[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140045)  [Next](2140047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-Page_40"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> the Paulianists who
have flown for refuge to the Catholic Church, it has been decreed that
they must by all means be rebaptized; and if any of them who in past
time have been numbered among their clergy should be found blameless and
without reproach, let them be rebaptized and ordained by the Bishop of
the Catholic Church; but if the examination should discover them to be
unfit, they ought to be deposed.  Likewise in the case of their
deaconesses, and generally in the case of those who have been enrolled
among their clergy, let the same form be observed.  And we mean by
deaconesses such as have assumed the habit, but who, since they have no
imposition of hands, are to be numbered only among the laity.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p5"></span>Paulianists must be rebaptised, and
if such as are clergymen seem to be blameless let them be ordained.  If
they do not seem to be blameless, let them be deposed.  Deaconesses who
have been led astray, since they are not sharers of ordination, are to
be reckoned among the laity.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p6.1"></span>Ffoulkes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p7"></span>(*Dict. Chr. Ant. s.v.* Nicæa,
Councils of.)

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p8"></span>That this is the true meaning of the
phrase <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p8.1"></span>ὅρος
ἐκτέθειται</span>, viz. “a decree has now been made,” is clear from the
application of the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p8.2"></span>ὅρος</span> in Canon xvii., and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p8.3"></span>ὥρισεν</span>, in
Canon vi.  It has been a pure mistake, therefore, which Bp. Hefele
blindly follows, to understand it of some canon previously passed,
whether at Arles or elsewhere.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p9.1"></span>Justellus.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p10"></span>Here <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p10.1"></span>χειροθεσία</span> is taken for
ordination or consecration, not for benediction,…for neither were
deaconesses, sub-deacons, readers, and other ministers ordained, but a
blessing was merely pronounced over them by prayer and imposition of
hands.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p11.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p12"></span>Their (the Paulicians’) deaconesses
also, since they have no imposition of hands, if they come over to the
Catholic Church and are baptized, are ranked among the laity.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p13"></span>With this Zonaras and Balsamon also
agree.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p14.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p15"></span>By Paulianists must be understood
the followers of Paul of Samosata the anti-Trinitarian who, about the
year 260, had been made bishop of Antioch, but had been deposed by a
great Synod in 269.  As Paul of Samosata was heretical in his teaching
on the Holy Trinity the Synod of Nice applied to him the decree passed
by the council of Arles in its eighth canon.  “If anyone shall come from
heresy to the Church, they shall ask him to say the creed; and if they
shall perceive that he was baptized into the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) he shall have a
hand laid on him only that he may receive the Holy Ghost.  But if in
answer to their questioning he shall not answer this Trinity, let him be
baptized.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p17"></span>The Samosatans, according to St.
Athanasius, named the Father, Son and Holy Spirit in administering
baptism (*Orat*. ii, *Contra Arian*. No. xliii.), but as they gave a
false meaning to the baptismal formula and did not use the words Son and
Holy Spirit in the usual sense, the Council of Nice, like St. Athanasius
himself, considered their baptism as invalid.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p18"></span>There is great difficulty about the
text of the clause beginning “Likewise in the case, etc.,” and Gelasius,
the *Prisca*, Theilo and Thearistus, (who in 419 translated the canons
of Nice for the African bishops), the Pseudo-Isidore, and Gratian have
all followed a reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p18.1"></span>διακόνων</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p18.2"></span>διακονισσῶν</span>. 
This change makes all clear, but many canonists keep the ordinary text,
including Van Espen, with whose interpretation Hefele does not agree.

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p19"></span>The clause I have rendered “And we
mean by deaconesses” is most difficult of translation.  I give the
original, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p19.1"></span>᾽Εμνήσθημεν δὲ διακονισσῶν τῶν ἐν τῷ
σχήματι ἐξετασθεισῶν, ἐπεὶ κ.τ.λ</span>.  Hefele’s translation seems to
me impossible, by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p19.2"></span>σχήματι</span> he understands the list
of the clergy just mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[40:102](2140046.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="vii.vi.xxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxviii-p16"></span> In Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto
esse baptizatum

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Deaconess of the Early Church.](2140047.md)
