[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140067)  [Next](2140069.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Canon VII.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> those who have
partaken at a heathen feast in a place appointed for heathens, but who
have brought and eaten their own meats, it is decreed that they be
received after they have been prostrators two years; but whether with
oblation, every bishop must determine after he has made examination into
the rest of their life.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p5"></span>If anyone having his own food,
shall eat it with heathen at their feasts, let him be a prostrator for
two years.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.vii-p7"></span>Several Christians tried with
worldly prudence, to take a middle course.  On the one hand, hoping to
escape persecution, they were present at the feasts of the heathen
sacrifices, which were held in the buildings adjoining the temples; and
on the other, in order to appease their consciences, they took their own
food, and touched nothing that had been offered to the gods.  These
Christians forgot that St. Paul had ordered that meats sacrificed to the
gods should be avoided, not because they were tainted in themselves, as
the idols were nothing, but from another, and in fact a twofold reason: 
1st, Because, in partaking of them, some had still the idols in their
hearts, that is to say, were still attached to the worship of idols, and
thereby sinned; and 2dly, Because others scandalized their brethren, and
sinned in that way.  To these two reasons a third may be added, namely,
the hypocrisy and the duplicity of those Christians who wished to appear
heathens, and nevertheless to remain Christians.  The Synod punished
them with two years of penance in the third degree, and gave to each
bishop the right, at the expiration of this time, either to admit them
to communion, or to make them remain some time longer in the fourth
degree.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VIII](2140069.md)
