[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140355)  [Next](2140357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="xii.v-Page_304"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.v-p2.1"></span>Session VII.</span>

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>(*From the Paris manuscript found in*
Hardouin *Concilia*, Tom. III., 171 et seqq.; Mansi, Tom. ix., 346 et
seqq.  *This speech is not found in full in any other <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.v-p3.1"></span>ms.</span>  The Ballerini
\[Hefele notes\] raise objections to the genuineness of the additions*
\[in Noris. *Opp.,* Tom. IV., 1037\], but Hefele does not consider the
objections of serious moment.  \[*Hist. of the Councils*, Vol. IV., p.
323, note 2.\]  *All the <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p3.2"></span>mss.</span> agree that* The most glorious quæster
of the sacred palace, Constantine, was sent by the most pious Emperor,
and when he had entered the Council spake as follows:  “Certum est
vestræ beatitudini, quantum, etc.”  *The rest of the speech differs in
the different manuscripts.  I follow that of Paris.*)

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span>You know how much care the most invincible
Emperor has always had that the contention raised up by certain persons
with regard to the Three Chapters should have a termination.…For this
intent he has required the most religious Vigilius to assemble with you
and draw up a decree on this matter in accordance with the Orthodox
faith.  Although therefore, Vigilius has already frequently condemned
the Three Chapters in writing, and has done this also by word of mouth
in the presence of the Emperor, and of the most glorious judges and of
many members of this synod, and has always been ready to smite with
anathema the defenders of Theodore of Mopsuestia, and the letter which
was attributed to Ibas, and the writings of Theodoret which he set forth
against the orthodox faith and against the twelve capitula of the holy
Cyril: <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)   yet he has refused to
do this in communion with you and your synod.

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>Yesterday Vigilius sent Servus Dei, a most
reverend Subdeacon of the Roman Church, and invited Belisarius, <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) Cethegus, as also Justinus and
Constantine the most glorious consuls, as well as bishops Theodore,
Ascidas, Benignus, and Phocas, to come to him as he wished to give
through them an answer to the Emperor.  They came, but speedily returned
and informed the most pious lord, that we had visited Vigilius, the most
religious bishop, and that he had said to us:  “We have called you for
this reason, that you may know what things have been done in the past
days.  To this end I have written a document about the disputed Three
Chapters, addressed to the most pious Emperor, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) pray be good enough to read it, and to
carry it to his Serenity.”  But when we had heard this and had seen the
document written to your serenity, we said to him that we could not by
any means receive any document written to the most pious Emperor without
his bidding.  “But you have deacons for running with messages, by whom
you can send it.”  He, however, said to us:  “You now know that I have
made the document.”  But we, bishops, answered him:  “If your
blessedness is willing to meet together with us and the most holy
Patriarchs, and the most religious bishops, and to treat of the Three
Chapters and to give, in unison with us all, a suitable form of the
orthodox faith, as the Holy Apostles and the holy Fathers and the four
Councils have done, we will hold thee as our head, as a father and
primate.  But if your holiness has drawn up a document for the Emperor,
you have errand-runners, as we have said; send it by them.”  And when he
had heard these things from us, he sent Servus Dei the Subdeacon, who
now awaits the answer of your serenity.  And when his Piety had heard
this, he commanded through the aforesaid most religious and glorious
men, the before-named subdeacon to carry back this message to the most
religious Vigilius:  “We invited him (*you*) to meet together with the
most blessed patriarchs and other religious bishops, and with them in
common to examine and judge the Three Chapters.  But since you have
refused to do this, and you say that you alone have written by yourself
somewhat on <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="xii.v-Page_305"></span>the Three Chapters; if you have condemned
them, in accordance with those things which you did before, we have
already many such statements and need no more; but if you have written
now something contrary to these things which were done by you before,
you have condemned yourself by your own writing, since you have departed
from orthodox doctrine and have defended impiety.  And how can you
expect us to receive such a document from you?”

<span id="xii.v-p9"></span>And when this answer was given by the most
pious Emperor, he did not send through the same deacon any document in
writing from himself.  And all this was done without writing as also to
your blessedness.

<span id="xii.v-p10"></span>\[*He then, according to all the <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.v-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>, presented certain
documents to be read, in the <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p10.2"></span>ms.</span> printed by Labbe and Cossart, Tom.
V., col.* 549 *et seqq.  These are fewer than in the Paris <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.v-p10.3"></span>ms.</span>, which last also
contains the following just after the reading of the documents and after
the Council had declared that they proved the Emperor’s zeal for the
faith*.\]

<span id="xii.v-p11"></span>Constantine, the most glorious Quæstor,
said:  While I am still present at your holy council by reason of the
reading of the documents which have been presented to you, I would say
that the most pious Emperor has sent a minute (*formam*), to your Holy
Synod, concerning the name of Vigilius, that it be no more inserted in
the holy diptychs of the Church, on account of the impiety which he
defended.  Neither let it be recited by you, nor retained, either in the
church of the royal city, or in other churches which are intrusted to
you and to the other bishops in the State committed by God to his rule. 
And when you hear this minute, again you will perceive by it how much
the most serene Emperor cares for the unity of the holy churches and for
the purity of the holy mysteries.

<span id="xii.v-p12"></span>\[The letter was then read.\]

<span id="xii.v-p13"></span>The holy Synod said:  What has seemed good
to the most pious Emperor is congruous to the labours which he bears for
the unity of the churches.  Let us preserve unity to (*ad*) the
Apostolic See of the most holy Church of ancient Rome, carrying out all
things according to the tenor of what has been read.  De proposita vero
quæstione quod jam promisimus procedat.

<span id="xii.v-p14"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.v-p14.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xii.v-p15"></span>Hefele understands that the Council heard
and approved this letter of the Emperor’s, but that the “Emperor did not
mean entirely to break off communion with the Apostolic see, neither did
he wish the Synod to do so” (*Hist. Councils*, Vol. IV., p. 326), as
indeed he says in his letter.

<span id="xii.v-p16"></span>The Ballerini consider this letter of the
Emperor’s to be spurious, but (says Hefele) “on insufficient grounds”
(*l. c*., p. 326, note 3).  The expressions used by the Emperor may not
unnaturally be somewhat startling to those holding the theological
position of the Ballerini:  “We will not endure to receive the spotless
communion from him nor from any one else who does not condemn this
impiety…lest we be found thus communicating with the impiety of
Nestorius and Theodore.”  It is noteworthy that the Fifth Ecumenical
Council should strike the name of the reigning Pope from the diptychs as
a father of heresy; and that the Sixth Ecumenical Synod should
anathematize another Pope as a heretic!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[304:305](2140356.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span> Thus far the <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> agree almost word for word.  The
divergence for the rest is most marked.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[304:306](2140356.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span> There is some doubt about this name.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[304:307](2140356.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p8"></span> This was the “Constitutum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sentence of the Synod.](2140357)
