[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140577)  [Next](2140579) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>Canon LIV.  (Greek lviii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p2"></span>That a strange cleric is under no
circumstances to be received by another.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p3.1"></span>Epigonius</span>, the bishop, said:  This
has been decreed in many councils, also just now it has been confirmed
by your prudence, most blessed brethren, that no bishop should receive a
strange cleric into his diocese without the consent of the bishop to
whose jurisdiction the cleric belongs.  But I say that Julian, who is
ungrateful for the layouts bestowed upon him by God through my
littleness, is so rash and audacious, that a certain man who was
baptized by me, when he was a most needy boy, commended to me by the
same, and when for many years he had been fed and reared by me, it is
certain that this one, as I have said, was baptized in my church, by my
own unworthy hands; this same man began to exercise the office of reader
in the Mappalien diocese, and read there for nearly two years, with a
most incomprehensible contempt of my littleness, the aforenamed Julian
took this man, whom he declared to be a citizen of his own city
Vazarita, and without consulting me ordained him deacon.  If, most
blessed brethren, that is permissible, let it be declared to us; but if
not, let such an impudent one be restrained that he may in no way mix
himself in someone’s communion.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p4"></span>Numidius, the bishop, said:  If, as it
seems, Julian did this without your worthiness being asked for his
consent, nor even consulted, we all judge that this was done
iniquitously and unworthily.  Wherefore unless Julian shall correct his
error, and shall return the cleric to your people with proper
satisfaction, since what he did was contrary to the decrees of the
council, let him be condemned and separated from us on account of his
contumacy.  Epigonius, the bishop, said:  Our father in age, and most
ancient by his promotion, that laudable man, our brother and colleague
Victor wishes that this petition should be made general to all.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p7"></span>Since Julian has ordained a reader of
Epigonius’s to the diaconate, unless he shall shew authority received
from him to do so, he shall increase the penalty of his contumacy.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p8"></span>This canon is Canon vj. of the Synod of
Carthage, August 28th, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lv-p10"></span>See Canon of the Apostles, 12 (15,
16), and Chalcedon, 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LV](2140579)
