[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140556)  [Next](2140558) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_458">p. 458</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-Page_458"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XXXIII.  (Greek xxxvi.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>*That presbyters should not sell the
goods of the Church in which they are constituted; and that no bishop
can rightly use anything the title to which vests in the ecclesiastical
maternal centre* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>μάτρικος</span>).

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>It</span> also seemed good that
presbyters should not sell the ecclesiastical property where they are
settled without their bishop’s knowledge; and it is not lawful for
bishops to sell the goods of the Church without the council or their
presbyters being aware of it.  Nor should the bishop without necessity
usurp the property of the maternal (*matricis*) Church \[nor should a
presbyter usurp the property of his own cure (*tituli*)\]. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434)

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p7"></span>A presbyter is not to sell
ecclesiastical property without the consent of the bishop.  A bishop is
not to sell without the approbation of his synod a country property.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p8"></span>Fuchs (*Biblioth. der Kirchenvers*.,
vol. iij., p. 5) thinks the text is corrupt in the last sentence and
should be corrected by Canon x. of the Council of Carthage of 421, so as
to read, “that which is left by will to a rural church in the diocese
must not be applied to the Mother Church through the usurpation of the
bishop.”

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p10"></span>“Or title.”  So I turn the Lat.
*Titulus* for want of a proper English word.  It denotes a lesser church
in any city or diocese, served by a priest.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p11"></span>“The Mother Church,” i.e., The
cathedral, the Church in which the bishop resides.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p12"></span>Moreover at this Synod we read all
the conciliar decrees of all the Province of Africa in the different
synods held in the time of Bishop Aurelius. <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435)

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p14"></span>Concerning the Synod which
assembled in Hippo Regio.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p15"></span>Under the most illustrious consuls,
the most glorious Emperor Theodosius Augustus for the third time, and
Abundantius, on the viij. Ides of October, at Hippo Regio, in the
*secretarium* of the Church of Peace.  And the rest of the acts of this
Synod have not been written down here because these constitutions are
found set forth above.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p16"></span>Of the Council of Carthage at which
the proconsular bishops were appointed legates to the Council at
Adrumetum.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p17"></span>In the consulate of the most
glorious emperors—Arcadius for the third time and Honorius for the
second time, Augustuses, on the vith <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) day before the Calends of July, at
Carthage.  In this council the proconsular bishops were chosen as
legates to the Council of Adrumetum.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p19"></span>Of a Council of Carthage at which
many statutes were made.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p20"></span>In the consulate of those most
illustrious men, Cæsarius and Atticus, on the vth day before the Calends
of September in the secretarium of the restored basilica, when Aurelius
the bishop, together with the bishops, had taken his seat, the deacons
also standing by, and Victor the old man of Puppiana, Tutus of Migirpa
and Evangel of Assuri.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p21"></span>The Allocution of Aurelius the
bishop of Carthage to the bishops.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p22"></span>Aurelius, the bishop, said: <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437)   After the day fixed for the council,
as ye remember, most blessed brethren, we sat and waited for the
legations of all the African provinces to assemble upon the day, as I
have said, set by our missive; but when the letter of our <span
id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-Page_459"></span>Byzacene bishops had been read, that
was read to your charity, which they had discussed with me who had
anticipated the time and day of the council; also it was read by our
brethren Honoratus and Urban, who are to-day present with us in this
council, sent as the legation of the Sitifensine Province.  For our
brother Reginus of the Vege \[t\]selitane <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) Church, <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) the letters sent to my littleness by
Crescentian and Aurelius, our fellow-bishops, of the first sees of the
\[two\] Numidias, in which writings your charity will see with me how
they promised that either they themselves would be good enough to come
or else that they would send legates according to custom to this
council; but this it seems they did not do at all, the legates of
Mauritania Sitifensis, who had come so great a distance gave notice that
they could stay no longer; and, therefore, brethren, if it seem good to
your charity, let the letters of our Byzacene brethren, as also the
breviary, which they joined to the same letter, be read to this
assembly, so that if by any chance they are not entirely satisfactory to
your charity, such things in the breviary may be changed for the better
after diligent examination.  For this very thing our brother and
fellow-bishop of the primatial see, a man justly conspicuous for his
gravity and prudence, Mizonius, demanded in a letter he addressed to my
littleness.  If therefore it meets with your approval, let there be read
the things which have been adopted and let each by itself be considered
by your charity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_434"></span>[458:435](2140557.htm#fr_434) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span> Only found in the Latin.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[458:436](2140557.htm#fr_435) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p13"></span> These interludes or “Digressions,”
as Van Espen calls them, are found in Dionysius and in the Greek texts.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[458:437](2140557.htm#fr_436) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p18"></span> In the Greek this reads xvith.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[458:438](2140557.htm#fr_437) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p23"></span> The text here I suspect is much
corrupted.  The Greek and Latin do not agree.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[459:439](2140557.htm#fr_438) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p24"></span> In Gustavus Willmann’s *Corpus
Inscriptionum Latinarum*, vol. viii., p. 47, the reading is given as
*Vegeselitanæ*, in one word.  The town was Vegesela, and unfortunately
there were two towns having the same name and not far one from the
other.  *Cf*. map 20, Spruner-Sieglin, *Atlas Antiquus*.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[459:440](2140557.htm#fr_439) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xxxiv-p25"></span> The verb is lacking.  The Ed. of
Migne’s Dion. Exig. suggests *legit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXXIV](2140558)
