[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140244)  [Next](2140246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.v"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p1.1"></span>Canon IV.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> Maximus the Cynic and the
disorder which has happened in Constantinople on his account, it is
decreed that Maximus never was and is not now a Bishop; that those who
have been ordained by him are in no order whatever of the clergy; since
all which has been done concerning him or by him, is declared to be
invalid.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p5"></span>Let Maximus the Cynic be cast out from
among the bishops, and anyone who was inscribed by him on the clergy
list shall be held as profane.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p6.1"></span>Edmund Venables.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p7"></span>(Smith and Wace, *Dict. Christ. Biog*.)

<span id="ix.viii.v-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p8.1"></span>Maximus</span> the Cynic; the intrusive
bishop of Constantinople, <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span> 380.  Ecclesiastical history
hardly presents a more extraordinary <span id="page_180">p. 180</span>
<span id="ix.viii.v-Page_180"></span>career than that of this man, who,
after a most disreputable youth, more than once brought to justice for
his misdeeds, and bearing the scars of his punishments, by sheer
impudence, clever flattery, and adroit management of opportunities,
contrived to gain the confidence successively of no less men than Peter
of Alexandria, Gregory Nazianzen, and Ambrose, and to install himself in
one of the first sees of the church, from which he was with difficulty
dislodged by a decree of an ecumenical council.  His history also
illustrates the jealousy felt by the churches of Alexandria and Rome
towards their young and vigorous rival for patriarchal honours, the
church of Constantinople; as well as their claim to interfere with her
government, and to impose prelates upon her according to their
pleasure.  Alexandria, as the chief see of the Eastern world, from the
first asserted a jurisdiction which she has never formally relinquished
over the see of Constantinople, more particularly in a vacancy in the
episcopate (Neale, *Patr. of Alexandria*, i., 206).  The conduct of
Peter, the successor of Athanasius, first in instituting Gregory
Nazianzen bishop of Constantinople by his letters and sending a formal
recognition of his appointment and then in substituting Maximus, as has
been remarked by Milman (*History of Christianity*, iii., 115, note) and
Ullman (Greg. Naz., p. 203 \[Cox’s translation\]), furnish unmistakable
indications of the desire to erect an Oriental papacy, by establishing
the primacy of Alexandria over Constantinople and so over the East,
which was still further illustrated a few years later by the high-handed
behaviour of Theophilus towards Chrysostom.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p9"></span>Maximus was a native of Alexandria of low
parentage.  He boasted that his family had produced martyrs.  He got
instructed in the rudiments of the Christian faith and received baptism,
but strangely enough sought to combine the Christian profession with
Cynic philosophy.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p10"></span>When he presented himself at the Eastern
capital he wore the white robe of a Cynic, and carried a philosopher’s
staff, his head being laden with a huge crop of crisp curling hair, dyed
a golden yellow, and swinging over his shoulders in long ringlets.  He
represented himself as a confessor for the Nicene faith, and his
banishment to the Oasis as a suffering for the truth (*Orat.* xxiii., p.
419).  Before long he completely gained the ear and heart of Gregory,
who admitted him to the closest companionship.  Maximus proclaimed the
most unbounded admiration for Gregory’s discourses, which he praised in
private, and, according to the custom of the age, applauded in public. 
His zeal against heretics was most fierce, and his denunciation of them
uncompromising.  The simple-hearted Gregory became the complete dupe of
Maximus.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p11"></span>All this time Maximus was secretly
maturing a plot for ousting his unsuspicious patron from his throne.  He
gained the ear and the confidence of Peter of Alexandria, and induced
him to favour his ambitious views.  Gregory, he asserted, had never been
formally enthroned bishop of Constantinople; his translation thither was
a violation of the canons of the church; rustic in manners, he had
proved himself quite unfitted for the place.  Constantinople was getting
weary of him.  It was time the patriarch of the Eastern world should
exercise his prerogative and give New Rome a more suitable bishop.  The
old man was imposed on as Gregory had been, and lent himself to
Maximus’s projects.  Maximus found a ready tool in a presbyter of
Constantinople, envious of Gregory’s talents and popularity (*de Vit*.,
p. 13).  Others were gained by bribes.  Seven unscrupulous sailor
fellows were despatched from Alexandria to mix with the people, and
watch for a favourable opportunity for carrying out the plot.  When all
was ripe they were followed by a bevy of bishops, with secret
instructions from the patriarch to consecrate Maximus.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p12"></span>The conspirators chose the night for the
accomplishment of their enterprise.  Gregory they knew was confined by
illness.  They forced their way into the cathedral, and commenced the
rite of ordination.  By the time they had set the Cynic on the
archiepiscopal throne, and had just begun shearing away his long curls,
they were surprised by the dawn.  The news quickly spread, and everybody
rushed to the church.  The magistrates appeared on the scene with their
officers; Maximus and his consecrators were driven from the sacred
precincts, and in the house or shop of a flute-player the tonsure was
completed.  Maximus repaired to Thessalonica to lay his cause before
Theodosius.  He met with a cold reception from the emperor, who
committed the matter to Ascholius, the much respected bishop of that
city, charging him to refer it to pope Damasus.  We have two letters of
Damasus’s on this subject.  In the first, addressed to Ascholius and the
Mace<span id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span
id="ix.viii.v-Page_181"></span>donian bishops, he vehemently condemns
the “ardor animi et fœda presumptio” which had led certain persons
coming from Egypt, in violation of the rule of ecclesiastical
discipline, to have proposed to consecrate a restless man, an alien from
the Christian profession, not worthy to be called a Christian, who wore
an idolatrous garb (“habitus idoli”) and the long hair which St. Paul
said was a shame to a man, and remarks on the fact that being expelled
from the church they were compelled to complete the ordination “intra
parietes alienos.”  In the second letter addressed to Ascholius
individually (*Ep*. vi.) he repeats his condemnation of the ordination
of the long-haired Maximus (“comatum”) and asks him to take special care
that a Catholic bishop may be ordained (Migne, *Patrolog*., xiii., pp.
366–369; *Ep*. 5; 5, 6).

<span id="ix.viii.v-p13"></span>Maximus returned to Alexandria, and
demanded that Peter should assist him in re-establishing himself at
Constantinople.  But Peter had discovered the man’s true character, and
received him as coldly as Theodosius had done.  Determined to carry his
point he presented himself to the patriarch at the head of a disorderly
mob, with the threat that if he did not help him to gain the throne of
Constantinople he would have that of Alexandria.  Peter appealed to the
prefect, by whom Maximus was driven out of Egypt.  The death of Peter
and the accession of Timotheus are placed Feb. 14, 380.  The events
described must therefore have occurred in 379.  When the second
ecumenical council met at Constantinople in 381, the question of
Maximus’s claim to the see of Constantinople came up for consideration. 
His pretensions were unanimously rejected.

<span id="ix.viii.v-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.v-p14.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.v-p15"></span>(*Notes on the Canons*, in loc.)

<span id="ix.viii.v-p16"></span>Maximus, however, having been expelled
from Egypt, made his way into Northern Italy, presented to Gratian at
Milan a large work which he had written against the Arians (as to which
Gregory sarcastically remarks—“Saul a prophet, Maximus an author!” 
*Carm. adv. Mar*., 21), and deceived St. Ambrose and his suffragans by
showing the record of his consecration, with letters which Peter had
once written in his behalf.  To these prelates of the “Italic diocese”
the appeal of Maximus seemed like the appeal of Athanasius, and more
recently of Peter himself, to the sympathy of the church of Rome; and
they requested Theodosius to let the case be heard before a really
General Council (Mansi, iii. 631).  Nothing further came of it; perhaps,
says Tillemont, those who thus wrote in favour of Maximus “reconnurent
bientôt quel il était” (ix., 502):  so that when a Council did meet at
Rome towards the end of 382, no steps were taken in his behalf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140246.md)
