[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140588)  [Next](2140590) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p1.1"></span>Canon LXV.  (Greek lxviii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p2"></span>Concerning the condemned bishop
Equitius.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p3.1"></span>Aurelius</span>, the bishop, said:  I do
not think that the case of Equitius should be passed over in the
legation, who some time ago for his crimes was condemned by an Episcopal
sentence; that if by any chance our legate should meet him in those
parts, our brother should take care for the state of the Church, as
opportunity offered or where he could, to <span id="page_475">p.
475</span> <span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-Page_475"></span>act against him. 
And all the bishops said:  This prosecution is exceedingly agreeable to
us, especially as Equitius was condemned some time ago, his impudent
unrest ought to be repelled everywhere more and more for the good estate
and health of the Church.  And they subscribed, I, Aurelius, the bishop
of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and after
having read it have signed my name.  Likewise also signed all the other
bishops.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p6"></span>Equitius, who had been condemned by
the judgment of the bishops, and had behaved impudently against the
ecclesiastical authority, ought to be opposed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p7"></span>This is Canon ix. of the Synod of
Carthage, June 15 (or 16), <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p8.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p9"></span>See *Can. Afr*., 78.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p10"></span>In this council the letters of
Anastasius the Roman Pontiff were read, admonishing the Catholic bishops
concerning the Donatists.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxvi-p11"></span>In the consulship of those most
illustrious men Vencentius and Flavius, on the Ides of September, at
Carthage, in the secretarium of the restored basilica.  When we had been
gathered together in council in the church at Carthage and had taken our
seats, bishops from all the African Provinces, that is to say, Aurelius,
the bishop of that see with his colleagues (just who they were is made
evident by their signatures) \[the same bishop Aurelius said\]:  When
the letters of our most blessed brother and fellow priest, Anastasius,
bishop of the Church of Rome, had been read, in which he exhorted us out
of the solicitude and sincerity of his paternal and brotherly love, that
we should in no way dissimulate with regard to the wiles and
wickednesses of the Donatist heretics and schismatics, by which they
gravely vex the Catholic Church of Africa, we thank our Lord that he
hath vouchsafed to inspire that best and holy archbishop with such a
pious care for the members of Christ, although in divers lands, yet
builded together into the one body of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXVI](2140590)
