[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140010)  [Next](2140012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxix"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="vi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the History of the Roman Law and Its
Relation to the Canon Law.</span>

<span id="vi-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi-p3.1"></span>The</span> foregoing bibliographical outline would
be entirely incomplete did I not give the reader at least a sketch of
how those canons adopted by the various councils gradually won admission
to the law-code of the Empire, and how that code itself came into
being.  For those wishing to study the matter in detail I would name as
the most recent authorities upon the Roman Law, Mr. Muirhead, who has
published with additions and notes his article on the subject in the
“Encyclopædia Britannica,” and Mr. Bury’s new edition of Gibbon’s *Rome*
just being issued with most learned notes.

<span id="vi-p4"></span>But neither of these writers has put the matter
exactly as I desire for this purpose, and I have therefore been forced
to seek elsewhere the information I now lay before the reader.

<span id="vi-p5"></span>The study of Jurisprudence did not form a
separate department among the ancient Greeks, but among the Romans it
was quite otherwise, and a very elaborate system was developed, so
elaborate as to demand the care of a special class of men, who devoted
themselves to this business alone and handed down to their successors a
constantly increasing mass of legal matter.

<span id="vi-p6"></span>When Greece fell under the Roman yoke the laws
of the victor were imposed upon the vanquished, but even then the Greeks
did not take to legal studies.  In fact not until the seat of the Empire
was removed to Constantinople did the East become a centre of
jurisprudence or the residence of the chief legal experts.  In the whole
period before the fourth century of our era we know of but one barrister
who wrote in Greek, and he came from the West, Herennius Modestinus.  He
was a disciple of Ulpian and preceptor to the Emperor Maximian the
Younger.

<span id="vi-p7"></span>From the time of Hadrian to that of Alexander
Severus the influence of the legal schools of Rome had been paramount. 
The Emperors consulted them and asked them to decide difficult points. 
But after the death of Alexander this custom fell into entire disuse,
and the Emperors themselves decided the matters formerly entrusted to
the lawyers.  After this time the Imperial Constitutions became the
chief sources of Roman law.  It is only in the time of Constantine the
Great that we find once again the lawyers rising into prominence and a
flourishing school at Beyroot in Syria.  It was at this time that the
Imperial Constitutions or Edicts were first collected, for until then
they existed only in detached documents.  This collection was made by
two lawyers, Gregory or Gregorian, and Hermogenes.  Gregory’s collection
contains the laws set forth from the time of Hadrian to Constantine, and
Hermogenes wrote a supplement.  Although this was but a private
enterprise, yet it was cited in the courts of law, just as Lord
Lyndwood’s *Provinciale* is with us to-day.

<span id="vi-p8"></span>It is interesting to note that it was about this
same time that the first attempt was made to collect the ecclesiastical
canons, and so the Civil Law and the Canon Law (as we know them in after
times) had their rise about the same period.

<span id="vi-p9"></span>The law of the Empire was not, however, to be
left to private and unofficial action, but by the care of Theodosius the
Younger its first official collection was made.  This prince directed
eight men learned in the law to gather into one body of laws all the
Imperial Constitutions published since the last included in the
collections of Gregory and Hermogenes.  This is the “Theodosian Code,”
and contains the laws set forth by Constantine and his successors.  It
was promulgated in 438 in the East, and received by the then Emperor of
the West, Valentinian III.  To this were subsequently added such laws as
each set forth, under the title of “New Constitutions.”

<span id="vi-p10"></span>The Emperor Justinian determined still further
to simplify the attaining of judicial decisions.  It is true that the
making of the legal collections referred to had added greatly to the
ease of determining the law in any given case, but there was a source of
great confusion in the endless number of legal decisions which by custom
had acquired <span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxx"></span>the force of law, and which were by no means
always consistent between themselves; these were the famous *responsa
jurisperitorum.*  To clear up this difficulty was no small task, but the
Emperor went about it in the most determined fashion and appointed a
commission, consisting of Tribonian and ten other experts, to make a new
collection of all the imperial constitutions from Hadrian to his own
day.  This is the famous Justinian Code, which was promulgated in 529,
and abrogated all previous collections. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)

<span id="vi-p12"></span>This, however, was not sufficient to remove the
difficulty, and Tribonian next, together with sixteen lawyers, spent
three years in making extracts from the great mass of decisions of the
ancient jurists, filling as they did nearly two thousand volumes.  These
they digested and did their best to clear away the contradictions.  When
the work was finished it appeared to the world as the “Pandects,”
because it was intended to contain all there was to be said upon the
subject.  It is also known as the “Digest.”  This work was set forth in
533 and from that time such of the former decisions as were not
incorporated ceased to have any force.

<span id="vi-p13"></span>It must however be remembered that, while this
was the case, all the decisions contained in the Pandects did not obtain
the force of law.  The Pandects are not a code of laws, but a system of
public jurisprudence composed by public authority.  To the Pandects were
added by the Emperor two ordinances, the first to forbid any copyist to
write them in an abbreviated form; and the second forbidding
commentators to treat them in anything but their literal sense.

<span id="vi-p14"></span>While this work was in progress some points
were so complicated and obscure that the Emperor had to be appealed to,
and his writings in these particulars are the origin of the “Fifty
Decisions.”

<span id="vi-p15"></span>At the same time was prepared the “Institutes,”
containing the elements of the whole Roman law. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)

<span id="vi-p17"></span>Later, new laws having been made, the Code had
to be revised; the former edition was abrogated in 534, and a new one
set forth with the title “Codex repetitæ prælectionis.”

<span id="vi-p18"></span>The last of Justinian’s labours in the field of
jurisprudence (if indeed they were not collected after his death) are
his “Novels,” a series of imperial constitutions issued between 535 and
559 (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi-p18.1"></span>Νεαραὶ
Διατάξεις</span>).  There are one hundred and sixty-eight of these
Novels, but the ancient glosses only know ninety-seven, and the rest
have been added since, as they have been found.

<span id="vi-p19"></span>Such is the origin of the *Corpus Juris
Civilis,* and its history needed to be set forth in this place on
account of its close connection with the *Corpus Juris Canonici.*  In
the foregoing I have followed M. Schœll in his admirable *Histoire de la
Littérature Grecque Profane,* to which I am also chiefly indebted for
the following notes upon the jurists of the sixth and ensuing centuries.

<span id="vi-p20"></span>A work which is often looked upon as the origin
of the Canon Law was composed by a lawyer of Antioch, somewhere near the
middle of the sixth century.  This jurist was John of Antioch, surnamed
Scholasticus.  He was representative or apocrisiarius of the Church of
Antioch at Constantinople, and afterward was made Patriarch of that see,
over which he ruled from 564 until his death in 578.  While still a
simple priest at Antioch he made his *Collection of the Canons of the
Councils.*

<span id="vi-p21"></span>“He was not the first who conceived the idea of
such a work.  Some writers, resting upon a passage in Socrates, have
been of opinion that this honour belonged to Sabinus, bishop of
Heraclea, in Thrace, at the beginning of the fifth century; but Socrates
is not speaking of a collection of canons at all, but of the synodal
acts, of the letters written by or addressed to the synods.  If,
however, Sabinus did not make a collection of canons, it is certain
nevertheless that before John of Antioch there existed one, for he
himself cites it many times, although he does not name the
authors.” <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

<span id="vi-p23"></span><span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxxi"></span>“In gathering together thus the canons of the
councils John of Antioch did not form a complete body of ecclesiastical
law.  By his Novel CXLI., Justinian had indeed given to the canons of
the Church the force of law, but he himself published a great number of
constitutions upon Church matters.  Now it was necessary to harmonize
these constitutions and canons, and to accomplish this feat was the
object of a second work undertaken by John of Antioch, to which he gave
the title of Nomocanon (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p23.1"></span>Νομοκάνων</span> ), <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) a word which from that time has served to
designate any collection of this sort.” <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)

<span id="vi-p26"></span>Bury says, “In the troubles of the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi-p26.1"></span>VII</span>th century the study of
law, like many other things, declined, and in the practical
administration of justice the prescriptions of the Code and Digest were
often ignored or modified by the alien precepts of Christianity.  The
religion of the Empire had exerted but very slight influence—no
fundamental influence, we may say—on the Justinian law.  Leo III., the
founder of the Syrian (vulgarly called Isaurian) dynasty, when he
restored the Empire after a generation of anarchy, saw the necessity of
legislation to meet the changed circumstances of the time.  The
settlements of foreigners—Slavs and Mardaites—in the provinces of the
Empire created an agrarian question, which he dealt with in his Agrarian
Code.  The increase of Slavonic and Saracenic piracy demanded increased
securities for maritime trade, and this was dealt with in a Navigation
Code.  But it was not only for special relations that Leo made laws; he
legislated also, and in an entirely new way, for the general relations
of life.  He issued a law book (in <span class="sc"><span
id="vi-p26.2"></span>a.d.</span> 740 in the name of himself and his son
Constantine), which changed and modified the Roman law, as it had been
fixed by Justinian.  The Ecloga, <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) as
it is called, may be described as a Christian law book.  It is a
deliberate attempt to change the legal system of the Empire by an
application of Christian principles.  Examples, to illustrate its
tendency, will be given below.  The horror in which the iconoclasts were
held on account of their heresy by the image-worshippers, cast discredit
upon all their works.  This feeling had something to do with the great
reaction, which was inaugurated by Basil I., against their legal
reforms.  The Christian Code of Leo prevailed in the empire for less
than a century and a half; and then, under the auspices of Basil, the
Roman law of Justinian was (partially) restored.  In legal activity the
Basilian epoch faintly reflected the epoch of Justinian itself.  A
handbook of extracts from the Institutes, Digest, Code, and Novels, was
published in <span class="sc"><span id="vi-p27.1"></span>a.d.</span>
879, entitled the Prochiron, to diffuse a knowledge of the forgotten
system.  But the great achievement of the Basilian epoch is the
‘Basilica’—begun under Basil, completed under Leo VI.—a huge collection
of all the laws of the Empire, not only those still valid, but those
which had become obsolete.  It seems that two commissions of experts
were appointed to prepare the material for this work.  One of these
commissions compiled the Prochiron by the way, and planned out the
Basilica in sixty Books.  The other commission also prepared a handbook
called the Epanagoge, which was never actually published (though a
sketch of the work is extant), and planned out the Basilica in forty
Books.  The Basilica, as actually published, are arranged in sixty
Books, compiled from the materials prepared by both commissions.

<span id="vi-p28"></span>“The Basilian revival of Justinianean law was
permanent; and it is outside our purpose to follow the history further,
except to note the importance of the foundation of a school of law at
Constantinople in the 11th century by the Emperor Constantine IX.  The
law enacting the institution of this school, under the direction of a
salaried Nomophylax, is extant.  John Xiphilin (see above) was the first
director.  This foundation may have possibly had some influence on the
institution of the school at Bologna half a century later.” <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md)

<span id="vi-p30"></span>I take from Schœll the following description of
the “Basilica”:

<span id="vi-p31"></span>“The ‘Basilica’ are a body of Roman law in the
Greek language, extracted from the Institutes, the Pandects, the Codes
and the Novels of Justinian as well as from the Im<span
id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span> <span id="vi-Page_xxxii"></span>perial
Constitutions posterior to that prince; also extracts from the
interpretations of such jurists as had won a fixed authority in the
courts, and the canons of the councils.  Here is found together the
civil and the ecclesiastical law of the Greeks, these two laws having
been in an intimate union by reason of the authority which the Emperors
exercised over the Church; on the other hand, in the West there was
formed step by step a canon law separate from the civil law, and having
a different source.” <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="vi-p33"></span>Such, then, were the “Basilica,” but what is
most singular is that this collection was not given the force of law,
neither by Leo VI. nor by Constantine VI., although it was prepared at
their order, under their authority, and was written in the language
which was spoken by their subjects.  The Justinian code of law, although
in Latin, still continued to be the only authority in the entire East. 
An anonymous writer prepared an Epitome of the Basilica, digested into
Alphabetical order, and beginning with “Of the Orthodox faith of
Christians.”

<span id="vi-p34"></span>In 883 Photius published a “Syntagma canonum”
and a “Nomocanon” with the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p34.1"></span>Προκανὼν</span>, because it was placed before the
canons.  This last work at the command of Constantine VI. was revised
and soon took the place of the Nomocanon of John of Antioch, over which
work it had the advantage of being more recent and of being digested in
better order.  In citing the canons, only the titles are given; but the
text of the civil laws appears in full.  “As in the Eastern Church the
influence of the imperial authority increased at the expense of that of
the councils, and as these princes made ecclesiastical affairs a
principal part of their government, it came to pass that the *Nomocanon*
of Photius became of more frequent and more necessary use than his
*Syntagma,* \[which contained the actual text of the canons of the
councils down to 880\].  Many commentators busied themselves with it,
while the collection of the councils was neglected.  Thus it has
happened that the *Nomocanon* has become the true foundation of the
ecclesiastical law of the East.” <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)

<span id="vi-p36"></span>But while this is true, yet there were not
lacking commentators upon the Canon law, and of the three chiefest of
these some notice must be taken in this place.  As I have already
pointed out it is to Bishop Beveridge that we owe the publication not
only of Photius’s Collection of Canons which are found in his “<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi-p36.1"></span>Συνοδικὸν</span> sive
Pandectæ,” but also of the scholia of all three of these great
commentators, Zonaras, Aristenus, and Balsamon, and from his most
learned Prolegomena to the same work I have chiefly drawn the following
facts, referring the curious reader to the introduction <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) itself for further particulars.

<span id="vi-p38"></span>John Zonaras was probably the same person who
wrote the Byzantine History which bears his name.  He flourished under
Alexis Comnenus, and enjoyed the high office of Grand Drungarius Viglæ
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi-p38.1"></span>Δρουγγαριος τῆς
Βίγλης</span>) and Chief of the Clerks.  After some years of secular
life he retired to a monastery and devoted himself to literary
pursuits.  While here, at the command of his superiors, and moved by the
persuasion of his friends, he wrote that great book which has made his
fame, which he entitled “An Exposition of the Sacred and Divine Canons,
as well those of the holy and venerable Apostles, as also those of the
sacred Œcumenical Synods, and those of the local or particular councils,
and those of the rest of the Holy Fathers; by the labour of John Zonaras
the monk, who was formerly Grand Drungarius Viglæ and Chief of the
Clerks.” <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)

<span id="vi-p40"></span>One of the greatest peculiarities of this work,
and one which distinguishes it very markedly from the later work of
Balsamon upon the same subject, is that Zonaras confines himself
strictly to the canon law and rarely makes any references to the civil
law whatever; and in such canons as bear no relation to the civil law
Balsamon often adopts Zonaras’s notes without change or addition.

<span id="vi-p41"></span>These commentaries were first brought to light
by John Quintin, a professor of canon law at Paris, who published a
Latin translation of the scholia upon the Apostolic <span
id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxxiii"></span>Canons.  This was in 1558.  In 1618 Antonius
Salmatia edited his commentaries on the canons of the Councils done into
Latin.  To this Latin version the Paris press added the Greek text from
the <span class="sc"><span id="vi-p41.1"></span>ms.</span> codex in the
Royal Library and printed it in 1618.  In 1622 the same press issued his
commentaries upon the Epistles of the Holy Fathers, together with those
of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Macarius of Egypt, and Basil.  But
Beveridge collected them in his Oxford Edition for the first time into
one work; preparing a somewhat critical text by collation with some
manuscripts he found at home.

<span id="vi-p42"></span>The second of these great Greek scholiasts is
Alexis Aristenus.  As Beveridge points out, he must have flourished
before or at the same time as Balsamon, for this latter speaks of him in
high terms of commendation in his scholion on the Sixth of the Apostolic
Canons, describing him as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p42.1"></span>τον ὑπέρτιμον</span>.  Aristenus was Nomophylax,
Orphanotrophe and Protecdekas, or chief of the Syndics of the Communes,
called Ecdics (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p42.2"></span>῎Εκδικοι</span>).  He wrote the excellent series of
notes upon the Epitomes of the Canons which are given the reader in
Beveridge’s Pradects.  Schoell says that it is an error to attribute to
him the “Extract of the Ancient Ecclesiastical Laws,” “which is none of
his.” <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md)   Aristenus was Grand
Economus of the Church of Constantinople and a man of great distinction;
and his opinion was sought after and his decision followed even when in
opposition to one of the Patriarchs, viz.:  Nicephorus of Jerusalem.

<span id="vi-p44"></span>Beveridge was the first to print Aristenus’s
*Scholia,* and he did so from four <span class="sc"><span
id="vi-p44.1"></span>mss.</span>, in England, for a description of which
I refer the reader to the bishop’s prolegomena. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="vi-p46"></span>Theodore Balsamon is the last of the three
great Greek scholiasts.  He flourished in the time of the Emperor Isaac
Angelus and bore the title of Patriarch of Antioch, although at that
time the city was in the hands of the Latins and had been so since
1100.  He was looked upon as the greatest jurist of his times both in
ecclesiastical and civil matters.  Somewhere about the year 1150, he
wrote by the order of Manuel Comnenus a series of “Scholia upon the
Nomocanon of Photius,” and another set styled “Scholia upon the Canons
of the Apostles, of the Councils and of the Fathers of the Church;” he
also prepared a “Collection of \[imperial\] Constitutions upon
ecclesiastical matters,” <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) in three
books, which has been published (by Lœwenklaw) at Frankfort, 1595, under
the title “Paratitles.”  There remains also a great number of his
opinions on cases presented to him, notably his “answers to sixty-four
canonical questions by Mark, Patriarch of Alexandria.”

<span id="vi-p48"></span>These most learned writings were unknown and
forgotten, at least in the West, until they were set forth in a Latin
translation during the time the Council of Trent was sitting, in 1561,
and not till 1620 did the Greek text appear in the Paris edition of that
date.  But this text was imperfect and corrupt, and Beveridge produced a
pure text from an Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="vi-p48.1"></span>ms.</span>, with which he compared several others. 
Moreover in his Pandects he amended the Latin text as well in numberless
particulars.  For further, particulars of the bibliography of the matter
see Beveridge. <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md)

<span id="vi-p50"></span>It may not be amiss to add that abundant proof
of the high esteem in which Balsamon was held is found in contemporary
authors, and no words can give an exaggerated idea of the weight of his
opinion on all legal matters, religious and profane; his works were
undertaken at the command of the Emperor and of the Patriarch, and were
received with an unmixed admiration. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md)

<span id="vi-p52"></span>In the thirteenth century a certain Chumnus who
had been Nomophylax and was afterwards elevated to the Archiepiscopal
chair of Thessalonica wrote a little book on the “Degrees of
Relationship.” <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md)

<span id="vi-p54"></span>In the fourteenth century we find Matthew
Blastares writing “An Alphabetical Table” <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) of the contents of the canons of the
councils, and of the laws of the Emperors.

<span id="vi-p56"></span>And in the same century we find Constantine
Harmenopulus, who was born in 1320.  He was, when thirty years of age, a
member of the first court of civil justice (*Judex* <span
id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxxiv"></span>*Dromi*).  Subsequently he was appointed
Counsellor of the Emperor, John Cantacuzene, and finally Sebastos and
Curopalatos under John Paleologus.  In the year 1345 he published a
“Manual of Jurisprudence.” <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md)   This
work is of great value to the student of Roman law as he completes the
work of the Emperor Basil by adding the imperial constitutions since
that time.  But our chief concern with him is as the author of an
“Epitome of the Divine and Sacred Canons.” <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md)

<span id="vi-p59"></span>Constantine Harmenopulus was the last Greek
jurist, and then Constantinople fell, to the everlasting disgrace of a
divided Christendom, into the hands of the Infidel, and the law of the
false Prophet supplanted the Roman Law, the Code of Civilization and
Christianity.

<span id="vi-p60"></span>I pass now to the history of the growth of the
canon law in the West.  No one reading even cursorily the canons
contained in the present volume can fail to notice that, with the
exception of those of the African code, they are primarily intended for
the government of the East and of persons more immediately under the
shadow of the imperial city.  In fact in the canons of the Council in
Trullo and in those of the Seventh Synod there are places which not even
covertly are attacks, or at least reflections, upon the Western customs
of the time.  And it does not seem to be an unjust view of the matter to
detect in the Council of Chalcedon and its canon on the position of the
See of Rome, a beginning of that unhappy spirit which found its full
expression in that most lamentable breaking off of communion between
East and West.

<span id="vi-p61"></span>While, then, as I have pointed out, in the East
the Canon Law was developed and digested side by side and in consonance
with the civil law, in the West the state of things was wholly
different, and while in secular matters the secular power was supposed
to be supreme, there grew up a great body of Ecclesiastical Law, often
at variance with the secular decrees upon the subject.  To trace this,
step by step, is no part of my duty in this excursus, and I shall only
give so brief an outline that the reader may be able to understand the
references in the notes which accompany the Canons in the text.

<span id="vi-p62"></span>Somewhere about the year 500 Dionysius Exiguus,
who was Abbot of a Monastery in Rome, translated a collection of Greek
Canons into Latin for Bishop Stephen of Salona.  At the head of these he
placed fifty of what we now know as the “Canons of the Apostles,” but it
must not be supposed that he was convinced of their Apostolic origin,
for in the Preface to his translation he expressly styles them “Canons
which are said to be by the Apostles,” and adds “quibus plurimi
consensum non prœbuere facilem.” <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md)  
To these he added the canons of Chalcedon with those that council had
accepted, viz., those of Sardica, and a large number passed by African
Synods, and lastly the Papal Decretals from Siricius to Anastasius II.

<span id="vi-p64"></span>The next collection is that of St. Isidore of
Seville, or which is supposed to have been made by him, early in the
seventh century.

<span id="vi-p65"></span>About the middle of the ninth century there
appeared a collection bearing the name of Isidore Mercator, and
containing the “false decretals” which have been so fruitful a theme of
controversial writing.  This collection was made somewhere about the
year 850, and possibly at Mayence.  Many writers in treating of these
decretals, which are undoubtedly spurious, seem to forget that they must
have expressed the prevailing opinions of the day in which they were
forged, of what those early Popes would have been likely to have said,
and that therefore even forgeries as they certainly are, they have a
great historical value which no sound scholar can properly neglect.

<span id="vi-p66"></span>After the collection of St. Isidore we have no
great collection till that of Gratian in 1151.  Gratian was a
Benedictine monk, and he styled his work “A Reconciling of contradictory
canons” (*Concordantia discordantium Canonum*), which well sets forth
what his chief object in view was, but his work had a great future
before it, and all the world <span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span> <span
id="vi-Page_xxxv"></span>knows it as “Gratian’s Decretum,” and with it
begins the “collections” of Canon law, if we consider it as a system in
present force.

<span id="vi-p67"></span>“This great work is divided into three parts. 
The first part, in 101 ‘Distinctions,’ treats of ecclesiastical law, its
origin, principles, and authority, and then of the different ranks and
duties of the clergy.  The second part, in thirty-six ‘Causes,’ treats
of ecclesiastical courts and their forms of procedure.  The third part,
usually called ‘De Consecratione,’ treats of things and rites employed
in the service of religion.  From its first appearance the *Decretum*
obtained a wide popularity, but it was soon discovered that it contained
numerous errors, which were corrected under the directions of successive
Popes down to Gregory XIII.  Nor, although every subsequent generation
has resorted to its pages, is the *Decretum* an authority to this
day—that is, whatever canons or maxims of law are found in it possess
only that degree of legality which they would possess if they existed
separately; their being in the *Decretum* gives them no binding force. 
In the century after Gratian, several supplementary collections of
Decretals appeared.  These, with many of his own, were collected by the
orders of Gregory IX., who employed in the work the extraordinary
learning and acumen of St. Raymond of Pennafort, into five books, known
as the *Decretals* of Gregory IX.  These are in the fullest sense
authoritative, having been deliberately ratified and published by that
Pope (1234).  The *Sext,* or sixth book of the Decretals, was added by
Boniface VIII. (1298).  The *Clementines* are named after Clement V.,
who compiled them out of the canons of the Council of Vienne (1316) and
some of his own constitutions.  The *Extravagantes* of John XXII., who
succeeded Clement V., and the *Extravagantes Communes,* containing the
decretals of twenty-five Popes, ending with Sixtus IV. (1484), complete
the list.  Of these five collections—namely the Decretals, the Sext, the
Clementines, the Extravagants of John XXII. and the Extravagants
Common—the ‘Corpus Juris Ecclesiastici’ of the West is made up.” <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)

<span id="vi-p69"></span>Into this body of canon law of course many of
the canons we shall have to treat of in the following pages have been
incorporated and so far as possible I shall give the reader a reference
which will help his research in this particular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxx:25](2140011.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p11"></span> It was written in Latin but, says Bury
(Appendix to Vol. V. of Gibbon’s *Rome*, p. 525), “was also immediately
after its publication in Latin, issued (perhaps incompletely) in a Greek
form (cf. Zacharia Von Lingenthal, *Gr. Röm. Recht*, p. 6).  Most of the
later Novels are Greek, and Novel vij. \[15, ed. Zach.\] expressly
recognizes the necessity of using ‘the common Greek tongue.’”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxx:26](2140011.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p16"></span> The Pandects or Digest was translated into
Greek by Dorotheus, and Theophilus prepared a Greek paraphrase of the
Institutes.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxx:27](2140011.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p22"></span> Schœll, *Hist. Litt. Grec*., Tome vii., Lib.
vi., chap. xcvij., p. 226.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxxi:28](2140011.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p24"></span> The two collections of John are published with
a translation in the *Bibliotheca Juris Canonici Veteris* of Voellus and
Justellus, Vol. II.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxxi:29](2140011.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p25"></span> *Ibid ut supra*, p. 227.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxxi:30](2140011.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="vi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="vi-p27"></span> The “*Ecloga*” were edited in 1852 by
Zacharia, and again in 1889 by Monferratus.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxxi:31](2140011.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p29"></span> Appendix to Vol. V. of Gibbon’s *Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire*, pp. 525 and 526.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxxii:32](2140011.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p32"></span> Schœll, *ut supra*, p. 229.  The best edition
of the *Basilica* is by W. E. Heimbach in 6 vols. (1833–70).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxxii:33](2140011.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p35"></span> Schœll, *ut ante*, p. 238.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxxii:34](2140011.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="vi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p37"></span> Beveridge, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p37.1"></span>Συνοδικὸν</span> *sive Pandectæ*, Tom. I. of the
original ed.  Reprinted in *Lib. Anglo. Cath. Theol*., appendix to Vol.
XII. of Beveridge’s Works, pp. xxi.–xxxix.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxxii:35](2140011.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p39.1"></span>’</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p39.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p39.3"></span>ξήγησις τῶν ἱερῶν καὶ θείων κανόνων τῶν τε ἁγίων
καὶ σεπτῶν ’Αποστάλων, κ.τ.λ.</span>

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxxiii:36](2140011.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="vi-p42.3"></span>

<span id="vi-p43"></span> Schœll, Hist. Lib. Grec., Tom. VII., p. 241.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxxiii:37](2140011.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p45"></span> Beveridge, *Pandectæ*.  Prol. § XXX.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxxiii:38](2140011.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p47.1"></span>Τῶν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν διάταξεων Συλλογὴ</span>.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxxiii:39](2140011.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p49"></span> Beveridge, *Pandects*, Prol. § XIX.–XXII.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxxiii:40](2140011.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p51"></span> Ibid., Prol. § XVI.–XIX.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxxiii:41](2140011.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p53"></span> Found in Leunclavius, *Jur. Grec. Rom*., Vol.
ii.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxxiii:42](2140011.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="vi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p55.1"></span>Σύνταγμα κατὰ Στοιχεῶν</span>, found in Beveridge’s
*Synodicon*, but (says Schœll) “in a manner very little correct.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxxiv:43](2140011.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p57.1"></span>Πρόχειρον τῶν νόμων</span>.  Of this there have
been many editions since the first, which was that of Paris, 1540,
edited by Snallenberg, without any Latin translation and without notes. 
The first Latin version was published at Cologne in 1547, a second at
Lyons in 1556, and a third at Lausanne in 1580.  At last in 1587, at
Geneva, there appeared an edition in Greek and Latin.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxxiv:44](2140011.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="vi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p58.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p58.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi-p58.3"></span>πιτομὴ τῶν θείῶν καὶ ἰερῶν κανόνων</span>.  This
work is found with a Latin version in the Collection of Lœwenklaw.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxxiv:45](2140011.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p63"></span> Hefele points out that Dr. von Drey’s
contention that “plurimi” refers to the Greeks cannot be sustained if it
is pushed so far as to exclude from the West an acquaintance with these
canons in their Greek form, for, as he well points out, Greek was a
perfectly well understood language at this time in the West, especially
in Italy, where it was largely spoken.  (*A Hist. Christ. Councils*,
Vol. I.  Appendix, p. 449.)

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxxv:46](2140011.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="vi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p68"></span> Addis and Arnold, *A Catholic Dictionary*,
*sub voce* Canon Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Ecumenical Council:  The First Council of
Nice.](2140012.md)
