[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140002)  [Next](2140004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_xi"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>General Introduction.</span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>I.  Method of Treatment.</span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>It</span> is absolutely necessary that a few
words should be said on the general arrangement of the work.  The reader
will find given him in the English tongue, so far as they have come down
to us, all the doctrinal definitions of the Seven Ecumenical Councils
(councils which have always, and still do, receive the unqualified
acceptance of both East and West), and all the canons, disciplinary and
doctrinal, which were enacted by them.  To these has been added a
translation in full of all the canons of the local synods which received
the approval and sanction of the aforesaid Ecumenical Councils.  Besides
this, as throwing light upon the subject, large extracts from the *Acta*
have been given, in fact all that seemed to illustrate the decrees; and,
that nothing might be lacking, in an appendix has been placed a
collection of all the non-synodal canons which have received the
sanction of the Ecumenical Synods, the “Canons of the Apostles” (so
called) being given in full, and the others in a shortened form, for the
most part in the words of the admirable and learned John Johnson.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>This then is the text of the volume; but it
is manifest that it stood in need of much comment to make its meaning
clear to the reader, even if well informed on ordinary matters.  To
provide for this, to each synodal canon there has been added the Ancient
Epitome.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>Of this Epitome Bishop Beveridge treats with
great learning in section xxvi. of his “Prolegomena” to his *Synodicon,*
and shows that while some attributed this epitome to the Greek mediæval
scholiast Aristenus, it cannot be his, as he has taken it for the text
of his commentaries, and has in more than one instance pointed out that
whoever he was who made it had, in his judgment, missed the sense. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>The Epitome must indeed be much older, for
Nicholas Hydruntinus, who lived in the times of Alexis Angelus, when
intending to quote one of the canons of Ephesus, actually quotes words
which are not in that canon, but which are in the Epitome.  “Wherefore,”
says Beveridge, “it is manifest that the Epitome is here cited, and that
under the name of the whole canon.”  This being established we may
justly look upon the Ancient Epitome as supplying us with a very ancient
gloss upon the canons.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>To this Epitome have been added Notes, taken
from most of the great commentators, and Excursuses, largely made up
from the writings of the greatest theologians, canonists, archæologists,
etc., with regard to whom and their writings, all the information that
seems necessary the reader will find in the Bibliographical
Introduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](2140003.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span> Vide Apostolic Canon LXXV., and Ancyr. Canon
XIX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](2140004)
