[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140076)  [Next](2140078.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_70">p. 70</span>
<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-Page_70"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Let</span> those who have been or who
are guilty of bestial lusts, if they have sinned while under twenty
years of age, be prostrators fifteen years, and afterwards communicate
in prayers; then, having passed five years in this communion, let them
have a share in the oblation.  But let their life as prostrators be
examined, and so let them receive indulgence; and if any have been
insatiable in their crimes, then let their time of prostration be
prolonged.  And if any who have passed this age and had wives, have
fallen into this sin, let them be prostrators twenty-five years, and
then communicate in prayers; and, after they have been five years in the
communion of prayers, let them share the oblation.  And if any married
men of more than fifty years of age have so sinned, let them be admitted
to communion only at the point of death.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p5"></span>Whoever shall have commerce with
animals devoid of reason being younger than twenty, shall be a
prostrator for fifteen years.  If he is over that age and has a wife
when he falls into this wickedness he shall be a prostrator for
twenty-five years.  But the married man who shall do so when over fifty
years of age, shall be a prostrator to his life’s end.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p6"></span>It is interesting to compare with
this, as Van Espen does, the canon of the Church of England set forth in
the tenth century under King Edgar, where, Part II., canon xvi., we
read—

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xvi-p7"></span>“If any one twenty years of age
shall defile himself with a beast, or shall commit sodomy let him fast
fifteen years; and if he have a wife and be forty years of age, and
shall do such a deed let him abstain now and fast all the rest of his
life, neither shall he presume until he is dying to receive the Lord’s
body.  Youths and fools who shall do any such thing shall be soundly
trounced.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVII](2140078.md)
