[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140145)  [Next](2140147.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Canon IX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>It</span> behoves the bishops in every
province to acknowledge the bishop who presides in the metropolis, and
who has to take thought for the whole province; because all men of
business come together from every quarter to the metropolis.  Wherefore
it is decreed that he have precedence in rank, and that the other
bishops do nothing extraordinary without him, (according to the ancient
canon which prevailed from \[the times of\] our Fathers) or such things
only as pertain to their own particular parishes and the districts
subject to them.  For each bishop has authority over his own parish,
both to manage it with the piety which is incumbent on every one, and to
make provision for the whole district which is dependent on his city; to
ordain presbyters and deacons; and to settle everything with judgment. 
But let him undertake nothing further without the bishop of the
metropolis; neither the latter without the consent of the others.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p3"></span><span id="page_113">p. 113</span>
<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-Page_113"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p5"></span>Bishops should be bound to the
opinion of the metropolitan, and nothing should they do without his
knowledge except only such things as have reference to the diocese of
each, and let them ordain men free from blame.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p7"></span>From this canon we see that causes of
more importance and greater moment are to be considered in the
Provincial Synod which consisted of the metropolitan and the other
bishops of the province.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p8"></span>By the “ancient canon” of which
mention is here made, there can scarcely be a doubt is intended the
xxxiv. of the Canons of the Apostles, since in it are read the same
provisions (and almost in the same words) as here are set forth somewhat
more at length; nor is there any other canon in which these provisions
are found earlier in date than this synod, wherefore from this is
deduced a strong argument for the integrity of the Canons of the
Apostles.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p9"></span>The wording of this canon should be
compared with the famous sentence so often quoted of St. Irenæus.  “Ad
hanc enim ecclesiam \[i.e. of Rome\] propter potentiorem principalitatem
necesse est omnem convenire ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique
fideles, in quâ semper ab his, qui sunt undique, conservata est eaque
est ab Apostolis traditio.”

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p10"></span>Is it not likely that in the lost
Greek original the words translated *convenire* *ad* were <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>συντρέχειν
ἐν</span>?  Vide on the meaning of *convenire ad*, F. W. Puller, *The
Primitive Saints and the See of Rome*, pp. 32 *et seqq*.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ix-p11"></span>Compare Apostolic Canon XXXIV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon X](2140147.md)
