[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140296)  [Next](2140298.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xv-Page_240"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xv-p1.1"></span>The Definition of the Holy and Ecumenical
Synod of Ephesus Against the Impious Messalians Who are Also Called
Euchetæ and Enthusiasts.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xv-p2"></span>(*Found in Latin only*.  Labbe and
Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III., col. 809.)

<span id="x.xvi.xv-p3"></span>When the most pious and religious bishops,
Valerian and Amphilochius had come to us, they proposed that we should
consider in common the case of the Messalians, that is the Euchetes or
Enthusiasts, who were flourishing in Pamphylia, or by what other name
this most contaminating heresy is called.  And when we were considering
the question, the most pious and religious bishop Valerian, presented to
us a synodical schedule which had been drawn up concerning them in the
great city of Constantinople, under Sisinnius of blessed memory:  What
we read therein was approved by all, as well composed and as a due
presentation of the case.  And it seemed good to us all, and to the most
pious bishops Valerian and Amphilochius and to all the most pious
bishops of the provinces of Pamphylia and Lycaonia, that all things
contained in that Synodical chart should be confirmed and in no way
rescinded; also that the action taken at Alexandria might also be made
firm, so that all those who throughout the whole province are of the
Messalian or Enthusiastic heresy, or suspected of being tainted with
that heresy, whether clerics or laymen, may come together; and if they
shall anathematize in writing, according to the decrees pronounced in
the aforesaid synod \[their errors\], if they are clergymen they may
remain such; and if laymen they may be admitted to communion.  But if
they refuse to anathematize, if they were presbyters or deacons or in
any other ecclesiastical grade, let them be cast out of the clergy and
from their grade, and also from communion; if they be lay-men let them
be anathematized.

<span id="x.xvi.xv-p4"></span>Furthermore those convicted of this heresy
are no more to be permitted to have the rule of our monasteries, lest
tares be sown and increase.  And we give command that the most pious
bishops Valerian and Amphilochius, and the rest of the most reverend
bishops of the whole province shall pay attention that this decree be
carried into effect.  In addition to this it seemed good that the filthy
book of this heresy, which is called the “Asceticon,” should be
anathematized, as composed by heretics, a copy of which the most
religious and pious Valerian brought with him.  Likewise anything
savouring of their impiety which may be found among the people, let it
be anathema.

<span id="x.xvi.xv-p5"></span>Moreover when they come together, let
there be commended by them in writing such things as are useful and
necessary for concord, and communion, and arrangement (*dispositionem
vel dispensationem*).  But should any question arise in connexion with
the present business, and if it should prove to be difficult and
ambiguous, what is not approved by the most pious bishops Valerian and
Amphilochius, and the other bishops throughout the province, they ought
to discuss all things by reference to what is written.  And if the most
pious bishops of the Lycians or of the Lycaonians shall have been passed
over; nevertheless let not a Metropolitan be left out of whatever
province he may be.  And let these things be inserted in the Acts so
that if any have need of them they would find how also to expound these
things more diligently to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note on the Messalians or Massalians.](2140298.md)
