[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140694)  [Next](2140696) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>Canon IX.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p2"></span>That none of the books containing the
heresy of the traducers of the Christians are to be hid.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ix-p3.1"></span>All</span> the childish devices and mad
ravings which have been falsely written against the venerable images,
must be delivered up to the Episcopium of Constantinople, that they may
be locked away with other heretical books.  And if anyone is found
hiding such books, if he be a bishop or presbyter or deacon, let him be
deposed; but if he be a monk or layman, let him be anathema.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ix-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ix-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p6"></span>If any one is found to have concealed a
book written against the venerable images, if he is on the clergy list
let him be deposed; if a layman or monk let him be cut off.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ix-p7.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p8"></span>What here is styled Episcopium was the
palace of the Patriarch.  In this palace were the archives, and this was
called the “Cartophylacium,” in which the charts and episcopal <span
id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span id="xvi.xiv.ix-Page_562"></span>laws
were laid up.  To this there was a prefect, the grand Chartophylax, one
of the principal officials and of most exalted dignity of the Church of
Constantinople, whose office Codinus explains as follows:  “The
Chartophylax has in his keeping all the charts which pertain to
ecclesiastical law (that is to say the letters in which privileges and
other rights of the Church are contained) and is the judge of all
ecclesiastical causes, and presides over marriage controversies which
are taken cognizance of, and proceedings for dissolution of the marriage
bond; moreover, he is judge in other clerical strifes, as the right hand
of the Patriarch.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.ix-p9"></span>In this Cartophylaceum or Archives,
therefore, under the faithful guardianship of the Chartophylax, the
fathers willed that the writings of the Iconoclasts should be laid up,
lest in their perusal simple Catholics might be led astray.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon X](2140696)
