[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140327)  [Next](2140329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.x"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p1.1"></span>Canon X.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p2.1"></span>It</span> shall not be lawful for a
clergyman to be at the same time enrolled in the churches of two cities,
that is, in the church in which he was at first ordained, and in another
to which, because it is greater, he has removed from lust of empty
honour.  And those who do so shall be returned to their own church in
which they were originally ordained, and there only shall they
minister.  But if any one has heretofore been removed from one church to
another, he shall not intermeddle with the affairs of his former church,
nor with the martyries, almshouses, and hostels belonging to it.  And
if, after the decree of this great and ecumenical Synod, any shall dare
to do any of these things now forbidden, the synod decrees that he shall
be degraded from his rank.

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon X.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p5"></span>No cleric shall be recorded on the
clergy-list of the churches of two cities.  But if he shall have strayed
forth, let him be returned to his former place.  But if he has been
transferred, let him have no share in the affairs of his former church.

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p6"></span>Van Espen, following Christian Lupus,
remarks that this canon is opposed to pluralities.  For if a clergyman
has by presentation and institution obtained two churches, he is
enrolled in two churches at the same time, contrary to this canon; but
surely that this be the case, the two churches must needs be in two
cities, and that, in the days of Chalcedon, meant in two dioceses.

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p7.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p8"></span>Here a new institution comes into view,
of which there were many instances.  Julian had directed Pagan hospices
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.x-p8.1"></span>ξενοδοχεῖα</span>
) to be established on the Christian model (*Epist*. xlix.).  The
Basiliad at Cæsarea was a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p8.2"></span>ξενοδοχεῖον</span> as well as a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.x-p8.3"></span>πτωχεῖον</span>; it
contained <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p8.4"></span>καταγώγια τοῖς ξένοις</span>, as well as for
wayfayers, and those who needed assistance on account of illness, and
Basil distinguished various classes of persons engaged in charitable
ministrations, including those who escorted the traveller on his way
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.x-p8.5"></span>τοὺς
παραπέμποντας</span> , *Epist*. xciv.).  Jerome writes to Pammachius: 
“I hear that you have made a ‘xenodochion’ in the port of Rome,” and
adds that he himself had built a “diversorium” for pilgrims to Bethlehem
(*Epist*. xvi., 11, 14).  Chrysostom reminds his auditors at
Constantinople that “there is a common dwelling set apart by the
Church,” and “called a xenon” (*in Act. Hom*., xlv. 4).  His friend
Olympias was munificent to “xenotrophia” (*Hist. Lausiac*, 144).  There
was a xenodochion near the church of the monastic settlement at <span
id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span id="xi.xviii.x-Page_276"></span>Nitria
(*ib.*, 7).  Ischyrion, in his memorial read in the 3d session of
Chalcedon, complains of his patriarch Dioscorus for having misapplied
funds bequeathed by a charitable lady <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.x-p8.6"></span>τοῖς ξενεῶσι καὶ πτωχείοις</span> in Egypt,
and says that he himself had been confined by Dioscorus in a “xenon” for
lepers (Mansi, vi. 1013, 1017).  Justinian mentions xenodochia in Cod.,
i. 3, 49, and their wardens in Novell., 134, 16.  Gregory the Great
orders that the accounts of xenodochia should be audited by the bishop
(*Epist*. iv., 27).  Charles the Great provides for the restoration of
decayed “senodochia” (Capitul. of 803; Pertz, Leg., i. 110); and Alcuin
exhorts his pupil, archbishop Eanbald, to think where in the diocese of
York he could establish “xenodochia, id est, hospitalia” (*Epist. L*.).

<span id="xi.xviii.x-p9"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XXI., Q. I., canon ij.,
and again Causa XXI., Q. II., canon iij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XI](2140329)
