[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140029)  [Next](2140031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> those who call themselves
Cathari, if they come over to the Catholic and Apostolic Church, the
great and holy Synod decrees that they who are ordained shall continue
as they are in the clergy.  But it is before all things necessary that
they should profess in writing that they will observe and follow the
dogmas of the Catholic and Apostolic Church; in particular that they
will communicate with persons who have been twice married, and with
those who having lapsed in persecution have had a period \[of <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="vii.vi.xii-Page_20"></span>penance\]
laid upon them, and a time \[of restoration\] fixed so that in all
things they will follow the dogmas of the Catholic Church.  Wheresoever,
then, whether in villages or in cities, all of the ordained are found to
be of these only, let them remain in the clergy, and in the same rank in
which they are found.  But if they come over where there is a bishop or
presbyter of the Catholic Church, it is manifest that the Bishop of the
Church must have the bishop’s dignity; and he who was named bishop by
those who are called Cathari shall have the rank of presbyter, unless it
shall seem fit to the Bishop to admit him to partake in the honour of
the title.  Or, if this should not be satisfactory, then shall the
bishop provide for him a place as Chorepiscopus, or presbyter, in order
that he may be evidently seen to be of the clergy, and that there may
not be two bishops in the city.

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p5"></span>If those called Cathari come over, let
them first make profession that they are willing to communicate with the
twice married, and to grant pardon to the lapsed.  And on this condition
he who happens to be in orders, shall continue in the same order, so
that a bishop shall still be bishop.  Whoever was a bishop among the
Cathari let him, however, become a Chorepiscopus, or let him enjoy the
honour of a presbyter or of a bishop.  For in one church there shall not
be two bishops.

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p6"></span>The Cathari or Novatians were the
followers of Novatian, a presbyter of Rome, who had been a Stoic
philosopher and was delivered, according to his own story, from
diabolical possession at his exorcising by the Church before his
baptism, when becoming a Catechumen.  Being in peril of death by illness
he received clinical baptism, and was ordained priest without any
further sacred rites being administered to him.  During the persecution
he constantly refused to assist his brethren, and afterwards raised his
voice against what he considered their culpable laxity in admitting to
penance the lapsed.  Many agreed with him in this, especially of the
clergy, and eventually, in <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 251, he induced three bishops to
consecrate him, thus becoming, as Fleury remarks, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) “the first Anti-Pope.”  His indignation
was principally spent upon Pope Cornelius, and to overthrow the
prevailing discipline of the Church he ordained bishops and sent them to
different parts of the empire as the disseminators of his error.  It is
well to remember that while beginning only as a schismatic, he soon fell
into heresy, denying that the Church had the power to absolve the
lapsed.  Although condemned by several councils his sect continued on,
and like the Montanists they rebaptized Catholics who apostatized to
them, and absolutely rejected all second marriages.  At the time of the
Council of Nice the Novatian bishop at Constantinople, Acesius, was
greatly esteemed, and although a schismatic, was invited to attend the
council.  After having in answer to the emperor’s enquiry whether he was
willing to sign the Creed, assured him that he was, he went on to
explain that his separation was because the Church no longer observed
the ancient discipline which forbade that those who had committed mortal
sin should ever be readmitted to communion.  According to the Novatians
he might be exhorted to repentance, but the Church had no power to
assure him of forgiveness but must leave him to the judgment of God.  It
was then that Constantine said, “Acesius, take a ladder, and climb up to
heaven alone.” <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p10"></span>If any of them be bishops or
chorepiscopi they shall remain in the same rank, unless perchance in the
same city there be found a bishop of the Catholic Church, ordained
before their coming.  For in this case he that was properly bishop from
the first shall have the preference, and he alone shall retain the
Episcopal throne.  For it is not right that in the same city there
should be two bishops.  But he who by the Cathari was called bishop,
shall be honoured as a presbyter, or (if it so please the bishop), he
shall be sharer of the title bishop; but he shall exercise no episcopal
jurisdiction.

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p11"></span>Zonaras, Balsamon, Beveridge and Van
Espen, are of opinion that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>χειροθετουμένους</span> does not mean that
they are to receive a new laying on of hands at their reception into the
Church, but that it refers to their already condition of being ordained,
the meaning being that as they have had Novatian ordination they must be
reckoned among the clergy.  Dionysius Exiguus takes a different view, as
does also the *Prisca* version, according to which the <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="vii.vi.xii-Page_21"></span>clergy of
the Novatians were to receive a laying on of hands, <span
class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p11.2"></span>χειροθετουμένους</span>, but that it was
not to be a reordination.  With this interpretation Hefele seems to
agree, founding his opinion upon the fact that the article is wanting
before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xii-p11.3"></span>χειροθετουμένους</span>, and that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xii-p11.4"></span>αὐτοὺς</span> is
added.  Gratian <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) supposes that this
eighth canon orders a re-ordination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[20:68](2140030.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="vii.vi.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p7"></span> Fleury, *Hist. Eccles*. liv. VI., liij.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[20:69](2140030.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="vii.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p8"></span> Socrates, *Hist. Eccl.*, i. 10.  *Vide*
also Tillemont, *Mémoires*, etc., tom. vi., art. 17, and Sozoman, *H.
E*. i. 22.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[21:70](2140030.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="vii.vi.xii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xii-p12"></span> Gratian, *Decretum, Corp. Juris
Canon*, Pars. II. Causa I. Quæst. 7, Can. viij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Chorepiscopi.](2140031.md)
