[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140147)  [Next](2140149.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Canon XI.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>If</span> any bishop, or presbyter, or
any one whatever of the canon shall presume to betake himself to the
Emperor without the consent and letters of the bishop of the province,
and particularly of the bishop of the metropolis, such a one shall be
publicly deposed and cast out, not only from communion, but also from
the rank which he happens to have; inasmuch as he dares to trouble the
ears of our Emperor beloved of God, contrary to the law of the Church. 
But, if necessary business shall require any one to go to the Emperor,
let him do it with the advice and consent of the metropolitan and other
bishops in the province, and let him undertake his journey with letters
from them.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p5"></span>A bishop or presbyter who of his own
motion and not at the bidding of the Metropolitan of the province goes
to the Emperor shall be deprived both of communion and dignity.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p6"></span>This canon is one of those
magnificent efforts which the early church made to check the already
growing inclination to what we have in later times learned to call
Erastianism.  Not only did the State, as soon as it became Christian,
interfere in spiritual matters at its own motion, but there were found
bishops and others of the clergy who not being able to attain their ends
otherwise, appealed to the civil power, usually to the Emperor himself,
and thus the whole discipline of the Church was threatened, and the
authority of spiritual synods set aside.  How unsuccessful the Church
often was in this struggle is only too evident from the remarks of the
Greek commentator Balsamon on this very canon.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xi-p8"></span>Kellner (*Das Buss. und
Strafversahren*, p. 61) remarks with reference to this, that deposition
is here treated as a heavier punishment than exclusion from communion,
and therefore the latter cannot mean actual excommunication but only
suspension.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XII](2140149.md)
