[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140194)  [Next](2140196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Minor Orders of the
Early Church.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p2"></span>(Lightfoot, *Apostolic Fathers*,
Ignatius, Vol. I., p. 258.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3"></span>Some of these lower orders, the
subdeacons, readers, door-keepers, and exorcists, are mentioned in the
celebrated letter of Cornelius bishop of Rome (<span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 251) preserved by
Eusebius (*H. E*., vi., 43), and the readers existed at least half a
century earlier (Tertull., *de Præscr*., 41).  In the Eastern Church,
however, if we except the Apostolic Constitutions, of which the date and
country are uncertain, the first reference to such offices is found in a
canon of the Council of Antioch, <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341, where readers,
subdeacons, and exorcists, are mentioned, this being apparently intended
as an exhaustive enumeration of the ecclesiastical orders below the
diaconate; and for the first mention of door-keepers in the East, we
must go to the still later Council of Laodicea, about <span
class="sc"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 363,
(see III., p. 240, for the references, where also fuller information is
given).  But while most of these lower orders certainly existed in the
West, and probably in the East, as early as the middle of the third
century the case is different with the “singers” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.4"></span>ψάλται</span>)
and the “labourers” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.5"></span>κοπιᾶται</span>).  Setting aside the
Apostolic Constitutions, the first notice of the “singers” occurs in the
canons of the above-mentioned Council of Laodicea.  This, however, may
be accidental.  The history of the word *copiatai* affords a more
precise and conclusive indication of date.  The term first occurs in a
rescript of Constantius (<span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.6"></span>a.d.</span> 357), “clerici qui
copiatai appellantur,” and a little later (<span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p3.7"></span>a.d.</span> 361), the same emperor
speaks of them as “hi quos copiatas *recens usus* instituit nuncupari.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p4"></span>(Adolf Harnack, in his little
book ridiculously intituled in the English version *Sources of the
Apostolic Canons*, page 85.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p5"></span>Exorcists and readers there had
been in the Church from old times, subdeacons are not essentially
strange, as they participate in a name (deacon) which dates from the
earliest days of Christianity.  But acolytes and door-keepers (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>πυλωροί</span>)
are quite strange, are really novelties.  And these acolytes even at the
time of Cornelius stand at the head of the *ordines minores*:  for that
the subdeacons follow on the deacons is self-evident.  Whence do they
come?  Now if they do not spring out of the Christian tradition, their
origin must be explained from the Roman.  It can in fact be shown there
with desirable plainness.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p6"></span>With regard to subdeacons the
reader may also like to see some of Harnack’s speculations.  In the
volume just quoted he writes as follows (p. 85 note):

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p7"></span>According to Cornelius and
Cyprian subdeacons were mentioned in the thirtieth canon <span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-Page_145"></span>of the Synod of Elvira (about
305), so that the sub diaconate must then have been acknowledged as a
fixed general institution in the whole west (see Dale, *The Synod of
Elvira*, Lond., 1882).  The same is seen in the “gesta apud
Zenophilum.”  As the appointment of the lower orders took place at Rome
between about the years 222–249, the announcement in the *Liber
Pontificalis* (see Duchesne’s edition, fasc. 2, 1885, p. 148) is not to
be despised, as according to it Bishop Fabian appointed seven
subdeacons:  “Hic regiones dividit diaconibus et fecit vii.
subdiaconos.”  The Codex Liberianus indeed (see Duchesne, fasc. 1, pp. 4
and 5; Lipsius, *Chronologie d. röm Bischöfe*, p. 267), only contains
the first half of the sentence, and what the *Liber Pontif*. has added
of the account of the appointment of subdeacons (…qui vii notariis
imminerent, ut gestas martyrum in integro fideliter colligerent) is, in
spite of the explanation of Duchesne, not convincing.  According to
Probst and other Catholic scholars the subdiaconate existed in Rome a
long time before Fabian (*Kirchl. Disciplin*, p. 109), but Hippolytus is
against them.  Besides, it should be observed that the officials first,
even in Carthage, are called hypo-deacons, though the word subdiaconus
was by degrees used in the West.  This also points to a Roman origin of
the office, for in the Roman church in the first part of the third
century the Greek language was the prevailing one, but not at Carthage.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p8"></span>But to return to the Acolythes,
and door-keepers, whom Harnack thinks to be copies of the old Roman
temple officers.  He refers to Marquardt’s explanation of the
sacrificial system of the Romans, and gives the following resumé (page
85 *et seqq*.):

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p9"></span>1.  The temples have only
partially their own priests, but they all have a superintendent
(*œdituus-curator templi*).  These *œditui*, who lived in the temple,
fall again into two classes.  At least “in the most important
brotherhoods the chosen *œdituus* was not in a position to undertake in
person the watching and cleaning of the sacellum.  He charged therefore
with this service a freedman or slave.”  “In this case the *sacellum*
had two *œditui*, the temple-keeper, originally called *magister
œdituus*, and the temple-servant, who appears to be called the *œdituus
minister*.”  “To both it is common that they live in the temple,
although in small chapels the presence of the servant is sufficient. 
The temple-servant *opens, shuts, and cleans the sacred place, and shows
to strangers its curiosities, and allows, according to the rules of the
temple, those persons to offer up prayers and sacrifices to whom this is
permitted, while he sends away the others*.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p10"></span>2.  “Besides the endowment, the
colleges of priests were also supplied with a body of servants”—the
under officials—; “they were appointed to the priests,…by all of whom
they were used partly as letter-carriers (*tabellarii*), partly as
scribes, partly as assistants at the sacrifices.”  Marquardt reckons,
(page 218 and fol.) the various categories of them among the sacerdotes
publici, lictores, pullarii, victimarii, tibicines, viatores, sixthly
the calatores, in the priests’ colleges free men or freedmen, not
slaves, *and in fact one* for the personal service of each member.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p11"></span>Here we have the forerunners of
the Church door-keepers and acolytes.  Thus says the fourth Council of
Carthage, as far as refers to the former:  “Ostiarius cum ordinatur,
postquam ab archidiacono instructus fuerit, qualiter in domo dei debeat
conversari, ad suggestionem archidiaconi, tradat ei episcopus claves
ecclesiæ de altari, dicens.  Sic age, quasi redditurus deo rationem pro
his rebus, quæ hisce clavibus recluduntur.”  The ostiarius (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p11.1"></span>πυλωρός</span>)
is thus the ædituus minister.  He had to look after the opening and
shutting of the doors, to watch over the coming in and going out of the
faithful, to refuse entrance to suspicious persons, and, from the date
of the more strict separation between the missa catechumenorum and the
missa fidelium, to close the doors, after the dismissal of the
catechumens, against those doing penance and unbelievers.  He first
became necessary when there were special <span id="page_146">p.
146</span> <span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-Page_146"></span>church buildings
(there were such even in the second century), and they like the temples,
together with the ceremonial of divine service, had come to be
considered as holy, that is, since about 225.  The church acolytes are
without difficulty to be recognised in the under officials of the
priests, especially in the “calatores,” the personal servants of the
priests.  According to Cyprian the acolytes and others are used by
preference as tabellarii.  According to Cornelius there were in Rome
forty-two acolytes.  As he gives the number of priests as forty-six, it
may be concluded with something like certainty that the rule was that
the number of the priests and of the acolytes should be equal, and that
the little difference may have been caused by temporary vacancies.  If
this view is correct, the identity of the calator with the acolyte is
strikingly proved.  But the name “acolyte” plainly shows the acolyte was
not, like the door-keeper, attached to a sacred thing, but to a sacred
person.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p12"></span>(Lightfoot, *Apostolic Fathers,*
Ignatius, *ad Antioch*, xj., note.  Vol. II., Sec. II., p. 240.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p13"></span>The acolytes were confined to
the Western Church and so are not mentioned here.  On the other hand the
“deaconesses” seem to have been confined to the Eastern Church at this
time.  See also *Apost. Const*., iii., 11.; viii., 12; comp. viii.,
19–28, 31; *Apost. Can*., 43; *Conc. Laodic*., Can. 24; Conc. Antioch,
Can. 10.  Of these lower orders the “subdeacons” are first mentioned in
the middle of the third century, in the passage of Cornelius already
quoted and in the contemporary letters of Cyprian.  The “readers” occur
as early as Tertullian *de Præscr*. 41 “hodie diaconus, qui cras
lector,” where the language shows that this was already a firmly
established order in the Church.  Of the “singers” the notices in the
*Apostolical Constitutions* are probably the most ancient.  The
“door-keepers,” like the sub-deacons, seem to be first mentioned in the
letter of Cornelius.  The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p13.1"></span>κοπιῶντες</span> first appear a full
century later; see the next note.  The “exorcists,” as we have seen, are
mentioned as a distinct order by Cornelius, while in *Apost. Const*.,
viii., 26, it is ordered that they shall not be ordained, because it is
a spiritual function which comes direct from God and manifests itself by
its results.  The name and the function, however, appear much earlier in
the Christian Church; *e.g.*, Justin Mart., *Apol*. ii., 6 (p. 45).  The
forms <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p13.2"></span>ἐπορκιστὴς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p13.3"></span>ἐξορκιστὴς</span> are convertible;
*e.g.*, Justin Mart., *Dial.*, 85 (p. 311).  The “confessors” hardly
deserve to be reckoned a distinct order, though accidentally they are
mentioned in proximity with the different grades of clergy in *Apost.
Const*., viii., 12, already quoted.  Perhaps the accidental connexion in
this work has led to their confusion with the offices of the Christian
ministry in our false Ignatius.  In *Apost. Const*., viii., 23, they are
treated in much the same way as the exorcists, being regarded as in some
sense an order and yet not subject to ordination.  Possibly, however,
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p13.4"></span>ὁμολογηταὶ</span> has here a
different sense, “chanters,” as the corresponding Latin “confessores”
seems sometimes to have, *e.g.*, in the Sacramentary of Gregory “Oremus
et pro omnibus episcopis, presbyteris, diaconibus, acolythis,
exorcistis, lectoribus, ostiariis, confessoribus, virginibus, viduis, et
pro omni populo sancto Dei;” see Ducange, *Gloss. Lat*., s.v. (11. p.
530, Henschel).

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p14"></span>In a law of the year 357 (*Cod.
Theod*., xiii., 1) mention is made of “clerici qui copiatæ appellantur,”
and another law of the year 361 (*Cod.* *Theod*. xvi., 2, 15) runs
“clerici vero vel his quos copiatas recens usus instituit nuncupari,”
etc.  From these passages it is clear that the name <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p14.1"></span>κοπιῶντες</span>
was not in use much before the middle of the fourth century, though the
office under its Latin name “fossores” or “fossarii” appears somewhat
earlier.  Even later Epiphanius (*Expos. Fid*., 21) writes as if the
word still needed some explanation.  In accordance with these facts,
Zahn (I. *v*., A. p. 129), correctly argues with regard to our Ignatian
writer, urging that on the one hand he would not have ascribed such
language to Ignatius if the word had been quite recent, while on the
other hand his using the participle (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-p14.2"></span>τοὺς κοπιῶντας</span>) rather than
the substantive indicates that it had not yet firmly established <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxix-Page_147"></span>itself.  For these “copiatæ” see
especially de Rossi, *Roma Sotteranea*, III., p. 533 sq., Gothofred on
*Cod. Theod*., II., cc., and for the Latin “fossores” Martigny, *Dict.
des Antiq. Chrét*. s.v.  See also the inscriptions, *C. I. G*., 9227,
*Bull. de Corr. Hellen*., vii., p. 238, *Journ. of Hellen. Stud*., vi.,
p. 362.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXV](2140196)
