[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140265)  [Next](2140267.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ix.v"></span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.ix.v-p1.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.v-p2.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall divide between two
persons or subsistences those expressions (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix.v-p2.2"></span>φωνάς</span>) which are contained in the
Evangelical and Apostolical writings, or which have been said concerning
Christ by the Saints, or by himself, and shall apply some to him as to a
man separate from the Word of God, and shall apply others to the only
Word of God the Father, on the ground that they are fit to be applied to
God:  let him be anathema.

<span id="x.ix.v-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.ix.v-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.v-p4.1"></span>Nestorius.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p5"></span>IV.

<span id="x.ix.v-p6"></span>If any one assigns the expressions of the
Gospels and Apostolic letters, which refer to the two natures of Christ,
to one only of those natures, and even ascribes suffering to the divine
Word, both in the flesh and in the Godhead; let him be anathema.

<span id="x.ix.v-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.v-p7.1"></span>St. Cyril.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p8"></span>(*Apol. contra Orientales*.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p9"></span>For we neither teach the division of the
hypostases after the union, nor do we say that the nature of the Deity
needs increase and growth; but this rather we hold, that by way of an
economical appropriation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix.v-p9.1"></span>κατ᾽ οἰκείωσιν οἰκονομικὴν</span>), he made his
own the <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="x.ix.v-Page_212"></span>properties of the flesh, as having become
flesh.

<span id="x.ix.v-p10"></span>(*Quod unus est Christus*.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p11"></span>For the wise Evangelist, introducing the
Word as become flesh, shows him economically submitting himself to his
own flesh and going through the laws of his own nature.  But it belongs
to humanity to increase in stature and in wisdom, and, I might add, in
grace, intelligence keeping pace with the measure of the body, and
differing according to age.  For it was not impossible for the Word born
of the Father to have raised the body united to himself to its full
height from the very swaddling-clothes.  I would say also, that in the
babe a wonderful wisdom might easily have *appeared*.  But that would
have approached the thaumaturgical, and would have been incongruous to
the laws of the economy.  For the mystery was accomplished noiselessly. 
Therefore he economically allowed the measures of humanity to have power
over himself.

<span id="x.ix.v-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.v-p12.1"></span>A. B. Bruce.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p13"></span>(*The Humiliation of Christ*.  Appendix to
Lect. II.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p14"></span>The accommodation to the laws of the
economy, according to this passage, consisted in this—in stature, real
growth; in wisdom, apparent growth.  The wonderful wisdom was there from
the first, but it was not allowed to appear (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix.v-p14.1"></span>ἐκφῆναι</span>), to avoid an aspect of
monstrosity.

<span id="x.ix.v-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.v-p15.1"></span>St. Cyril.</span>

<span id="x.ix.v-p16"></span>(*Adversus Nestorium*.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p17"></span>Therefore there would have been shown to
all an unwonted and strange thing, if, being yet an infant, he had made
a demonstration of his wisdom worthy of God; but expanding it gradually
and in proportion to the age of the body, and (in this gradual manner)
making it manifest to all, he might be said to increase (in wisdom) very
appropriately.

<span id="x.ix.v-p18"></span>(*Ad Reginas de recta fide*, Orat. II.,
cap. xvi.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p19"></span>“But the boy increased and waxed strong in
spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.” 
And again:  “Jesus increased in stature and wisdom, and in favour with
God and men.”  In affirming our Lord Jesus Christ to be one, and
assigning to him both divine and human properties, we truly assert that
it was congruous to the measures of the kenosis, on the one hand, that
he should receive bodily increase and grow strong, the parts of the body
gradually attaining their full development; and, on the other hand, that
he should seem to be filled with wisdom, in so far as the manifestation
of the wisdom dwelling within him proceeded, as by addition, most
congruously to the stature of the body; and this, as I said, agreed with
the economy of the Incarnation, and the measures of the state of
humiliation.

<span id="x.ix.v-p20"></span>(*Apol. contra Theod*., ad Anath. iv.)

<span id="x.ix.v-p21"></span>And if he is one and the same in virtue of
the true unity of natures, and is not one and another (two persons)
disjunctively and partitively, to him will belong both to know and to
seem not to know.  Therefore he knows on the divine side as the Wisdom
of the Father.  But since he subjected himself to the measure of
humanity, he economically appropriates this also with the rest,
although, as I said a little ago, being ignorant of nothing, but knowing
all things with the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Anathematism V](2140267.md)
