[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140036)  [Next](2140038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Canon XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> the departing, the ancient
canonical law is still to be maintained, to wit, that, if any man be at
the point of death, he must not be deprived of the last and most
indispensable Viaticum.  But, if any one should be restored to health
again who has received the communion when his life was despaired of, let
him remain among those who communicate in prayers only.  But in general,
and in the case of any dying person whatsoever asking to receive the
Eucharist, let the Bishop, after examination made, give it him.

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p5"></span>The dying are to be communicated.  But
if any such get well, he must be placed in the number of those who share
in the prayers, and with these only.

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xix-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p7"></span>It cannot be denied that antiquity used
the name “Viaticum” not only to denote the Eucharist which was given to
the dying, but also to denote the reconciliation, and imposition of
penance, and in general, everything that could be conducive to the happy
death of the person concerned, and this has been shown by Aubespine
(*lib.* 1, *Obs. cap.* ii.).  But while this is so, the more usual sense
of the word is the Eucharist.  For this cannot be denied that the
faithful of the first ages of the Church looked upon the Eucharist as
the complement of Christian perfection, and as the last seal of <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="vii.vi.xix-Page_30"></span>hope and
salvation.  It was for this reason that at the beginning of life, after
baptism and confirmation, the Eucharist was given even to infants, and
at the close of life the Eucharist followed reconciliation and extreme
unction, so that properly and literally it could be styled “the last
Viaticum.”  Moreover for penitents it was considered especially
necessary that through it they might return to the *peace* of the
Church; for perfect peace is given by that very communion of the
Eucharist.  \[A number of instances are then cited, and various ancient
versions of the canon.\]  Balsamon and Zonaras also understand the canon
as I have done, as is evident from their commentaries, and so did
Josephus Ægyptius, who in his Arabic Paraphrase gives the canon this
title:  “Concerning him who is excommunicated and has committed some
deadly sin, and desires the Eucharist to be granted to him.”

<span id="vii.vi.xix-p8"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici*, Gratian, *Decretum* Pars. II. causa xxvi, Quæs. VI., c. ix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Communion of the Sick.](2140038)
