[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140159)  [Next](2140161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Canon XXIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span>It</span> shall not be lawful for a
bishop, even at the close of life, to appoint another as successor to
himself; and if any such thing should be done, the appointment shall be
void.  But the ecclesiastical law must be observed, that a bishop must
not be appointed otherwise than by a synod and with the judgment of the
bishops, who have the authority to promote the man who is worthy, after
the falling asleep of him who has ceased from his labours.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p5"></span>A dying bishop shall not appoint
another bishop.  But when he is dead a worthy successor shall be
provided by a synod of those who have this power.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p6"></span>Nothing could be more important
than the provision of this canon.  It is evidently intended to prevent
nepotism in every form, and to leave the appointment to the vacant <span
id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-Page_120"></span>see absolutely to the free choice
of the Metropolitan and his synod.  The history of the Church, and its
present practice, is a curious commentary upon the ancient legislation,
and the appointment of coadjutor bishops *cum jure successionis*, so
common in later days, seems to be a somewhat ingenious way of escaping
the force of the canon.  Van Espen, however, reminds his readers of the
most interesting case of St. Augustine of Hippo (which he himself
narrates in his Epistle CCXIII.) of how he was chosen by his predecessor
as bishop of Hippo, both he and the then bishop being ignorant of the
fact that it was prohibited by the canons.  And how when in his old age
the people wished him to have one chosen bishop to help him till his
death and to succeed him afterwards, he declined saying:  “What was
worthy of blame in my own case, shall not be a blot likewise upon my
son.”  He did not hesitate to say who he thought most worthy to succeed
him, but he added, “he shall be a presbyter, as he is, and when God so
wills he shall be a bishop.”  Van Espen adds; “All this should be read
carefully that thence may be learned how St. Augustine set an example to
bishops and pastors of taking all the pains possible that after their
deaths true pastors, and not thieves and wolves, should enter into their
flocks, who in a short time would destroy all they had accomplished by
so much labour in so long a time.”  (Cf. Eusebius.  *H. E.*, Lib. VI.,
cap. xj. and cap. xxxij.)

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p7"></span>Compare Apostolic Canon number
LXXVI.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiii-p8"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa VIII., Quæst. I.,
can. III., in Dionysius’s version, and again Canon IV. in that of Martin
Bracarensis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXIV](2140161.md)
