[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140248)  [Next](2140250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Canon VII.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>Those</span> who from heresy turn to
orthodoxy, and to the portion of those who are being saved, we receive
according to the following method and custom:  Arians, and Macedonians,
and Sabbatians, and Novatians, who call themselves Cathari or Aristori,
and Quarto-decimans or Tetradites, and Apollinarians, we receive, upon
their giving a written renunciation \[of their errors\] and anathematize
every heresy which is not in accordance with the Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church of God.  Thereupon, they are first sealed or anointed
with the holy oil upon the forehead, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears;
and when we seal them, we say, “The Seal of the gift of the Holy
Ghost.”  But Eunomians, who are baptized with only one immersion, and
Montanists, who are here called Phrygians, and Sabellians, who teach the
identity of Father and Son, and do sundry other mischievous things, and
\[the partisans of\] all other heresies—for there are many such here,
particularly among those who come from the country of the Galatians:—all
these, when they desire to turn to orthodoxy, we receive as heathen.  On
the first day we make them Christians; on the second, catechumens; on
the third, we exorcise them by breathing thrice in their face and ears;
and thus we instruct them and oblige them to spend some time in the
Church, and to hear the Scriptures; and then we baptize them.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VII. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) </span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p6"></span>Quarto-decimans or Tetradites, Arians,
Macedonians, Sabbatians, and Apollinarians ought to be received with
their books and anointed in all their organs of sense.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p8"></span>Eunomians baptized with one immersion,
Sabellians, and Phrygians are to be received as heathen.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p9.1"></span>Aristemus</span> (in*Can*. vij.).

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p10"></span>Those giving up their books and
execrating every heresy are received with only anointing with chrism of
the eyes, the nostrils, the ears, the mouth, and the brow; and signing
them with the words, “The Seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p11"></span>For the “Cathari,” see Notes on Canon
viij. of I. Nice.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ix-p12.1"></span>Hammond.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p13"></span>Sabbatians.  Sabbatius was a presbyter
who adopted the sentiments of Novatius, but as it is clear from the
histories of Socrates and Sozomen, that he did not do so till at least
eight years after the celebration of this council, it is of course
equally clear that this canon could not have been framed by this
council.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p14"></span><span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="ix.viii.ix-Page_186"></span>Aristeri.  This is probably a false
reading for Aristi, i.e. the best.  In the letter above mentioned the
expression is Cathari and Catheroteri, i.e. the pure, and the more pure.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p15"></span>The Quarto-decimans, or Tetradites,
were those persons who persisted in observing the Easter festival with
the Jews, on the fourteenth day of the first month, whatever day of the
week it happened to be.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p16"></span>Montanists.  One of the older sects, so
called from Montanus, who embraced Christianity in the second century. 
He professed to be inspired in a peculiar way by the Holy Ghost, and to
prophesy.  He was supported in his errors by two women, Priscilla and
Maximilla, who also pretended to prophesy.  His heresy infected many
persons, amongst others Tertullian, but being condemned by the Church.
his followers formed a sect remarkable for extreme austerity.  But
although they asserted that the Holy Ghost had inspired Montanus to
introduce a system of greater perfection than the Church had before
known, and condemned those who would not join them as carnal, they did
not at first innovate in any of the articles of the Creed.  This sect
lasted a long time, and spread much in Phrygia and the neighbouring
districts, whence they were called Phryges and Cata-phryges, and
latterly adopted the errors of Sabellius respecting the Trinity.

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p17"></span>The other heresies mentioned in this
canon have been treated of in the excursus to Canon j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[185:233](2140249.htm#fr_232) <span
id="ix.viii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.ix-p5"></span> This canon is broken into two by the
Ancient Epitome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Authority of the Second Ecumenical
Council.](2140250)
