[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140708)  [Next](2140710.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span
id="xvi.xv-Page_571"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xv-p1.1"></span>The Letter of the Synod to the Emperor and
Empress.</span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. VII.,
col. 577.)

<span id="xvi.xv-p3"></span>To our most religious and most serene
princes, Constantine and Irene his mother.  Tarasius, the unworthy
bishop of your God-protected royal city, new Rome, and all the holy
Council which met at the good pleasure of God and upon the command of
your Christ-loving majesty in the renowned metropolis of Nice, the
second council to assemble in this city.

<span id="xvi.xv-p4"></span>Christ our God (who is the head of the
Church) was glorified, most noble princes, when your heart, which he
holds in his hands, gave forth that good word bidding us to assemble in
his name, in order that we might strengthen our hold on the sure,
immovable, and God-given truth contained in the Church’s dogmas.  As
your heads were crowned with gold and most brilliant stones, so likewise
were your minds adorned with the precepts of the Gospel and the
teachings of the Fathers.  And being the disciples and companions, as it
were, of those whose sounds went forth into all the earth, ye became the
leaders in the way of piety of all who bore the name of Christ, setting
forth clearly the word of truth, and giving a brilliant example of
orthodoxy and piety; so that ye were to the faithful as so many burning
lamps.  The Church which was ready to fall, ye upheld with your hands,
strengthening it with sound doctrine, and bringing into the unity of a
right judgment those who were at variance.  We may therefore well say
with boldness that it was through you that the good pleasure of God
brought about the triumph of godliness, and filled our mouth with joy
and our tongue with gladness.  And these things our lips utter with a
formal decree.  For what is more glorious than to maintain the Church’s
interests; and what else is more calculated to provoke our gladness?

<span id="xvi.xv-p5"></span>Certain men rose up, having the form of
godliness, inasmuch as they were clothed with the dignity of the
priesthood, but denying the power thereof; and thus deserving for
themselves the charge of being but priests of Babylon.  Of such the word
of prophecy had before declared that “lawlessness went forth from the
priests <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) of Babylon.”  Nay more,
they banded themselves together in a sanhedrim, like to that which
Caiaphas held, and became the propagators of ungodly doctrines.  And
having a mouth full of cursing and bitterness, they thought to win the
mastery by means of abusive words.  With a slanderous tongue and a pen
of a like character, and objecting to the very terms used by God
himself, they devised marvellous tales, and then proceeded to stigmatise
as idolaters the royal priesthood and the holy nation, even those who
had put on Christ, and by his grace had been kept safe from the folly of
idols.  And having a mind set upon evil, they took in hand unlawful
deeds, thinking to suppress altogether the depicting of the venerable
images.  Accordingly, as many icons as were set in mosaic work they dug
out, and those which were in painted waxwork, they scraped away; thus
turning the comely beauty of the sacred temples into complete disorder. 
Among doings of this sort, it is to be specially noted that the pictures
set up on tablets in memory of Christ our God and of his Saints, they
gave over to the flames.  Finally, in a word, having desecrated our
churches, they reduced them to utter confusion.  Then some bishops
became the leaders of this heresy and where before was peace, they
fomented strife among the people; and instead of wheat sowed tares in
the Church’s fields.  They mingled wine with water, and gave the foul
draught to those about them.  Although but Arabian wolves, they hid
themselves under sheeps’ clothing, and by specious reasoning against the
truth sought to commend their lie.  But all the while “they hatched
asps’ eggs and wove a spider’s web,” as says the prophet; and “he that
would eat of their eggs, having crushed one, found it to be addled, with
a basilisk within it,” and giving forth a deadly stench.

<span id="xvi.xv-p7"></span>In such a state of affairs, with a lie busy
destroying the truth, ye, most gracious and <span id="page_572">p.
572</span> <span id="xvi.xv-Page_572"></span>most noble princes, did not
idly allow so grave a plague, and such soul-destroying error long to
continue in your day.  But moved by the divine Spirit which abideth in
you, ye set yourselves with all your strength utterly to exterminate it,
and thus preserve the stability of the Church’s government, and likewise
concord among your subjects; so that your whole empire might be
established in peace agreeably with the name \[Irene\] you bear.  Ye
rightly reasoned, that it was not to be patiently endured, that while in
other matters we could be of one mind and live in concord, yet in what
ought to be the chief concern of our life, the peace of the Churches,
there was amongst us strife and division.  And that too, when Christ
being our head, we ought to be members one of another, and one body, by
our mutual agreement and faith.  Accordingly, ye commanded our holy and
numerously-attended council to assemble in the metropolis of Nice, in
order that after having rid the Church of division, we might restore to
unity the separated members, and might be careful to rend and utterly
destroy the coarse cloak of false doctrine, which they had woven of
thorn fibre, and unfold again the fair robe of orthodoxy.

<span id="xvi.xv-p8"></span>And now having carefully traced the
traditions of the Apostles and Fathers, we are bold to speak.  Having
but one mind by the inbreathing of the most Holy Spirit, and being all
knit together in one, and understanding the harmonious tradition of the
Catholic Church, we are in perfect harmony with the symphonies set forth
by the six, holy and ecumenical councils; and accordingly we have
anathematised the madness of Arius, the frenzy of Macedonius, the
senseless understanding of Appolinarius, the man-worship of Nestorius,
the irreverent mingling of the natures devised by Eutyches and
Dioscorus, and the many-headed hydra which is their companion.  We have
also anathematised the idle tales of Origen, Didymus, and Evagrius; and
the doctrine of one will held by Sergius, Honorius, Cyrus, and Pyrrhus,
or rather, we have anathematised their own evil will.  Finally, taught
by the Spirit, from whom we have drawn pure water, we have with one
accord and one soul, altogether wiped out with the sponge of the divine
dogmas the newly devised heresy, well-worthy to be classed with those
just mentioned, which springing up after them, uttered such empty
nonsense about the sacred icons.  And the contrivers of this vain, but
revolutionary babbling we have cast forth far from the Church’s
precincts.

<span id="xvi.xv-p9"></span>And as the hands and feet are moved in
accordance with the directions of the mind, so likewise, we, having
received the grace and strength of the Spirit, and having also the
assistance and co-operation of your royal authority, have with one voice
declared as piety and proclaimed as truth:  that the sacred icons of our
Lord Jesus Christ are to be had and retained, inasmuch as he was very
man; also those which set forth what is historically narrated in the
Gospels; and those which represent our undefiled Lady, the holy Mother
of God; and likewise those of the Holy Angels (for they have manifested
themselves in human form to those who were counted worthy of the vision
of them), or of any of the Saints.  \[We have also decreed\] that the
brave deeds of the Saints be pourtrayed on tablets and on the walls, and
upon the sacred vessels and vestments, as hath been the custom of the
holy Catholic Church of God from ancient times; which custom was
regarded as having the force of law in the teaching both of those holy
leaders who lived in the first ages of the Church, and also of their
successors our reverend Fathers.  \[We have likewise decreed\] that
these images are to be reverenced (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.1"></span>προσκυνεῖν</span>), that is, salutations are to
be offered to them.  The reason for using the word is, that it has a
two-fold signification.  For <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.2"></span>κυνεῖν</span> in the old Greek tongue signifies
both “to salute” and “to kiss.”  And the preposition <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.3"></span>προς</span> gives to it the
additional idea of strong desire towards the subject; as for example, we
have <span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.4"></span>φέρω</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.5"></span>προσφέρω</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.6"></span>κυρῶ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.7"></span>προσκυρῶ</span>, and so also
we have <span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.8"></span>κυνέω</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.9"></span>προσκυνέω</span>. 
Which last word implies salutation and strong love; for that which one
loves he also reverences (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.10"></span>προσκυνεῖ</span>) and what he reverences that
he greatly loves, as the everyday custom, which we observe towards those
we love, bears witness, and in which both ideas are practically
illustrated when two friends meet together.  The word is not only made
use of by us, but we also find it set down in the Divine Scriptures by
the ancients.  For it is written in the histories of the Kings, <span
id="page_573">p. 573</span> <span id="xvi.xv-Page_573"></span>“And David
rose up and fell upon his face and did reverence to (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.11"></span>προσεκυνήσε</span>)
Jonathan three times and kissed him” ([1 Kings xx.
41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#041)<span id="xvi.xv-p9.12"></span>.md). 
And what is it that the Lord in the Gospel says concerning the
Pharisees?  “They love the uppermost rooms at feasts and greetings
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.13"></span>ἀσπασμοὺς</span>) in
the markets.”  It is evident that by “greetings” here, he means
reverence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.14"></span>προσκύνησιν</span>) for the Pharisees being
very high-minded and thinking themselves to be righteous were eager to
be reverenced by all, but not \[merely\] to be kissed.  For to receive
salutations of this latter sort savoured too much of lowly humility, and
this was not to the Pharisees’ liking.  We have also the example of Paul
the divine Apostle, as Luke in the Acts of the Apostles relates:  “When
we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly, and the day
following Paul went in with us unto James, and all the presbyters were
present.  And when he had saluted (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.15"></span>ἀσπασάμενος</span>) them, he declared
particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his
ministry” ([Acts 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#019)<span id="xvi.xv-p9.16"></span>.md). 
By the salutation here mentioned, the Apostle evidently intended to
render that reverence of honour (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.17"></span>τιμητικὴν προσκύνησιν</span>) which we shew to
one another, and of which he speaks when he says concerning Jacob, that
“he reverenced (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p9.18"></span>προσεκύνησεν</span>) the top of his staff”
([Heb. xi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021.md)<span
id="xvi.xv-p9.19"></span>).  With these examples agrees what Gregory
surnamed Theologus says:  “Honour Bethlehem, and reverence (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p9.20"></span>προσκυνήσον</span>) the
manger.”

<span id="xvi.xv-p10"></span>Now who of those rightly and sincerely
understanding the Divine Scriptures, has ever supposed that these
examples which we have cited speak of the worship in spirit (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p10.1"></span>τῆς ἐν πνεύματι
λατρείας</span>)?  \[Certainly no one has ever thought so\] except
perhaps some persons utterly bereft of sense and ignorant of all
knowledge of the Scriptures and of the teaching of the Fathers.  Surely
Jacob did not adore (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p10.2"></span>ἐλάτρευσεν</span>) the top of his staff; and
surely Gregory Theologus does not bid us to adore (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p10.3"></span>λατρεύειν</span>) the
manger?  By no means.

<span id="xvi.xv-p11"></span>Again, when offering salutations to the
life-giving Cross, we together sing:  “We reverence (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p11.1"></span>προσκυνῶμεν</span>), thy
cross, O Lord, and we also reverence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p11.2"></span>προσκυνῶμεν</span>) the spear which opened the
life-giving side of thy goodness.”  This is clearly but a salutation,
and is so called, and its character is evinced by our touching the
things mentioned with our lips.  We grant that the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p11.3"></span>προσκύνησις</span> is
frequently found in the Divine Scriptures and in the writings of our
learned and holy Fathers for the worship in spirit (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xv-p11.4"></span>ἐπὶ της ἐν πνεύματι
λατρείας</span>), since, being a word of many significations, it may be
used to express that kind of reverence which is service.  As there is
also the veneration of honour, love and fear.  In this sense it is, that
we venerate your glorious and most noble majesty.  So also there is
another veneration which comes of fear alone, thus Jacob venerated
Esau.  Then there is the veneration of gratitude, as Abraham reverenced
the sons of Heth, for the field which he received from them for a
burying place for Sarah his wife.  And finally, those looking to obtain
some gift, venerate those who are above them, as Jacob venerated
Pharaoh.  Therefore because this term has these many significations, the
Divine Scriptures teaching us, “Thou shalt venerate the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve,” says simply that veneration is to be
given to God, but does not add the word “only;” for veneration being a
word of wide meaning is an ambiguous term; but it goes on to say “thou
shalt serve (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p11.5"></span>λατρεύσεις</span>) him only,” for to God alone
do we render latria.

<span id="xvi.xv-p12"></span>The things which we have decreed, being
thus well supported, it is confessedly and beyond all question
acceptable and well-pleasing before God, that the images of our Lord
Jesus Christ as man, and those of the undefiled Mother of God, the
ever-virgin Mary, and of the honourable Angels and of all Saints, should
be venerated and saluted.  And if anyone does not so believe, but
undertakes to debate the matter further and is evil affected with regard
to the veneration due the sacred images, such an one our holy ecumenical
council (fortified by the inward working of the Spirit of God, and by
the traditions of the Fathers and of the Church) anathematises.  Now
anathema is nothing less than complete separation from God.  For if any
are quarrelsome and will not obediently accept what has now been
decreed, they but kick against the pricks, and injure their own souls in
their fighting against Christ.  And in taking pleasure at the insults
which are offered to the Church, they clearly shew themselves <span
id="page_574">p. 574</span> <span id="xvi.xv-Page_574"></span>to be of
those who madly make war upon piety, and are therefore to be regarded as
in the same category with the heretics of old times, and their
companions and brethren in ungodliness.

<span id="xvi.xv-p13"></span>We have sent our brethren and fellow
priests, God-beloved Bishops, together with certain of the Hegumenoi and
clergy, that they may give a full report of our proceedings to your
godly-hearing ears.  In proof and confirmation of what we have decreed,
and also for the assurance of your most religious majesty, we have
submitted proofs from the Fathers, a few of the many we have gathered
together in illustration of the brightly shining truth.

<span id="xvi.xv-p14"></span>And now may the Saviour of us all, who
reigns with you (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xv-p14.1"></span>συμβασιλεύων ὑμῖν</span>) and who was pleased
to vouchsafe his peace to the Churches through you, preserve your
kingdom for many years, and also your council, princes, and faithful
army, and the whole estate of the empire; and may he also give you
victory over all your enemies.  For he it is, who says:  “As I live,
saith the Lord, they that glorify me, I will glorify.”  He it is also
who hath girded you with strength, and will smite all your enemies, and
make your people to rejoice.

<span id="xvi.xv-p15"></span>And do thou, O city, the new Sion, rejoice
and be glad; thou that art the wonder of the whole world.  For although
David hath not reigned in thee, nevertheless thy pious princes here
preside over thy affairs as David would have done.  The Lord is in the
midst of thee; may his name be blessed forever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_544"></span>[571:545](2140709.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="xvi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p6"></span> “Presbyters” in LXX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Two Letters of Gregory II. To the Emperor
Leo.](2140710.md)
