[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140277)  [Next](2140279.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="x.xii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xii-p2.1"></span>Session II.</span>

<span id="x.xii-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 609.)

<span id="x.xii-p4"></span>The most pious and God-beloved bishops,
Arcadius and Projectus, as also the most beloved-of-God Philip, a
presbyter and legate of the Apostolic See, then entered and took their
seats. <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md)

<span id="x.xii-p6"></span>Philip the presbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said:  We bless the holy and adorable Trinity that our
lowliness has been deemed worthy to attend your holy Synod.  For a long
time ago (<span class="Greek"><span id="x.xii-p6.1"></span>πάλαι</span>)
our most holy and blessed pope Cœlestine, bishop of the Apostolic See,
through his letters to that holy and most pious man Cyril, bishop of
Alexandria, gave judgment concerning the present cause and affair (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xii-p6.2"></span>ὥρισεν</span>) which letters
have been shown to your holy assembly.  And now again for the
corroboration of the Catholic (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xii-p6.3"></span>καθολικῆς</span>) faith, he has sent through us
letters to all your holinesses, which you will bid (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xii-p6.4"></span>κελούσατε</span>) to be read
with becoming reverence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xii-p6.5"></span>πρεπόντως</span>) and to be entered on the
ecclesiastical minutes.

<span id="x.xii-p7"></span>Arcadius, a bishop and legate of the Roman
Church said:  May it please your blessedness to give order that the
letters of the holy and ever-to-be-mentioned-with-veneration Pope
Cœlestine, bishop of the Apostolic See, which have been brought by us,
be read, from which your reverence will be able to see what care he has
for all the Churches.

<span id="x.xii-p8"></span>Projectus, a bishop and legate of the Roman
Church said, May it please, etc.  \[*The same as Arcadius had said*
verbatim!\]

<span id="x.xii-p9"></span>And afterwards the most holy and
beloved-of-God Cyril, bishop of the Church of Alexandria, spoke as is
next in order contained; Siricius, notary of the holy Catholic (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xii-p9.1"></span>καθολικῆς</span>) Church of
Rome read it.

<span id="x.xii-p10"></span>Cyril, the bishop of Alexandria said:  Let
the letter received from the most holy and altogether most blessed
Cœlestine, bishop of the Apostolic See of Rome be read to the holy Synod
with fitting honour.

<span id="x.xii-p11"></span>Siricius, notary of the holy Catholic (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xii-p11.1"></span>καθολικῆς</span>) Church of
the city of Rome read it.

<span id="x.xii-p12"></span>And after it was read in Latin, Juvenal, the
bishop of Jerusalem said:  Let the writings of the most holy and blessed
bishop of great Rome which have just been read, be entered on the
minutes.

<span id="x.xii-p13"></span>And all the most reverend bishops prayed
that the letter might be translated and read.

<span id="x.xii-p14"></span>Philip, the presbyter of the Apostolic See
and Legate said:  The custom has been sufficiently complied with, that
the writings of the Apostolic See should first be read in Latin. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md)   But now since your holiness has
<span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="x.xii-Page_220"></span>demanded that they be read in Greek also, it
is necessary that your holiness’s desire should be satisfied; We have
taken care that this be done, and that the Latin be turned into Greek. 
Give order therefore that it be received and read in your holy hearing.

<span id="x.xii-p16"></span>Arcadius and Projectus, bishops and legates
said, As your blessedness ordered that the writings which we brought
should be brought to the knowledge of all, for of our holy brethren
bishops there are not a few who do not understand Latin, therefore the
letter has been translated into Greek and if you so command let it be
read.

<span id="x.xii-p17"></span>Flavian, the bishop of Philippi said:  Let
the translation of the letter of the most holy and beloved of God,
bishop of the Roman Church be received and read.

<span id="x.xii-p18"></span>Peter, the presbyter of Alexandria and
primicerius of the notaries read as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[219:258](2140278.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="x.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p5"></span> It should be noted that in the Acts Cyril is
described as having “the place of the most holy and sacred Archbishop of
the Roman Church Cœlestine.”  Hefele says “that Cyril presided as Pope’s
vicar is asserted also by Mennas of Constantinople and other Greek
bishops in their letter to Pope Vigilius, in Mansi, t. ix., p. 62;
Hardouin, t. iii., p. 10.”  (Hef., *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol. III.,
p. 46, n. 4.)

<span id="fn_258"></span>[219:259](2140278.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="x.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p15"></span> This seems to me to be the climax of
improbable statements.  There are many other things which will induce
the curious reader to suspect that the Acts are not in good shape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of Pope Cœlestine to the Synod of Ephesus.](2140279.md)
