[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140043)  [Next](2140045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on Usury.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p2"></span>The famous canonist Van Espen defines
usury thus:  “Usura definitur lucrum ex mutuo exactum aut
speratum;” <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) and then goes on to
defend the proposition that, “Usury is forbidden by natural, by divine,
and by human law.  The first is proved thus.  Natural law, as far as its
first principles are concerned, is contained in the decalogue; but usury
is prohibited in the decalogue, inasmuch as theft is prohibited; and
this is the opinion of the Master of the Sentences, of St. Bonaventura,
of St. Thomas and of a host of others:  for by the name of theft in the
Law all unlawful taking of another’s goods is prohibited; but usury is
an unlawful, etc.”  For a proof of usury’s being contrary to divine law
he cites [Exod. 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025), [Deut.
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#029), [Luke
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034)<span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.  “The third assertion is proved thus.
 Usury is forbidden by human law:  The First Council of Nice in Canon
VII. deposed from the clergy and from all ecclesiastical rank, clerics
who took usury; and the same thing is the case with an infinite number
of councils, in fact with nearly all *e.g.* Elvira, ij, Arles j,
Carthage iij, Tours iij, etc.  Nay, even the pagans themselves formerly
forbid it by their laws.”  He then quotes Tacitus (*Annal*. lib. v.),
and adds, “with what severe laws the French Kings coerced usurers is
evident from the edicts of St. Louis, Philip IV., Charles IX., Henry
III., etc.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p4"></span>There can be no doubt that Van Espen in
the foregoing has accurately represented and without any exaggeration
the universal opinion of all teachers of morals, theologians, doctors,
Popes, and Councils of the Christian Church for the first fifteen
hundred years.  All interest exacted upon loans of money was looked upon
as usury, and its reception was esteemed a form of theft and
dishonesty.  Those who wish to read the history of the matter in all its
details are referred to Bossuet’s work on the subject, *Traité de
l’Usure*, <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) where they will find
<span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-Page_37"></span>the old, traditional view of the
Christian religion defended by one thoroughly acquainted with all that
could be said on the other side.

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p6"></span>The glory of inventing the new moral
code on the subject, by which that which before was looked upon as
mortal sin has been transfigured into innocence, if not virtue, belongs
to John Calvin!  He made the modern distinction between “interest” and
“usury,” and was the first to write in defence of this then new-fangled
refinement of casuistry. <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)   Luther
violently opposed him, and Melancthon also kept to the old doctrine,
though less violently (as was to be expected); today the whole Christian
West, Protestant and Catholic alike, stake their salvation upon the
truth of Calvin’s distinction!  Among Roman Catholics the new doctrine
began to be defended about the beginning of the eighteenth century, the
work of Scipio Maffei, *Dell’ impiego dell danaro*, written on the laxer
side, having attracted a widespread attention.  The Ballerini affirm
that the learned pope Benedict XIV. allowed books defending the new
morals to be dedicated to him, and in 1830 the Congregation of the Holy
Office with the approval of the reigning Pontiff, Pius VIII., decided
that those who considered the taking of interest allowed by the state
law justifiable, were “not to be disturbed.”  It is entirely
disingenuous to attempt to reconcile the modern with the ancient
doctrine; the Fathers expressly deny that the State has any power to
make the receiving of interest just or to fix its rate, there is but one
ground for those to take who accept the new teaching, viz. that all the
ancients, while true on the moral principle that one must not defraud
his neighbour nor take unjust advantage of his necessity, were in error
concerning the facts, in that they supposed that money was barren, an
opinion which the Schoolmen also held, following Aristotle.  This we
have found in modern times, and amid modern circumstances, to be an
entire error, as Gury, the famous modern casuist, well says, “fructum
producit et multiplicatur per se.” <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p9"></span>That the student may have it in his
power to read the Patristic view of the matter, I give a list of the
passages most commonly cited, together with a review of the conciliar
action, for all which I am indebted to a masterly article by Wharton B.
Marriott in Smith and Cheetham’s *Dictionary of Christian Antiquities*
(*s.v.* Usury).

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p10"></span>Although the conditions of the
mercantile community in the East and the West differed materially in
some respects, the fathers of the two churches are equally explicit and
systematic in their condemnation of the practice of usury.  Among those
belonging to the Greek church we find Athanasius (*Expos. in Ps.* xiv);
Basil the Great (*Hom. in Ps.* xiv). Gregory of Nazianzum (*Orat.* xiv.
*in Patrem tacentem*). Gregory of Nyssa (*Orat. cont. Usurarios*); Cyril
of Jerusalem (*Catech.* iv. c. 37), Epiphanius (*adv. Hæres. Epilog.* c.
24), Chrysostom (*Hom.* xli. *in Genes*), and Theodoret (*Interpr. in
Ps.* xiv. 5, and liv. 11).  Among those belonging to the Latin church,
Hilary of Poitiers (*in Ps.* xiv); Ambrose (*de Tobia liber unus*).
Jerome (*in Ezech.* vi. 18); Augustine *de Baptismo contr. Donatistas*,
iv. 19); Leo the Great (*Epist.* iii. 4), and Cassiodorus (*in Ps.* xiv.
10).

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p11"></span>The canons of later councils differ
materially in relation to this subject, and indicate a distinct tendency
to mitigate the rigour of the Nicæan interdict.  That of the council of
Carthage of the year 348 enforces the original prohibition, but without
the penalty, and grounds the veto on both Old and New Testament
authority, “nemo contra prophetas, nemo contra evangelia facit sine
periculo” (Mansi, iii. 158).  The language, however, when compared with
that of the council of Carthage of the year 419, serves to suggest that,
in the interval, the lower clergy had occasionally been found having
recourse to the forbidden practice, for the general terms of the earlier
canon, “ut non liceat clericis fenerari,” are enforced with <span
id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="vii.vi.xxvi-Page_38"></span>greater
particularity in the latter, “Nec omnino *cuiquam clericorum* liceat de
qualibet re fœnus accipere” (Mansi, iv. 423).  This supposition is
supported by the language of the council of Orleans (<span
class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 538), which
appears to imply that deacons were not prohibited from lending money at
interest, “Et clericus a diaconatu, et supra, pecuniam non commodet ad
usuras” (*ib.* ix. 18).  Similarly, at the second council of Trullanum
(<span class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p11.2"></span>a.d.</span> 692) a
like liberty would appear to have been recognised among the lower clergy
(Hardouin, iii. 1663).  While, again, the Nicæan canon requires the
immediate deposition of the ecclesiastic found guilty of the practice,
the Apostolical canon enjoins that such deposition is to take place only
after he has been admonished and has disregarded the admonition.

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p12"></span>Generally speaking, the evidence
points to the conclusion that the Church imposed no penalty on the
layman.  St. Basil (*Epist*. clxxxviii. can. 12), says that a usurer may
even be admitted to orders, provided he gives his acquired wealth to the
poor and abstains for the future from the pursuit of gain (Migne,
*Patrol. Græc*. xxxii. 275).  Gregory of Nyssa says that usury, unlike
theft, the desecration of tombs, and sacrilege (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p12.1"></span>ἱεροσυλία</span> ), is
allowed to pass unpunished, although among the things forbidden by
Scripture, nor is a candidate at ordination ever asked whether or no he
has been guilty of the practice (Migne, *ib.* xlv. 233).  A letter of
Sidonius Apollinaris (*Epist*. vi. 24) relating an experience of his
friend Maximus, appears to imply that no blame attached to lending money
at the legal rate of interest, and that even a bishop might be a
creditor on those terms.  We find also Desideratus, bishop of Verdun,
when applying for a loan to king Theodebert, for the relief of his
impoverished diocese, promising repayment, “cum usuris legitimis,” an
expression which would seem to imply that in the Gallican church usury
was recognised as lawful under certain conditions (Greg. Tur. *Hist.
Franc*. iii. 34).  So again a letter (*Epist*. ix. 38) of Gregory the
Great seems to shew that he did not regard the payment of interest for
money advanced by one layman to another as unlawful.  But on the other
hand, we find in what is known as archbishop Theodore’s “Penitential”
(*circ*. <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p12.2"></span>a.d.</span> 690) what appears to be a
general law on the subject, enjoining “Sie quis usuras undecunque
exegerit…tres annos in pane et aqua” (c. xxv. 3); a penance again
enjoined in the Penitential of Egbert of York (c. ii. 30).  In like
manner, the legates, George and Theophylact, in reporting their
proceedings in England to pope Adrian I. (<span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p12.3"></span>a.d.</span> 787), state that they have
prohibited “usurers,” and cite the authority of the Psalmist and St.
Augustine (Haddan and Stubbs, *Conc*. iii. 457).  The councils of
Mayence, Rheims, and Châlons, in the year 813, and that of Aix in the
year 816, seem to have laid down the same prohibition as binding both on
the clergy and the laity (Hardouin, *Conc*. iv. 1011, 1020, 1033, 1100).

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p13"></span>Muratori, in his dissertation on the
subject (*Antichità*, vol. i.), observes that “we do not know exactly
how commerce was transacted in the five preceding centuries,” and
consequently are ignorant as to the terms on which loans of money were
effected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[36:96](2140044.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p3"></span> Van Espen, *Dissertatio de Usura*,
Art. I.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[36:97](2140044.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p5"></span> Bossuet, *Œuvres Comp.* xxxj.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[37:98](2140044.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p7"></span> Funk (*Zins und Wucher*, p. 104) says
that Eck and Hoogsträten had already verbally defended this distinction
at Bologna.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[37:99](2140044.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vii.vi.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxvi-p8"></span> Gury, *Comp. Theol. Moral* (Ed.
Ballerini) vol. ii. p. 611.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVIII](2140045)
