[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140337)  [Next](2140339.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xx"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xx-p1.1"></span>Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xx-p2.1"></span>It</span> shall not be lawful, as we have
already decreed, for clergymen officiating in one church to be appointed
to the church of another city, but they shall cleave to that in which
they were first thought worthy to minister; those, however, being
excepted, who have been driven by necessity from their own country, and
have therefore removed to another church.  And if, after this decree,
any bishop shall receive a clergyman belonging to another bishop, it is
decreed that both the received and the receiver shall be excommunicated
until such time as the clergyman who has removed shall have returned to
his own church.

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xx-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xx-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p5"></span>A clergyman of one city shall not be
given a cure in another.  But if he has been driven from his native
place and shall go into another he shall be without blame.  If any
bishop receives clergymen from without his diocese he shall be
excommunicated as well as the cleric he receives.

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p6"></span>It is quite doubtful as to what
“excommunication” means in this canon, probably not anathematism (so
think the commentators) but separation from the communion of the other
bishops, and suspension from the performance of clerical functions.

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xx-p7.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p8"></span>This canon is the third of those which
were originally proposed by Marcian in the end of the sixth session, as
certain articles for which synodical sanction was desirable (see above
Canons iij. and iv.).  It was after they had been delivered by the
Emperor’s own hand to Anatolius of Constantinople that the Council broke
out into plaudits, one of which is sufficiently startling, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xx-p8.1"></span>τῷ ἱερεῖ</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xx-p8.2"></span>τῷ βασιλεῖ</span>
(Mansi, vii., 177).  The imperial draft is in this case very slightly
altered.  A reference is made to a previous determination (i.e., canon
x.) against clerical pluralities, and it is ordered that “clerics
registered as belonging to one church shall not be ranked as belonging
to the church of another city, but must be content with the one in which
they were originally admitted to minister, excepting those who, having
lost their own country, have been compelled to migrate to another
church,”—an exception intelligible enough at such a period.  Eleven
years before, the Vandal Gaiseric had expelled the Catholic bishops
<span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.xx-Page_283"></span>and priests of Western Africa from
their churches:  Quodvultdeus, bishop of Carthage with many of his
clergy, had been “placed on board some unseaworthy vessels,” and yet,
“by the Divine mercy, had been carried safe to Naples” (Vict. Vitens.,
*De Persec. Vandal*., i., 5:  he mentions other bishops as driven into
exile).  Somewhat later, the surge of the Hunnish invasion had
frightened the bishop of Sirmium into sending his church vessels to
Attila’s Gaulish secretary and had swept onward in 447 to within a short
distance of the “New Rome” (Hodgkin, *Italy and her Invaders*, ii.,
54–56).  And the very year of the Council was the most momentous in the
whole history of the “Barbaric” movement.  The bishops who assembled in
October at Chalcedon must have heard by that time of the massacre of the
Metz clergy on Easter Eve, of a bishop of Rheims slain at his own altar,
of the deliverance of Orleans at the prayer of St. Anianus, of “the
supreme battle” in the plain of Chalons, which turned back Attila and
rescued Christian Gaul (Hodgkin, ii., 129–152; Kitchin, *Hist. France*,
i. 61).

<span id="xi.xviii.xx-p9"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. lxxi, c. iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXI](2140339.md)
