[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140052)  [Next](2140054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>On the Keeping of Easter.</span>

<span id="vii.x-p2"></span>From the Letter of the Emperor to all those
not present at the Council.

<span id="vii.x-p3"></span>(*Found in Eusebius*, Vita Const., *Lib.
iii.,* 18–20.)

<span id="vii.x-p4"></span>When the question relative to the sacred
festival of Easter arose, it was universally thought that it would be
convenient that all should keep the feast on one day; for what could be
more beautiful and more desirable, than to see this festival, through
which we receive the hope of immortality, celebrated by all with one
accord, and in the same manner?  It was declared to be particularly
unworthy for this, the holiest of all festivals, to follow the custom
\[the calculation\] of the Jews, who had soiled their hands with the
most fearful of crimes, and whose minds were blinded.  In rejecting
their custom, <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) we may transmit to
our descendants the legitimate mode of celebrating Easter, which we have
observed from the time of the Saviour’s Passion to the present day
\[according to the day of the week\].  We ought not, therefore, to have
anything in common with the Jews, for the Saviour has shown us another
way; our worship follows a more legitimate and more convenient course
(the order of the days of the week); and consequently, in unanimously
adopting this mode, we desire, dearest brethren, to separate ourselves
from the detestable company of the Jews, for it is truly shameful for us
to hear them boast that without their direction we could not keep this
feast.  How can they be in the right, they who, after the death of the
Saviour, have no longer been led by reason but by wild violence, as
their delusion may urge them?  They do not possess the truth in this
Easter question; for, in their blindness and repugnance to all
improvements, they frequently celebrate two passovers in the same year. 
We could not imitate those who are openly in error.  How, then, could we
follow these Jews, who are most certainly blinded by error? for to
celebrate the passover twice in one year is totally inadmissible.  But
even if this were not so, it would still be your duty not to tarnish
your soul by communications with such wicked people \[the Jews\]. 
Besides, consider well, that in such an important matter, and on a
subject of such great solemnity, there ought not to be any division. 
Our Saviour has left us only one festal day of our redemption, that is
to say, of his holy passion, and he desired \[to establish\] only one
Catholic Church.  Think, then, how unseemly it is, that on the same day
some should be fasting whilst others are seated at a banquet; and that
after Easter, some should be rejoicing at feasts, whilst others are
still observing a strict fast.  For this reason, a Divine Providence
wills that this custom should be rectified and regulated in a uniform
way; and everyone, I hope, will agree upon this point.  As, on the one
hand, it is our duty not to have anything in common with the murderers
of our Lord; and as, on the other, the custom now followed by the
Churches of the West, of the South, and of <span id="page_55">p.
55</span> <span id="vii.x-Page_55"></span>the North, and by some of
those of the East, is the most acceptable, it has appeared good to all;
and I have been guarantee for your consent, that you would accept it
with joy, as it is followed at Rome, in Africa, in all Italy, Egypt,
Spain, Gaul, Britain, Libya, in all Achaia, and in the dioceses of Asia,
of Pontus, and Cilicia.  You should consider not only that the number of
churches in these provinces make a majority, but also that it is right
to demand what our reason approves, and that we should have nothing in
common with the Jews.  To sum up in few words:  By the unanimous
judgment of all, it has been decided that the most holy festival of
Easter should be everywhere celebrated on one and the same day, and it
is not seemly that in so holy a thing there should be any division.  As
this is the state of the case, accept joyfully the divine favour, and
this truly divine command; for all which takes place in assemblies of
the bishops ought to be regarded as proceeding from the will of God. 
Make known to your brethren what has been decreed, keep this most holy
day according to the prescribed mode; we can thus celebrate this holy
Easter day at the same time, if it is granted me, as I desire, to unite
myself with you; we can rejoice together, seeing that the divine power
has made use of our instrumentality for destroying the evil designs of
the devil, and thus causing faith, peace, and unity to flourish amongst
us.  May God graciously protect you, my beloved brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[54:113](2140053.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="vii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p5"></span> We must read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.x-p5.1"></span>ἕθους</span>, not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.x-p5.2"></span>ἔθνους</span>, as the Mayence impression of the
edition of Valerius has it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Subsequent History of the Easter
Question.](2140054.md)
