[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140576)  [Next](2140578.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p1.1"></span>Canon LIII.  (Greek lvii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p2"></span>That dioceses should not receive a
bishop except by the consent of its own bishop.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p3.1"></span>Epigonius</span>, the bishop, said:  In
many councils it has been decreed by the sacerdotal assembly that such
communities as are contained in other dioceses and ruled by their
bishops, and which never had any bishops of their own, should not
receive rulers, that is bishops, for themselves except with the consent
of the bishop under whose jurisdiction they have been.  But because some
who have attained a certain domination abhor the communion of the
brethren, or at least, having become depraved, claim for themselves
domination with what is really tyranny, for the most part tumid and
stolid presbyters, who lift up their heads against their own bishops or
else win the people to themselves by feasting them or by malignant
persuasion, that they may by unlawful favour wish to place themselves as
rulers over them; we indeed hold fast that glorious desire of your mind,
most pious brother Aurelius, for thou hast often opposed these things,
paying no heed to such petitioners; but on account of their evil
thoughts and basely conceived designs this I say, that such a community,
which has always been subject in a diocese, ought not to receive a
rector, nor should it ever have a bishop of its own.  Therefore if this
which I have proposed seems good to the whole most holy council, let it
be confirmed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p4"></span>Aurelius, the bishop, said:  I am not
in opposition to the proposition of our brother and fellow bishop:  but
I confess that this has been and shall be my practice concerning those
who were truly of one mind, not only with regard to the Church of
Carthage, but concerning every sacerdotal assemblage.  For there are
many who, as has been said, conspire with the people whom they deceive,
tickling their ears and blandly seducing them, men of vicious lives, or
at least puffed up and separated from this meeting, who think to watch
over their own people, and never come to our council for fear that their
wickedness should be discussed.  I say, if it seems good, that not only
should these not keep their dioceses, but that every effort should be
made to have them expelled by public authority from that church of
theirs which has evilly favoured them, and that they be removed even
from the chief sees.  For it is right that he who cleaves to all the
brethren and the whole council, should possess with full right not only
his church but also the dioceses.  But they who think that the people
suffice them and spurn the love of the brethren, shall not only lose
their dioceses, but (as I have said,) they shall be deprived by public
authority of their own cures as rebels.  Honoratus and Urban, the
bishops, said:  The lofty provision of your holiness obtains the
adherence of the minds of all of us, and I think that by the answer of
all what you have deigned to propose will be confirmed.  All the bishops
said:  Placet, placet.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LIII.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p7"></span>Whoso shall neglect his call to a
synod, and shall despise the charity of his brethren, putting his trust
in the multitude who are with him, let him be deprived of them by the
imperial authority.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p8"></span><span id="page_468">p. 468</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-Page_468"></span>This canon is Canon v. of the
Synod of Carthage of August 28th, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397, beginning with the second
clause.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p10"></span>It is very evident that a diocese
here signifies some town or village lying remote from the Bishop’s City,
but belonging to his jurisdiction; and is to be understood to be a place
distinct from the bishop’s church or cathedral.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.liv-p11"></span>See also Can. 56 and Decr. Anast., 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LIV](2140578.md)
