[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140070)  [Next](2140072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Canon X.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>They</span> who have been made deacons,
declaring when they were ordained that they must marry, because they
were not able to abide so, and who afterwards have married, shall
continue in their ministry, because it was conceded to them by the
bishop.  But if any were silent on this matter, undertaking at their
ordination to abide as they were, and afterwards proceeded to marriage,
these shall cease from the diaconate.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.x-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon X.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p5"></span>Whoso is to be ordained deacon, if
he has before announced to the bishop that he cannot persevere
unmarried, let him marry and let him be a deacon; but if he shall have
kept silence, should he take a wife afterwards let him be cast out.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.x-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p7"></span>The case proposed to the synod and
decided in this canon was as follows:  When the bishop was willing to
ordain two to the diaconate, one of them declared that he did not intend
to bind himself to preserving perpetual continence, but intended to get
married, because he had not the power to remain continent.  The other
said nothing.  The bishop laid his hands on each and conferred the
diaconate.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p8"></span>After the ordination it fell out
that both got married, the question propounded is, What must be done in
each case?  The synod ruled that he who had made protestation at his
ordination should remain in his ministry, “because of the license of the
bishop,” that is that he might contract matrimony after the reception of
the diaconate.  With regard to him who kept silence the synod declares
that he should cease from his ministry.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p9"></span>The resolution of the synod to the
first question shews that there was a general law which bound the
deacons to continence; but this synod judged it meet that the bishops
for just cause might dispense with this law, and this license or
dispensation was deemed to have been given by the bishop if he ordained
him after his protestation at the time of his ordination that he
intended to be married, because he could not remain as he was; giving by
the act of ordination his tacit approbation.  Moreover from this
decision it is also evident that not only was the ordained deacon
allowed to enter but also to use matrimony after his
ordination.…Moreover the deacon who after this protestation entered and
used matrimony, not only remained a deacon, but continued in the
exercise of his ministry.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p10"></span>On the whole subject of Clerical
Celibacy in the Early Church see the Excursus devoted to that matter.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.x-p11"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*.  *Decretum* Pars I., Dist. xxviii, c. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XI](2140072)
