[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140283)  [Next](2140285.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon I.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>Whereas</span> it is needful that they who
were detained from the holy Synod and remained in their own district or
city, for any reason, ecclesiastical or personal, should not be ignorant
of the matters which were thereby decreed; we, therefore, notify your
holiness and charity that if any Metropolitan of a Province, forsaking
the holy and Ecumenical Synod, has joined the assembly of the apostates,
or shall join the same hereafter; or, if he has adopted, or shall
hereafter adopt, the doctrines of Celestius, he has no power in any way
to do anything in opposition to the bishops of the province, since he is
already cast forth from all ecclesiastical communion and made incapable
of exercising his ministry; but he shall himself be subject in all
things to those very bishops of the province and to the neighbouring
orthodox metropolitans, and shall be degraded from his episcopal rank.

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon I.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p5"></span>If a metropolitan, having deserted his
synod, adheres or shall adhere to Celestine, let him be cast out.

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>Nicholas Hydruntinus.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p7"></span>Scholion concerning Celestine and
Celestius.  Whose finds at the end of the fourth canon of the Holy Synod
of Ephesus \[and the same is true of this first canon.  *Ed*.\] “Clerics
who shall have consented to Celestine or Nestorius, should be deposed,”
let him not read “Celestine” with an “n,” but “Celestius” without the
“n.”  For Celestine was the holy and orthodox Pope of Rome, Celestius
was the heretic.

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p8"></span>It is perfectly certain that this was no
ac<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="x.xvi.ii-Page_226"></span>cident on the part of Aristenus, for in
his commentary on Canon V., he expressly says that “Celestine was Bishop
of Rome” and goes on to affirm that, “The Holy Synod decreed that they
who embraced the opinions of Nestorius and Celestine,” etc.  What
perhaps is equally astonishing is that Nicholas Hydruntinus, while
correcting the name, still is of opinion that Celestius was a pope of
Rome and begins his scholion with the title, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>περι Κελεστίνου καὶ Κελεστίου Παπῶν
Ρώμης</span>.  Beveridge well points out that this confusion is all the
more remarkable as in the Kalendar of the Saints observed at that very
time by the Greeks, on the eighth day of April was kept the memory of
“Celestine, Pope of Rome, as a Saint and Champion against the Nestorian
heretics.”  (Bev., *Annot*, in C. v.).

<span id="x.xvi.ii-p9"></span>Simeon the Logothete adds to this epitome
the words, <span class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>καὶ τὸ
ἐξῆς ἀδιοίκητος</span> which are necessary to make the sense complete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Conciliabulum of John of Antioch.](2140285.md)
