[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140000)  [Next](2140002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="ii-Page_vii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> work intrusted to me of preparing this
volume evidently can be divided into two separate parts.  The first, the
collecting of the material needed and the setting of it before the
reader in the English tongue; the other, the preparation of suitable
introductions and notes to the matter thus provided.  Now in each of
these departments two courses were open to the editor:  the one, to be
original; the other, to be a copyist.  I need hardly say that of these
the former offered many temptations.  But I could not fail to recognize
the fact that such a course would greatly take from the real value of
the work, and therefore without any hesitation I have adopted the other
alternative, and have endeavoured, so far as was at all possible, to
keep myself out of the question altogether; and as a general rule even
the translation of the text (as distinguished from the notes) is not
mine but that of some scholar of well-established reputation.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>In the carrying out of this method of procedure
I have availed myself of all the translations which I could find, and
where, after comparing them with the original, I have thought them
substantially accurate, I have adopted them and reproduced them.  Where
I have thought that the translation was misleading, I have amended it
from some other translation, and, I think, in no case have I ventured a
change of translation which rests upon my own judgment alone.  A very
considerable portion, however, of the matter found in this volume is now
translated into English for the first time.  For some of this I am
indebted to my friends, who have most kindly given me every assistance
in their power, but even here no translation has been made from the
Greek without careful reference being had to the traditional
understanding, as handed down in the Latin versions, and wherever the
Latin and Greek texts differ on material points the difference has been
noted.  I have not thought it necessary nor desirable to specify the
source of each particular translation, but I have provided for the use
of the reader a list of all the translations which I have used.  I
should also add that I have not considered any one text sufficiently
well established as to command any deference being paid to it, and that
I have usually followed (for my own convenience rather than for any
other reason) the text contained in Labbe and Cossart’s *Concilia.*  No
doubt Hardouin and Mansi are in some respects superior, but old
prejudices are very strong, and the reader will remember that these
differing *Concilia* gave rise to a hard-fought battle in the history of
the Gallican Church.  I should add, however, that where more recent
students of the subject have detected errors of importance in Labbe’s
text, I have corrected them, usually noting the variety of reading. 
With regard then to the text I entirely disclaim any responsibility, and
the more so as on such a matter my opinion would be entirely valueless. 
And with regard to the translation my responsibility goes no further
than the certifying the reader that, to all intents and purposes, the
meaning of the original is presented to him in the English language and
without interpretation being introduced under the specious guise of
translation.  Some portions are mere literal translations, <span
id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="ii-Page_viii"></span>and some
are done into more idiomatic English, but all—so far as I am able to
judge—are fair renderings of the original, *its ambiguities being duly
preserved.*  I have used as the foundation of the translation of the
canons of the first four synods and of the five Provincial Synods that
most convenient book, *Index Canonum,* by the Rev. John Fulton, D.D.,
D.C.L., in which united to a good translation is a Greek text, very well
edited and clearly printed.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>In preparing the other division of the book,
that is to say, the Introduction and Notes, I have been guided by the
same considerations.  Here will be found no new and brilliant guesses of
my own, but a collection of the most reliable conclusions of the most
weighty critics and commentators.  Where the notes are of any length I
have traced the source and given the exact reference, but for the brief
notes, where I have not thought this necessary, the reader may feel the
greatest confidence that he is not reading any surmises of mine, but
that in every particular what he reads rests upon the authority of the
greatest names who have written on the subject.  In the bibliographical
table already referred to I have placed the authorities most frequently
cited.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>I think it necessary to make a few remarks upon
the rule which I have laid down for myself with regard to my attitude on
controverted questions bearing upon doctrine or ecclesiastical
discipline.  It seems to me that in such a work as the present any
expression of the editor’s views would be eminently out of place.  I
have therefore confined myself to a bare statement of what I conceive to
be the facts of the case, and have left the reader to draw from them
what conclusions he pleases.  I hope that this volume may be equally
acceptable to the Catholic and to the Protestant, to the Eastern and to
the Western, and while I naturally think that the facts presented are
clearly in accordance with my own views, I hope that those who draw from
the same premises different conclusions will find these premises stated
to their satisfaction in the following pages.  And should such be the
case this volume may well be a step toward “the union of all” and toward
“the peace of all the holy churches of God,” for which the unchanging
East has so constantly prayed in her liturgy.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>I wish to explain to the reader one other
principle on which I have proceeded in preparing this volume.  It
professes to be a translation of the decrees and canons of certain
ecclesiastical synods.  It is not a history of those synods, nor is it a
theological treatise upon the truth or otherwise of the doctrines set
forth by those synods in their legislation.  I have therefore carefully
restricted my own historical introductions to a bare statement of such
facts as seemed needed to render the meaning of the matter subsequently
presented intelligible to the reader.  And with regard to doctrine I
have pursued the same course, merely explaining what the doctrine taught
or condemned was, without entering into any consideration of its truth
or falsity.  For the history of the Church and its Councils the reader
must consult the great historians; for a defence of the Church’s faith
he must read the works of her theologians.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>I need hardly say that the overwhelming majority
of the references found in this volume I have had no opportunity of
verifying, no copy of many of the books being (so far as I know) to be
found in America.  I have, however, taken great pains to insure accuracy
in reproducing the references as given in the books from which I have
cited them; this, however, does not give me any feeling of confidence
that they may be relied on, especially as in some cases where I have
been able to look them up, I have found errors of the most serious kind.

<span id="ii-p9"></span><span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span
id="ii-Page_ix"></span>It now only remains that I thank all those who
have assisted me in this work, and especially I must mention his
Excellency the High Procurator of the Holy Governing Synod of Russia,
who directed the bibliographical table of Russian editions of the
Canons, etc., which is found in this volume, to be prepared for me by
Professor Glubokoffski of the Ecclesiastical Academy at St.
Petersburgh.  My special thanks are due to the learned professor just
named for the very admirable manner in which he has performed the work,
and to Mr. W. J. Birkbeck, who has added one more to his numerous
labours for making the West better acquainted with the East by
translating the Russian <span class="sc"><span
id="ii-p9.1"></span>ms.</span> into English.  I cannot but pause here to
remark how deep my regret is that my ignorance of the Russian and Slavic
tongues has prevented me from laying before my readers the treasures of
learning and the stores of tradition and local illustration which these
volumes must contain.  I am, however, extremely well pleased in being
able to put those, who are more fortunate than myself in this respect,
in the way of investigating the matter for themselves, by supplying them
with the titles of the books on the subject.  I desire also to offer my
thanks to Professor Bolotoff for the valuable information he sent me as
well as for a copy of his learned (and often most just) strictures upon
Professor Lauchert’s book, “Die Kanones der wichtigsten altkirchlichen
Concilien nebst den Apostolischen Kanones.”  (Freiburg in B. und
Leipzig, 1896.)

<span id="ii-p10"></span>The Rev. Wm. McGarvey has helped me most kindly
by translating parts of the Second Council of Nice, and one or more of
the African Canons; and by looking over the translation of the entire
African Code.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>The Rev. F. A. Sanborn translated two of St.
Cyril’s letters, and the Rev. Leighton Hoskins the Sardican Canons.  To
these and many other of my friends, who in one way or another helped me,
I wish to return my deep thanks; also to the Nashotah Theological
Seminary and to the Lutheran Theological Seminary at Mt. Airy,
Philadelphia, for having placed their libraries entirely at my disposal;
nor can I end this list without mention of my sister, who has assisted
me most materially through the entire progress of the work, and without
whom I never could have undertaken it.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>When I think of the great number of authors
cited, of the rapidity with which most of the translation has had to be
done, of the difficulty of getting access to the necessary books, and of
the vast range of subjects touched upon (including almost every branch
of ecclesiastical and theological learning), I feel I must throw myself
and my work upon the reader’s indulgence and beg him to take all this in
consideration in making his estimate of the value of the work done.  As
for me, now that it is all finished, I feel like crying out with the
reader, in deep shame at the recollection of the many blunders he has
made in reading the lesson,—“Tu autem, Domine, miserere nobis!”

<span id="ii-p13"></span>In conclusion I would add that nothing I have
written must be interpreted as meaning that the editor personally has
any doubt of the truth of the doctrines set forth by the Ecumenical
Councils of the Christian Church, and I wish to declare in the most
distinct manner that I accept all the doctrinal decrees of the Seven
Ecumenical Synods as infallible and irreformable.

<span id="ii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii-p14.1"></span>Henry R. Percival.</span>

<span id="ii-p15"></span>Pentecost, 1899.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: General Introduction.](2140002.md)
