[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140343)  [Next](2140345.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Canon XXVI.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as we have heard that in
certain churches the bishops managed the church-business without
stewards, it has seemed good that every church having a bishop shall
have also a steward from among its own clergy, who shall manage the
church business under the sanction of his own bishop; that so the
administration of the church may not be without a witness; and that thus
the goods of the church may not be squandered, nor reproach be brought
upon the priesthood; and if he \[i.e., the Bishop\] will not do this, he
shall be subjected to the divine canons.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p5"></span>The Œconomus in all churches must be
chosen from the clergy.  And the bishop who neglects to do this is not
without blame.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p7"></span>As the stream of offerings became
fuller, the work of dispensing them became more complex, until the
archdeacons could no <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-Page_286"></span>longer find time for it, and it was
committed to a special officer called “œconomus” or steward (Bingham,
iii, 12, 1; Transl. of Fleury, iii., 120).  So the Council of Gangra, in
the middle of the fourth century, forbids the church offerings to be
disposed of without consent of the bishop or of the person appointed,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>εἰς οἰκονομίαν
εὐποιϊασ</span> (canon viij.); and St. Basil mentions the œconomi of his
own church (*Epist*., xxiij. 1), and the “<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>ταμίαι</span> of the sacred goods” of his
brother’s at Nyssa (*ib.*, 225).  And although Gregory Nazianzen took
credit to himself for declining to appoint a “stranger” to make an
estimate of the property which of right belonged to the church of
Constantinople, and in fact, with a strange confusion between personal
and official obligations, gave the go-by to the whole question (*Carm.
de Vita sua*, 1479 ff.), his successor, Nectarius, being a man of
business, took care to appoint a “church-steward”; and Chrysostom, on
coming to the see, examined his accounts, and found much superfluous
expenditure (Palladius, *Dial*, p. 19).  Theophilus of Alexandria
compelled two of the Tall Brothers to undertake the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p7.3"></span>οἰκονομία</span> of
the Alexandrian church (Soc., vi. 7); and in one of his extant
directions observes that the clergy of Lyco wish for another “œconomus,”
and that the bishop has consented, in order that the church-funds may be
properly spent (Mansi, iii., 1257).  At Hippo St. Augustine had a
“præpositus domus” who acted as Church-steward (Possidius, *Vit.
August*., xxiv.).  Isidore of Pelusium denounces Martinianus as a
fraudulent “œconomus,” and requests Cyril to appoint an upright one
(*Epist*. ii., 127), and in another letter urges him to put a stop to
the dishonest greed of those who acted as stewards of the same church
(*ib.*, v. 79).  The records of the Council of Ephesus mention the
“œconomus” of Constantinople, the “œconomus” of Ephesus (Mansi, iv.,
1228–1398), and, the “œconomus” of Philadelphia.  According to an extant
letter of Cyril, the “œconomi” of Perrha in Syria were mistrusted by the
clergy, who wished to get rid of them “and appoint others by their own
authority” (*ib.*, vii., 321).  Ibas of Edessa had been complained of
for his administration of church property; he was accused, *e.g.*, of
secreting a jewelled chalice, and bestowing the church revenues, and
gold and silver crosses, on his brother and cousins; he ultimately
undertook to appoint “œconomi” after the model of Antioch (Mansi, vii.,
201).  Proterius, afterwards patriarch of Alexandria and a martyr for
Chalcedonian orthodoxy, was “œconomus” under Dioscorus (*ib.*, iv.,
1017), as was John Talaia, a man accused of bribery, under his successor
(Evag., iii., 12).  There may have been many cases in which there was no
“œconomus,” or in which the management was in the hands of private
agents of the bishop, in whom the Church could put no confidence; and
the Council, having alluded to the office of “œconomus” in canons ij.
and xxv., now observes that some bishops had been managing their church
property without “œconomi,” and thereupon resolves “that every church
which has a bishop shall also have an œconomus” from among its own
clergy, to administer the property of the church under the direction of
its own bishop; so that the administration of the church property may
not be unattested, and thereby waste ensue, and the episcopate incur
reproach.”  Any bishop who should neglect to appoint such an officer
should be punishable under “the divine” (or sacred) “canons.”

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p8"></span>Nearly three years after the Council,
Leo saw reason for requesting Marcian not to allow civil judges, “novo
exemplo,” to audit the accounts of “the œconomi of the church of
Constantinople,” which ought, “secundum traditum morem,” to be examined
by the bishop alone (*Epist*. cxxxvij. 2).  In after days the “great
steward” of St. Sophia was always a deacon; he was a conspicuous figure
at the Patriarch’s celebrations, standing on the right of the altar,
vested in alb and stole, and holding the sacred fan (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>ῥιπίδιον</span>); his
duty was to enter all incomings and outgoings of the church’s revenue in
a charterlary, and exhibit it quarterly, or half yearly, to the
patriarchs; and he governed the church during a vacancy of the see
(Eucholog., pp. 268, 275).  In the West, Isidore of Seville describes
the duties of the “œconomus”; he has to see to the repair and building
of churches, the care of church lands, the cultivation of vineyards, the
payment of clerical stipends, of doles to the widows and the poor, and
of food and clothing to church servants, and even the carrying on of
church law suits,—all “cum jussu et arbitrio sui episcopi” (*Ep. to
Leudefred*, *Op*. ii., 520); and before Isidore’s death the <span
class="sc"><span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p8.2"></span>IV</span>th Council of
Toledo refers to this canon, and orders the bishops to appoint “from
their own clergy those whom the Greeks call œconomi, hoc est, qui vici
episcoporum res ecclesiasticas tractant (canon xlviij., Mansi, x, 631).
 There was an officer named “œconomus” in the old Irish monasteries; see
Reeves’ edition of Adamnan, p. 47.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p9"></span>This Canon is found twice in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XVI., Q.
VII, Canon xxi., and again in Pars I., Dist. LXXXIX., c. iv. <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_293"></span>[286:294](2140344.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxvi-p10"></span> It is curious that both the French
and English translations of Hefele give this reference incorrectly, and
each makes the error, giving Dist. lxxix. instead of lxxxix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXVII](2140345.md)
