[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140154)  [Next](2140156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Canon XVIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>If</span> any bishop ordained to a
parish shall not proceed to the parish to which he has been ordained,
not through any fault of his own, but either because of the rejection of
the people, or for any other reason not arising from himself, let him
enjoy his rank and ministry; only he shall not disturb the affairs of
the Church which he joins; and he shall abide by whatever the full synod
of the province shall determine, after judging the case.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p5"></span>Let a bishop ordained but not
received by his city have his part of the honour, and offer the liturgy
only, waiting for the synod of the province to give judgment.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p7"></span>In canon xvij. the fathers
punished him who when ordained could not be persuaded to go to the
church to which he was assigned.  In the present canon they grant pardon
to him who is willing to take the charge of the diocese, for which he
was consecrated, but is prevented from doing so by the impudence of the
people or else by the incursions of the infidel; and therefore they
allow him to enjoy, in whatever province he may happen to be, the honour
due his rank, viz., his throne, his title, and the exercise of the
episcopal office, with the knowledge and consent of the bishop of the
diocese.  He must not, however, meddle with the affairs of the church of
which he is a guest, that is to say he must not teach, nor ordain, nor
perform any episcopal act without the consent of the bishop of the
diocese; but he must observe quiet, until he learns what he ought to do
by the determination of the full Synod.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p8"></span>Aristenus explains that by keeping
quiet is intended that he should not “use any military help or other
power.”

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xviii-p9"></span>This canon is found twice in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. xcii., c.
iv. and v.; in the versions of Martin Bracarensis and of Dionysius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIX](2140156)
