[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140280)  [Next](2140282.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="x.xv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xv-p2.1"></span>Session III.</span>

<span id="x.xv-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 621.)

<span id="x.xv-p4"></span>Juvenal the bishop of Jerusalem said to
Arcadius and Projectus the most reverend bishops, and to Philip the most
reverend presbyter; Yesterday while this holy and great synod was in
session, when your holiness was present, you demanded after the reading
of the letter of the most holy and blessed bishop of Great Rome,
Cœlestine, that the minutes made in the Acts with regard to the
deposition of Nestorius the heretic should be read.  And thereupon the
Synod ordered this to be done.  Your holiness will be good enough to
inform us whether you have read them and understand their power.

<span id="x.xv-p5"></span>Philip the presbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said:  From reading the Acts we have found what things
have been done in your holy synod with regard to Nestorius.  We have
found from the minutes that all things have been decided in accordance
with the canons and with ecclesiastical discipline.  And now also we
seek from your honour, although it may be useless, that what things have
been read in your synod, the same should now again be read to us also;
so that we may follow the formula (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xv-p5.1"></span>τύπῳ</span>) of the most holy pope Cœlestine (who
committed this same care to us), and of your holiness also, and may be
able to confirm (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xv-p5.2"></span>βεβαιώσαι</span>) the judgment.

<span id="x.xv-p6"></span>\[*Arcadius having seconded Philip’s motion,
Memnon directed the acts to be read which was done by the primicerius of
the notaries*.\]

<span id="x.xv-p7"></span>Philip the presbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said:  There is no doubt, and in fact it has been known in
all ages, that the holy and most blessed Peter, prince (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xv-p7.1"></span>ἔξαρχος</span>) and head of
the Apostles, pillar of the faith, and foundation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xv-p7.2"></span>θεμέλιος</span>) of the
Catholic Church, received the keys of the kingdom from our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Saviour and Redeemer of the human race, and that to him was
given the power of loosing and binding sins:  who down even to to-day
and forever both lives and judges in his successors.  The holy and most
blessed pope Cœlestine, according to due order, is his successor and
holds his place, and us he sent to supply his place in this holy synod,
which the most humane and Christian Emperors have commanded to assemble,
bearing in mind and continually watching over the Catholic faith.  For
they both have kept and are now keeping intact the apostolic doctrine
handed down to them from their most pious and humane grandfathers and
fathers of holy memory down to the present time, etc.

<span id="x.xv-p8"></span>\[*There is no further reference in the speech
to the papal prerogatives*.\]

<span id="x.xv-p9"></span>Arcadius the most reverend bishop and legate
of the Apostolic See said:  Nestorius hath brought us great sorrow.…And
since of his own accord he hath made himself an alien and an exile from
us, we following the sanctions handed down from the beginning by the
holy Apostles, and by the Catholic Church (for they taught what they had
received from our Lord Jesus Christ), also following the types (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xv-p9.1"></span>τύποις</span>) of Cœlestine,
most holy pope of the Apostolic See, who has condescended to send us as
his executors of this business, and also following the decrees of the
holy Synod \[we give this as our conclusion\]:  Let Nestorius know that
he is deprived of all episcopal dignity, and is an alien from the whole
Church and from the communion of all its priests.

<span id="x.xv-p10"></span>Projectus, bishop and legate of the Roman
Church said:  Most clearly from the reading, etc.…Moreover I also, by my
authority as legate of the holy Apostolic See, define, being with my
brethren an executor (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xv-p10.1"></span>ἐκβιβαστὴς</span>) of the aforesaid sentence,
that the beforenamed Nestorius is an <span id="page_224">p. 224</span>
<span id="x.xv-Page_224"></span>enemy of the truth, a corrupter of the
faith, and as guilty of the things of which he was accused, has been
removed from the grade of Episcopal honour, and moreover from the
communion of all orthodox priests.

<span id="x.xv-p11"></span>Cyril, the bishop of Alexandria said:  The
professions which have been made by Arcadius and Projectus, the most
holy and pious bishops, as also by Philip, the most religious presbyter
of the Roman Church, stand manifest to the holy Synod.  For they have
made their profession in the place of the Apostolic See, and of the
whole of the holy synod of the God-beloved and most holy bishops of the
West.  Wherefore let those things which were defined by the most holy
Cœlestine, the God-beloved bishop, be carried into effect, and the vote
cast against Nestorius the heretic, by the holy Synod, which met in the
metropolis of Ephesus be agreed to universally; for this purpose let
there be added to the already prepared acts the proceedings of yesterday
and today, and let them be shewn to their holiness, so that by their
subscription according to custom, their canonical agreement with all of
us may be manifest.

<span id="x.xv-p12"></span>Arcadius the most reverend bishop and legate
of the Roman Church, said:  According to the acts of this holy Synod, we
necessarily confirm with our subscriptions their doctrines.

<span id="x.xv-p13"></span>The Holy Synod said:  Since Arcadius and
Projectus the most reverend and most religious bishops and legates and
Philip, the presbyter and legate of the Apostolic See, have said that
they are of the same mind with us, it only remains, that they redeem
their promises and confirm the acts with their signatures, and then let
the minutes of the acts be shewn to them.

<span id="x.xv-p14"></span>\[*The three then signed*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Two Hundred Holy and Blessed Fathers Who Met at
Ephesus.](2140282.md)
