[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140423)  [Next](2140425.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xli"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xli-p1.1"></span>Canon XL.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xli-p2.1"></span>Since</span> to cleave to God by retiring
from the noise and turmoil of life is very beneficial, it behoves us not
without examination to admit before the proper time those who choose the
monastic life, but to observe respecting them the limit handed down by
our fathers, in order that we may then admit a profession of the life
according to God as for ever firm, and the result of knowledge and
judgment after years of discretion have been reached.  He therefore who
is about to submit to the yoke of monastic life should not be less than
ten years of age, the examination of the matter depending on the
decision of the bishop, whether he considers a longer time more
conducive for his entrance and establishment in the monastic life.  For
although the great Basil in his holy canons decreed that she who
willingly offers to God and embraces virginity, if she has completed her
seventeenth year, is to be entered in the order of virgins: 
nevertheless, having followed the example respecting widows and
deaconesses, analogy and proportion being considered, we have admitted
at the said time those who have chosen the monastic life.  For it is
written in the divine Apostle that a widow is to be elected in the
church at sixty years old:  but the sacred canons have decreed that a
deaconess shall be ordained at forty, since they saw that the Church by
divine grace had gone forth more powerful and robust and was advancing
still further, and they saw the firmness and stability of the faithful
in observing the divine commandments.  Wherefore we also, since we most
rightly comprehend the matter, appoint the benediction of grace to him
who is about to enter the struggle according to God, even as impressing
speedily a certain seal upon him, hereupon introducing him to the
not-long-to-be-hesitated-over and declined, or rather inciting him even
to the choice and determination of good.

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xli-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xli-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XL.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p5"></span>A monk must be ten years old.  Even if
the Divine Basil thought the one shorn should be over seventeen.  But
although the Apostle ordains that a widow to be espoused to the Church
must be sixty, yet the Fathers say a Deaconess is to be ordained at
forty, the Church in the meanwhile having become stronger; so we place
the seal on a monk at an earlier age.

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xli-p6.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xli-p7"></span>The eighteenth canon of Basil the Great
orders that she who offers herself to the Lord and renounces marriage,
ought to be over sixteen or even seventeen years of age:  so that her
promise may be firm and that if she violates it she may suffer the due
penalties.  For, says he, children’s voices are not to be thought of any
value in such matters.  But the present canon admits him who is not less
than ten years and desires to be a monk, but entrusts the determination
of the exact time to the judgment of the hegumenos, whether he thinks it
more advantageous to increase the age-requirement for the entering and
being established in the married life.  But the canon lessens the time
defined by Basil the Great, because the Fathers thought that the Church
by divine grace had grown stronger since then, and was going on more and
more, and that the faithful seemed firmer and more stable for the
observance of the divine commandments.  And for the same reason, viz.,
that the Church was growing better, the sacred canons had lessened the
age of deaconesses, and fixed it at forty years, although the Apostle
himself orders that no widow is to be chosen into the Church under sixty
years of age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XLI](2140425.md)
