[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140657)  [Next](2140659.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p1.1"></span>Canon CXXXIV.  (Continuation of cxxxv.
in the Greek.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p2"></span>Here beginneth the letter directed
from the whole African Council to Boniface, bishop of the City of Rome,
by Faustinus the bishop, and Philip and Asellus the presbyters, legates
of the Roman Church.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p3.1"></span>To</span> the most blessed lord, and our
honourable brother Boniface, Aurelius, Valentine of the primatial See of
Numidia, and others present with us to the number of 217 from the whole
council in Africa.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p4"></span>Since it has pleased the Lord that
our humility should write concerning those things which with us our holy
brethren, Faustinus a fellow-bishop and Philip and Asellus, fellow
presbyters, have done, not to the bishop Zosimus of blessed memory, from
whom they brought commands and letters to us, but to your holiness, who
art constituted in his room by divine authority, we ought briefly to set
forth what has been determined upon by mutual consent; not indeed those
things which are contained in the prolix volumes of the acts, in which,
while charity was preserved, yet we loitered not without some little
labour of altercation, deliberating those things in the acts which now
pertain to the cause.  However the more gratefully would he have
received this news as he would have seen a more peaceful ending of the
matter, my lord and brother, had he been still in the body!  Apiarius
the presbyter, concerning whose ordination, excommunication, and appeal
no small scandal arose not only at Sicca but also in the whole African
Church, has been restored to communion upon his seeking pardon for all
his sins.  First our fellow bishop Urban of Sicca doubtless corrected
whatever in him seemed to need correction.  For there should have been
kept in mind the peace and quiet of the Church not only in the present
but also in the future, since so many evils of such a kind had gone
before, that it was incumbent to take care that like or even graver
evils should be prevented thereafter.  It seemed good to us that the
presbyter Apiarius should be removed from the church of Sicca, retaining
only the honour of his grade, and that he should exercise the office of
the presbyterate wherever else he wished and could, having received a
letter to this effect.  This we granted without difficulty at his own
petition made in a letter.  But truly before this case should be thus
closed, among other things which we were treating of in daily
discussions, the nature of the case demanded that we should ask our
brothers, Faustinus our fellow bishop, and Philip and Asellus our fellow
presbyters, to set forth what they had been enjoined to treat of with us
that they might be inserted in the ecclesiastical acts.  And they
proceeded to make a verbal statement, but when we earnestly asked that
they would present it rather in writing, then they produced the
Commonitory.  This was read to us and also set down in the acts, which
they <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-Page_507"></span>are bringing with them to you.  In
this they were bidden to treat of four things with us, first concerning
the appeal of bishops to the Pontiff of the Roman Church, second that
bishops should not unbecomingly be sailing to court, thirdly concerning
the treating the causes of presbyters and deacons by contiguous bishops,
if they had been wrongly excommunicated by their own, and fourthly
concerning the bishop Urban who should be excommunicated or even sent to
Rome, unless he should have corrected what seemed to need correction. 
Of all which things concerning the first and third, that is that it is
allowed to bishops to appeal to Rome and that the causes of clerics
should be settled by the bishops of their own provinces, already last
year we have taken pains to insinuate, in our letter to the same bishop
Zosimus of venerable memory, that we were willing to observe these
provisions for a little while without any injury to him, until the
search for the statutes of the Council of Nice had been finished.  And
now we ask of your holiness that you would cause to be observed by us
the acts and constitutions of our fathers at the Council of Nice, and
that you cause to be exercised by you there, those things which they
brought in the commonitory:  that is to say, If a bishop shall have been
accused, etc.  \[*Here follows Canon vii.* of Sardica.\]

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p5"></span>Item concerning presbyters and
deacons.  If any bishop has been quickly angered, etc.  \[*Here follows
Canon xvii. of Sardica*.\]

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p6"></span>These are the things which have been
inserted in the acts until the arrival of the most accurate copies of
the Nicene Council, which things, <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484.md) if they are contained there (as in the
Commonitory, which our brethren directed to us from the Apostolic See
alleged) and be even kept according to that order by you in Italy, in no
way could we be compelled either to endure such treatment as we are
unwilling to mention or could suffer what is unbearable: <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md)   but we believe, through the mercy of
our Lord God, while your holiness presides over the Roman Church, we
shall not have to suffer that pride (*istum typhum passuri*).  And there
will be kept toward us, what should be kept with brotherly love to us
who are making no dispute.  You will also perceive according to the
wisdom and the justice which the most Highest has given thee, what
should be observed, <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md) if perchance
the canons of the Council of Nice are other \[than you suppose\].  For
although we have read very many copies, yet never have we read in the
Latin copies that there were any such decrees as are contained in the
commonitory before mentioned.  So too, because we can find them in no
Greek text here, we have desired that there should be brought to us from
the Eastern Churches copies of the decrees, for it is said that there
correct copies of the decrees are to be found.  For which end we beg
your reverence, that you would deign yourself also to write to the
pontiffs of these parts, that is of the churches of Antioch, Alexandria,
and Constantinople, <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) and to any
others also if it shall please your holiness, that thence there may come
to us the same canons decreed by the Fathers in the city of Nice, and
thus you would confer by the help of the Lord this most great benefit
upon all the churches of the West.  For who can doubt that the copies of
the Nicene Council gathered in the Greek empire are most accurate, which
although brought together from so diverse and from such noble Greek
churches are found to agree when compared together?  And until this be
done, the provisions laid down to us in the Commonitory aforesaid,
concerning the appeals of bishops to the pontiff of the Roman Church and
concerning the causes of clerics which should be terminated by the
bishops of their own provinces, we are willing to allow to be observed
until the proof arrives and we trust your blessedness will help us in
this according to the will of God.  The rest of the matters treated and
defined in our synod, since the aforesaid brethren, our fellow bishop
Faustinus, and the presbyters Philip and Asellus are carrying the acts
with them, if you deign to receive them, will make known to your
holiness.  And they signed. <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md)  
Our Lord keep thee to us for many years, most blessed brother.  Alypius,
Augustine, Possidius, Marinus and the rest of the bishops (217) also
signed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p12"></span><span id="page_508">p. 508</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-Page_508"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p12.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXIV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p13"></span>*Urban, the bishop of Siccas, is
either to be excommunicated or else summoned to Rome unless he corrects
what should be corrected by him.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_484"></span>[507:485](2140658.htm#fr_484.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p7"></span> The text here is very uncertain.  I
follow Allies.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[507:486](2140658.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p8"></span> It is evident that the Latin text
here is corrupt in more places than one.  There would seem to be no
doubt that for Migne’s reading *quæ sibi*, the Greek translators had
*quæ si ibi* and accordingly rendered it <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p8.1"></span>ἅτινα ἐὰν ἐκεῖ</span>, and so the text
stands in Labbe and Cossart.  The following sentence is also clearly in
a somewhat altered form from its original.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[507:487](2140658.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p9"></span> L. and C. insert here wrongly a
*nisi*.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[507:488](2140658.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p10"></span> This order of naming the sees is
worthy of note.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[507:489](2140658.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxv-p11"></span> So in the Greek; the Latin reads
*Et alia manu*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon CXXXV](2140659.md)
