[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140138)  [Next](2140140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>All</span> who enter the church of God
and hear the Holy Scriptures, but do not communicate with the people in
prayers, or who turn away, by reason of some disorder, from the holy
partaking of the Eucharist, are to be cast out of the Church, until,
after they shall have made confession, and having brought forth the
fruits of penance, and made <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-Page_109"></span>earnest entreaty, they shall have
obtained forgiveness; and it is unlawful to communicate with
excommunicated persons, or to assemble in private houses and pray with
those who do not pray in the Church; or to receive in one Church those
who do not assemble with another Church.  And, if any one of the
bishops, presbyters, or deacons, or any one in the Canon shall be found
communicating with excommunicated persons, let him also be
excommunicated, as one who brings confusion on the order of the Church.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p5"></span>Whoso comes to church, and
attentively hears the holy Scriptures, and then despises, goes forth
from, and turns his back upon the Communion, let him be cast out, until
after having brought forth fruits of penance, he shall be indulged.  And
whoso communicates with one excommunicated, shall be excommunicated, and
whoso prays with him who prays not with the Church is guilty, and even
whoso receives him who does not attend the services of the Church is not
without guilt.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p7"></span>In the Eighth and Ninth canons of the
Apostles it is set forth how those are to be punished who will not wait
for the prayers, and the holy Communion:  So, too, in the Tenth canon
provision is made with respect to those who communicate with the
excommunicated.  In pursuance of this the present canon provides that
they are to be cut off who come to church and do not wait for the
prayer, and through disorder \[? <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>ἀταξίαν</span>\] <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) will not receive the holy Communion;
for such are to be cast out until with confession they shew forth worthy
penance.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p10"></span>In this canon the Fathers refer to
such as go to church but will not tarry to the prayer nor receive holy
Communion, held back by some perversity or license, that is to say
without any just cause, but petulantly, and by reason of some disorder
\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>ἀταξίαν</span>\]; these are forbidden to
be expelled from the Church, that is to say cut off from the
congregation of the faithful.  But the Fathers call it a turning away
from, not a hatred of the divine Communion, which holds them back from
communion; a certain kind of flight from it, brought about perchance by
reverence and lowliness of mind.  Those who object to communicate by
reason of hatred or disgust, such must be punished not with mere
separation, but by an altogether absolute excommunication, and be cursed
with anathema.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p11"></span>It need hardly be remarked that this
canon has no reference to such of the faithful as tarry to the end of
the service and yet do not partake of the holy sacrament, being held
back by some good reason, recognized by the Church as such.  It will be
remembered that the highest grade of Penitents did this habitually, and
that it was looked upon as a great privilege to be allowed to be present
when the Divine Mysteries were performed, even though those assisting as
spectators might not be partakers of them.  What this canon condemns is
leaving the Church before the service of the Holy Eucharist is done;
this much is clear, the difficulty is to understand just why these
particular people, against whom the canon is directed, did so.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p12"></span>This canon should be compared with
the Apostolic canons viij., ix., x., xj. xij. and xiij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[109:169](2140139.htm#fr_168) <span
id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p8"></span> I confess I do not know what the
phrase <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>κατά
τινα ἀταξίαν</span> means, nor do the Greek Commentators give much
help.  I have translated “by reason of some disorder” in the canon
itself, and in the notes, but Beveridge renders it *propter aliquam
insolentiam*, which to me appears very unsatisfactory.  The *pro quædam
intemperantia* of the ordinary Latin seems no better.  The same word is
used in the next canon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140140)
