[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140709)  [Next](2140711.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_575">p. 575</span> <span
id="xvi.xvi-Page_575"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Two Letters of Gregory II. To
the Emperor Leo.</span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p2"></span>(J. B. Bury, Appendix 14 to Vol. V. of his
edition of Gibbon’s *Rome*. 1898.)

<span id="xvi.xvi-p3"></span>It is incorrect to say that “the two
epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the Acts of the Nicene
Council” \[as Gibbon does\].  In modern collections of the Acts of
Ecclesiastical Councils, they have been printed at the end of the Acts
of the Second Nicene Council.  But they first came to light at the end
of the <span class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvi-p3.1"></span>XVI</span>th.
century and were printed for the first time in the *Annales
Ecclesiastici* of Baronius, who had obtained them from Fronton le Duc. 
This scholar had copied the text from a Greek <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p3.2"></span>ms.</span> at Rheims.  Since then other <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvi-p3.3"></span>mss.</span> have been found,
the earliest belonging to the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p3.4"></span>XI</span>th., if not the Xth century.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p4"></span>In another case we should say that the
external evidence for the genuineness of the epistles was good.  We know
on the authority of Theophanes that Gregory wrote one or more letters to
Leo (<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xvi-p4.1"></span>ἐπιστολὴν
δογματικήν</span> , *sub* <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p4.2"></span>a. m</span>. 6172, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p4.3"></span>οι ἐπιστολῶν</span>, *sub* <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvi-p4.4"></span>a. m</span>. 6221); and we
should have no external reasons to suspect copies dating from about 300
years later.  But the omission of these letters in the Acts of the
Nicene Council, though they are stated to have been read at the council,
introduces a shadow of suspicion.  If they were preserved, how comes it
that they were not preserved in the Acts of the Council, like the letter
of Gregory to the Patriarch Germanus?  There is no trace anywhere of the
Latin originals.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p5"></span>Turning to the contents, we find enough to
convert suspicion into a practical certainty that the documents are
forgeries.  This is the opinion of M. l’abbé Duchesne (the editor of the
*Liber Pontificalis*), M. L. Guérard (*Mélanges d’Archéologie et
d’Histoire*, p. 44 *sqq*., 1890); Mr. Hodgkin (*Italy and her Invaders*,
Vol. vi., p. 501 *sqq*.).  A false date (the beginning of Leo’s reign is
placed in the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xvi-p5.1"></span>XIV</span>th. instead of the <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvi-p5.2"></span>XV</span>th. indiction), and
the false implication that the Imperial territory of the “Ducatus Romæ”
terminated at twenty-four stadia, or three miles, from Rome, point to an
author who was neither a contemporary of Leo nor a resident in Rome. 
But the insolent tone of the letters is enough to condemn them.  Gregory
II. would never have addressed to his sovereign the crude abuse with
which these documents teem.  Another objection (which I have never seen
noticed) is that in the First Letter the famous image of Christ which
was pulled down by Leo, is stated to have been in the “Chalkoprateia”
(bronzesmith’s quarter), whereas, according to the trustworthy sources,
it was above the Chalkâ gate of the Palace.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p6"></span>Rejecting the letters on these
grounds—which are supported by a number of smaller points—we get rid of
the difficulty about a Lombard siege of Ravenna before <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvi-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 727:  a siege
which is not mentioned elsewhere and was doubtless created by the
confused knowledge of the fabricator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Reception of the Seventh Council.](2140711.md)
