[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140141)  [Next](2140143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Canon V.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.v-p2.1"></span>If</span> any presbyter or deacon,
despising this own bishop, has separated himself from the Church, and
gathered a private assembly, and set up an altar; and if, when summoned
by his bishop, he shall refuse to be persuaded and will not obey, even
though he summon him a first and a second time, let such an one be
wholly deposed and have no further remedy, neither be capable of
regaining his rank.  And if he persist in troubling and disturbing the
Church, let him be corrected, as a seditious person, by the civil power.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p3"></span><span id="page_111">p. 111</span>
<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-Page_111"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.v-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.v-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon V.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p5"></span>Any presbyter or deacon who spurns his
bishop, and withdraws from him, and sets up another altar, if after
being thrice called by the bishop, he shall persist in his arrogancy,
let him be deposed and be deprived of all hope of restoration.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p6"></span>It will be noted that the Ancient
Epitome mentions three warnings, and the canon only two.  The epitome in
this evidently follows the Apostolical Canon, number thirty-one.  It is
somewhat curious that Aristenus in commenting on this canon does not
note the discrepancy.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.v-p7.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p8"></span>This canon, together with the
preceding was read from the Code of Canons at the Council of Chalcedon,
at the Fourth Session in connexion with the case of Carosus and
Dorothœus, and of other monks who adhered to them.  And a sentence in
accordance with them was conceived in these words against those who
would not obey the Council in the condemnation of Eutyches, “Let them
know that they together with the monks who are with them, are deprived
of grade, and of all dignity, and of communion, as well as he, so that
they cease to preside over their monasteries:  and if they attempt to
escape, this holy and universal great council decrees the same
punishment shall attach to them, that is to say the external authority,
according to the divine and holy laws of the Fathers, shall carry out
the sentence passed against the contumacious.”

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p9"></span>This canon shews that monks and
clerics who were rebellious were sometimes coerced by the Secular Power,
when the ecclesiastical power was not sufficient to coerce them, and
hence it was that the secular arm was called in.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p10"></span>Compare with this Apostolic Canon
XXXI.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.v-p11"></span>The last clause of this canon is
found in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II.
Causa XI., Quæst VIII. Can. vij.  (The Latin however for “by the civil
power” is, as is pointed out by the Roman Correctors, *per forinsecam
potestatem* or *per forasticam potestatem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VI](2140143)
