[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140303)  [Next](2140305.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.iv-p2.1"></span>Session II.</span>

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span>(L. and C., *Concilia*, Tom. IV., col. 338.)

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span>When all were seated before the rails of the
most holy altar, the most superb and glorious judges and the great
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>ὑπερφυὴς</span>)
senate said; At a former meeting the question was examined of the
condemnation of the most reverend bishop Flavian of blessed memory and
Eusebius, and it was patent to you all with what justice and accuracy
the examination was conducted:  and it was proved that they had been
cruelly and improperly condemned.  What course we should pursue in this
matter became clear after your deliberations.  Now however the question
to be enquired into, studied, and decided, is how the true faith is to
be established, which is the chief end for which this Council has been
assembled.  As we know that ye are to render to God a strict account not
only for your own souls in particular, but as well for the souls of all
of us who desire rightly to be taught all things that pertain to
religion, and that all ambiguity be taken away, by the agreement and
consent of all the holy fathers, and by their united exposition and
doctrine; hasten therefore without any fear of pleasing or displeasing,
to set forth (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p4.2"></span>ἐκθέσθαι</span>) the pure faith, so that they who
do not seem to <span id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="xi.iv-Page_249"></span>believe with all the rest, may be brought to
unity through the acknowledging of the truth.  For we wish you to know
that the most divine and pious lord of the whole world and ourselves
hold the orthodox faith set forth by the 318 and by the 150 holy
fathers, and what also has been taught by the rest of the most holy and
glorious fathers, and in accordance with this is our belief.

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>The most reverend bishops cried; Any other
setting forth (<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>ἔκθεσιν
ἄλλην</span>) no one makes, neither will we attempt it, neither will we
dare to set forth \[anything new\] (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p5.2"></span>ἐκθεσθαι</span>).  For the fathers taught, and in
their writings are preserved, what things were set forth by them, and
further than this we can say nothing.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span>Cecropius, the most reverend bishop of
Sebastopol said:  The matters concerning Eutyches have been examined,
and the most holy archbishop of Rome has given a form (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>τύπον</span>) which we follow
and to his letter we all \[i.e. those in his neighbourhood\] have
subscribed.

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>The most reverend bishops cried:  These are
the opinions of all of us.  The expositions (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p7.1"></span>ἐκτεθέντα</span>) already made are quite
sufficient:  it is not lawful to make any other.

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>The most glorious judges and great senate
said, If it pleases your reverence, let the most holy patriarch of each
province, choosing one or two of his own province and going into the
midst, and together considering the faith, make known to all what is
agreed upon.  So that if, as we desire, all be of one mind, all
ambiguity may be removed:  But if some entertain contrary opinions
(which we do not believe to be the case) we may know what their opinions
are.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>The most reverend bishops cried out, we make
no new exposition in writing.  This is the law, \[i.e. of the Third
Synod\] which teaches that what has been set forth is sufficient.  The
law wills that no other exposition should be made.  Let the sayings of
the Fathers remain fast.

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span>Florentius, the most reverend bishop of
Sardis, said, since it is not possible for those who follow the teaching
of the holy Synod of Nice, which was confirmed rightly and piously at
Ephesus, to draw up suddenly a declaration of faith in accordance with
the faith of the holy fathers Cyril and Celestine, and of the letter of
the most holy Leo, we therefore pray your magnificence to give us time,
so that we may be able to arrive at the truth of the matter with a
fitting document, although so far as we are concerned, who have
subscribed the letter of the most holy Leo, nothing further is needed.

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>Cecropius, the most reverend bishop of
Sebastopol, said, The faith has been well defined by the 318 holy
fathers and confirmed by the holy fathers Athanasius, Cyril, Celestine,
Hilary, Basil, Gregory, and now once again by the most holy Leo:  and we
pray that those things which were decreed by the 318 holy fathers, and
by the most holy Leo be read.

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span>The most glorious judges and great Senate
said:  Let there be read the expositions (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p12.1"></span>ἐκτεθέντα</span>) of the 318 fathers gathered
together at Nice.

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span>Eunomius, the most reverend bishop of
Nicomedia read from a book \[the Exposition of faith of the 318
fathers. <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) \]

<span id="xi.iv-p15"></span>The Exposition of faith of the Council held
at Nice.

<span id="xi.iv-p16"></span>“In the consulate of Paul and Julian” etc.

<span id="xi.iv-p17"></span>“We believe in one God,” etc.

<span id="xi.iv-p18"></span>“But those who say,” etc.

<span id="xi.iv-p19"></span>The most reverend bishops cried out; This is
the orthodox faith; this we all believe:  into this we were baptized;
into this we baptize:  Blessed Cyril so taught:  this is the true
faith:  this is the holy faith:  this is the everlasting faith:  into
this we were baptized:  into this we baptize:  we all so believe:  so
believes Leo, the Pope (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p19.1"></span>ὁ πάπας</span>):  Cyril thus believed:  Pope Leo
so interpreted it.

<span id="xi.iv-p20"></span>The most glorious judges and great senate
said, Let there be read what was set forth by the 150 holy fathers.

<span id="xi.iv-p21"></span>Aëtius, the reverend deacon of
Constantinople read from a book \[the creed of the 150 fathers. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) \]

<span id="xi.iv-p23"></span>*The holy faith which the* 150 *fathers set
forth as consonant to the holy and great Synod of Nice.*

<span id="xi.iv-p24"></span>“We believe in one God,” etc.

<span id="xi.iv-p25"></span>All the most reverend bishops cried out: 
This is the faith of all of us:  we all so believe.

<span id="xi.iv-p26"></span>The reverend archdeacon Aëtius said, There
remains the letter of Cyril of holy <span id="page_250">p. 250</span>
<span id="xi.iv-Page_250"></span>and blessed memory, sometime bishop of
the great city Alexandria, which he wrote to Nestorius, which was
approved by all the most holy bishops assembled in the first Council at
Ephesus, called to condemn the same Nestorius, and which was confirmed
by the subscription of all.  There is also another letter of the same
Cyril, of blessed memory, which he wrote to John, of blessed memory,
sometime bishop of the great city of Antioch, which likewise was
confirmed.  If it be so ordered, I shall read these.

<span id="xi.iv-p27"></span>The most glorious judges and great senate
said, Let the letters of Cyril of blessed memory be read.

<span id="xi.iv-p28"></span>Aëtius, the Archdeacon of the imperial city
Constantinople read.

<span id="xi.iv-p29"></span>To the most reverend and most religious
fellow-priest Nestorius, Cyril sends greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xi.iv-p30"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.iv-p30.1"></span>Καταφλυαροῦσι μὴν κ.τ.λ</span>.  Lat.
Obloquuntur quidem, etc.  *This letter is found among the acts of the
Council of Ephesus*.\]

<span id="xi.iv-p31"></span>Likewise the same Archdeacon Aëtius read
\[the letter of the same holy Cyril of blessed memory to John of
Antioch, on the peace\].

<span id="xi.iv-p32"></span>\[*This letter begins*, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.iv-p32.1"></span>Εὐφραινέθωσαν οἱ οὐρανοὶ
κ.τ.λ</span>.; *and in the Latin* Lætentur cæli.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[249:281](2140304.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p14"></span> Added in the Latin acts.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[249:282](2140304.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p22"></span> Ibid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of Cyril to John of Antioch.](2140305.md)
