[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140160)  [Next](2140162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XXIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span>It</span> is right that what belongs to
the Church be preserved with all care to the Church, with a good
conscience and faith in God, the inspector and judge of all.  And these
things ought to be administered under the judgment and authority of the
bishop, who is entrusted with the whole people and with the souls of the
congregation.  But it should be manifest what is church property, with
the knowledge of the presbyters and deacons about him; so that these may
know assuredly what things belong to the Church, and that nothing be
concealed from them, in order that, when the bishop may happen to depart
this life, the property belonging to the Church being well known, may
not be embezzled nor lost, and in order that the private property of the
bishop may not be disturbed on a pretence that it is part of the
ecclesiastical goods.  For it is just and well-pleasing to God and man
that the private property of the bishop be bequeathed to whomsoever he
will, but that for the Church be kept whatever belongs to the Church; so
that neither the Church may suffer loss, nor the bishop be injured under
pretext of the Church’s interest, nor those who belong to him fall into
lawsuits, and himself, after his death, be brought under reproach.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p5"></span>All the clergy should be cognizant
of ecclesiastical matters; so that when the bishop dies the Church may
preserve her own goods; but what belongs to the bishop shall be disposed
of according to his directions.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>This canon shews the early
discipline according to which the presbyters and deacons of the
episcopal city, who were said to be “about him” or to pertain to his
chair, represented the senate of the church, who together with the
bishop administered the church affairs, and, when the see was vacant,
had the charge of it.  All this Martin of Braga sets forth more clearly
in his version, and I have treated of the matter at large in my work on
*Ecclesiastical Law*, Pars I., Tit. viii.<span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p7.1"></span>, cap. i., where I have shewn that the
Cathedral chapter succeeded to this senate of presbyters and deacons.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>Compare with this canon Apostolical
Canon XL.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>This canon in a somewhat changed
form is found in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars
II., Causa XII., Quæst. I., can. xx., and attributed to “Pope Martin’s
Council”; also compare with this the ensuing canon, number XXI.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXV](2140162)
