[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140301)  [Next](2140303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_244"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>General Introduction.</span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>I should consider it a piece of impertinence
were I to attempt to add anything to what has been already said with
regard to the Council of Chalcedon.  The literature upon the subject is
so great and so bitterly polemical that I think I shall do well in
laying before my readers the Acts, practically complete on all disputed
points, and to leave them to draw their own conclusions.  I shall not,
however, be liable to the charge of unfairness if I quote at some length
the deductions of the Eagle of Meaux, the famous Bossuet, from these
acts; and since his somewhat isolated position as a Gallican gives him a
singular fitness to serve in this and similar questions as a mediator
between Catholics and Protestants, his remarks upon this Council will, I
think, be read with great interest and respect.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>(Bossuet.  *Defensio Dec. Cleri Gallic*. Lib.
VII., cap. xvij.  \[Translation by Allies\].)

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>An important point treated in the Council of
Chalcedon, that is, the establishing of the faith, and the approval of
Leo’s letter, is as follows:  Already almost the whole West, and most of
the Easterns, with Anatolius himself, Bishop of Constantinople, had gone
so far as to confirm by subscription that letter, before the council
took place; and in the council itself the Fathers had often cried out,
“We believe, as Leo:  Peter hath spoken by Leo:  we have all subscribed
the letter:  what has been set forth is sufficient for the Faith:  no
other exposition may be made.”  Things went so far, that they would
hardly permit a definition to be made by the council.  But neither
subscriptions privately made before the council, nor these vehement
cries of the Fathers in the council, were thought sufficient to
tranquillize minds in so unsettled a state of the Church, for fear that
a matter so important might seem determined rather by outcries than by
fair and legitimate discussion.  And the clergy of Constantinople
exclaimed, “It is a few who cry out, not the whole council which
speaks.”  So it was determined, that the letter of Leo should be
lawfully examined by the council, and a definition of faith be written
by the synod itself.  So the acts of foregoing councils being previously
read, the magistrates proposed concerning Leo’s letter, “As we see the
divine Gospels laid before your Piety, let each one of the assembled
bishops declare, whether the exposition of the 318 Fathers at Nice, and
of the 150 who afterwards assembled in the imperial city, agrees with
the letter of the most reverend Archbishop Leo.”

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>After the question as to examining the letter
of Leo was put in this form, it will be worth while to weigh the
sentences and, as they are called, the votes of the Fathers, in order to
understand from the beginning why they approved of the letter; why they
afterwards defended it with so much zeal; why, finally, it was ratified
after so exact an examination of the council.  Anatolius first gives his
sentence.  “The letter of the most holy and religious Archbishop Leo
agrees with the creed of our 318 Fathers at Nice, and of the 150 who
afterwards assembled at Constantinople, and confirmed the same faith,
and with the proceedings at Ephesus under the most blessed Cyril, who is
among the saints, by the Ecumenical and holy Council, when it condemned
Nestorius.  I therefore agree to it, and willingly subscribe to it.” 
These are the words of one plainly deliberating, not blindly subscribing
out of obedience.  The rest say to the same effect:  “It agrees, and I
subscribe.”  Many plainly and expressly, “It agrees, and I therefore
subscribe.”  Some add, “It agrees, and I subscribe, as it is correct.” 
Others, “I am sure that it agrees.”  Others, “As it is concordant, and
has the same aim, we embrace it, and subscribe.”  Others, “This is the
faith we have long held:  this we hold:  in this we were baptized:  in
this we baptize.”  Others, and a great part, “As I see, as I feel, as I
have proved, as I find that it agrees, I subscribe.”  Others, “As I am
persuaded, instructed, informed, that all agrees, I subscribe.”  Many
set forth their dif<span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_245"></span>ficulties, mostly arising from a foreign
language; others from the subject matter, saying, that they had heard
the letter, “and in very many points were assured it was right; some few
words stood in their way, which seemed to point at a certain division in
the person of Christ.”  They add, that they had been informed by
Paschasinus and the Legates “that there is no division, but one Christ;
therefore,” they say, “we agree and subscribe.”  Others after mentioning
what Paschasinus and Lucentius had said, thus conclude:  “By this we
have been satisfied and, considering that it agrees in all things with
the holy Fathers, we agree and subscribe.”  Where the Illyrian bishops,
and others who before that examination had expressed their acclamations
to the letter, again cry out, “We all say the same thing, and agree with
this.”  So that, indeed, it is evident that, in the council itself, and
before it their agreement is based on this that, after weighing the
matter, they considered, they judged, they were persuaded, that all
agreed with the Fathers, and perceived that the common faith of all and
each had been set forth by Leo.  This is that examination of Leo’s
letter, synodically made at Chalcedon, and placed among the acts.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>(*Gallia Orthod*., LIX.)

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>Nor did Anatolius and the other bishops
receive it, until they had deliberated, and found that Leo’s letter
agreed with the preceding councils.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>(*Gallia Orthod*., LX.)

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>But here a singular discussion arises between
the eminent Cardinals Bellarmine and Baronius.  The latter, and with him
a large number of our theologians, recognize the letter of Leo as the
Type and Rule of faith, by which all Churches were bound:  but
Bellarmine, alarmed at the examination which he could not deny, answers
thus:  “Leo had sent his letter to the council, not as containing his
final and definitive sentence, but as an instruction, assisted by which
the bishops might form a better judgment.”  But, most eminent man, allow
me to say that Leo, upon the appeal of Eutyches, and at the demand of
Flavian, composed this letter for a summary of the faith, and sent it to
every Church in all parts, when as yet no one thought about a council. 
Therefore it was not an instruction to the council which he provided,
but an Apostolic sentence which he put forth.  The fact is that out of
this strait there was no other escape:  Baronius will not allow that a
letter, confirmed by so great an authority of the Apostolic See, should
be attributed to any other power but that which is supreme and
indefectible:  Bellarmine will not take that to emanate from the supreme
and indefectible authority, which was subjected to synodical inquiry,
and deliberation.  What, then, is the issue of this conflict, unless
that it is equally evident that the letter was written with the whole
authority of the Apostolic See, and yet subjected, as usual, to the
examination of an Universal Council.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>(*Ib.* LXI.)

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>And in this we follow no other authority
than Leo himself, who speaks thus in his letter to Theodoret:  “What God
had before decreed by our ministry, he confirmed by the irreversible
assent of the whole brotherhood, to shew that what was first put forth
in form by the First See of all, and then received by the judgment of
the whole Christian world, really proceeded from himself.”  Here is a
decree, as Baronius says, but not as Bellarmine says, an instruction: 
here is a judgment of the whole world upon a decree of the Apostolic
See.  He proceeds:  “For in order that the consent of other sees to that
which the Lord of all appointed to preside over the rest might not
appear flattery, nor any other adverse suspicion creep in, persons were
at first found who doubted concerning our judgments.”  And not only
heretics, but even the Fathers of the council themselves, as the acts
bear witness.  <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_246"></span>Here the First See shews a fear of flattery,
if doubt about its judgments were forbidden.  Moreover, “The truth
itself likewise is both more clearly conspicuous, and more strongly
maintained, when after examination confirms what previous faith had
taught.”  Here in plain words he speaks of an examination by the
council, *de fide*, not by himself, as they wretchedly object, but of
that faith which the decretal letter set forth.  And at length that same
letter is issued as the Rule, but confirmed by the assent of the
universal holy Council, or as he had before said, after that it is
confirmed by the irreversible assent of the whole Brotherhood.  Out of
this expression of that great Pontiff, the Gallican clergy drew theirs,
that in questions of faith the judgment is, what Tertullian calls, “not
to be altered;” what Leo calls, “not to be reconsidered,” only when the
assent of the Church is added.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>(*Defens. Dec. Cleri Gall*. VII. xvij.)

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>This certainly no one can be blamed for
holding with him and with the Fathers of Chalcedon.  The forma is set
forth by the Apostolic See, yet it is to be received with a judgment,
and that free, and each bishop individually is inferior to the First,
yet so that all together pass judgment even on his decree.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>They conceived no other way of removing all
doubt; for, after the conclusion of the synod, the Emperor thus
proclaims:  “Let then all profane contentions cease, for he is indeed
impious and sacrilegious, who, after the sentence of so many priests,
leaves anything for his own opinion to consider.”  He then prohibits all
discussion concerning religion; for, says he, “he does an injury to the
judgment of the most religious council, who endeavours to open afresh,
and publicly discuss, what has been once judged, and rightly ordered.” 
Here in the condemnation of Eutyches is the order of Ecclesiastical
judgments in questions of faith.  He is judged by his proper Bishop,
Flavian:  the cause is reheard, reconsidered by the Pope St. Leo; it is
decided by a declaration of the Apostolic See:  after that declaration
follows the examination, inquiry, judgment of the Fathers or bishops, in
a General Council:  after the declaration has been approved by the
judgment of the Fathers no place is any longer left for doubt or
discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session I.](2140303)
