[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140579)  [Next](2140581.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p1.1"></span>Canon LVI.  (Greek lx.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p2"></span>*That bishops who were ordained for
dioceses shall not choose for themselves dioceses \[*in the Greek
*provinces\].*

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p3.1"></span>Honoratus</span> and Urban, the bishops,
said:  We have heard that it has been decreed that dioceses should not
be deemed fit to receive bishops, unless with the consent of their
founder:  but in our province since some have been ordained bishops in
the diocese, by the consent of that bishop by whose power they were
established, have even seized dioceses for themselves, this should be
corrected by the judgment of your charity, and prohibited for the
future.  Epigonius, the bishop, said:  To every bishop should be
reserved what is right, so that from the mass of dioceses no part should
be snatched away, so as to have its own bishop, without consent from the
proper authority.  For it shall suffice, if the consent be given, that
the diocese thus set apart have its own bishop <span id="page_470">p.
470</span> <span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-Page_470"></span>only, and let
him <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) not seize other dioceses,
for only the one cut off from the many merited the honour of receiving a
bishop.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  I do not doubt that it is pleasing
to the charity of you all, that he who was ordained for a diocese by the
consent of the bishop who held the mother see, should retain only the
people for whom he was ordained.  Since therefore I think that
everything has been treated of, if all things are agreeable to your
mind, pray confirm them all by your suffrage.  All the bishops said:  We
all are well pleased, and we have confirmed them with our subscription. 
And they signed their names.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p5"></span>I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of
Carthage, have consented to this decree, and have subscribed what has
been read.  So too did all the other bishops in like fashion sign.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p6"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p6.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p7.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p8"></span>If any diocese has received consent
to have a bishop of its own from him who has the right, that one shall
not invade the rest of the dioceses.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p9"></span>This is the last part of Canon vij.
of the Synod of Carthage, August 28, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p10.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p11"></span>It had scarce been worth while to
give so much of this canon in English if I had not thought it proper, in
order to confirm the sense of the word diocese, mentioned in note on
Can. 53, viz., a town or village, where there is a church subject to the
bishop of the city.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p12"></span>Between this canon and the
following, there is a reference to a former council at Carthage
forbidding bishops to sail, without a formal letter from the Primate;
and this said to be done when Cæsarius and Atticus were consuls, anno
æræ vulg. 397, and there is mention of an embassy of two bishops from a
council of Carthage to the Emperors, to procure the privilege of
sanctuary to all impeached for any crime, if they fled to the Church. 
This is said to be done when Honorius and Eutychianus were consuls, anno
æræ vulg. 398.  And further, here is an account of a bishop sent legate
to Anastasius, Bishop of the Apostolical see, and Venerius of Milan, to
supply the African Church with men fit to be ordained.  For Aurelius
complains that many Churches have not so much as one man, not so much as
an illiterate one, in deacon’s orders, much less had they a competent
number of men for the superior dignities.  He speaks of the importunate
clamours of many people, that were themselves almost killed, I suppose,
by some common pestilence.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p13"></span>In this council it was decreed that
bishops should not travel by sea without formed letters.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p14"></span>During the consulate of those
illustrious men, Cæsar and Atticus, on the sixth before the Calends of
July, at Carthage, it seemed good that no bishop should travel by water
without “formed letters” from the Primate.  The authentic acts will be
found by him who seeks them.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p15"></span>In this council, bishops whose names
are set down hereafter were sent as legates to the Emperor.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p16"></span>After the consulate of the most
glorious Emperor Honorius Augustus for the fourth time, and of the
renowned Eutychian, on the fifth of the calends of May, at Carthage in
the secretarium of the restored basilica.  In this council Epigonius and
Vincent, the bishops, received a legation, in order that they might
obtain a law from the most glorious princes in behalf of those taking
refuge in the Church, whatever might be the crime of which they were
accused, that no one should dare to force them away.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p17"></span>In this council a legation was sent
to the Bishops of Rome and Milan with regard to children baptized by
heretics, and to the Emperor with regard to having such idols as still
remained taken away, and also with regard to many other matters.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p18"></span>After the consulate of the renowned
Flabius Stilico, on the sixteenth of the calends of July, at Carthage in
the secretarium of the restored basilica.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p19"></span>When Aurelius, the Bishop, together
with his fellow-bishops had taken their seats, <span id="page_471">p.
471</span> <span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-Page_471"></span>the deacons standing
by, Aurelius, the Bishop, said:  Your charity, most holy brethren, knows
fully as well as I do the necessities of the churches of God throughout
Africa.  And since the Lord has vouchsafed that from a part of your holy
company this present assembly should be convened, it seems to me that
these necessities which in the discharge of our solicitude we have
discovered, we ought to consider together.  And afterwards, that there
should be chosen a bishop from our number who may, with the help of the
Lord and your prayers, assume the burden of these necessities, and
zealously accomplish whatever ought to be done in the premises, going to
the parts of Italy across seas, that he may acquaint our holy brethren
and fellow-bishops, the venerable and holy brother Anastasius, bishop of
the Apostolic see, and also our holy brother Venerius the Bishop of
Milan, with our necessity and grief, and helplessness.  For there has
been withheld from these sees the knowledge of what was necessary to
provide against the common peril, especially that the need of clergy is
so great that many churches are in such destitution as that not so much
as a single deacon or even an unlettered clerk is to be found.  I say
nothing of the superior orders and offices, because if, as I have said,
the ministry of a deacon is not easily to be had, it is certainly much
more difficult to find one of the superior orders.  \[And let them also
tell these bishops\] that we can no longer bear to hear the daily
lamentations of the different peoples almost ready to die, and unless we
do our best to help them, the grievous and inexcusable cause of the
destruction of innumerable souls will be laid at our door before God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_456"></span>[470:457](2140580.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvii-p4"></span> The common reading “vindicent” is
almost certainly wrong, and is not even mentioned by Bruns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LVII](2140581.md)
