[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140578)  [Next](2140580.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p1.1"></span>Canon LV.  (Greek lix.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p2"></span>That it be lawful for the bishop of
Carthage to ordain a cleric whenever he wishes.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p3.1"></span>Aurelius</span>, the bishop, said:  My
brethren, pray allow me to speak.  It often happens that ecclesiastics
who are in need seek deacons \[*præpositis* in the Latin\], or
presbyters or bishops from me:  and I, bearing in mind what things have
been ordained these I observe, to wit, I summon the bishop of the cleric
who is sought for, and I shew him the state of affairs, how that they of
a certain church ask for a certain one of his clergy.  Perchance then
they make no objection, but lest it happen that afterwards they might
object when in this case they shall have been demanded (*postulati*) by
me, who (as you know) have the care of many churches and of the
ordinands.  It is right therefore that I should summon a fellow bishop
with two or three witnesses from our number.  But if <span
id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-Page_469"></span>he
be found *indevotus* \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p3.2"></span>ἀκαθοσίωτος</span>\], what does your
charity think should be done?  For I, as ye know, brethren, by the
condescension of God have the care of all the churches.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p4"></span>Numidius, the bishop, said: <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md)   This see always had the power of
ordaining a bishop according to the desire of each Church as he wills
and on whose name there was agreement (*fuisset conventus*).  Epigonius,
the bishop, said:  Your good nature makes small use of your powers, for
you make much less use of them than you might, since, my brother, you
are good and gentle to all; for you have the power, but it is far from
your practice to satisfy the person of each bishop in prima tantummodo
conventione.  But if it should be thought that the rights of this see
ought to be vindicated, you have the duty of supporting all the
churches, wherefore we do not give thee power, but we confirm that power
thou hast, viz.:  that thou hast the right at thy will always to choose
whom thou wilt, to constitute <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md)
prelates over peoples and churches who shall have asked thee to do so,
and when thou so desirest.  Posthumianus, the bishop, said:  Would it be
right that he who had only one presbyter should have that one taken away
from him?  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  But there may be one bishop by
whom many presbyters can be made through the divine goodness, but one
fit to be made bishop is found with difficulty.  Wherefore if any bishop
has a presbyter necessary for the episcopate and has one only, my
brother, as you have said, even that one he ought to give up for
promotion.  Posthumianus, the bishop, said:  If some other bishop has
plenty of clergy, should that other diocese come to my help?  Aurelius,
the bishop, said:  Of course, when you have come to the help of another
Church, he who has many clerics should be persuaded to make one over to
you for ordination.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p7.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p8.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p9"></span>It is lawful for the bishop of
Carthage, whenever he wills, to choose those who are to be set over the
churches:  even if there were only one presbyter worth of rule.  For one
bishop can ordain many presbyters, but one fit for the episcopate is
hard to find.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p10"></span>This canon is the first half of Canon
vij. of the Council of Carthage held August 28th <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p11.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p12"></span>It is evident, that this privilege of
the Bishop of Carthage extended to the whole African diocese or the six
provinces of Africa, which contained near five hundred bishoprics.  This
was what caused such frequent ordinations of bishops in the Church of
Carthage (See *Can. Afr*. 49, and the Note).  And it is further
apparent, that the Bishop of Carthage had some power over the whole
African church, and was probably their visitor (See Can. 52).  But that
he had the sole power of ordaining bishops for every church, with the
assistance of any two bishops, does not appear, though Justellus is of
this opinion; nay, the 49th canon proves that he had it not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_454"></span>[469:455](2140579.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p5"></span> The meaning of this whole canon is
very obscure, the text is almost certainly corrupt; and the Greek in
many places in no way corresponds to the Latin.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[469:456](2140579.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lvi-p6"></span> Migne’s text reads this negatively
“ut non constituas,” but I have followed Labbe and Cossart and have
omitted the “non.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LVI](2140580.md)
