[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140304)  [Next](2140306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="xi.v-Page_251"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>The Letter of Cyril to John of Antioch.</span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>(*Found in Labbe and Cossart,* Concilia, *Tom.
IV., col.* 343 *and col.* 164; *and in Migne,* Pat. Græc., *Tom.
LXXVII.  \[Cyrilli* Opera, *Tom. X.\], col.* 173.*  This is the letter
which is often styled “the Ephesine Creed*.”)

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>Cyril to my lord, beloved brother, and fellow
minister John, greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span>“Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be
glad” for the middle wall of partition has been taken away, and grief
has been silenced, and all kind of difference of opinion has been
removed; Christ the Saviour of us all having awarded peace to his
churches, through our being called to this by our most devout and
beloved of God kings, who are the best imitators of the piety of their
ancestors in keeping the right faith in their souls firm and immovable,
for they chiefly give their mind to the affairs of the holy Churches, in
order that they may have the noted glory forever and show forth their
most renowned kingdom, to whom also Christ himself the Lord of powers
distributes good things with plenteous hand and gives to prevail over
their enemies and grants them victory.  For he does not lie in saying: 
“As I live saith the Lord, them that honour me, I will honour.”  For
when my lord, my most-beloved-of-God, fellow-minister and brother Paul,
had arrived in Alexandria, we were filled with gladness, and most
naturally at the coming of such a man as a mediator, who was ready to
work beyond measure that he might overcome the envy of the devil and
heal our divisions, and who by removing the offences scattered between
us, would crown your Church and ours with harmony and peace.

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span>Of the reason of the disagreement it is
superfluous to speak.  I deem it more useful both to think and speak of
things suitable to the time of peace.  We were therefore delighted at
meeting with that distinguished and most pious man, who expected perhaps
to have no small struggle, persuading us that it is necessary to form an
alliance for the peace of the Church, and to drive away the laughter of
the heterodox, and for this end to blunt the goads of the stubbornness
of the devil.  He found us ready for this, so as absolutely to need no
labour to be bestowed upon us.  For we remembered the Saviour’s saying;
“My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you.”  We have been
taught also to say in prayers:  “O Lord our God give us peace, for thou
hast given us all things.”  So that if anyone should be in the
participation of the peace furnished from God, he is not lacking in any
good.  That as a matter of fact, the disagreement of the Churches
happened altogether unnecessarily and inopportunely, we now have been
fully satisfied by the document brought by my lord, the most pious
bishop Paul, which contains an unimpeachable confession of faith, and
this he asserted to have been prepared, by your holiness and by the
God-beloved Bishops there.  The document is as follows, and is set down
verbatim in this our epistle.

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>Concerning the Virgin Mother of God, we thus
think and speak; and of the manner of the Incarnation of the Only
Begotten Son of God, necessarily, not by way of addition but for the
sake of certainty, as we have received from the beginning from the
divine Scriptures and from the tradition of the holy fathers, we will
speak briefly, adding nothing whatever to the Faith set forth by the
holy Fathers in Nice.  For, as we said before, it suffices for all
knowledge of piety and the refutation of all false doctrine of
heretics.  But we speak, not presuming on the impossible; but with the
confession of our own weakness, excluding those who wish us to cling to
those things which transcend human consideration.

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>We confess, therefore, our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Only Begotten Son of God, perfect God, and perfect Man of a
reasonable soul and flesh consisting; begotten before the ages of the
Father according to his Divinity, and in the last days, for us and for
our salvation, of Mary the Virgin according to his humanity, of the same
substance with his Father according to his Divinity, and of the same
substance with us according to his humanity; for there became a union of
two natures.  Wherefore we confess one Christ, one Son, one Lord.

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span>According to this understanding of this <span
id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span id="xi.v-Page_252"></span>unmixed
union, we confess the holy Virgin to be Mother of God; because God the
Word was incarnate and became Man, and from this conception he united
the temple taken from her with himself.

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>For we know the theologians make some things
of the Evangelical and Apostolic teaching about the Lord common as
pertaining to the one person, and other things they divide as to the two
natures, and attribute the worthy ones to God on account of the Divinity
of Christ, and the lowly ones on account of his humanity \[to his
humanity\].

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span>These being your holy voices, and finding
ourselves thinking the same with them (“One Lord, One Faith, One
Baptism,”) we glorified God the Saviour of all, congratulating one
another that our churches and yours have the Faith which agrees with the
God-inspired Scriptures and the traditions of our holy Fathers.

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>Since I learned that certain of those
accustomed to find fault were humming around like vicious wasps, and
vomiting out wretched words against me, as that I say the holy Body of
Christ was brought from heaven, and not of the holy Virgin, I thought it
necessary to say a few words concerning this to them:

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span>O fools, and only knowing how to
misrepresent, how have ye been led to such a judgment, how have ye
fallen into so foolish a sickness?  For it is necessary, it is
undoubtedly necessary, to understand that almost all the opposition to
us concerning the faith, arose from our affirming that the holy Virgin
is Mother of God.  But if from heaven and not from her the holy Body of
the Saviour of all was born, how then is she understood to be Mother of
God?  What then did she bring forth except it be true that she brought
forth the Emmanuel according to the flesh?  They are to be laughed at
who babble such things about me.  For the blessed prophet Isaiah does
not lie in saying “Behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and
shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is God with us.” 
Truly also the holy Gabriel said to the Blessed Virgin:  “Fear not,
Mary, for thou hast found favour with God.  And, behold, thou shalt
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name
Jesus.  He shall save his people from their sins.”

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span>For when we say our Lord Jesus Christ
descended from heaven, and from above, we do not so say this as if from
above and from heaven was his Holy Flesh taken, but rather by way of
following the divine Paul, who distinctly declares:  “the first man is
of the earth, earthy; the Second Man is the Lord from heaven.”

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span>We remember too, the Saviour himself saying,
“And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the Son of Man.”  Although he was born according to his
flesh, as just said, of the holy Virgin, yet God the Word came down from
above and from heaven.  He “made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant,” and was called the Son of Man, yet remaining
what he was, that is to say God.  For he is unchanging and unchangeable
according to nature; considered already as one with his own Flesh, he is
said to have come down from heaven.

<span id="xi.v-p15"></span>He is also called the Man from heaven, being
perfect in his Divinity and perfect in his Humanity, and considered as
in one Person.  For one is the Lord Jesus Christ, although the
difference of his natures is not unknown, from which we say the
ineffable union was made.

<span id="xi.v-p16"></span>Will your holiness vouchsafe to silence those
who say that a crasis, or mingling or mixture took place between the
Word of God and flesh.  For it is likely that certain also gossip about
me as having thought or said such things.

<span id="xi.v-p17"></span>But I am far from any such thought as that,
and I also consider them wholly to rave who think a shadow of change
could occur concerning the Nature of the Word of God.  For he remains
that which he always was, and has not been changed, nor can he ever be
changed, nor is he capable of change.  For we all confess in addition to
this, that the Word of God is impassible, even though when he dispenses
most wisely this mystery, he appears to ascribe to himself the
sufferings endured in his own flesh.  To the same purpose the all-wise
Peter also said when he wrote of Christ as having “suffered in the
flesh,” and not in the nature of his ineffable godhead.  In order that
he should be believed to be the Saviour of all, by an economic
appropriation to himself, as just said, he assumed the sufferings of his
own Flesh.

<span id="xi.v-p18"></span><span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="xi.v-Page_253"></span>Like to this is the prophecy through the voice
of the prophet, as from him, “I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair:  I hid not my face from shame
and spitting.”  Let your holiness be convinced nor let anyone else be
doubtful that we altogether follow the teachings of the holy fathers,
especially of our blessed and celebrated Father Athanasius, deprecating
the least departure from it.

<span id="xi.v-p19"></span>I might have added many quotations from them
also establishing my words, but that it would have added to the length
of my letter and it might become wearisome.  And we will allow the
defined Faith, the symbol of the Faith set forth by our holy Fathers who
assembled some time ago at Nice, to be shaken by no one.  Nor would we
permit ourselves or others, to alter a single word of those set forth,
or to add one syllable, remembering the saying:  “Remove not the ancient
landmark which thy fathers have set,” for it was not they who spoke but
the Spirit himself of God and the Father, who proceedeth also from him,
and is not alien from the Son, according to his essence.  And this the
words of the holy initiators into mysteries confirm to us.  For in the
Acts of the Apostles it is written:  “And after they were come to Mysia,
they assayed to go into Bithynia; but the Spirit of Jesus suffered them
not.”  And the divine Paul wrote:  “So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.  But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if
so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you.  Now if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.”

<span id="xi.v-p20"></span>When some of those who are accustomed to turn
from the right, twist my speech to their views, I pray your holiness not
to wonder; but be well assured that the followers of every heresy gather
the occasions of their error from the God-inspired Scriptures,
corrupting in their evil minds the things rightly said through the Holy
Spirit, and drawing down upon their own heads the unquenchable flame.

<span id="xi.v-p21"></span>Since we have learned that certain, after
having corrupted it, have set forth the orthodox epistle of our most
distinguished Father Athanasius to the Blessed Epictetus, so as thereby
to injure many; therefore it appeared to the brethren to be useful and
necessary that we should send to your holiness a copy of it from some
correct ancient transcripts which exist among us.  Farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session II. (Continued).](2140306)
