[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140722)  [Next](2140724) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_591">p. 591</span> <span
id="xvii.iii-Page_591"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>The Apostolical Canons.</span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvii.iii-p2.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span>To affirm that the “Apostolical Canons”
were a collection of canons made by the Apostles would be about as
sensible as to affirm that the “Psalterium Davidicum” <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) was a collection of his own psalms
made by David, or that the “Proverbs of Solomon” was a collection of
proverbs made by Solomon.

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span>Many of the Psalms had David for their
composer; many of the Proverbs had Solomon for their originator; but
neither the book we call “The Psalter” nor the book we call “The
Proverbs” had David or Solomon for its compiler.  The matter contained
in the one is largely, many think chiefly, of Davidic origin, the matter
contained in the other is no doubt Solomonic; and just so “The
Apostolical Canons” may well be to a great extent of Apostolic origin,
committed to writing, some possibly by the Apostles themselves, others
by their immediate successors, who heard them at their mouth; and these
at some period not far removed from the date of the Nicene Council
(<span class="sc"><span id="xvii.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 325),
probably earlier than the Council of Antioch, were gathered together
into a code which has since then been somewhat enlarged and modified. 
This is the view of the matter to which the general drift of the learned
seems to be moving, and it is substantially the view so ably defended by
Bishop Beveridge in his *Synodicon*, and in his remarkably learned and
convincing answer to his French opponent, <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) entitled *Codex Canonum Ecclesiæ
Primitivæ vindicatus ac illustratus*.  (This last volume, together with
the “Preface to the Notes on the Apostolical Canons” has been reprinted
in Vol. XII. of Bishop Beveridge’s Works in the “Library of
Anglo-Catholic Theology.”) <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560)

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span>In thus accepting in the main the old
conclusions I am far from intending to imply that more recent research
has not shewn some of the details of the bishop’s view to be erroneous. 
In brief, the proposition which seems to be most tenable is that in the
main the Apostolic Canons represent the very early canon-law of the
Church, that the canons which make up the collection are of various
dates, but that most of them are earlier than the year 300, and that
while it is not possible to say exactly when the collection, as we now
have it, was made, there is good reason for assigning it a date not
later than the middle of the fourth century.  With regard to the name
“Apostolic Canons” there need be no more hesitation in applying it to
these canons than in calling Ignatius an “Apostolic Father,” the
adjective necessarily meaning nothing more than that the canons set
forth the disciplinary principles which were given to the early Church
by the Apostles, just as we speak of the “Apostles’ Creed.”

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span>While this is true there can be no
question that in the East the Apostolic Canons were very generally
looked upon as a genuine work prepared by the Holy Apostles.  I proceed
now to quote Bishop Hefele, but I have already (Cf. Council in Trullo)
expressed my own opinion that there is not contained in the Quinisext
decree any absolute definition of what is technically known as the
“authenticity” of the Canons of the Apostles.

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>(Hefele.  *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol.
I., p. 451 *et seqq*.).

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span>The Synod *in Trullo* being, as is well
known, regarded as ecumenical by the Greek Church, the authenticity of
the eighty-five canons was decided in the East for all future time.  It
was otherwise in the West.  At the same period that Dionysius Exiguus
translated the collection question for Bishop Stephen, Pope Gelasius
promulgated his celebrated decree *de libris non recipiendis*.  Drey
mentions it, but in a way which requires correction.  Following in this
the usual opinion, he says that the Synod at Rome in which Gelasius
published this decree was held in 494; but we shall see hereafter that
this synod was held in 496.  Also Drey considers himself obliged to
adopt another erroneous opinion, according to which Gelasius declared in
the same decree the Apostolic Canons to be apocryphal.  This opinion is
to be maintained only so long as the usual text of this decree is
consulted, since the original text as it is given <span id="page_592">p.
592</span> <span id="xvii.iii-Page_592"></span>in the ancient
manuscripts does not contain the passage which mentions the Apostolic
Canons. <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561)   This passage was
certainly added subsequently, with many others, probably by Pope
Hormisdas (514–543) when he made a new edition of the decree of
Gelasius.  As Dionysius Exiguus published his collection in all
probability subsequently to the publication of the decree of Gelasius,
properly so called, in 496, we can understand why this decree did not
mention the Apostolical Canons.  Dionysius did not go to Rome while
Gelasius was living, and did not know him personally, as he himself says
plainly in the *Præfatio* of his collection of the papal decrees.  It is
hence also plain how it was that in another collection of canons
subsequently made by Dionysius, of which the preface still remains to
us, he does not insert the Apostolic Canons, but has simply this
remark:  *Quos non admisit uniniversalitas, ego quoque in hoc opere
prætermisi*.  Dionysius Exiguus in fact compiled this new collection at
a time when Pope Hormisdas had already explicitly declared the Apostolic
Canons to be apocryphal.

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span>Notwithstanding this, these canons, and
particularly the fifty mentioned by Dionysius, did not entirely fall
into discredit in the West; but rather they came to be received, because
the first collection of Dionysius was considered of great authority. 
They also passed into other collections, and particularly into that of
the pseudo-Isidore; and in 1054, Humbert, legate of Pope Leo IX., made
the following declaration:  *Clementis libel, id est itinerarium Petri
Apostoli et Canones Apostolorum numerantur inter apocrypha*, <span
class="sc"><span id="xvii.iii-p13.1"></span>Exceptis</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="xvii.iii-p13.2"></span>Capitulis</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="xvii.iii-p13.3"></span>Quisquaginta</span>, *quæ
decreverunt regulis orthodoxis adjungenda*.  Gratian also, in his
decree, borrowed from the fifty Apostolic Canons, and they gradually
obtained the force of laws.  But many writers, especially Hincmar of
Rheims, like Dionysius Exiguus, raised doubts upon the apostolical
origin of these canons.  From the sixteenth century the opinion has been
universal that these documents are not authentic; with the exception,
however, of the French Jesuit Turrianus, who endeavoured to defend their
genuineness, as well as the authenticity of the pseudo-Isidorian
decrees.  According to the Centuriators of Magdeburg, it was especially
Gabriel d’Aubespine, Bishop of Orleans, the celebrated Archbishop Peter
de Marca, and the Anglican Beveridge, who proved that they were not
really compiled by the Apostles, but were made partly in the second and
chiefly in the third century.  Beveridge considered this collection to
be a repertory of ancient canons given by synods in the second and third
centuries.  In opposition to them, the Calvinist Dallæus (Daillé)
regarded it as the work of a forger who lived in the fifth and sixth
centuries; but Beveridge refuted him so convincingly, that from that
time his opinion, with some few modifications, has been that of all the
learned.

<span id="xvii.iii-p14"></span>Beveridge begins with the principle, that
the Church in the very earliest times must have had a collection of
canons; and he demonstrates that from the commencement of the fourth
century, bishops, synods, and other authorities often quote, as
documents in common use, a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.iii-p14.1"></span>κανὼν αποστολικὸς</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvii.iii-p14.2"></span>ἐκκλησιαστικὸς</span>, or
<span class="Greek"><span id="xvii.iii-p14.3"></span>ἀρχαῖος</span>; as
was done, for instance, at the Council of Nice, by Alexander, Bishop of
Alexandria, and by the Emperor Constantine, etc. <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562)   According to Beveridge, these
quotations make allusion to the Apostolic Canons, and prove that they
were already in use *before* the fourth century.

<span id="xvii.iii-p16"></span>In opposition to Beveridge Dr. von Drey
wrote with profound learning; <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563)
and Bickell, in his work just quoted, to a great degree accepts his
conclusions as being well-founded.

<span id="xvii.iii-p18"></span>These conclusions in short are that the
so-called “Apostolic Canons” are a patchwork taken from the “Apostolic
Constitutions,” which are said to have been of Eastern origin and to
date from the latter part of the third century, and from the canons of
various synods, notably Nice, Antioch, and Chalcedon.

<span id="xvii.iii-p19"></span>But this last reference to Chalcedon is
too much for Bickell to stomach; and for many reasons he makes the date
of the collection earlier.

<span id="xvii.iii-p20"></span>Hefele points out a rather significant
document which he says both “Drey and Bickell have overlooked.  In 1738
Scipio Maffei published three ancient documents, the first of which was
a Latin translation of a letter written on the subject of Meletius by
the Egyptian bishops Hesychius, Phileas, etc.  This letter was written
during the persecution of Diocletian, that is, between 303 and 305:  it
is addressed to Meletius himself, and especially accuses him of having
ordained priests in other dioceses.  This conduct, they tell him, is
contrary to all ecclesiastical rule (*aliena a more divino et regula
ecclesiastica*), and <span id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="xvii.iii-Page_593"></span>Meletius himself knows very well that it
is a *lex patrum et propatrum…in alienis paræciis non licere alicui
episcoporum ordinationes celebrare*.  Maffei himself supposes that the
Egyptian bishops were here referring to the thirty-fifth canon (the
thirty-sixth according to the enumeration of Dionysius), and this
opinion can hardly be controverted.”

<span id="xvii.iii-p21"></span>After Bickell and Drey about ten years
passed and then Bunsen and Ültzen wrote on the subject.  Of these Bunsen
renewed Beveridge’s arguments, and considers the “Apostolic Canons” as a
reflex of the customs of the Primitive Church, if not in the Johannean
age, at latest in that which immediately succeeded; and he is of opinion
that the legend attributing them to the Apostles is earlier in date than
the Council of Nice. Ültzen does not express himself definitely on the
point, but in a note to p. xvj. of the Preface to his book regrets that
Bunsen should have renewed Beveridge’s argument with regard to the
relative age of the Apostolic Canons and those of Antioch because in his
judgment “all the more recent judges of this matter had refuted it.”

<span id="xvii.iii-p22"></span>I think I should here interrupt my
narrative to warn the reader that Beveridge has been often misunderstood
and misrepresented.  For example he expressly says that according to his
theory <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) “these canons were set
forth by various synods, so too they seem to us to have been collected
by different persons, of whom some collected more, some fewer.…And these
canons, thus collected, some called ecclesiastical and some called them
Apostolical; not that they believed them to have been written by the
very Apostles, for they had made the collection themselves, but because
they were consonant to the doctrine and traditions of the Apostles, and
they were persuaded that they had been originally established at least
by apostolic men.”  This is Beveridge’s position in his own words.

<span id="xvii.iii-p24"></span>I come now to the most recent writings
upon the subject.  Harnack has developed a theory which is partly his
own with regard to the Apostolical Constitutions, in his edition of the
“Didache,” and has also considered the question of the Apostolic
Canons.  The fullest discussion however of the matter is in a work
entitled, *Die Apostolischen Konstitutionem, Eine Litteran-historische
Untersuchung, von Franz Zaver Funk*.  *Rottenburg am Neckar*.  1891.

<span id="xvii.iii-p25"></span>Funk gives the history of the
controversy, and refuses to allow that Hefele’s citation of the Letter
of the Egyptian bishops throws any light upon the point.  In most
matters he agrees with Bickell, and declares (p. 188) that “the Synod of
Antioch is certainly to be regarded as the source of the Apostolic
Canons,” and that thus by comparing the canons, it is manifest that the
Apostolic “are certainly to be regarded as the dependent writing” (p.
185).  And after considering their relation to the Apostolical
Constitutions, Funk states his conclusion as follows (p. 190):  “The
drawing up of the canons falls therefore not earlier than the
interpolation of the Didaskalia and the preparation of the two last
books of the Constitution, hence not before the beginning of the fifth
century.  On the other hand there is no ground for fixing the writing at
a later period, not a single canon bears the mark of a later time.”

<span id="xvii.iii-p26"></span>Such was the state of things until Mgr.
Rihmani, the Syrian Archbishop of Aleppo, gave notice that he had found
in a codex at Mossul a Syrian version of the Apocryphal book known as
the *Testamentum Jesu Christi*.  It is stated that in the discoverer’s
opinion the *Testamentum* is earlier in date than the Apostolic Canons,
than the Canons of Hippolytus, and than the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvii.iii-p26.1"></span>VIII</span>th Book of the Apostolic
Constitutions; and further that it was the direct source of the
Apostolic Canons.  As I know nothing further of this matter, I must
simply note it for the guidance of the reader in his further study of
the subject.

<span id="xvii.iii-p27"></span>Having now traced the history of the
discussion, I need only add that Mr. Turner has just issued a very
critical text of the version of Dionysius Exiguus, the full title of
which is as follows:

<span id="xvii.iii-p28"></span>Ecclesiæ Occidentalis Monvmenta Jvris
Antiqvissima Canonvm et Conciliorvm Gräecorum, Interpretationes Latinæ.
Edidit Cvthbertvs Hamilton Turner, A.M.  Fascicvli Primi Pars Prior
Canones Apostolorvm Nicaenorvm Patrvm Svbscriptiones.  And that I have
taken, except where noted to the contrary, Hammond’s translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_558"></span>[591:559](2140723.htm#fr_558) <span
id="xvii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span> The reader may remember that when it was
proposed in a first draft to the Council of Trent to say the “Psalms of
David,” the Fathers refused to pass it as proposed, because the Psalter
contained Psalms not by David, and substituted the expression “The
Davidic Psalter” (Psalterium Davidicum).

<span id="fn_559"></span>[591:560](2140723.htm#fr_559) <span
id="xvii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span> Matthieu de Larroque.  *Observationes…et
in Annot.* *Bev. in Can. Apost*.  1674.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[591:561](2140723.htm#fr_560) <span
id="xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span> It is most unfortunate that the Rev. A.
B. Grosart, LL.D., in the article “Beveridge” in that usually accurate
and learned work, the *Dictionary of English Biography*, should have
written “regretting” this republication of the *Vindicatio*, on the
ground that Bp. Beveridge in its pages “demonstrates that he lacked the
instincts of the genuine scholar as distinguished from the merely
largely read man!”  There seem to be a great many *soidisant* “genuine
scholars” who lack all sense of humour!

<span id="fn_561"></span>[592:562](2140723.htm#fr_561) <span
id="xvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span> Cf. Ballerini, *Opp. S. Leon. M*., Vol.
III. p. 158; Mansi, *Conc*., Tom. VIII., 170.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[592:563](2140723.htm#fr_562) <span
id="xvii.iii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p15"></span> Cf. (for catena) Bickell, *<span
id="xvii.iii-p15.1"></span>Geschichte des Kirchenrechts*, S. 82.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[592:564](2140723.htm#fr_563) <span
id="xvii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p17"></span> *<span id="xvii.iii-p17.1"></span>Neue
Untersuchungen über die Const. und Canones der Apostel*.  Tübing., 1832.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[593:565](2140723.htm#fr_564) <span
id="xvii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p23"></span> Bev.  *Præfatio ad Annotat. in Can.
Apost*., § xiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Holy and Altogether August Apostles.](2140724)
