[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140259)  [Next](2140261.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>The Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius with the XII.
Anathematisms.</span>

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 395; Migne, *Patr. Græc*., Tom. LXXVII. \[Cyril, *Opera*, Tom.
X.\], col. 105 *et seqq*.)

<span id="x.viii-p3"></span>To the most reverend and God-loving
fellow-minister Nestorius, Cyril and the synod assembled in Alexandria,
of the Egyptian Province, Greeting in the Lord.

<span id="x.viii-p4"></span>When our Saviour says clearly:  “He that
loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me:  and he that
loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me,” what is to
become of us, from whom your Holiness requires that we love you more
than Christ the Saviour of us all?  Who can help us in the day of
judgment, or what kind of excuse shall we find for thus keeping silence
so long, with regard to the blasphemies made by you against him?  If you
injured yourself alone, by teaching and holding such things, perhaps it
would be less matter; but you have greatly scandalized the whole Church,
and have cast among the people the leaven of a strange and new heresy. 
And not to those there \[i.e. at Constantinople\] only; but also to
those everywhere \[the books of your explanation were sent\].  How can
we any longer, under these circumstances, make a defence for our
silence, or how shall we not be forced to remember that Christ said: 
“Think not that I am come to send peace on earth:  I came not to send
peace, but a sword.  For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother.”  For if faith be injured,
let there be lost the honour due to parents, as stale and tottering, let
even the law of tender love towards children and brothers be silenced,
let death be better to the pious than living; “that they might obtain a
better resurrection,” as it is written.

<span id="x.viii-p5"></span>Behold, therefore, how we, together with the
holy synod which met in great Rome, presided over by the most holy and
most reverend brother and fellow-minister, Celestine the Bishop, also
testify by this third letter to you, and counsel you to abstain from
these mischievous and distorted dogmas, which you hold and teach, and to
receive the right faith, handed down to the churches from the beginning
through the holy Apostles and Evangelists, who “were eye-witnesses, and
ministers of the Word.”  And if your holiness have not a mind to this
according to the limits defined in the writings of our brother of
blessed memory and most reverend fellow-minister Celestine, Bishop of
the Church of Rome, be well assured then that you have no lot with us,
nor place or standing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p5.1"></span>λόγον</span>) among the priests and bishops of
God.  For it is not possible for us to overlook the churches thus
troubled, and the people scandalized, and the right faith set aside, and
the sheep scattered by you, who ought to save them, if indeed we are
ourselves adherents of the right faith, and followers of the devotion of
the holy fathers.  And we are in communion with all those laymen and
clergymen cast out or deposed by your holiness on account of the faith;
for it is not right that those, who resolved to believe rightly, should
suffer by your choice; for they do well in opposing you.  This very
thing you have mentioned in your epistle written to our most holy and
fellow-bishop Celestine of great Rome.

<span id="x.viii-p6"></span>But it would not be sufficient for your
reverence to confess with us only the sym<span id="page_202">p.
202</span> <span id="x.viii-Page_202"></span>bol of the faith set out
some time ago by the Holy Ghost at the great and holy synod convened in
Nice:  for you have not held and interpreted it rightly, but rather
perversely; even though you confess with your voice the form of words. 
But in addition, in writing and by oath, you must confess that you also
anathematize those polluted and unholy dogmas of yours, and that you
will hold and teach that which we all, bishops, teachers, and leaders of
the people both East and West, hold.  The holy synod of Rome and we all
agreed on the epistle written to your Holiness from the Alexandrian
Church as being right and blameless.  We have added to these our own
letters and that which it is necessary for you to hold and teach, and
what you should be careful to avoid.  Now this is the Faith of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church to which all Orthodox Bishops, both East
and West, agree:

<span id="x.viii-p7"></span>“We believe in one God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ,
the Only-begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father, that is, of the
substance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very
God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made, both those in heaven and those in the earth.  Who
for us men and for our salvation, came down, and was incarnate, and was
made man.  He suffered, and rose again the third day.  He ascended into
the heavens, from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead.  And in the Holy Ghost:  But those that say, There was a time when
he was not, and, before he was begotten he was not, and that he was made
of that which previously was not, or that he was of some other substance
or essence; and that the Son of God was capable of change or alteration;
those the Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes.”

<span id="x.viii-p8"></span>Following in all points the confessions of
the Holy Fathers which they made (the Holy Ghost speaking in them), and
following the scope of their opinions, and going, as it were, in the
royal way, we confess that the Only begotten Word of God, begotten of
the same substance of the Father, True God from True God, Light from
Light, through Whom all things were made, the things in heaven and the
things in the earth, coming down for our salvation, making himself of no
reputation (<span class="Greek"><span id="x.viii-p8.1"></span>καθεὶς
ἑαυτὸν εἰς κένωσιν</span>), was incarnate and made man; that is, taking
flesh of the holy Virgin, and having made it his own from the womb, he
subjected himself to birth for us, and came forth man from a woman,
without casting off that which he was; but although he assumed flesh and
blood, he remained what he was, God in essence and in truth.  Neither do
we say that his flesh was changed into the nature of divinity, nor that
the ineffable nature of the Word of God was laid aside for the nature of
flesh; for he is unchanged and absolutely unchangeable, being the same
always, according to the Scriptures.  For although visible and a child
in swaddling clothes, and even in the bosom of his Virgin Mother, he
filled all creation as God, and was a fellow-ruler with him who begat
him, for the Godhead is without quantity and dimension, and cannot have
limits.

<span id="x.viii-p9"></span>Confessing the Word to be made one with the
flesh according to substance, we adore one Son and Lord Jesus Christ: 
we do not divide the God from the man, nor separate him into parts, as
though the two natures were mutually united in him only through a
sharing of dignity and authority (for that is a novelty and nothing
else), neither do we give separately to the Word of God the name Christ
and the same name separately to a different one born of a woman; but we
know only one Christ, the Word from God the Father with his own Flesh. 
For as man he was anointed with us, although it is he himself who gives
the Spirit to those who are worthy and not in measure, according to the
saying of the blessed Evangelist John.

<span id="x.viii-p10"></span>But we do not say that the Word of God
dwelt in him as in a common man born of the holy Virgin, lest Christ be
thought of as a God-bearing man; for although the Word tabernacled among
us, it is also said that in Christ “dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily”; but we understand that he became flesh, not just as he is said
to dwell in the saints, but we define that that tabernacling in him was
according to equality (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p10.1"></span>κατὰ τον ἴσον ἐν αὐτῷ τρόπον</span>).  But
being made one <span class="Greek"><span id="x.viii-p10.2"></span>κατὰ
φύσιν</span>, <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) and not converted
into flesh, he made his indwell<span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="x.viii-Page_203"></span>ing in such a way, as we may say that the
soul of man does in his own body.

<span id="x.viii-p12"></span>One therefore is Christ both Son and Lord,
not as if a man had attained only such a conjunction with God as
consists in a unity <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) of dignity
alone or of authority.  For it is not equality of honour which unites
natures; for then Peter and John, who were of equal honour with each
other, being both Apostles and holy disciples \[would have been one,
and\], yet the two are not one.  Neither do we understand the manner of
conjunction to be apposition, for this does not suffice for natural
oneness (<span class="Greek"><span id="x.viii-p13.2"></span>πρὸς ἕνωσον
φυσικήν</span>).  Nor yet according to relative participation, as we are
also joined to the Lord, as it is written “we are one Spirit in him.” 
Rather we deprecate the term of “junction” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p13.3"></span>συναφείας</span>) as not having sufficiently
signified the oneness.  But we do not call the Word of God the Father,
the God nor the Lord of Christ, lest we openly cut in two the one
Christ, the Son and Lord, and fall under the charge of blasphemy, making
him the God and Lord of himself.  For the Word of God, as we have said
already, was made hypostatically one in flesh, yet he is God of all and
he rules all; but he is not the slave of himself, nor his own Lord.  For
it is foolish, or rather impious, to think or teach thus.  For he said
that God was his Father, although he was God by nature, and of his
substance.  Yet we are not ignorant that while he remained God, he also
became man and subject to God, according to the law suitable to the
nature of the manhood.  But how could he become the God or Lord of
himself?  Consequently as man, and with regard to the measure of his
humiliation, it is said that he is equally with us subject to God; thus
he became under the Law, although as God he spake the Law and was the
Law-giver.

<span id="x.viii-p14"></span>We are careful also how we say about
Christ:  “I worship the One clothed on account of the One clothing him,
and on account of the Unseen, I worship the Seen.”  It is horrible to
say in this connexion as follows:  “The assumed as well as the assuming
have the name of God.”  For the saying of this divides again Christ into
two, and puts the man separately by himself and God also by himself. 
For this saying denies openly the Unity according to which one is not
worshipped in the other, nor does God exist together with the other; but
Jesus Christ is considered as One, the Only-begotten Son, to be honoured
with one adoration together with his own flesh.

<span id="x.viii-p15"></span>We confess that he is the Son, begotten of
God the Father, and Only-begotten God; and although according to his own
nature he was not subject to suffering, yet he suffered for us in the
flesh according to the Scriptures, and although impassible, yet in his
Crucified Body he made his own the sufferings of his own flesh; and by
the grace of God he tasted death for all:  he gave his own Body thereto,
although he was by nature himself the life and the resurrection, in
order that, having trodden down death by his unspeakable power, first in
his own flesh, he might become the first born from the dead, and the
first-fruits of them that slept.  And that he might make a way for the
nature of man to attain incorruption, by the grace of God (as we just
now said), he tasted death for every man, and after three days rose
again, having despoiled hell.  So although it is said that the
resurrection of the dead was through man, yet we understand that man to
have been the Word of God, and the power of death was loosed through
him, and he shall come in the fulness of time as the One Son and Lord,
in the glory of the Father, in order to judge the world in
righteousness, as it is written.

<span id="x.viii-p16"></span>We will necessarily add this also. 
Proclaiming the death, according to the flesh, of the Only-begotten Son
of God, that is Jesus Christ, confessing his resurrection from the dead,
and his ascension into heaven, we offer the Unbloody Sacrifice in the
churches, and so go on to the mystical thanksgivings, and are
sanctified, having received his Holy Flesh and the Precious Blood of
Christ the Saviour of us all.  And not as common flesh do we receive it;
God forbid:  nor as of a man sanctified and associated with the Word
according to the unity of worth, or as having a divine indwelling, but
as truly the Life-giving and very flesh of the Word himself.  For he is
the Life according to his nature as God, and when he became united to
his Flesh, he made it also to be Life-giving, as also he said to us: 
Verily, verily, I say unto <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="x.viii-Page_204"></span>you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man and drink his Blood.  For we must not think that it is flesh of a
man like us (for how can the flesh of man be life-giving by its own
nature?) but as having become truly the very own of him who for us both
became and was called Son of Man.  Besides, what the Gospels say our
Saviour said of himself, we do not divide between two hypostases or
persons.  For neither is he, the one and only Christ, to be thought of
as double, although of two (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p16.1"></span>ἐκ δύο</span>) and they diverse, yet he has
joined them in an indivisible union, just as everyone knows a man is not
double although made up of soul and body, but is one of both.  Wherefore
when thinking rightly, we transfer the human and the divine to the same
person (<span class="Greek"><span id="x.viii-p16.2"></span>παρ’ ἑνὸς
εἰρῆσθαι</span>).

<span id="x.viii-p17"></span>For when as God he speaks about himself: 
“He who hath seen me hath seen the Father,” and “I and my Father are
one,” we consider his ineffable divine nature according to which he is
One with his Father through the identity of essence—“The image and
impress and brightness of his glory.”  But when not scorning the measure
of his humanity, he said to the Jews:  “But now ye seek to kill me, a
man that hath told you the truth.”  Again no less than before we
recognize that he is the Word of God from his identity and likeness to
the Father and from the circumstances of his humanity.  For if it is
necessary to believe that being by nature God, he became flesh, that is,
a man endowed with a reasonable soul, what reason can certain ones have
to be ashamed of this language about him, which is suitable to him as
man?  For if he should reject the words suitable to him as man, who
compelled him to become man like us?  And as he humbled himself to a
voluntary abasement (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p17.1"></span>κένωσιν</span>) for us, for what cause can any
one reject the words suitable to such abasement?  Therefore all the
words which are read in the Gospels are to be applied to One Person, to
One hypostasis of the Word Incarnate.  For the Lord Jesus Christ is One,
according to the Scriptures, although he is called “the Apostle and High
Priest of our profession,” as offering to God and the Father the
confession of faith which we make to him, and through him to God even
the Father and also to the Holy Spirit; yet we say he is, according to
nature, the Only-begotten of God.  And not to any man different from him
do we assign the name of priesthood, and the thing, for he became “the
Mediator between God and men,” and a Reconciler unto peace, having
offered himself as a sweet smelling savour to God and the Father. 
Therefore also he said:  “Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not; but
a body hast thou prepared me:  In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin
thou hast had no pleasure.  Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of
the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God.”  For on account of
us he offered his body as a sweet smelling savour, and not for himself;
for what offering or sacrifice was needed for himself, who as God
existed above all sins?  For “all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God,” so that we became prone to fall, and the nature of man
has fallen into sin, yet not so he (and therefore we fall short of his
glory).  How then can there be further doubt that the true Lamb died for
us and on our account?  And to say that he offered himself for himself
and us, could in no way escape the charge of impiety.  For he never
committed a fault at all, neither did he sin.  What offering then did he
need, not having sin for which sacrifices are rightly offered?  But when
he spoke about the Spirit, he said:  “He shall glorify me.”  If we think
rightly, we do not say that the One Christ and Son as needing glory from
another received glory from the Holy Spirit; for neither greater than he
nor above him is his Spirit, but because he used the Holy Spirit to show
forth his own divinity in his mighty works, therefore he is said to have
been glorified by him just as if any one of us should say concerning his
inherent strength for example, or his knowledge of anything, “They
glorified me.”  For although the Spirit is the same essence, yet we
think of him by himself, as he is the Spirit and not the Son; but he is
not different from him; for he is called the Spirit of truth and Christ
is the Truth, and he is sent by him, just as, moreover, he is from God
and the Father.  When then the Spirit worked miracles through the hands
of the holy apostles after the Ascension of Our Lord Jesus Christ into
heaven, he glorified him.  For it is believed that he who works through
his own Spirit is God according to nature.  Therefore he said:  “He
shall receive of mine, and shall shew it <span id="page_205">p.
205</span> <span id="x.viii-Page_205"></span>unto you.”  But we do not
say this as if the Spirit is wise and powerful through some sharing with
another; for he is all perfect and in need of no good thing.  Since,
therefore, he is the Spirit of the Power and Wisdom of the Father (that
is, of the Son), he is evidently Wisdom and Power.

<span id="x.viii-p18"></span>And since the holy Virgin brought forth
corporally God made one with flesh according to nature, for this reason
we also call her Mother of God, not as if the nature of the Word had the
beginning of its existence from the flesh.

<span id="x.viii-p19"></span>For “In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was God, and the Word was with God,” and he is the Maker of the
ages, coeternal with the Father, and Creator of all; but, as we have
already said, since he united to himself hypostatically human nature
from her womb, also he subjected himself to birth as man, not as needing
necessarily in his own nature birth in time and in these last times of
the world, but in order that he might bless the beginning of our
existence, and that that which sent the earthly bodies of our whole race
to death, might lose its power for the future by his being born of a
woman in the flesh.  And this:  “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth
children,” being removed through him, he showed the truth of that spoken
by the prophet, “Strong death swallowed them up, and again God hath
wiped away every tear from off all faces.” <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md)   For this cause also we say that he
attended, having been called, and also blessed, the marriage in Cana of
Galilee, with his holy Apostles in accordance with the economy.  We have
been taught to hold these things by the holy Apostles and Evangelists,
and all the God-inspired Scriptures, and in the true confessions of the
blessed Fathers.

<span id="x.viii-p21"></span>To all these your reverence also should
agree, and give heed, without any guile.  And what it is necessary your
reverence should anathematize we have subjoined to our epistle. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_240"></span>[202:241](2140260.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="x.viii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p11"></span> *Vide* notes on this expression.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[203:242](2140260.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="x.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p13"></span> This passage is very difficult and I have
followed the Latin in omitting one <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.viii-p13.1"></span>Θεόν</span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[205:243](2140260.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="x.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p20"></span> There is a most curious blunder in the
editing of this Epistle in Migne, where this passage, which is but one
text, viz.:  [Isaiah xxv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008.md)<span
id="x.viii-p20.1"></span> is made into two, the first few words being
assigned in the margin to [Hosea xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014.md)<span id="x.viii-p20.2"></span>.  As
a matter of fact the whole sentence is turned into nonsense by making
the words <span class="Greek"><span id="x.viii-p20.3"></span>καὶ
πάλιν</span> as a connective supplied by St. Cyril.  What the text
really says is that Death prevailed indeed, but God wiped away again the
tears death had caused.  The same error is found in the letter as it
occurs in Labbe and Cossart, and it should be remarked that it is both
in the Greek and Latin.  I rather suspect that St. Cyril had a purer
text of the LXX. than ours which read—“And he hath swallowed death up
and hath wiped away, etc.,” as the Vulgate and A.V. read.  This is the
reading the context certainly seems to call for.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[205:244](2140260.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="x.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p22"></span> For critical notes and proposed
emendations of the text, see Routh’s *Scriptorum Eccles. Opuscula*. 
Tom. II. (Ed. III.), p. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The XII. Anathematisms of St. Cyril Against Nestorius.](2140261.md)
