[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140323)  [Next](2140325.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p2.1"></span>Neither</span> presbyter, deacon, nor any
of the ecclesiastical order shall be ordained at large, nor unless the
person ordained is particularly appointed to a church in a city or
village, or to a martyry, or to a monastery.  And if any have been
ordained without a charge, the holy Synod decrees, to the reproach of
the ordainer, that such an ordination shall be inoperative, and that
such shall nowhere be suffered to officiate.

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p5"></span>In Martyries and Monasteries
ordinations are strictly forbidden.  Should any one be ordained therein,
his ordination shall be reputed of no effect.

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p7"></span>The wording of the canon seems to
intimate that the synod of Chalcedon held ordinations of this sort to be
not only *illicit* but also invalid, *irritis* and *cassis*.  Nor is
this to be wondered at, if we take into account the pristine and ancient
discipline of the church and the opinion of many of the Scholastics
(Morinus, *De SS. Ordinat*., Parte III., Exercit. V., cap. ix.).

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p8"></span><span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.vi-Page_272"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p8.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p9"></span>It is clear that our canon forbids the
so-called absolute ordinations, and requires that every cleric must at
the time of his ordination be designated to a definite church.  The only
*titulus* which is here recognized is that which was later known as
*titulus beneficii*.  As various kinds of this title we find here (a)
the appointment to a church in the city; (b) to a village church; (c)
that to the chapel of a martyr; (d) the appointment as chaplain of a
monastery.  For the right understanding of the last point, it must be
remembered that the earliest monks were in no wise clerics, but that
soon the custom was introduced in every larger convent, of having at
least one monk ordained presbyter, that he might provide for divine
service in the monastery.

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p10"></span>Similar prohibitions of *ordinationes
absolutæ* were also put forth in after times.

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p11"></span>According to existing law, absolute
ordinations, as is well known, are still *illicitæ*, but yet *validæ*,
and even the Council of Chalcedon has not declared them to be properly
invalidæ, but only as without effect (by permanent suspension).  *Cf*.
Kober, *Suspension*, S. 220, and Hergenröther, *Photius*, etc., Bd. ii.,
S. 324.

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p12.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p13"></span>By the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.vi-p13.1"></span>μαρτυρίῳ</span> (“martyry”) is meant a
church or chapel raised over a martyr’s grave.  So the Laodicene Council
forbids Churchmen to visit the “martyries of heretics” (can. ix.).  So
Gregory of Nyssa speaks of “the martyry” of the Holy Martyrs (*Op*. ii.,
212); Chrysostom of a “martyry,” and Palladius of “martyries” near
Antioch (*In Act. Apost. Hom*., xxxviii. 5; *Dial.*, p. 17), and
Palladius of “the martyry of St. John” at Constantinople (*Dial.*, p.
25).  See Socrates, iv. 18, 23, on the “martyry” of St. Thomas at
Edessa, and that of SS. Peter and Paul at Rome; and vi. 6, on the
“martyry” of St. Euphenia at Chalcedon in which the Council actually
met.  In the distinct sense of a visible testimony, the word was applied
to the church of the Resurrection at Jerusalem (Eusebius, *Vit. Con*.,
iii. 40, iv. 40; Mansi, vi. 564; Cyril, *Catech*., xiv. 3), and to the
Holy Sepulchre itself (*Vit. Con*., iii. 28).  Churches raised over
martyrs’ tombs were called in the West “*memoriæ martyrum*,” see Cod.
Afric., lxxxiii. (compare Augustine, *De Cura pro Mortuis*, VI.).

<span id="xi.xviii.vi-p14"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. lxx., can. j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140325.md)
