[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140187)  [Next](2140189.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Worship of the Early
Church.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p2"></span>(Percival, H. R.:  *Johnson’s
Universal Cyclopædia*, Vol. V., *s.v.* Liturgics.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p3"></span>St. Paul is by some learned
writers supposed to have quoted in several places the already existing
liturgy, especially in [1 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) and there can be no doubt that the
Lord’s prayer was used and certain other formulas which are referred to
by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) as “the Apostles’ prayers.”  How early
these forms were committed to writing has been much disputed among the
learned, and it would be rash to attempt to rule this question.  Pierre
Le Brun <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) presents most strongly
the denial of their having been written during the first three
centuries, and Probst <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) argues
against this opinion.  While it does not seem possible to prove that
before the fourth century the liturgical books were written out in full,
owing no doubt to the influence of the *disciplina arcani*, it seems to
be true that much earlier than this there was a definite and fixed order
in the celebration of divine worship and in the administration of the
sacraments.  The famous passage in St. Justin Martyr <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) seems to point to the existence of
such a form in his day, shewing how even then the service for the Holy
Eucharist began with the Epistle and Gospel.  St. Augustine and St.
Chrysostom bear witness to the same thing. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p10"></span>Within, comparatively speaking,
a few years, a good deal of information with regard to the worship of
the early Church has been given us by the discovery of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p10.1"></span>Διδαχή</span>,
and of the fragments the Germans describe as the K. O., and by the
publication of M. Gamurrini’s transcript of the *Peregrinatio
Silviæ*. <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p12"></span><span id="page_137">p.
137</span> <span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-Page_137"></span>From all these
it is thought that liturgical information of the greatest value can be
obtained.  Moreover the first two are thought to throw much light upon
the age and construction of the Apostolical Constitutions.  Without in
any way committing myself to the views I now proceed to quote, I lay
them before the reader as the results of the most advanced criticism in
the matter.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p13"></span>(Duchesne.  *Origines du Culte
Chrétien*, p. 54 *et seq*.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p14"></span>All known liturgies may be
reduced to four principal types—the Syrian, the Alexandrian, the Roman,
and the Gallican.  In the fourth century there certainly existed these
four types at the least, for the Syrian had already given rise to
several sub-types which were clearly marked.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p15"></span>The most ancient documents of
the Syrian Liturgy are:

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p16"></span>1.  The Catechetical Lectures of
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, delivered about the year 347.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p17"></span>2.  The Apostolic Constitutions
(Bk. II., 57, and Bk. VIII., 5–15).

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p18"></span>3.  The homilies of St. John
Chrysostom.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p19"></span>St. John Chrysostom often quotes
lines of thought and even prayers taken from the liturgy.  Bingham <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md) was the first to have the idea of
gathering together and putting in order these scattered references. 
This work has been recently taken in hand afresh by Mr. Hammond. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md)   From this one can find much
interesting corroborative evidence, but the orator does not give
anywhere a systematic description of the liturgy, in the order of its
rites and prayers.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p22"></span>The Catechetical Lectures of St.
Cyril are really a commentary upon the ceremonies of the mass, made to
the neophytes after their initiation.  The preacher does not treat of
the *missa catechumenorum* because his hearers had so long been familiar
with it; he presupposes the bread and wine to have been brought to and
placed upon the altar, and begins at the moment when the bishop prepares
himself to celebrate the Holy Mysteries by washing his hands.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p23"></span>In the Apostolic Constitutions a
distinction must be drawn between Book II. and Book VIII.  The first is
very sketchy; it only contains a description of the rites without the
words used, the other gives at length all the formulas of the prayers,
but only from the end of the Gospel.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p24"></span>We know now that the Apostolical
Constitutions in the present state of the Greek text represent a melting
down and fusing together of two analogous books—the *Didaskale* of the
Apostles, of which only a Syriac version is extant; and the Didake of
the Apostles, recently discovered by the metropolitan, Philotheus
Bryennius.  The first of these two books has served as a basis for the
first six books of the Apostolical Constitutions.  The second, much
spread out, has become the seventh book of the same collection.  The
eighth book is more homogeneous.  It must have been added to the seven
others by the author of the recension of the *Didaskale* and of the
*Didake*.  This author is the same as he who made the interpolations in
the seven authentic letters of St. Ignatius, and added to them six
others of his own manufacture.  He lived at Antioch in Syria, or else in
the ecclesiastical region of which that city was the centre.  He wrote
about the middle of the fourth century, at the very high tide of the
Subordination theology, which finds expression more than once in his
different compositions.  He is the author of the description of the
liturgy, which is found in Book II.; in fact, that whole passage is
lacking in the Syriac *Didaskale*.  Was it also he who composed the
liturgy of the <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p24.1"></span>VIII</span>th book?  This is open to
doubt, for there are certain differences between this liturgy and that
of the IId book. <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p26"></span>I shall now describe the
religious service such as these documents suppose, noting, where
necessary, their divergences.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p27"></span><span id="page_138">p.
138</span> <span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-Page_138"></span>The congregation
is gathered together, the men on one side the women on the other, the
clergy in the apsidal chancel.  The readings immediately begin; they are
interrupted by chants.  A reader ascends the ambo, which stood in the
middle of the church, between the clergy and the people, and read two
lessons; then another goes up in his place to sing a psalm.  This he
executes as a solo, but the congregation join in the last modulations of
the chant and continue them.  This is what is called the “Response”
(*psalmus responsorius*), which must be distinguished carefully from the
“Antiphon,” which was a psalm executed alternately by two choirs.  At
this early date the antiphon did not exist, only the response was
known.  There must have been a considerable number of readings, but we
are not told how many.  The series ended with a lection from the Gospel,
which is made not by a reader but by a priest or deacon.  The
congregation stands during this lesson.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p28"></span>When the lessons and psalmodies
are done, the priests take the word, each in his turn, and after them
the bishop.  The homily is always preceded by a salutation to the
people, to which they answer, “And with thy spirit.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p29"></span>After the sermon the sending out
of the different categories of persons who should not assist at the holy
Mysteries takes place.  First of all the catechumens.  Upon the
invitation of the deacon they make a prayer in silence while the
congregation prays for them.  The deacon gives the outline of this
prayer by detailing the intentions and the things to be prayed for.  The
faithful answer, and especially the children, by the supplication *Kyrie
eleison*.  Then the catechumens rise up, and the deacon asks them to
join with him in the prayer which he pronounces; next he makes them bow
before the bishop to receive his benediction, after which he sends them
home.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p30"></span>The same form is used for the
energumens, for the competentes, *i.e*., for the catechumens who are
preparing to receive baptism, and last of all for the penitents.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p31"></span>When there remain in the church
only the faithful communicants, these fall to prayer; and prostrate
toward the East they listen while the deacon says the litany—“For the
peace and good estate of the world; for the holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church; for bishops, priests; for the Church’s benefactors; for the
neophytes; for the sick; for travellers; for little children; for those
who are erring,” etc.  And to all these petitions is added *Kyrie
eleison*.  The litany ends with this special form “Save us, and raise us
up, O God, for thy mercy’s sake.”  Then the voice of the bishop rises in
the silence—he pronounces a solemn prayer of a grave and majestic style.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p32"></span>Here ends the first part of the
liturgy; that part which the Church had taken from the old use of the
synagogues.  The second part, the Christian liturgy, properly so-called,
begins by the salutation of the bishop, followed by the response of the
people.  Then, at a sign given by a deacon, the clergy receive the kiss
of peace from the bishop, and the faithful give it to each other, men to
men, women to women.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p33"></span>Then the deacons and the other
lower ministers divide themselves between watching and serving at the
altar.  The one division go through the congregation, keeping all in
their proper place, and the little children on the outskirts of the
sacred enclosure, and watching the door that no profane person may enter
the church.  The others bring and set upon the altar the breads and the
chalices prepared for the Sacred Banquet; two of them wave fans
backwards and forwards to protect the holy offerings from insects.  The
bishop washes his hands and vests himself in festal habit; the priests
range themselves around him, and all together they approach the altar. 
This is a solemn moment.  After private prayer the bishop makes the sign
of the cross upon his brow and begins,

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p34"></span>“The grace of God Almighty, and
the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion of the Holy Ghost
be with you always!”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p35"></span>“And with thy spirit.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p36"></span><span id="page_139">p.
139</span> <span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-Page_139"></span>“Lift up your
hearts.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p37"></span>“We lift them up unto the Lord.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p38"></span>“Let us give thanks unto our
Lord.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p39"></span>“It is meet and right so to do.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p40"></span>“It is very meet,” etc.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p41"></span>And the eucharistic prayer goes
on…concluding at last with a return to the mysterious Sanctuary where
God abides in the midst of spirits, where the Cherubims and the
Seraphims eternally make heaven ring with the trisagion.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p42"></span>Here the whole multitude of the
people lift up their voices and joining their song with that of the
choir of Angels, sing, “Holy, Holy, Holy,” etc.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p43"></span>When the hymn is done and
silence returns, the bishop continues the interrupted eucharistic
prayer.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p44"></span>“Thou truly art holy,” etc., and
goes on to commemorate the work of Redemption, the Incarnation of the
Word, his mortal life, his passion; now the officiant keeps close to the
Gospel account of the last supper; the mysterious words pronounced at
first by Jesus on the night before his death are heard over the holy
table.  Then, taking his inspiration from the last words, “Do this in
remembrance of me,” the bishop develops the idea, recalling the Passion
of the Son of God, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, the hope
of his glorious return, and declaring that it is in order to observe
this precept and make this memorial that the congregation offers to God
this eucharistic bread and wine.  Finally he prays the Lord to turn upon
the Oblation a favourable regard, and to send down upon it the power of
his Holy Spirit, to make it the Body and Blood of Christ, the spiritual
food of his faithful, and the pledge of their immortality.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p45"></span>Thus ends the eucharistic
prayer, properly so-called.  The mystery is consummated.…The bishop then
directs the prayers…and when this long prayer is finished by a doxology,
all the congregation answer “Amen,” and thus ratify his acts of thanks
and intercession.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p46"></span>After this is said “Our Father,”
accompanied by a short litany.…The bishop then pronounces his
benediction on the people.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p47"></span>The deacon awakes the attention
of the faithful and the bishop cries aloud, “Holy things for holy
persons.”  And the people answer, “There is one only holy, one only Lord
Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father,” etc.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p48"></span>No doubt at this moment took
place the fraction of the bread, a ceremony which the documents of the
fourth century do not mention in express terms.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p49"></span>The communion then follows.  The
bishop receives first, then the priests, the deacons, the sub-deacons,
the readers, the singers, the ascetics, the deaconesses, the virgins,
the widows, the little children, and last of all the people.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p50"></span>The bishop places the
consecrated bread in the right hand, which is open, and supported by the
left; the deacon holds the chalice—they drink out of it directly.  To
each communicant the bishop says, “The Body of Christ”; and the deacon
says, “The Blood of Christ, the Cup of life,” to which the answer is
made, “Amen.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p51"></span>During the communion the singers
execute Psalm XXXIII. \[XXXIV. Heb. numbering\] *Benedicam Dominum*, in
which the words “O, taste and see how gracious the Lord is,” have a
special suitability.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p52"></span>When the communion is done, the
deacon gives the sign for prayer, which the bishop offers in the name of
all; then all bow to receive his blessing.  Finally the deacon dismisses
the congregation, saying, “Go in peace.” <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[136:183](2140188.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p4"></span> J. M. Neale.  *Essays on
Liturgiology.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[136:184](2140188.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p5"></span> [Acts
2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)<span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[136:185](2140188.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p6"></span> Pierre Le Brun.  *Explic*. Tom.
II.*, Diss.* j. p. II., *et seqq.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[136:186](2140188.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p7"></span> Probst.  *<span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>Liturgie der drei ersten Christichen
Jarhunderten.*

<span id="fn_186"></span>[136:187](2140188.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p8"></span> *Apolog*.  Cap. LXVII.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[136:188](2140188.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p9"></span> I venture to draw the reader’s
attention to the rest of this article as containing information not
readily found elsewhere.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[136:189](2140188.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p11"></span> The <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> from which this was
printed was found in a library in Arezzo.  Silvia was a lady of rank,
living in the times of Theodosius, who made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem
and the Holy Places from Meridian Gaul.  To us the chief interest of her
book lies in the account she gives of the services.  The following is
the title, *S. Silviæ Aquittanæ peregrinatio ad loca Sancta*.  It will
be found in the *Biblioteca dell’ Accademia storica giuridica*.  Tom.
IV.  Rome, 1887, and again in the *Studi e Documenti di storia e dir
itto*, April-September, 1888, and the liturgical parts in an appendix to
Duchesne.  Of the other books the best edition is Adolf Harnack’s.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[137:190](2140188.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p20"></span> Bingham, *Antiquities*, XIII.
6.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[137:191](2140188.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p21"></span> Hammond.  *The Ancient Liturgy
of Antioch* (Oxford, 1879).

<span id="fn_191"></span>[137:192](2140188.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p25"></span> The reader will, of course,
recognize the foregoing as a piece of “Higher Criticism,” and need not
be told that it rests upon no foundation more secure than probable
guess-work.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[139:193](2140188.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxii-p53"></span> An interesting and instructive
book has recently been published on this subject by F. E. Warren,
F.S.A., entitled *The Liturgy and Ritual of the Ante-Nicene Church*, in
which all the theories from Vitringa to Bickell are carefully
considered.  The book is one of the S. P. C. K. series, “Side-lights of
Church History.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XX](2140189.md)
