[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140150)  [Next](2140152.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>If</span> a bishop shall be tried on any
accusations, and it should then happen that the bishops of the province
disagree concerning him, some pronouncing the accused innocent, and
others guilty; for the settlement of all disputes, the holy Synod
decrees that the metropolitan call on some others belonging to the
neighbouring province, who shall add their judgment and resolve the
dispute, and thus, with those of the province, confirm what is
determined.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p5"></span>If the bishops of the province
disagree among themselves as to an accused bishop, that the controversy
may be certainly settled, let other neighbouring bishops be called in.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p7"></span>When any bishop shall have been
condemned with unanimous consent by all the bishops of the province, the
condemnation cannot be called into doubt, as this synod has set forth in
its fourth canon.  But if all the bishops are not of the same mind, but
some contend that he should be condemned and others the contrary, then
other bishops may be called in by the metropolitan from the neighbouring
provinces, and when their votes are added to one or other of the parties
among the bishops, then controversy should be brought to a close.  This
also is the law of the Synod of Sardica, canons iii. and v.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p9"></span>Every bishop accused of crimes
should be judged by his own synod, but if the bishops of the province
differ, some saying that he is innocent and some that he is guilty, the
metropolitan can call other bishops from a neighbouring province that
they may solve the controversy agitated by the bishops.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xiv-p10"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa vi., Quæst. iv.,
can. j.  The Roman Correctors note that the Latin translation implies
that the neighbouring metropolitan is to be invited and say, “But, in
truth, it hardly seems fitting that one metropolitan should come at the
call of another, and that there should be two metropolitans in one
synod.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XV](2140152.md)
