[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140294)  [Next](2140296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xiii-Page_236"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xiii-p1.1"></span>The Letter of the Same Holy Synod of
Ephesus, to the Sacred Synod in Pamphylia Concerning Eustathius Who Had
Been Their Metropolitan.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xiii-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tome
III., col. 806.)

<span id="x.xvi.xiii-p3"></span>Forasmuch as the divinely inspired
Scripture says, “Do all things with advice,” <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) it is especially their duty who have
had the priestly ministry allotted to them to examine with all diligence
whatever matters are to be transacted.  For to those who will so spend
their lives, it comes to pass both that they are established in \[the
enjoyment of\] an honest hope concerning what belongs to them, and that
they are borne along, as by a favouring breeze, in things that they
desire:  so that, in truth, the saying \[of the Scripture\] has much
reason \[to commend it\].  But there are times when bitter and
intolerable grief swoops down upon the mind, and has the effect of
cruelly beclouding it, so as to carry it away from the pursuit of what
is needful, and persuade it to consider that to be of service which is
in its \[very\] nature mischievous.  Something of this kind we have seen
endured by that most excellent and most religious Bishop Eustathius. 
For it is in evidence that he has been ordained canonically; but having
been much disturbed, as he declares, by certain parties, and having
entered upon circumstances he had not foreseen, therefore, though fully
able to repel the slanders of his persecutors, he nevertheless, through
an extraordinary inexperience of affairs, declined to battle with the
difficulties which beset him, and in some way that we know not set forth
an act of resignation.  Yet it behooved him, when he had been once
entrusted with the priestly care, to cling to it with spiritual energy,
and, as it were, to strip himself to strive against the troubles and
gladly to endure the sweat for which he had bargained.  But inasmuch as
he proved himself to be deficient in practical capacity, having met with
this misfortune rather from inexperience than from cowardice and sloth,
your holiness has of necessity ordained our most excellent and most
religious brother and fellow-bishop, Theodore, as the overseer of the
Church; for it was not reasonable that it should remain in widowhood,
and that the Saviour’s sheep should pass their time without a shepherd. 
But when he came to us weeping, not contending with the aforenamed most
religious Bishop Theodore for his See or Church, but in the meantime
seeking only for his rank and title as a bishop, we all suffered with
the old man in his grief, and considering his weeping as our own, we
hastened to discover whether the aforenamed \[Eustathius\] had been
subjected to a legal deposition, or whether, forsooth, he had been
convicted on any of the absurd charges alleged by certain parties who
had poured forth idle gossip against his reputation.  And indeed we
learned that nothing of such a kind had taken place, but rather that his
resignation had been counted against the said Eustathius instead of a
\[regular\] indictment.  Wherefore, we did by no means blame your
holiness for being compelled to ordain into his place the aforenamed
most excellent Bishop Theodore.  But forasmuch as it was not seemly to
contend much against the unpractical character of the man, while it was
rather necessary to have pity on the elder who, at so advanced an age,
was now so far away from the city which had given him birth, and from
the dwelling-places of his fathers, we have judicially pronounced and
decreed without any opposition, that he shall have both the name, and
the rank, and the communion of the episcopate.  On this condition,
however, only, that he shall not ordain, and that he shall not take and
minister to a Church of his own individual authority; but that \[he
shall do so only\] if taken as an assistant, or when appointed, if it
should so chance, by a brother and fellow-bishop, in accordance with the
ordinance and the love which is in Christ.  If, however, ye shall
determine anything more favourable towards him, either now or hereafter,
this also will be pleasing to the Holy Synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[236:272](2140295.htm#fr_271) <span
id="x.xvi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xiii-p4"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
32.19](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#019)<span
id="x.xvi.xiii-p4.1"></span>—“Do nothing without advice” (*sine consilio
nihil facias*):  The deutero-canonical book of Ecclesiasticus is here by
an Ecumenical Council styled “divinely-inspired Scripture.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of the Synod to Pope Celestine.](2140296)
