[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140661)  [Next](2140663.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p1.1"></span>Canon CXXXVIII.  (Not numbered in the
Greek.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p2"></span>Here beginneth the epistle of the
African synod to Pope Celestine, bishop of the City of Rome.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p3.1"></span>To</span> the lord and most beloved and
our honourable brother Celestine, Aurelius, Palatinus, Antony, Totus,
Servusdei, Terentius, Fortunatus, Martin, Januarius, Optatus, Ceticius,
Donatus, Theasius, Vincent, Fortunatian, and the rest of us, assembled
at Carthage in the General Council of Africa.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p4"></span>We could wish that, like as your
Holiness intimated to us, in your letter sent by our fellow presbyter
Leo, your pleasure at the arrival of Apiarius, so we also could send to
you these writings with pleasure respecting his clearing.  Then in truth
both our own satisfaction, and yours of late would be more reasonable;
nor would that lately expressed by you concerning the hearing of him
then to come, as well as that already past, seem hasty and
inconsiderate.  Upon the arrival, then, of our holy Brother and
fellow-Bishop Faustinus, we assembled a council, and believed that he
was sent with that man, in order that, as he \[Apiarius\] had before
been restored to the presbyterate by his assistance, so now he might
with his exertions be cleared of the very great crimes charged against
him by the inhabitants of Tabraca.  But the due course of examination in
our council discovered in him such great and monstrous crimes as to
overbear even Faustinus, who acted rather as an advocate of the
aforementioned person than as a judge, and to prevail against what was
more the zeal of a defender, than the justice of an inquirer.  For first
he vehemently opposed the whole assembly, inflicting on us many
injuries, under pretence of asserting the privileges of the Roman
Church, and wishing that he should be received into communion by us, on
the ground that your Holiness, believing him to have appealed, though
unable to prove it, had restored him to communion.  But this we by no
means allowed, as you will also better see by reading the acts.  After
however, a most laborious inquiry carried on for three days, during
which in the greatest affliction we took cognizance of various charges
against him, God the just Judge, strong and long suffering, cut short by
a sudden stroke both the delays of our fellow-bishop Faustinus and the
evasions of Apiarius himself, by which he was endeavouring to veil his
foul enormities.  For his strong and shameless obstinacy was <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-Page_510"></span>overcome, by which he endeavoured
to cover, through an impudent denial, the mire of his lusts, and God so
wrought upon his conscience and published, even to the eyes of men, the
secret crimes which he was already condemning in that man’s heart, a
very sty of wickedness, that, after his false denial he suddenly burst
forth into a confession of all the crimes he was charged with, and at
length convicted himself of his own accord of all infamies beyond
belief, and changed to groans even the hope we had entertained,
believing and desiring that he might be cleared from such shameful
blots, except indeed that it was so far a relief to our sorrow, that he
had delivered us from the labour of a longer inquiry, and by confession
had applied some sort of remedy to his own wounds, though, lord and
brother, it was unwilling, and done with a struggling conscience. 
Premising, therefore, our due regards to you, we earnestly conjure you,
that for the future you do not readily admit to a hearing persons coming
hence, nor choose to receive to your communion those who have been
excommunicated by us, because you, venerable Sir, will readily perceive
that this has been prescribed even by the Nicene council.  For though
this seems to be there forbidden in respect of the inferior clergy, or
the laity, how much more did it will this to be observed in the case of
bishops, lest those who had been suspended from communion in their own
Province might seem to be restored to communion hastily or unfitly by
your Holiness.  Let your Holiness reject, as is worthy of you, that
unprincipled taking shelter with you of presbyters likewise, and the
inferior clergy, both because by no ordinance of the Fathers hath the
Church of Africa been deprived of this authority, and the Nicene decrees
have most plainly committed not only the clergy of inferior rank, but
the bishops themselves to their own Metropolitans.  For they have
ordained with great wisdom and justice, that all matters should be
terminated in the places where they arise; and did not think that the
grace of the Holy Spirit would be wanting to any Province, for the
bishops of Christ (*Sacerdotibus*) wisely to discern, and firmly to
maintain the right:  especially since whosoever thinks himself wronged
by any judgment may appeal to the council of his Province, or even to a
General Council \[i.e. of Africa\] unless it be imagined that God can
inspire a single individual with justice, and refuse it to an
innumerable multitude of bishops (*sacerdotum*) assembled in council. 
And how shall we be able to rely on a sentence passed beyond the sea,
since it will not be possible to send thither the necessary witnesses,
whether from the weakness of sex, or advanced age, or any other
impediment?  For that your Holiness should send any on your part we can
find ordained by no council of Fathers.  Because with regard to what you
have sent us by the same our brother bishop Faustinus, as being
contained in the Nicene Council, we can find nothing of the kind in the
more authentic copies of that council, which we have received from the
holy Cyril our brother, Bishop of the Alexandrine Church, and from the
venerable Atticus the Prelate of Constantinople, and which we formerly
sent by Innocent the presbyter, and Marcellus the subdeacon through whom
we received them, to Boniface the Bishop, your predecessor of venerable
memory.  Moreover whoever desires you to delegate any of your clergy to
execute your orders, do not comply, lest it seem that we are introducing
the pride of secular dominion into the Church of Christ which exhibiteth
to all that desire to see God the light of simplicity and the day of
humility.  For now that the miserable Apiarius has been removed out of
the Church of Christ for his horrible crimes, we feel confident
respecting our brother Faustinus, that through the uprightness and
moderation of your Holiness, Africa, without violating brotherly
charity, will by no means have to endure him any longer.  Lord and
brother, may our Lord long preserve your Holiness to pray for us. <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md)

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon
CXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p7"></span>*Those excommunicated by us, ye are
not be willing to admit afterwards to communion, according to the decree
of the Nicene Synod.  For Apiarius, who was restored by you, has
resisted the Synod, and treated it with scorn, and at length has been
converted and confessed himself guilty with sighs and tears.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_496"></span>[510:497](2140662.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxxxix-p5"></span> This translation is by Allies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council of Constantinople held under Nectarius.](2140663.md)
