[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140234)  [Next](2140236.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_163"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>The Holy Creed Which the 150 Holy Fathers Set
Forth, Which is Consonant with the Holy and Great Synod of Nice <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) .</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>(*Found in all the Collections in the Acts
of the Council of Chalcedon*.)

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iii-p4.1"></span>Introductory Note.</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span>The reader should know that Tillemont
(*Mémoires*, t. ix., art. 78 in the treatise on St. Greg. Naz.) broached
the theory that the Creed adopted at Constantinople was not a new
expansion of the Nicene but rather the adoption of a Creed already in
use.  Hefele is of the same opinion (*Hist. of the Councils*, II., p.
349), and the learned Professor of Divinity in the University of Jena,
Dr. Lipsius, says, of St. Epiphanius:  “Though not himself present at
the Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381, which ensured the triumph of
the Nicene doctrine in the Oriental Churches, his shorter confession of
faith, which is found at the end of his *Ancoratus*, and seems to have
been the baptismal creed of the Church of Salamis, agrees almost word
for word with the Constantinopolitan formula.”  (Smith and Wace, *Dict.
Chr. Biog*., *s.v.* Epiphanius).  “The Ancoratus,” St. Epiphanius
distinctly tells us, was written as early as <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span> 374, and toward the end of chapter
cxix., he writes as follows.  “The children of the Church have received
from the holy fathers, that is from the holy Apostles, the faith to
keep, and to hand down, and to teach their children.  To these children
you belong, and I beg you to receive it and pass it on.  And whilst you
teach your children these things and such as these from the holy
Scriptures, cease not to confirm and strengthen them, and indeed all who
hear you:  tell them that this is the holy faith of the Holy Catholic
Church, as the one holy Virgin of God received it from the holy Apostles
of the Lord to keep:  and thus every person who is in preparation for
the holy laver of baptism must learn it:  they must learn it themselves,
and teach it expressly, as the one Mother of all, of you and of us,
proclaims it, saying.”  Then follows the Creed as on page 164.

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>We believe in one God, the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth and of all things visible and invisible.  And
in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all worlds, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten
not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made.  Who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven
and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary, and was made
man, and was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate.  He suffered
and was buried, and the third day he rose again according to the
Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the Right Hand of
the Father.  And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick
and the dead.  Whose kingdom shall have no end.  (*I*)

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>And \[we believe\] in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and Giver-of-Life, who proceedeth from the Father, who with the
Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spake by
the prophets.  And \[we believe\] in one, holy, (*II*) Catholic and
Apostolic Church.  We acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins,
\[and\] we look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the
world to come.  Amen.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>Note I.</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>This clause had already, so far as the
meaning is concerned, been added to the Nicene Creed, years before, in
correction of the heresy of Marcellus of Ancyra, of whose heresy a
statement will be found in the notes on Canon I. of this Council.  One
of the creeds of the Council of Antioch in Encæniis (<span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 341) reads:  “and
he sitteth at the right hand of <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="ix.iii-Page_164"></span>the Father, and he shall come again to judge
both the quick and the dead, and he remaineth God and King to all
eternity.” <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>Note II.</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>The word “Holy” is omitted in some texts of
this Creed, notably in the Latin version in the collection of Isidore
Mercator.  *Vide* Labbe, *Conc*., II., 960.  Cf. Creed in English
Prayer-Book.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>The Creed Found in Epiphanius’s</span>
*Ancoratus* (*Cap*. cxx.) <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible:  and
in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of the
Father before all worlds, that is of the substance of the Father, Light
of Light, very God of very God, begotten not made, consubstantial with
the Father:  by whom all things were made, both in heaven and earth: 
who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate of the Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary, and was made man, was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered, and was
buried, and on the third day he rose again according to the Scriptures,
and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
and from thence he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick
and the dead, whose kingdom shall have no end.  And in the Holy Ghost,
the Lord and Giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father; who, with
the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spake
by the prophets:  in one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.  We
acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins; we look for the
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.  And those
who say that there was a time when the Son of God was not, and before he
was begotten he was not, or that he was of things which are not, or that
he is of a different hypostasis or substance, or pretend that he is
effluent or changeable, these the Catholic and Apostolic Church
anathematizes.

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>Epiphanius thus continues:

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>“And this faith was delivered from the Holy
Apostles and in the Church, the Holy City, from all the Holy Bishops
together more than three hundred and ten in number.”

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span>“In our generation, that is in the times of
Valentinus and Valens, and the ninetieth year from the succession of
Diocletian the tyrant, <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) you and
we and all the orthodox bishops of the whole Catholic Church together,
make this address to those who come to baptism, in order that they may
proclaim and say as follows:”

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span>Epiphanius then gives this creed:

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span>We believe in one God, the Father Almighty,
maker of all things, invisible and visible.  And in one Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, begotten of God the Father, only begotten, that
is of the substance of the Father, God of God, Light of Light, very God
of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father,
by whom all things were made, both which be in heaven and in earth,
whether they be visible or invisible.  Who for us men and for our
salvation came down, and was incarnate, that is to say was conceived
perfectly through the Holy Ghost of the holy ever-virgin Mary, and was
made man, that is to say a perfect man, receiving a soul, and body, and
intellect, and all that make up a man, but without sin, not from human
seed, nor \[that he dwelt\] in a man, but taking flesh to himself into
one holy entity; not as he inspired the prophets and spake and worked
\[in them\], but was perfectly made man, for the Word was made flesh;
neither did he experience any change, nor did he convert his divine
nature into the nature of man, but united it to his one holy perfection
and Divinity.

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span>For there is one Lord Jesus Christ, not
two, the same is God, the same is Lord, the same is King.  He suffered
in the flesh, and rose again, and ascended into heaven in the same body,
and with glory he sat down at the right hand of the Father, and in the
same body he will come in glory to judge both the quick and the dead,
and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span>And we believe in the Holy Ghost, who spake
in the Law, and preached in the Prophets, and descended at Jordan, and
spake in the Apostles, and indwells the Saints.  And thus we believe in
him, that he is the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the perfect Spirit,
the Spirit the Comforter, uncreate, who proceedeth from the Father,
receiving of the Son (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p24.1"></span>ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ Υἱοῦ
λαμβανόμενον</span>), and believed on.  (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii-p24.2"></span>καὶ πιστευόμενον</span>, <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> <span id="ix.iii-Page_165"></span>which the Latin version
gives *in quem credimus*; and proceeds to insert, *Præterea credimus in
unam*, etc.  It certainly looks as if it had read <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii-p24.3"></span>πιστεύομεν</span>, and had
belonged to the following phrase.)

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span>\[We believe\] in one Catholic and
Apostolic Church.  And in one baptism of penitence, and in the
resurrection of the dead, and the just judgment of souls and bodies, and
in the Kingdom of heaven and in life everlasting.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>And those who say that there was a time
when the Son was not, or when the Holy Ghost was not, or that either was
made of that which previously had no being, or that he is of a different
nature or substance, and affirm that the Son of God and the Holy Spirit
are subject to change and mutation; all such the Catholic and Apostolic
Church, the mother both of you and of us, anathematizes.  And further we
anathematize such as do not confess the resurrection of the dead, as
well as all heresies which are not in accord with the true faith.

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span>Finally, you and your children thus
believing and keeping the commandments of this same faith, we trust that
you will always pray for us, that we may have a share and lot in that
same faith and in the keeping of these same commandments.  For us make
your intercessions, you and all who believe thus, and keep the
commandments of the Lord in our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with
whom, glory be to the Father with the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_205"></span>[163:206](2140235.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span> This is the title in the Acts of the IVth
Council.  Labbe, *Conc*., iv., 342.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[164:207](2140235.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span> Soc., *H. E.*, II., 10; Soz., *H. E*.,
III. 5; Athanas., *De Synod., C*. xxij.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[164:208](2140235.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span> I have used Petavius’s edition, Cologne,
1682; there are some differences in the various editions about the
numbering of the chapters, and this seems to be the origin of the
curious mistake Hefele makes in confounding the longer with the shorter
creed.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[164:209](2140235.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span> This would be the year 374, that is to say
seven years before this Second Ecumenical Council which was held at
Constantinople in 381.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Excursus on the Introduction into the Creed of the
Words “and the Son.”](2140236.md)
