[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140238)  [Next](2140240.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="ix.vii-Page_171"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Introduction on the Number of the Canons.</span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vii-p2.1"></span>Hefele</span>, *History of the Councils*, Vol.
II., p. 351.)

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>The number of canons drawn up by this synod
is doubtful.  The old Greek codices and the Greek commentators of the
Middle Ages, Zonaras and Balsamon, enumerate seven; the old Latin
translations—viz. the *Prisca*, those by Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore,
as well as the Codex of Luna—only recognize the first four canons of the
Greek text, and the fact that they agree in this point is the more
important as they are wholly independent of each other, and divide and
arrange those canons of Constantinople which they do acknowledge quite
differently.

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span>Because, however, in the *Prisca* the canons
of Constantinople are only placed after those of the fourth General
Council, the Ballerini brothers conclude that they were not contained at
all in the oldest Greek collections of canons, and were inserted after
the Council of Chalcedon.  But it was at this very Council of Chalcedon
that the first three canons of Constantinople were read out word for
word.  As however, they were not separately numbered, but were there
read under the general title of Synodicon Synodi Secundæ, Fuchs
concluded they were not originally in the form in which we now possess
them, but, without being divided into numbers, formed a larger and
unbroken decree, the contents of which were divided by later copyists
and translators into several different canons.  And hence the very
different divisions of these canons in the *Prisca*, Dionysius, and
Isidore may be explained.  The fact, however, that the old Latin
translations all agree in only giving the first four canons of the Greek
text, seems to show that the oldest Greek manuscripts, from which those
translations were made, did not contain the fifth, sixth, and seventh,
and that these last did not properly belong to this Synod, but were
later additions.  To this must be added that the old Greek
Church-historians, in speaking of the affairs of the second General
Council, only mention those points which are contained in the first four
canons, and say nothing of what, according to the fifth, sixth, and
seventh canons, had also been decided at Constantinople.  At the very
least, the seventh canon cannot have emanated from this Council, since
in the sixth century John Scholasticus did not receive it into his
collection, although he adopted the fifth and sixth.  It is also missing
in many other collections; and in treating specially of this canon
further on, we shall endeavour to show the time and manner of its
origin.  But the fifth and sixth canons probably belong to the Synod of
Constantinople of the following year, as Beveridge, the Ballerini, and
others conjectured.  The Greek scholiasts, Zonaras and Balsamon, and
later on Tillemont, Beveridge, Van Espen and Herbst, have given more or
less detailed commentaries on all these canons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canons of the One Hundred and Fifty Fathers who assembled at
Constantinople during the Consulate of those Illustrious Men, Flavius
Eucherius and Flavius Evagrius on the VII of the Ides of July.](2140240.md)
