[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140023)  [Next](2140025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="vii.vi.vi-Page_13"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon V.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> those, whether of the
clergy or of the laity, who have been excommunicated in the several
provinces, let the provision of the canon be observed by the bishops
which provides that persons cast out by some be not readmitted by
others.  Nevertheless, inquiry should be made whether they have been
excommunicated through captiousness, or contentiousness, or any such
like ungracious disposition in the bishop.  And, that this matter may
have due investigation, it is decreed that in every province synods
shall be held twice a year, in order that when all the bishops of the
province are assembled together, such questions may by them be
thoroughly examined, that so those who have confessedly offended against
their bishop, may be seen by all to be for just cause excommunicated,
until it shall seem fit to a general meeting of the bishops to pronounce
a milder sentence upon them.  And let these synods be held, the one
before Lent, (that the pure Gift may be offered to God after all
bitterness has been put away), and let the second be held about autumn.

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon V.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p5"></span>Such as have been excommunicated by
certain bishops shall not be restored by others, unless the
excommunication was the result of pusillanimity, or strife, or some
other similar cause.  And that this may be duly attended to, there shall
be in each year two synods in every province—the one before Lent, the
other toward autumn.

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p6"></span>There has always been found the greatest
difficulty in securing the regular meetings of provincial and diocesan
synods, and despite the very explicit canonical legislation upon the
subject, and the severe penalties attached to those not answering the
summons, in large parts of the Church for centuries these councils have
been of the rarest occurrence.  Zonaras complains that in his time
“these synods were everywhere treated with great contempt,” and that
they had actually ceased to be held.

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p7"></span>Possibly the opinion of St. Gregory
Nazianzen had grown common, for it will be remembered that in refusing
to go to the latter sessions of the Second Ecumenical he wrote, “I am
resolved to avoid every meeting of bishops, for I have never seen any
synod end well, nor assuage rather than aggravate disorders.” <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md)

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p10"></span>Gelasius has given in his history of the
Council of Nice, the text of the canons passed by the Council; and it
must be noticed that there is here a slight difference between his text
and ours.  Our reading is as follows:  “The excommunication continues to
be in force until it seem good to the assembly of bishops (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vi-p10.1"></span>τῳ κοινῷ</span>) to
soften it.”  Gelasius, on the other hand, writes:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vi-p10.2"></span>μέχρις ἄν τῷ κοινῷ ἢ τῷ
ἐπισκόπῳ, κ.τ.λ</span>., that is to say, “until it seem good to the
assembly of bishops, *or to the bishop* (who has passed the sentence),”
etc.…Dionysius the Less has also followed this variation, as his
translation of the canon shows.  It does not change the essential
meaning of the passage; for it may be well understood that the bishop
who has passed the sentence of excommunication has also the right to
mitigate it.  But the variation adopted by the *Prisca* alters, on the
contrary, the whole sense of the canon:  the *Prisca* has not <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vi-p10.3"></span>τῳ κοινῳ</span>, but
only <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vi-p10.4"></span>ἐπισκόπῳ</span> :  it is in this erroneous
form that the canon has passed into the *Corpus jurisc an*.

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p11"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XI, Quæst. III., Canon
lxxiij., and the latter part in Pars I., Distinc. XVIII., c. iij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[13:59](2140024.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="vii.vi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.vi-p8"></span> Greg. Naz. *Ep. ad Procop*., Migne,
*Pat. Græc*., No. cxxx.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Word Προσφέρειν.](2140025.md)
