[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140241)  [Next](2140243.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Heresies Condemned in Canon
I.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p2"></span>In treating of these heresies I shall
invert the order of the canon, and shall speak of the Macedonian and
Apollinarian heresies first, as being most nearly connected with the
object for which the Constantinopolitan Synod was assembled.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>The Semi-Arians, Macedonians or
Pneumatomachi.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p4"></span>Peace indeed seemed to have been secured
by the Nicene decision but there was an element of discord still extant,
and so shortly afterwards as in 359 the double-synod of Rimini <span
id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span
id="ix.viii.ii-Page_173"></span>(Ariminum) and Selencia rejected the
expressions *homousion* and *homœusion* equally, and Jerome gave birth
to his famous phrase, “the world awoke to find itself Arian.”  The cause
of this was the weight attaching to the Semi-Arian party, which counted
among its numbers men of note and holiness, such as St. Cyril of
Jerusalem.  Of the developments of this party it seems right that some
mention should be made in this place, since it brought forth the
Macedonian heresy.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p5"></span>(Wm. Bright, D.D., *St. Leo on the
Incarnation*, pp. 213 *et seqq*.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p6"></span>The Semi-Arian party in the fourth
century attempted to steer a middle course between calling the Son
Consubstantial and calling him a creature.  Their position, indeed, was
untenable, but several persisted in clinging to it; and it was adopted
by Macedonius, who occupied the see of Constantinople.  It was through
their adoption of a more reverential language about the Son than had
been used by the old Arians, that what is called the Macedonian heresy
showed itself.  Arianism had spoken both of the Son and the Holy Spirit
as creatures.  The Macedonians, rising up out of Semi-Arianism,
gradually reached the Church’s belief as to the uncreated majesty of the
Son, even if they retained their objection to the homoousion as a
formula.  But having, in their previously Semi-Arian position, refused
to extend their own “homoiousion” to the Holy Spirit, they afterwards
persisted in regarding him as “external to the one indivisible Godhead,”
Newman’s *Arians*, p. 226; or as Tillemont says (*Mém*. vi., 527), “the
denial of the divinity of the Holy Spirit was at last their capital or
only error.”  St. Athanasius, while an exile under Constantius for the
second time, “heard with pain,” as he says (*Ep*. i. *ad Serap.*, 1)
that “some who had left the Arians from disgust at their blasphemy
against the Son of God, yet called the Spirit a creature, and one of the
ministering spirits, differing only in degree from the Angels:”  and
soon afterwards, in 362, the Council of Alexandria condemned the notion
that the Spirit was a creature, as being “no true avoidance of the
detestable Arian heresy.”  See “Later Treatises of St. Athanasius,” p.
5.  Athanasius insisted that the Nicene Fathers, although silent on the
nature of the Holy Spirit, had by implication ranked him with the Father
and the Son as an object of belief (*ad Afros*, 11).  After the death of
St. Athanasius, the new heresy was rejected on behalf of the West by
Pope Damasus, who declared the Spirit to be truly and properly from the
Father (as the Son from the Divine substance) and very God, “omnia posse
et omnia nosse, et ubique esse,” coequal and adorable (Mansi, iii.,
483).  The Illyrian bishops also, in 374, wrote to the bishops of Asia
Minor, affirming the consubstantiality of the Three Divine Persons
(Theodoret, *H. E.*, iv., 9).  St. Basil wrote his *De Spiritu Sancto*
in the same sense (see Swete, *Early History of the Doctrine of the Holy
Spirit*, pp. 58, 67), and in order to vindicate this truth against the
Pneumatomachi, as the Macedonians were called by the Catholics, the
Constantinopolitan recension of the Nicene Creed added the words, “the
Lord and the Life-giver, proceeding from the Father, with the Father and
the Son worshipped and glorified” etc., which had already formed part of
local Creeds in the East.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p7"></span>From the foregoing by Canon Bright, the
reader will be able to understand the connexion between the Semi-Arians
and Pneumatomachi, as well as to see how the undestroyed heretical germs
of the Semi-Asian heresy necessitated by their development the
condemnation of a second synod.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>The Apollinarians.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p9"></span>(Philip Schaff, in Smith and Wace,
*Dict. Christ. Biog*., *s.v.* Apollinaris.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p10"></span>Apollinaris was the first to apply the
results of the Nicene controversy to Christology proper, and to call the
attention of the Church to the psychical and pneumatic element in the
humanity of Christ; but in his zeal for the true deity of Christ, and
fear of a double <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="ix.viii.ii-Page_174"></span>personality, he fell into the error of a
partial denial of his true humanity.  Adopting the psychological
trichotomy of Plato (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.1"></span>σῶμα ψυχὴ, πνεῦμα</span>), for which he
quoted [1 Thess. 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md), [Gal.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.2"></span>, he attributed to Christ a human body
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.3"></span>σῶμα</span>) and
a human soul (the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.4"></span>ψυχὴ ἄλογος</span>, the *anima animans*
which man has in common with the animal), but not a rational spirit
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.5"></span>νοῦς, πνεῦμα,
ψυχὴ λογικὴ</span>, *anima rationalis*,) and put in the place of the
latter the divine Logos.  In opposition to the idea of a mere connection
of the Logos with the man Jesus, he wished to secure an organic unity of
the two, and so a true incarnation; but he sought this at the expense of
the most important constituent of man.  He reached only a <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.6"></span>Θεὸς σαρκοφόρος</span>
as Nestorianism only an <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.7"></span>ἄνθρωπος θεοφόρος</span> instead of the
proper <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.8"></span>θεάνδρωτος</span> .  He appealed to the
fact that the Scripture says, “the Word was made *flesh*”—not *spirit*;
“God was manifest in the *flesh*” etc.  To which Gregory Nazianzen
justly replied that in these passages the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p10.9"></span>σάρξ</span> was used by synecdoche for the
whole human nature.  In this way Apollinaris established so close a
connection of the Logos with human flesh, that all the divine attributes
were transferred to the human nature, and all the human attributes to
the divine, and the two merged in one nature in Christ.  Hence he could
speak of a crucifixion of the Logos, and a worship of his flesh.  He
made Christ a middle being between God and man, in whom, as it were, one
part divine and two parts human were fused in the unity of a new
nature.  He even ventured to adduce created analogies, such as the mule,
midway between the horse and the ass; the grey colour, a mixture of
white and black; and spring, in distinction from winter and summer. 
Christ, said he, is neither whole man, nor God, but a mixture (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.10"></span>μίξις</span>) of God
and man.  On the other hand, he regarded the orthodox view of a union of
full humanity with a full divinity in one person—of two wholes in one
whole—as an absurdity.  He called the result of this construction <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.11"></span>ἀνθρωπόθεος</span> , a
sort of monstrosity, which he put in the same category with the
mythological figure of the Minotaur.  But the Apollinarian idea of the
union of the Logos with a truncated human nature might be itself more
justly compared with this monster.  Starting from the Nicene
*homoousion* as to the Logos, but denying the completeness of Christ’s
humanity, he met Arianism half-way, which likewise put the divine Logos
in the place of the human spirit in Christ.  But he strongly asserted
his unchangeableness, while Arians taught his changeableness (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p10.12"></span>τρεπτότης</span>).

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p11"></span>The faith of the Church revolted
against such a mutilated and stunted humanity of Christ which
necessarily involved also a merely partial redemption.  The incarnation
is an assumption of the entire human nature, sin only excluded.  The
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p11.1"></span>ἐνσάρκωσις</span>
is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p11.2"></span>ἐνανθρώπησις</span>.  To be a full and
complete Redeemer, Christ must be a perfect man (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.ii-p11.3"></span>τέλειος
ἄνθρωπος</span>).  The spirit or rational soul is the most important
element in man, his crowning glory, the seat of intelligence and
freedom, and needs redemption as well as the soul and the body; for sin
has entered and corrupted all the faculties.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p12"></span>In the sentence immediately preceding
the above Dr. Scruff remarks “but the peculiar Christology of
Apollinaris has reappeared from time to time in a modified shape, as
isolated theological opinion.”  No doubt Dr. Schaff had in mind the
fathers of the so-called “Kenoticism” of to-day, Gess and Ebrard, who
teach, unless they have been misunderstood, that the incarnate Son had
no human intellect or rational soul (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p12.1"></span>νοῦς</span>) but that the divine
personality took its place, by being changed into it.  By this last
modification, they claim to escape from the taint of the Apollinarian
heresy. <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p14"></span><span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="ix.viii.ii-Page_175"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p14.1"></span>The Eunomians or Anomœans.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p15"></span>(Bright, *Notes on the Canons*, Canon
I. of I. Const.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p16"></span>“The Eunomians or Anomœans.”  These
were the ultra-Arians, who carried to its legitimate issue the original
Arian denial of the eternity and uncreatedness of the Son, while they
further rejected what Arius had affirmed as to the essential
mysteriousness of the Divine nature (Soc., *H. E.*, iv., 7; comp.
Athan., *De Synod.*, 15).  Their founder was Aëtius, the most versatile
of theological adventurers (cf. Athan., *De Synod.*, 31; Soc., *H. E.*,
ii., 45; and see a summary of his career in Newman’s *Arians*, p. 347);
but their leader at the time of the Council was the daring and
indefatigable Eunomius (for whose personal characteristics, see his
admirer Philostorgius, x., 6).  He, too, had gone through many
vicissitudes from his first employment as the secretary of Aëtius, and
his ordination as deacon by Eudoxius; as bishop of Cyzicus, he had been
lured into a disclosure of his true sentiments, and then denounced as a
heretic (Theod., *H. E*., ii., 29); with Aëtius he had openly separated
from Eudoxius as a disingenuous time-server, and had gone into
retirement at Chalcedon (Philostorg., ix., 4).  The distinctive formula
of his adherents was the “Anomoion.”  The Son, they said, was not “like
to the Father in essence”; even to call him simply “like” was to obscure
the fact that he was simply a creature, and, as such, “unlike” to his
Creator.  In other words, they thought the Semi-Arian “homoiousion”
little better than the Catholic “homoousion”:  the “homoion” of the more
“respectable” Arians represented in their eyes an ignoble reticence; the
plain truth, however it might shock devout prejudice, must be put into
words which would bar all misunderstanding:  the Son might be called
“God,” but in a sense merely titular, so as to leave an impassable gulf
between him and the uncreated Godhead (see Eunomius’s *Exposition* in
Valesius’s note on Soc., *H. E.*, v., 10).  Compare Basil (*Epist*.,
233, and his work against Eunomius), and Epiphanius (*Hær*., 76).

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p17"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p17.1"></span>The Arians or Eudoxians.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p18"></span>(Bright.  *Ut supra*.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p19"></span>“The Arians or Eudoxians.”  By these
are meant the ordinary Arians of the period, or, as they may be called,
the Acacian party, directed for several years by the essentially worldly
and unconscientious Eudoxius.  His real sympathies were with the
Anomœans (see Tillemont, *Mémoires*, vi., 423, and compare his profane
speech recorded by Socrates, *H. E.*, ii., 43): but, as a bishop of
Constantinople, he felt it necessary to discourage them, and to abide by
the vague formula invented by Acacius of Cæsarea, which described the
Son as “like to the Father,” without saying whether this likeness was
supposed to be more than moral (*cf*. Newman, *Arians*, p. 317), so that
the practical effect of this “homoion” was to prepare the way for that
very Anomœanism which its maintainers were ready for political purposes
to disown.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p20.1"></span>The Sabellians.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p21"></span>(Bright.  *Ut supra*.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p22"></span>“The Sabellians,” whose theory is
traceable to Noetus and Praxeas in the latter part of the second
century:  they regarded the Son and the Holy Spirit as aspects and modes
of, or as emanations from, the One Person of the Father (see Newman’s
*Arians*, pp. 120 *et seqq*.).  Such a view tended directly to dissolve
Christian belief in the Trinity and in the Incarnation (*Vide*
Wilberforce, *Incarnation*, pp. 112, 197).  Hence the gentle Dionysius
of Alexandria characterised it in severe terms as involving “blasphemy,
unbelief, and irreverence, towards the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit” (Euseb., *H. E.*, vii.. 6).  Hence the deep repugnance which it
excited, and the facility with which the imputation of “Sabellianizing”
could be utilised by the Arians against maintainers of the
Consubstantiality (Hilary, *De Trinit*., iv., 4; *De Synod.*, 68;
*Fragm*., 11; Basil, *Epist*., 189, 2).  No organized Sabellian sect was
in exist<span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="ix.viii.ii-Page_176"></span>ence at the date of this anathema:  but
Sabellian ideas were “in the air,” and St. Basil could speak of a
revival of this old misbelief (*Epist*., 126).  We find it again
asserted by Chilperic I., King of Neustria, in the latter part of the
sixth century (Greg. Turon., *Hist. Fr*., v., 45).

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p23.1"></span>The Marcellians.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p24"></span>(Bright.  *Ut supra*.)

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p25"></span>“The Marcellians,” called after
Marcellus bishop of Ancyra, who was persistently denounced not only by
the Arianizers, but by St. Basil, and for a time, at least, suspected by
St. Athanasius (*Vide* Epiphan., *Hær*., 72, 4) as one who held notions
akin to Sabellianism, and fatal to a true belief in the Divine Sonship
and the Incarnation.  The theory ascribed to him was that the Logos was
an impersonal Divine power, immanent from eternity in God, but issuing
from him in the act of creation, and entering at last into relations
with the human person of Jesus, who thus became God’s Son.  But this
expansion of the original divine unity would be followed by a
“contraction,” when the Logos would retire from Jesus, and God would
again be all in all.  Some nine years before the council, Marcellus,
then in extreme old age, had sent his deacon Eugenius to St. Athanasius,
with a written confession of faith, quite orthodox as to the eternity of
the Trinity, and the identity of the Logos with a pre-existing and
personal Son, although not verbally explicit as to the permanence of
Christ’s “kingdom,”—the point insisted on in one of the
Epiphanian-Constantinopolitan additions to the Creed (Montfaucon,
*Collect. Nov*., ii., 1).  The question whether Marcellus was personally
heterodox—i.e. whether the extracts from his treatise, made by his
adversary Eusebius of Cæsarea, give a fair account of his real views—has
been answered unfavourably by some writers, as Newman (*Athanasian
Treatises*, ii., 200, ed. 2), and Döllinger (*Hippolytus and Callistus*,
p. 217, E. T. p. 201), while others, like Neale, think that “charity and
truth” suggest his “acquittal” (*Hist. Patr. Antioch*., p. 106). 
Montfaucon thinks that his written statements might be favourably
interpreted, but that his oral statements must have given ground for
suspicion.

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p26"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p26.1"></span>The Photinians.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p27"></span>(Bright.  *Ut supra*. )

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p28"></span>“The Photinians,” or followers of
Marcellus’s disciple Photinus, bishop of Sirmium, the ready-witted and
pertinacious disputant whom four successive synods condemned before he
could be got rid of, by State power, in <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.ii-p28.1"></span>a.d.</span> 351.  (See St. Athanasius’s
*Historical Writings*, Introd. p. lxxxix.)  In his representation of the
“Marcellian” theology, he laid special stress on its Christological
position—that Jesus, on whom the Logos rested with exceptional fulness,
was a mere man.  See Athanasius, *De Synodis*, 26, 27, for two creeds in
which Photinianism is censured; also Soc. *H. E.* ii., 18, 29, 30; vii.,
32.  There is an obvious affinity between it and the “Samosatene” or
Paulionist theory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[174:229](2140242.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="ix.viii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.ii-p13"></span> The theological views of Gess and
Ebrard I know only from the statements of them in writers on the subject
of the Incarnation, especially from those made by the Rev. A. B. Bruce,
D D., Professor at Free Church College, Glasgow, in his work “The
Humiliation of Christ.”  (Lecture IV.)  The following passage (cited by
Dr. Bruce) seems to prove his contention so far as Gess is concerned. 
“<span id="ix.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>Dass eine wahrhaft menschliche Seele
in Jesu war, versteht sich für und von selbt:  er war ja sonst kein
wirklicher Mensch.  Aber die Frage ist, ob der in’s Werden eingegangene
Logos selbst diese menschliche Seele, oder ob neben dem in’s Werden
eingegangenen Logos noch eine becondere menschliche Seele in Jesu war?” 
(Gess.  *Die Lehre v. d. Person Christi*, ii. p. 321.)  Bruce
understands Gess to teach that “The only difference between the Logos
and a human soul was, that he became human by voluntary kenosis, while
an ordinary human soul derives its existence from a creative act.”  (And
refers to Gess, *ut supra*, p. 325 *et seqq*.)  For Ebrard’s view, see
his *Christliche Dogmatik*, ii., p. 40.  Ritschl dubbed the whole
kenotic theory as “Verschämter Socinianismus.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon II](2140243.md)
