[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140040)  [Next](2140042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Translation of
Bishops.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p2"></span>There are few points upon which the
discipline of the Church has so completely changed as that which
regulated, or rather which forbade, the translation of a bishop from the
see for which he was consecrated to some other diocese.  The grounds on
which such prohibition rested were usually that such changes were the
outcome of ambition, and that if tolerated the result would be that
smaller and less important sees would be despised, and that there would
be a constant temptation to the bishops of such sees to make themselves
popular with the important persons in other dioceses with the hope of
promotion.  Besides this objection to translation, St. Athanasius
mentions a spiritual one, that the diocese was the bishop’s bride, and
that to desert it and take another was an act of unjustifiable divorce,
and subsequent adultery. <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)   Canon
XIV. of the Apostolic Canons does not forbid the practice absolutely,
but allows it for just cause, and although the Council of Nice is more
stringent so far as its words are concerned, apparently forbidding
translation under any circumstances, yet, as a matter of fact, that very
council did allow and approve a translation. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)   The general feeling, however, of the
early Church was certainly very strong against all such changes of
Episcopal cure, and there can be no doubt that the chief reason why St.
Gregory Nazianzen resigned the Presidency of the First Council of
Constantinople, was because he had been translated from his obscure see
Sasima (not Nazianzum as Socrates and Jerome say) to the Imperial
City. <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p12"></span>From the canons of some provincial
councils, and especially from those of the Third and of the Fourth
Council of Carthage, it is evident that despite the conciliar and papal
prohibitions, translations did take place, being made by the authority
of the provincial Synods, and without the consent of the pope, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) but it is also evident that this
authority was too weak, and that the aid of the secular power had often
to be invoked.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p14"></span>This course, of having the matter
decided by the synod, was exactly in accordance with the Apostolic Canon
(no. xiv.).  In this manner, for example, Alexander was translated from
Cappadocia to Jerusalem, a translation made, so it is narrated, in
obedience to heavenly revelation.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p15"></span>It will be noticed that the Nicene
Canon does not forbid Provincial Councils to translate <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-Page_34"></span>bishops, but forbids bishops to
translate themselves, and the author of the tract *De Translationibus*
in the *Jus Orient*. (i. 293, *Cit*. Haddon. Art. “Bishop,” Smith and
Cheetham, *Dict. Chr. Antiq*.) sums up the matter tersely in the
statement that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p15.1"></span>ἡ μετάβασις κεκώλυται, οὐ μὴν ἥ
μετάθεσις</span>:  i.e., the thing prohibited is “transmigration” (which
arises from the bishop himself, from selfish motives) not “translation”
(wherein the will of God and the good of the Church is the ruling
cause); the “going,” not the “being taken” to another see.  And this was
the practice both of East and West, for many centuries.  Roman Catholic
writers have tried to prove that translations, at least to the chief
sees, required the papal consent, but Thomassinus, considering the case
of St. Meletius having translated St. Gregory of Nazianzum to
Constantinople, admits that in so doing he “would only have followed the
example of many great bishops of the first ages, when usage had not yet
reserved translations to the first see of the Church.” <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p17"></span>But the same learned author frankly
confesses that in France, Spain, and England, translations were made
until the ninth century without consulting the pope at all, by bishops
and kings.  When, however, from grounds of simple ambition, Anthimus was
translated from Trebizonde to Constantinople, the religious of the city
wrote to the pope, as also did the patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem,
and as a result the Emperor Justinian allowed Anthimus to be
deposed. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p19"></span>Balsamon distinguishes three kinds of
translations.  The first, when a bishop of marked learning and of equal
piety is forced by a council to pass from a small diocese to one far
greater where he will be able to do the Church the most important
services, as was the case when St. Gregory of Nazianzum was transferred
from Sasima to Constantinople, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p19.1"></span>μετάθεσις</span>; the second when a
bishop, whose see has been laid low by the barbarians, is transferred to
another see which is vacant, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p19.2"></span>μετάβασις</span>; and the third when a
bishop, either having or lacking a see, seizes on a bishopric which is
vacant, on his own proper authority <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p19.3"></span>ἀνάβασις</span>.  It is this last which
the Council of Sardica punishes so severely.  In all these remarks of
Balsamon there is no mention of the imperial power.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p20"></span>Demetrius Chomatenus, however, who
was Archbishop of Thessalonica, and wrote a series of answers to
Cabasilas, Archbishop of Durazzo, says that by the command of the
Emperor a bishop, elected and confirmed, and even ready to be ordained
for a diocese, may be forced to take the charge of another one which is
more important, and where his services will be incomparably more useful
to the public.  Thus we read in the Book of Eastern Law that “If a
Metropolitan with his synod, moved by a praiseworthy cause and probable
pretext, shall give his approbation to the translation of a bishop, this
can, without doubt, be done, for the good of souls and for the better
administration of the church’s affairs, etc.” <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)   This was adopted at a synod held by the
patriarch Manuel at Constantinople, in the presence of the imperial
commissioners.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p22"></span>The same thing appears also in the
synodal response of the patriarch Michael, which only demands for
translation the authority of the Metropolitan and “the greatest
authority of the Church.” <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)   But,
soon after this, translation became the rule, and not the exception both
in East and West.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p24"></span>It was in vain that Simeon,
Archbishop of Thessalonica, in the East raised his voice against the
constant translations made by the secular power, and the Emperors of
Constantinople were often absolute masters of the choice and
translations of bishops; and Thomassinus sums up the matter, “At the
least we are forced to the conclusion that no translations could <span
id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span id="vii.vi.xxiii-Page_35"></span>be made
without the consent of the Emperor, especially when it was the See of
Constantinople that was to be filled.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p25"></span>The same learned writer continues: 
“It was usually the bishop or archbishop of another church that was
chosen to ascend the patriarchal throne of the imperial city.  The Kings
of England often used this same power to appoint to the Primatial See of
Canterbury a bishop already approved in the government of another
diocese.” <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p27"></span>In the West, Cardinal Bellarmine
disapproved the prevailing custom of translations and protested against
it to his master, Pope Clement VIII., reminding him that they were
contrary to the canons and contrary to the usage of the Ancient Church,
except in cases of necessity and of great gain to the Church.  The pope
entirely agreed with these wise observations, and promised that he would
himself make, and would urge princes to make, translations only “with
difficulty.”  But translations are made universally, all the world over,
today, and no attention whatever is paid to the ancient canons and
discipline of the Church. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[33:86](2140041.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p3"></span> Athanas. *Apol.* ij.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[33:87](2140041.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p4"></span> Sozom. *H. E.* I. 2.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[33:88](2140041.htm#fr_87) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p5"></span> By no one has this whole matter of
the translation of bishops been more carefully and thoroughly treated
than by Thomassinus, and in what follows I shall use his discussion as a
thesaurus of facts.  The title of his book is *Ancienne et Nouvelle
Discipline de l’Église* (there is also an edition in Latin).  In the
Third Part, and the Second Book,

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p6"></span>Chapter LX. treats of “Translations of
bishops in the Latin Church during the first five centuries.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p7"></span>Chapter LXI. “Translations in the
Eastern Church, during the first five centuries.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p8"></span>Chapter LXII. “Translation of bishops
and bishoprics between the years five hundred and eight hundred.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p9"></span>Chapter LXIII. “Translation under the
empire of Charlemagne and his descendants.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p10"></span>Chapter LXIV. “Translation of bishops
after the year one thousand.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p11"></span>Of all this I can in the text give
but a brief *resumé*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[33:89](2140041.htm#fr_88) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p13"></span> Thomassin. *l. c.* lx. viij.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[34:90](2140041.htm#fr_89) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p16"></span> Thomassin, *l. cit*., Chap. LI., §
xiij.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[34:91](2140041.htm#fr_90) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p18"></span> This is Thomassinus’s version of the
matter, in fact the charge of heresy was also made against Anthimus, but
his uncanonical translation was a real count in the accusation.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[34:92](2140041.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p21"></span> *Juris. Orient*. tom. I. p. 240,
241.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[34:93](2140041.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p23"></span> *Ibid*. p. 5.  I am not at all clear
as to what this last phrase means.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[35:94](2140041.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p26"></span> *Thomassin. lib cit*., chap. LXIV. §
x.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[35:95](2140041.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vii.vi.xxiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiii-p28"></span> I believe this is true of all
churches, Catholic and Protestant, having an episcopal form of
government (including the Protestant Church of Sweden, and the Methodist
Episcopal Church), with the exception of the Protestant Episcopal Church
in the United States, in which the ancient prohibition of the
translation of diocesan bishops is observed in all its Nicene
strictness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVI](2140042)
