[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140514)  [Next](2140516.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p3.2"></span>Gaudentius</span> said:  These things
wholesomely, duly, and fitly decreed, in the estimation of us the
bishops \[<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p3.3"></span>τῶν
ἱερέων</span>\] such as are pleasing both to God and to man will not be
able to obtain due force and validity, unless fear \[of a penalty\] be
added to the decrees proclaimed.  For we ourselves know that through the
shamelessness of a few, the divine and right reverend title of bishop
\[of the <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p3.4"></span>τῆς
ἱερωσύνης</span>\] hath often come into condemnation.  If therefore any
one, moved by arrogance and ambition rather than seeking to please God,
should have the hardihood to pursue a different course of action,
contrary to the decree of all, let him know beforehand that he must give
account and defend himself on this charge, and lose the honour and
dignity of the episcopate.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p4"></span>All answered:  This sentence is
proper and right, and such is our pleasure. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p6"></span>And this decree will be most widely
known and best carried into effect, if each of those bishops among us
who have sees on the thoroughfares or highway, on seeing a bishop \[pass
by\] shall inquire into the cause of his passage and his place of
destination.  And if at his departure he shall find that he is going to
the Court, he will direct his inquiries with reference to the objects
\[of a resort to the Court\] above mentioned.  And if he come by
invitation let no obstacle be put in the way of his departure.  But if
he is trying to go to the Court out of ostentation, as hath afore been
said by your charity, or to urge the petitions of certain persons, let
neither his letters be signed nor let such an one be received to
communion.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p7"></span>All said:  Be this also decreed.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p8"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p9.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p9.2"></span>Gaudentius</span> said:  These things
which you have wholesomely and suitably provided \[in your decrees\]
pleasing in \[*or*, to\] the estimation of all both \[*or*, and\] to God
and to men, can obtain force and validity only in case fear \[of a
penalty\] be added to this your action.  For we ourselves know that
through the shamelessness of a few the sacred and venerable sacerdotal
\[—episcopal\] name hath been many times and oft brought to blame.  If
therefore anyone attempts to oppose the judgment of all and seeks to
serve ambition rather than please God, he must be given to know that he
will have to render an account and lose office and rank.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p10"></span>This can be carried into effect only
provided each of us whose see is on the highway shall, if he sees a
bishop pass, inquire into the cause of his journey, ascertain his
desti<span id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-Page_433"></span>nation, and if he finds that he is on
his way to the Court, satisfy himself as to what is contained above
\[i.e., as to his objects at Court\], lest perhaps he has come by
invitation, that permission may be given him to proceed.  If, however,
as your holiness mentioned above, he is going to Court to urge petitions
and applications for office, let neither his letters be signed nor let
him be received to communion.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p11"></span>All said that this was proper and
right and that this regulation was approved by them.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p12"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p12.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p13.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.</span>
\[the last part of which in Beveridge, *Synod*., is numbered xxj.\]

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p14"></span>If any bishop tries out of pride to
do away with what has been decreed admirably, and in a manner pleasing
to God, he shall lose his episcopate.  A bishop who shall see a bishop
on his way to the camp, if he shall know that he goes there for any of
the before-mentioned causes, let him not trouble him, but if otherwise
let him pronounce excommunication against him.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p15"></span>This is Canon XI. of the Latin.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p16"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p16.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p17"></span>After the words \[“honour and
dignity”\] according to Balsamon and Zonaras, as also Gentian Hervetus,
there follows the approbation of the synod in these words:  “All
answered, This opinion is becoming and well-pleasing to us,” which
indicate this to be the end of the canon; and therefore the Greeks make
of this two distinct canons.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p18"></span>Dionysius and Isidore make but one
canon,…and this appears to be more congruous on account of the
subject-matter of the first part, and will be manifest by connecting the
two parts together.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p19"></span>Van Espen follows Zonaras and
Balsamon in understanding “Bishops in Canali,” as such as were set on
the public roads and public highways, or rather “in cities which are on
the public highways, or ‘Canals,’ by which they that pass go without
labour, as in a canal or aqueduct the water flows, for aqueduct and
canal are the same thing in the Roman tongue.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_401"></span>[432:402](2140515.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xxi-p5"></span> Here begins the Canon xxj.,
according to the Greek text of Bev.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XII](2140516.md)
