[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140705)  [Next](2140707) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p1.1"></span>Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p2"></span>That from henceforth, no double
monastery shall be erected; and concerning the double monasteries
already in existence.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p3.1"></span>We</span> decree that from henceforth, no
double monastery shall be erected; because this has become an offence
and cause of complaint to many.  In the case of those persons who with
the members of their family propose to leave the world and follow the
monastic life, let the men go into a monastery for men, and the women
into a monastery for women; for this is well-pleasing to God.  The
double monasteries which are already in existence, shall observe the
rule of our holy Father Basil, and shall be ordered by his precepts,
monks and nuns shall not dwell together in the same monastery, for in
thus living together adultery finds its occasion.  No monk shall have
access to a nunnery; nor shall a nun be permitted to enter a monastery
for the sake of conversing with anyone therein.  No monk shall sleep in
a monastery for women, nor eat alone with a nun. <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543)   When food is brought by men to the
canonesses, let the abbess accompanied by some one of the aged nuns,
receive it outside the gates of the women’s monastery.  When a monk
desires to see one of his kinswomen, who may be in the nunnery, let him
converse with her in the presence of the abbess, and that in a very few
words, and then let him speedily take his departure.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p7"></span>Monasteries shall not be double, neither
shall monks and nuns live in the same building, nor shall they talk
together apart.  Moreover if a man takes anything to a canoness, let him
wait without and hand it to her, and let him see his relative in the
presence of her superior.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p9"></span>It is evident, as Zonaras remarks, that
the double monasteries here referred to are not those in which men and
women live together, in one house, which in this canon is not tolerated
at all, but those which were situated so close together that it was
evident there could easily be an entrance from one to the other, these
are allowed under certain cautions by this canon.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p10"></span>But not only the Greeks but the Latins
also often disapproved of such monasteries.  See decree in Gratian,
Pars. II., Causa XVIII., Q. II., canon xxviij., and Pope Paschal’s
letter (*Epis*. X) to Didacus, Abp. of Compostella.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p11"></span>Despite all this St. Bridget of Sweden
again instituted double monasteries in the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p11.1"></span>XV</span>th century, concerning which
Thomas Walsingham, a monk of St. Alban’s Abbey, in England, writes that
in 1414, King Henry founded three monasteries, of which the third <span
id="page_569">p. 569</span> <span id="xvi.xiv.xx-Page_569"></span>was a
Brigittine, professing the rule of St. Augustine, with the additions
called by them the Rule of the Saviour.  “These two convents had one
church in common, the nuns lived in the upper part under the roof, the
brothers on the ground-floor, and each convent had a separate inclosure;
and after profession no one went forth, except by special licence of the
Lord Pope.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p12"></span>With regard to the chaplains of nuns,
provision is found in Justinian’s Code.  (Lib. xliv., *De Epis. et
clericis*. )

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p13"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars. II., Causa XVIII., Q. II.,
canon xxj.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[568:544](2140706.htm#fr_543) <span
id="xvi.xiv.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xx-p4"></span> Bev.  Neither shall a nun eat alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXI](2140707)
