[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140191)  [Next](2140193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Vestments of the
Early Church.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>It would be out of place to enter
into any specific treatment of the different vestments worn by the
clergy in the performance of their various duties.  For a full
discussion of this whole matter I must refer my readers to the great
writers on liturgical and kindred matters, especially to Cardinal Bona,
*De Rebus Liturgicis*; Pugin, *Ecclesiastical Glossary*; Rock, *Church
of our Fathers*; Hefele, *Beiträge zu Kircheschichte*, *Archäologie und
Liturgik* (essay in Die Liturgischen Gervänder, vol. ij. p. 184
*sqq*.).  And I would take this opportunity of warning the student
against the entirely unwarranted conclusions of Durandus’s *Rationale
Divinorum Officiorum* and of Marriott’s *Vestiarium Christianum*.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>The manner in which the use of
the stole is spoken of in this canon shews not only the great antiquity
of that vestment but of other ecclesiastical vestments as well.  Before,
however, giving the details of our knowledge with regard to this
particular vestment I shall need no apology for quoting a passage, very
germane to the whole subject, from the pen of that most delightful
writer Curzon, to whose care and erudition all scholars and students of
manuscripts are so deeply indebted.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p4"></span>(Robert Curzon, *Armenia*, p.
202.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p5"></span>Here I will remark that the
sacred vestures of the Christian Church are the same, with very
insignificant modifications, among every denomination of Christians in
the world; that they have always been the same, and never were otherwise
in any country, from the remotest times when we have any written
accounts of them, or any mosaics, sculptures, or pictures to explain
their forms.  They are no more a Popish invention, or have anything more
to do with the Roman Church, than any other usage which is common to all
denominations of Christians.  They are and always have been, of general
and universal—that is, of Catholic—use; they have never been used for
many centuries for ornament or dress by the laity, having been
considered as set apart to be used only by priests in the church during
the celebration of the worship of Almighty God.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p6"></span>Thus far the very learned
Curzon.  As is natural the distinctive dress of the bishops is the first
that we hear of, and that in connexion with St. John, who is said to
have worn a golden mitre or fillet. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p8"></span><span id="page_142">p. 142</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-Page_142"></span>(Duchesne, *Origines du
Culte Chrétien*, p. 376 *et sqq*.)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p9"></span>It was not the bishops alone who
were distinguished by insignia from the other ecclesiastics.  Priests
and deacons had their distinctive insignia as well.  There was, however,
a difference between Rome and the rest of the world in this matter.  At
Rome it would seem that but little favour was extended at first to these
marks of rank; the letter of Pope Celestine to the bishops shews this
already.  But what makes it evident still more clearly, is that the
*orarium* of the priest and of the deacon, looked upon as a visible and
distinctive mark of these orders, was unknown at Rome, at least down to
the tenth century, while it had been adopted everywhere else.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p10"></span>To be sure, the *orarium* is
spoken of in the *ordines* of the ninth century; but from these it is
also evident that this vestment was worn by acolytes and subdeacons, as
well as by the superior clergy, and that its place was under the top
vestment, whether dalmatic or chasuble, and not over it.  But that
*orarium* is nothing more than the ancient sweat-cloth (*sudarium*), the
handkerchief, or cravat which has ended up by taking a special form and
even by becoming an accessory of a ceremonial vestment:  but it is not
an insignia.  I know no Roman representation of this earlier than the
twelfth century.  The priests and deacons who figure in the mosaics
never display this detail of costume.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p11"></span>But such is not the case
elsewhere.  Towards the end of the fourth century, the Council of
Laodicea in Phrygia forbade inferior classes, subdeacons, readers, etc.,
to usurp the *orarium*.  St. Isidore of Pelusium knew it as somewhat
analogous to the episcopal *pallium*, except that it was of linen, while
the pallium was of wool.  The sermon on the Prodigal Son, sometimes
attributed to St. John Chrysostom \[Migne’s Ed., vol. viij., 520\], uses
the same term, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>ὀθόνη</span>; it adds that this
piece of dress was worn over the left shoulder, and that as it swung
back and forth it called to mind the wings of the angels.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p12"></span>The deacons among the Greeks
wear the stole in this fashion down to to-day, perfectly visible, over
the top of the upper vestment, and fastened upon the left shoulder.  Its
ancient name (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>ὠράριον</span>) still clings to it. 
As for the *orarium* of the priests it is worn, like the stole of Latin
priests, round the neck, the two ends falling in front, almost to the
feet.  This is called the epitrachilion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>ἐπιτραχήλιον</span>).

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p13"></span>These distinctions were also
found in Spain and Gaul.  The Council of Braga, in 561, ordered that
deacons should wear these *oraria*, not under the tunicle, which caused
them to be confounded with the subdeacon, but over it, over the
shoulder.  The Council of Toledo, in 633, describes the *orarium* as the
common mark of the three superior orders, bishops, priests, and deacons;
and specifies that the deacon should wear his over his left shoulder,
and that it should be white, without any mixture of colours or any gold
embroidery.  Another Council of Braga forbade priests to say mass
without having a stole around their necks and crossed upon the breast,
exactly as Latin priests wear it to-day.  St. Germanus of Paris speaks
of the insignia of a bishop and of a deacon; to the first he assigns the
name of *pallium*, and says that it is worn around the neck, and falls
down upon the breast where it ends with a fringe.  As for the insignia
of a deacon he calls it a stole (*stola*); and says that deacons wear it
over the alb.  This fashion of wearing the stole of the deacon spread
during the middle ages over nearly the whole of Italy and to the very
gates of Rome.  And even at Rome the ancient usage seems to have been
maintained with a compromise.  They ended up by adopting the stole for
deacons and by placing it over the left shoulder, but they covered it up
with the dalmatic or the chasuble.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p14"></span>The priest’s stole was also
accepted:  and in the mosaics of Sta. Maria in Trastevere is seen a
priest ornamented with this insignia.  It is worthy of notice that the
four popes who are represented in the same mosaic wear the pallium but
no stole.  The one seems to exclude <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-Page_143"></span>the other.  And as a matter
of fact the *ordines* of the ninth century in describing the costume of
the pope omit always the stole.  One can readily understand that who
bore one of these insignia should not wear the other.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p15"></span>However, they ended by combining
them, and at Ravenna, where they always had a taste for decorations,
bishop Ecclesius in the mosaics of San Vitale wears both the priest’s
stole and the Roman pallium.  This, however, seems to be unique, and his
successors have the pallium only.  The two are found together again in
the Sacramentary of Autun (*Vide* M. Lelisle’s reproduction in the
*Gazette Archéologique*, 1884, pl. 20), and on the paliotto of St.
Ambrose of Milan; such seems to have been the usage of the Franks.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p16"></span>In view of these facts one is
led to the conclusion that all these insignia, called *pallium*,
*omophorion*, *orarium*, stole, *epitrachilion*, have the same origin. 
They are the marks of dignity, introduced into church usage during the
fourth century, analogous to those which the Theodosian code orders for
certain kinds of civil functionaries.  For one reason or another the
Roman Church refused to receive these marks, or rather confined itself
to the papal pallium, which then took a wholly technical signification. 
But everywhere else, this mark of the then superior orders of the
hierarchy was adopted, only varying slightly to mark the degree, the
deacon wearing it over the left shoulder, the bishop and priest around
the neck, the deacon over the tunicle which is his uppermost vestment,
the priest under the chasuble; the bishop over his chasuble.   <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) However, for this distinction between
a bishop and priest we have very little evidence.  The Canon of III
Braga, already cited, which prescribes that priests shall wear the stole
crossed over the breast, presupposes that it is worn under the chasuble,
but the council understands that this method of wearing it pertains
distinctively to priests, and that bishops have another method which
they should observe; for the word *sacerdotes*, used by the council,
includes bishops as well as priests.  The rest of the Spanish
ecclesiastical literature gives us no information upon the point.  In
Gaul, St. Germanus of Paris (as we have seen) speaks of the episcopal
*pallium* after having described the chasuble, which makes one believe
that it was worn on top.  I have already said that Bishop Ecclesius of
Ravenna is represented with the stole pendant before, under the chasuble
and at the same time with the pallium on top of it; and that this usage
was adopted in France in the Carlovingian times.  Greek bishops also
wear at the same time the *epitrachilion* and the *omophorion*.  This
accumulation of insignia was forbidden in Spain in the seventh century
(*Vide* IV Toledo, Canon XXXIX), and (as we have stated) the Pope
abstained from it until about the twelfth century, contenting himself
with the pallium without adding to it the stole.\*

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p18"></span>The pallium, with the exception
of the crosses which adorn its ends, was always white; so too was the
deacon’s stole and also that of the priest and bishop.  The pallium was
always and everywhere made of wool; in the East the deacon’s stole was
of linen; I cannot say of what material the priest’s and deacon’s stole
was in the West.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[141:195](2140192.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p7"></span> Eusebius.  *Hist. Eccl*., v. 24.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[143:196](2140192.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxvi-p17"></span> What follows down to the next
asterisk is a foot-note to p. 379 of Duchesne’s book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXIII](2140193.md)
