[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140411)  [Next](2140413.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p1"></span> <span id="page_378">p. 378</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-Page_378"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Canon XXVIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>Since</span> we understand that in several
churches grapes are brought to the altar, according to a custom which
has long prevailed, and the ministers joined this with the unbloody
sacrifice of the oblation, and distributed both to the people at the
same time, we decree that no priest shall do this for the future, but
shall administer the oblation alone to the people for the quickening of
their souls and for the remission of their sins.  But with regard to the
offering of grapes as first fruits, the priests may bless them apart
\[from the offering of the oblation\] and distribute them to such as
seek them as an act of thanksgiving to him who is the Giver of the
fruits by which our bodies are increased and fed according to his divine
decree.  And if any cleric shall violate this decree let him be deposed.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p5"></span>Grapes are by some joined with the
unbloody sacrifice.  It is hereby decreed that no one shall for the
future dare to do this.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxix-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p7"></span>Similar blessings of fruit, and
particularly of grapes, are found in more recent rituals as well as in
the ancient Greek Euchologions and the Latin Rituales.  In the
Sacramentary of St. Gregory will be found a benediction of grapes on the
feast of St. Sixtus.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p8"></span>Cardinal Bona says (*De Rob. Liturg.*,
Lib. II., cap. xiv.), that immediately before the words *Semper bona
creas*, *sanctificas*, etc., if new fruits or any other things adapted
to human use were to be blessed, they were wont in former times to be
placed before the altar, and there to be blessed by the priest; and when
the benediction was ended with the accustomed words “Through Christ our
Lord,” there was added the following prayer:  “Perquem hæc omnia, etc.,”
which words are not so much to be referred to the body and blood of
Christ, as to the things to be blessed, which God continually creates by
renewing, and we ask that they may be sanctified by his benediction to
our use.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p9"></span>But in after ages when the fervour of
the faithful had grown cold, that the mass might not be too long, they
were separated and yet the prayer remained which, as said to-day over
the consecrated species alone, can hardly be understood.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p10"></span>This canon is found in a shortened
form in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Pars. III. De Consecrat., Dist.
II., can. vj.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxix-p11"></span>Compare Canon of the Apostles number
iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXIX](2140413.md)
