[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140134)  [Next](2140136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.ii"></span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="viii.vi.ii-Page_105"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Historical Introduction.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p2"></span>Of the Synod of Antioch which adopted
the canons subsequently received into the code of the universal church
we know the exact date.  This is fixed by the fact that the synod was
held at the time of the dedication of the great church in Antioch, known
as the “Golden,” which had been begun by his father, Constantine the
Great, and was finished in the days of Constantius.  The synod has for
this reason always been known as the Synod of Antioch *in Encæniis*,
i.e., at the dedication (*in Dedicatione*), and was holden in the summer
of the year 341.  Ninety-seven bishops assembled together and a large
number of them were hostile to St. Athanasius, being professed
Eusebians, all of them were Orientals and most of them belonged to the
patriarchate of Antioch.  Not a single Western or Latin bishop was
present and the pope, Julius, was in no way represented.  This fact gave
Socrates the historian the opportunity of making the statement (around
which such polemics have raged), that “an ecclesiastical canon commands
that the churches should not make decrees against the opinion of the
bishop of Rome.” <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159)

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p4"></span>But while this much is all clear, there
is no council that presents a greater amount of difficulty to the
historian as well as to the theologian.  No one can deny that St. Hilary
of Poictiers, who was a contemporary, styled it a Synod of Saints
(Synodus Sanctorum) <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) ; that two
of its canons were read at Chalcedon as the “canons of the Holy
Fathers”; and that Popes John II., Zacharias, and Leo. IV. all approved
these canons, and attributed them to “Holy Fathers.”  And yet this synod
set forth creeds to rival that of Nice, and, it is said, that some of
the canons were adopted to condemn Athanasius.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p6"></span>Various attempts have been made to
escape from these difficulties.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p7"></span>It has been suggested that there really
were two Synods at Antioch, the one orthodox, which adopted the canons,
the other heretical.

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p8"></span>Father Emanuel Schelstraten, S. J. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) improved on this theory.  He supposed
that the Eusebians stopped behind in Antioch after the orthodox bishops
left and then passed the decrees against Athanasius, giving out that the
synod was still in session.  This has been adopted by Pagi, Remi
Ceillier, Walch, and to a certain extent by Schröckh and others.  But
Tillemont demurs to this view, urging that according to Socrates <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) the deposition of Athanasius came
first and the adoption of the canons afterwards.  But Tillemont would
seem to have misunderstood Socrates on this point and this objection
falls to the ground.  But another objection remains, viz., that both
Socrates and Sozomen say that the creeds were drawn up *after* the
deposition of Athanasius, “and yet” (as Hefele remarks, Vol. II., p.
63), “St. Hilary says that these creeds proceeded from a ‘Synod of
Saints.’”

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p11"></span>Schelstraten’s hypothesis not being
satisfactory, the learned Ballerini, in their appendix to the *Opera S.
Leonis M*., have set forth another theory with which Mansi agrees in his
“Notes on Alexander Natalis’s *Church History*.”  These maintain that
the canons did not come from the Council *in Encæniis* at all, but from
another synod held before, in 332; but Hefele rejects this hypothesis
altogether, on the following grounds.  First and chiefest because it has
no external evidence to support it; and secondly because the internal
evidence is most unsatisfactory.  But even if the 25 canons were adopted
by a synod at Antioch in 332, the real difficulty would not be obviated,
for Socrates says <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) of that synod
that there too the <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="viii.vi.ii-Page_106"></span>“opposers of the Nicene faith” were able
to elect their candidate to fill the place of the banished bishop
Eustathius!

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p13"></span>Hefele seems to give the true solution
of the whole difficulty when he says:  “Certainly Athanasius identified
the Eusebians with the Arians and we regard them as at least
Semi-arians; but at that time, after they had made the orthodox
confession of faith, and repeatedly declared their disapproval of the
heresies condemned at Nice, they were considered, by the greater number,
as lawful bishops, and thoroughly orthodox and saintly men might without
hesitation unite with them at a synod.” <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p15"></span>Pope Julius styles the very Eusebian
synod that deposed Athanasius “dear brethren” while blaming their
action, and invited them to a common synod to enquire into the charges
made against the Saint.  In view of all this we may well believe that
both orthodox and Eusebians met together at the consecration of the
Emperor’s new church, and that the whole church afterwards awarded the
canons then adopted a rank in accordance with their intrinsic worth, and
without any regard to the motives or shades of theological opinion that
swayed those who drafted and voted for them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[105:160](2140135.htm#fr_159) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p3"></span> Socrates.  *H. E*., Lib. II., cap.
viij.  Hefele thinks the statement may rest upon nothing more than the
letter of Julius I. that the matter should first have been referred to
Rome (Hefele.  *Hist. Councils*, Vol. II., p. 59, n. 2).  But the word
used by Socrates is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>κανών</span>!

<span id="fn_160"></span>[105:161](2140135.htm#fr_160) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p5"></span> Hilar. Pict. *De Synodis, seu de Fide
Orient*., C. xxxii. Ed. Ben., 1170.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[105:162](2140135.htm#fr_161) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p9"></span> Schelstraten, S. J. *Sacrum Antiochenum
Concil. auctoritati suæ restitutum*.  (Ant. 1680.)

<span id="fn_162"></span>[105:163](2140135.htm#fr_162) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p10"></span> Socrates.  *H. E*., Lib. II., Cap.
viij.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[105:164](2140135.htm#fr_163) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p12"></span> Socrates.  *H. E.,* Lib. I., Cap.
xxiv.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[106:165](2140135.htm#fr_164) <span
id="viii.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ii-p14"></span> Hefele.  *History of the Councils*. 
Vol. II., p. 66.  I have in this introduction done little more than
condense Hefele.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Synodal Letter.](2140136)
