[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140196)  [Next](2140198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Canon XXVI.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>They</span> who have not been
promoted \[to that office\] by the bishop, ought not to adjure, either
in churches or in private houses.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p5"></span>No one shall adjure without the
bishop’s promotion to that office.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p7"></span>Some were in the habit of
“adjuring,” that is catechising the unbelievers, who had never received
the imposition of the bishop’s hands for that purpose; and when they
were accused of doing so, contended that as they did not do it in church
but only at home, they could not be considered as deserving of any
punishment.  For this reason the Fathers rule that even to “adjure”
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p7.1"></span>ἐφορκίζειν</span>) is an
ecclesiastical ministry, and must not be executed by anyone who shall
not have been promoted thereto by a bishop.  But the “Exorcist” must be
excepted who has been promoted by a Chorepiscopus, for he can indeed
properly catechize although not promoted by a bishop; for from Canon X.
of Antioch we learn that even a Chorepiscopus can make an Exorcist.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p8"></span>Zonaras notes that from this
canon it appears that “Chorepiscopi are considered to be in the number
of bishops.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p9.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p10"></span>“Promoted” (<span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p10.1"></span>προαχθέντας</span> ) by the bishops,
by which is signified a mere designation or appointment, in conformity
with the Greek discipline which never counted exorcism among the orders,
but among the simple ministries which were committed to certain persons
by the bishops, as Morinus proves at length in his work on Orders (*De
Ordinationibus*, Pars III., Ex. XIV., cap. ij.).

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p11"></span>Double is the power of devils
over men, the one part internal the other external.  The former is when
they hold the soul captive by vice and sin.  The latter when they
disturb the exterior and interior senses and lead anyone on to fury. 
Those who are subject to the interior evils are the Catechumens and
Penitents, and those who are subject to the exterior are the
Energumens.  Whoever are <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-Page_148"></span>occupied with the freeing from
the power of the devil of either of these kinds, by prayers,
exhortations, and exorcisms, are said “to exorcize” them; which seems to
be what Balsamon means when he says—“‘exorcize’ that is ‘to catechize
the unbelievers.’”  *Vide* this matter more at length in Ducange’s
*Glossary* (*Gloss*., s.v. Exorcizare).

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xxxi-p12"></span>This canon is found in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. LXIX. c.
ij., Isidore’s version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXVII](2140198)
