[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140495)  [Next](2140497) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  But if any such
person should be found so mad or audacious as to think to advance by way
of excuse an affirmation that he had brought letters from <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-Page_416"></span>the
people \[laity\], it is plain that some few persons, corrupted by bribes
and rewards, could have got up an uproar in the church, demanding,
forsooth, the said man for bishop.  I think then that practices and
devices of such sort absolutely must be punished, so that a man of this
kind be deemed unworthy even of lay communion *in extremis*.  Do ye
therefore make answer whether this sentence is approved by you.  They
\[the bishops\] answered:  What has been said is approved of.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p4"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  Even if any such
person should show himself so rash as perhaps to allege as an excuse and
affirm that he has received letters from the people, inasmuch as it is
evident that a few persons could have been corrupted by rewards and
bribes—\[namely\] persons who do not hold the pure faith—to raise an
uproar in the church, and seem to ask for the said man as bishop; I
judge that these frauds must be condemned, so that such an one should
not receive even lay communion at the last.  If ye all approve, do ye
decree it.  The synod answered:  We approve.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p6"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p8"></span>If anyone shall pass from one city to
another, and shall raise up seditions, tickling the people and be
assisted by them in raising a disturbance, he shall not be allowed
communion even when dying.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>To understand this canon aright it
must be remembered that in the first ages of the Church the people were
accustomed to have a share in the election of their bishop; and he whom
the people demanded was usually ordained their bishop.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p12"></span>This \[penalty\] is something unheard
of and horrible, that he should not be deemed worthy of communion even
at the hour of death; for it is a provision found nowhere else imposed
by any canon, nor inflicted upon any sin.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p14"></span>The Greek author Aristenus \[in the
above remarks\] probably has not erred from the truth when he asserts
that to no crime was this penalty attached, if he refers to the Eastern
Churches; for Morinus himself (in the xixth chapter of the ixth book,
*De Penitentia*), confesses that this penalty was never attached to any
crime among the Easterns:  nevertheless in some Churches in the first
ages the three crimes of idolatry, murder, and adultery were thus
punished:  that is, that to those who admitted any one of these,
reconciliation was denied even at his death, “and this,” says Morinus,
“I think no one can deny, who is at all versed in the testimony of the
ancients on this point.”

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p16"></span>The addition in the Latin text, *qui
sinceram fidem non habent*, is found both in Dionysius Exiguus and in
Isidore and the *Prisca*, and its meaning is as follows:  “In a town,
some few, especially those who have not the true faith, can be easily
bribed to demand this or that person as bishop.”  The Fathers of Sardica
plainly had here in view the Arians and their adherents, who, through
such like machinations, when they had gained over, if only a small party
in a town, sought to press into the bishoprics.  The Synod of Antioch
moreover, in 341, although the Eusebians, properly speaking, were
dominant there, had laid down in the twenty-first canon a similar, only
less severe, rule.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ii-p17"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Raymond’s *Decretales*, cap. ii, *De electione*, but
with the noteworthy addition “unless he shall have repented.”  These
words do not occur in the other Latin versions, and Hefele thinks them
to have been added by Raymond of Pennaforte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140497)
