[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140278)  [Next](2140280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>The Letter of Pope Cœlestine to the Synod of
Ephesus.</span>

<span id="x.xiii-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 613.  Also Migne, *Pat. Lat*., Tom. L, col. 505. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) )

<span id="x.xiii-p4"></span>Cœlestine the bishop to the holy Synod
assembled at Ephesus, brethren beloved and most longed for, greeting in
the Lord.

<span id="x.xiii-p5"></span>A Synod of priests gives witness to the
presence of the Holy Spirit.  For true is that which we read, since the
Truth cannot lie, to wit, the promise of the Gospel; “Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.”  And
since this is so, if the Holy Spirit is not absent from so small a
number how much more may we believe he is present when so great a
multitude of holy ones are assembled together!  Every council is holy on
account of a peculiar veneration which is its due; for in every such
council the reverence which should be paid to that most famous council
of the Apostles of which we read is to be had regard to.  Never was the
Master, whom they had received to preach, lacking to this, but ever was
present as Lord and Master; and never were those who taught deserted by
their teacher.  For he that had sent them was their teacher; he who had
commanded what was to be taught, was their teacher; he who affirms that
he himself is heard in his Apostles, was their teacher.  This duty of
preaching has been entrusted to all the Lord’s priests in common, for by
right of inheritance we are bound to undertake this solicitude, whoever
of us preach the name of the Lord in divers lands in their stead for he
said to them, “Go, teach all nations.”  You, dear brethren, should
observe that we have received a general command:  for he wills that all
of us should perform that office, which he thus entrusted in common to
all the Apostles.  We must needs follow our predecessors.  Let us all,
then, undertake their labours, since we are the successors in their
honour.  And we shew forth our diligence in preaching the same doctrines
that they taught, beside which, according to the admonition of the
Apostle, we are forbidden to add aught.  For the office of keeping what
is committed to our trust is no less dignified than that of handing it
down.

<span id="x.xiii-p6"></span>They sowed the seed of the faith.  This
shall be our care that the coming of our great father of the family, to
whom alone assuredly this fulness of the Apostles is assigned, may find
fruit uncorrupt and many fold.  For the vase of election tells us that
it is not sufficient to plant and to water unless God gives the
increase.  We must strive therefore in common to keep the faith which
has come down to us to-day, through the Apostolic Succession.  For we
are expected to walk according to the Apostle.  For now not our
appearance (*species*) but our faith is called in question.  Spiritual
weapons are those we must take, because the war is one of minds, and the
weapons are words; so shall we be strong in the faith of our King.  Now
the Blessed Apostle Paul admonishes that all should remain in that place
in which he bid Timothy remain.  The same place therefore, the same
cause, lays upon us the same duty.  Let us now also do and study <span
id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span id="x.xiii-Page_221"></span>that which
he then commanded him to do.  And let no one think otherwise, and let no
one pay heed to over strange fables, as he himself ordered.  Let us be
unanimous, thinking the same thing, for this is expedient:  let us do
nothing out of contention, nothing out of vain glory:  let us be in all
things of one mind, of one heart, when the faith which is one, is
attacked.  Let the whole body grieve and mourn in common with us.  He
who is to judge the world is called into judgment; he who is to
criticise all, is himself made the object of criticism, he who redeemed
us is made to suffer calumny.  Dear Brethren, gird ye with the armour of
God.  Ye know what helmet must protect our head, what breast-plate our
breast.  For this is not the first time the ecclesiastical camps have
received you as their rulers.  Let no one doubt that by the favour of
the Lord who maketh twain to be one, there will be peace, and that arms
will be laid aside since the very cause defends itself.

<span id="x.xiii-p7"></span>Let us look once again at these words of our
Doctor, which he uses with express reference to bishops, saying, “Take
heed to yourselves and to the whole flock, over which the Holy Ghost has
placed you as bishop, that ye rule the church of God, which he hath
purchased with his blood.”

<span id="x.xiii-p8"></span>We read that they who heard this at Ephesus,
the same place at which your holiness is come together, were called
thence.  To them therefore to whom this preaching of the faith was
known, to them also let your defence of the same faith also be known. 
Let us shew them the constancy of our mind with that reverence which is
due to matters of great importance; which things peace has guarded for a
long time with pious understanding.

<span id="x.xiii-p9"></span>Let there be announced by you what things
have been preserved intact from the Apostles; for the words of
tyrannical opposition are never admitted against the King of Kings, nor
can the business of truth be oppressed by falsehood.

<span id="x.xiii-p10"></span>I exhort you, most blessed brethren, that
love alone be regarded in which we ought to remain, according to the
voice of John the Apostle whose reliques we venerate in this city.  Let
common prayer be offered to the Lord.  For we can form some idea of what
will be the power of the divine presence at the united intercession of
such a multitude of priests, by considering how the very place was moved
where, as we read, the Twelve made together their supplication.  And
what was the purport of that prayer of the Apostles?  It was that they
might receive grace to speak the word of God with confidence, and to act
through its power, both of which they received by the favour of Christ
our God.  And now what else is to be asked for by your holy council,
except that ye may speak the Word of the Lord with confidence?  What
else than that he would give you grace to preserve that which he has
given you to preach? that being filled with the Holy Ghost, as it is
written, ye may set forth that one truth which the Spirit himself has
taught you, although with divers voices.

<span id="x.xiii-p11"></span>Animated, in brief, by all these
considerations (for, as the Apostle says:  “I speak to them that know
the law, and I speak wisdom among them that are perfect”), stand fast by
the Catholic faith, and defend the peace of the Churches, for so it is
said, both to those past, present, and future, asking and preserving
“those things which belong to the peace of Jerusalem.”

<span id="x.xiii-p12"></span>Out of our solicitude, we have sent our
holy brethren and fellow priests, who are at one with us and are most
approved men, Arcedius, and Projectus, the bishops, and our presbyter,
Philip, that they may be present at what is done and may carry out what
things have been already decreed be us (*quæ a nobis antea statuta sunt,
exequantur*).

<span id="x.xiii-p13"></span>To the performing of which we have no doubt
that your holiness will assent when it is seen that what has been
decreed is for the security of the whole church.  Given the viij of the
Ides of May, in the consulate of Bassus and Antiochus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[220:260](2140279.htm#fr_259) <span
id="x.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p3"></span> This letter we know was originally written
in Latin, and that it was translated into Greek and then read afterwards
in that language to the Council.  There would seem to be no doubt that
the Greek text we now find in the Acts is that first translation, but
whether the Latin is the original or whether it is a translation back
again from the Greek is not known, so far as I am aware.  Certainly the
Latin is of the most extraordinary character, and suggests that it was
the work of one not skilled in that tongue.  The text in several places
is manifestly corrupt and the Greek and Latin do not always agree.  If I
may venture to express an opinion I should say that the Greek was more
lucid.  Although in nineteen places Labbe considers the true reading
uncertain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session II. (Continued.)](2140280)
