[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140517)  [Next](2140519) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi-Page_435"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Excursus as to Whether the Sardican Council
Was Ecumenical.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p2"></span>Some theologians and canonists have been
of opinion that the Council of Sardica was Ecumenical and would reckon
it as the Second.  But besides the fact that such a numbering is
absolutely in contrariety to all history it also labours under the
difficulty, as we shall see presently, that the Westerns by insisting
that St. Athanasius should have a seat caused a division of the synod at
the very outset, so that the Easterns met at Philippopolis and confirmed
the deposition of the Saint.  It is also interesting to remember that
when Alexander Natalis in his history expressly called this synod
ecumenical, the passage was marked with disapproval by the Roman
censors.

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p3"></span>(Hefele.  *Hist. Councils*. Vol. II., pp.
172 *et seqq*.)

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p4"></span>The ecumenical character of this Synod
certainly cannot be proved. <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410)   It
is indeed true that it was the design of Pope Julius, as well as of the
two Emperors, Constantius and Constans, to summon a General Council at
Sardica; but we do not find that any such actually took place:  and the
history of the Church points to many like cases, where a synod was
probably intended to be ecumenical, and yet did not attain that
character.  In the present case, the Eastern and Western bishops were
indeed summoned, but by far the greater number of the Eastern bishops
were Eusebians, and therefore Semi-Arians, and instead of acting in a
better mind in union with the orthodox, they separated themselves and
formed a cabal of their own at Philippopolis.

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p6"></span>We cannot indeed agree with those who
maintain that the departure of the Eusebians in itself rendered it
impossible for the synod to be ecumenical, or it would be in the power
of heretics to make an Ecumenical Council possible or not.  We cannot,
however, overlook the fact that, in consequence of this withdrawal, the
great Eastern Church was far more poorly represented at Sardica, and
that the entire number of bishops present did not even amount to a
hundred!  So small a number of bishops can only form a General Council
if the great body of their absent colleagues subsequently give their
express consent to what has been decided.  This was not, however, the
case at the Synod of Sardica.  The decrees were no doubt at once sent
for acceptance and signature to the whole of Christendom, but not more
than about two hundred of those bishops who had been absent signed, and
of these, ninety-four, or nearly half, were Egyptians.  Out of the whole
of Asia only a few bishops from the provinces of Cyprus and Palestine
signed, not one from the other Eastern provinces; and even from the
Latin Church in Africa, which at that time numbered at least three
hundred bishops, we meet with very few names.  We cannot give much
weight to the fact that the Emperor Constantius refused to acknowledge
the decrees of Sardica:  it is of much greater importance that no single
later authority declared it to be a General Council.  Natalis
Alexander <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) is indeed of opinion
that because Pope Zosimus, in the year 417 or 418, cited the fifth canon
of Sardica as Nicene, and a synod held at Constantinople in 382 cited
the sixth as Nicene, the synod must evidently have been considered as an
appendix to that of Nicea, and therefore its equal, that is, must have
been honoured as ecumenical.  But we have already shown how Zosimus and
the bishops of Constantinople had been led into this confusion from the
defects of their manuscript collections of the canons.  Athanasius,
Sulpicius Severus, Socrates, and the Emperor Justinian were cited in
later times for the ecumenical character of this synod.  Athanasius
calls it a <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>μεγάλη
σύνοδος</span>; Sulpicius Severus says it was *ex toto orbe convocata*;
and Socrates relates that “Athanasius and other bishops had demanded an
Ecumenical Synod, and that of Sardica had been then summoned. <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412)   It is clear at the first <span
id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span id="xv.iii.vi-Page_436"></span>glance
that the two last authorities only prove that the Synod had been
intended to be a general one, and the expression “Great Synod,” used by
Athanasius, cannot be taken as simply identical with ecumenical.  While,
however, the Emperor Justinian, in his edict of 346, on the Three
Chapters, calls the Synod of Sardica ecumenical, he yet, in the same
edict, as well as in other places, does not reckon it among the General
Councils, of which he counts four.  To this must be added, first, that
the Emperor is not the authority entitled to decide as to the character
of an Ecumenical Synod; and secondly, that the expression *Universale
Concilium* was employed in a wider sense in speaking of those synods
which, without being general, represented a whole patriarchate.

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p9"></span>The Trullan Synod and Pope Nicholas I.
are further appealed to.  The former in its second canon approved of the
Sardican canons, and Pope Nicholas said of them:  “*omnis Ecclesia
recepit eos*.”  But this in no way contains a declaration that the Synod
of Sardica was ecumenical, for the canons of many other councils
also—for instance, Ancyra, Neocæsarea, and others—were generally
received without those synods themselves being therefore esteemed
ecumenical.  Nay, the Trullan Synod itself speaks for us; for had it
held the Synod of Sardica to be the second General Council, it would
have placed its canons immediately after those of Nice, whereas they are
placed after the four ancient General Councils, and from this we see
that the Trullan Synod did not reckon the Sardican among those councils,
but after them.  To this it must be added that the highest Church
authorities speak most decidedly against the synod being ecumenical.  We
may appeal first to Augustine, who only knew of the Eusebian assembly at
Sardica, and nothing at all of an orthodox synod in that place; which
would have been clearly impossible, if it had at that time been counted
among the ecumenical synods.  Pope Gregory the Great <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) and St. Isidore of Seville <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) speak still more plainly.  They only
know of four ancient General Councils—those of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon.  The objection of the Ballerini that Gregory and
Isidore did not intend to enumerate the most ancient general synods as
such, but only those which issued important dogmatic decrees, is plainly
quite arbitrary, and therefore without force.  Under such circumstances
it is natural that among the later scholars by far the great majority
should have answered the question, whether the Synod of Sardica is
ecumenical, in the negative, as have Cardinal Bellarmin, Peter de Marca,
Edmund Richer, Fleury, Orsi, Sacharelli, Tillemont, Du Pin, Berti,
Ruttenstock, Rohrbacher, Remi Ceillier, Stolberg, Neander, and others. 
On the other hand, Baronius, Natalis Alexander, the brothers Ballerini,
Mansi, and Palma <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) have sought to
maintain the ecumenical character of the synod, but as early as the
seventeenth century the Roman censors condemned the direct assertions of
Natalis Alexander on the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_410"></span>[435:411](2140518.htm#fr_410) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p5"></span> Hefele refers to his having himself
treated this matter fully in the *<span
id="xv.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>Theologischer Quartalschrift* of Tübingen,
1852.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[435:412](2140518.htm#fr_411) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p7"></span> Nat. Alex.  *H. E*., sec. iv., Diss.
xxvij., Art. 3.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[435:413](2140518.htm#fr_412) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p8"></span> Socrates.  *H. E.*, Lib. ii., cap. 20.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[436:414](2140518.htm#fr_413) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p10"></span> Greg. M.  Lib. ii., *Epist*. 10.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[436:415](2140518.htm#fr_414) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p11"></span> Isidor.  Hispal.  *Etymolog*., Lib.
vi., cap. 16.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[436:416](2140518.htm#fr_415) <span
id="xv.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi-p12"></span> Jno. Bapt. Palma.  *Prælectiones Hist.
Eccl. quas in Collegio Urbano habuit.*  Rome, l838.  Tom. i., P. ii., p.
85.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the CCXVII Blessed Fathers who assembled at
Carthage.  Commonly Called The Code of Canons of the African
Church.](2140519)
