[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140464)  [Next](2140466.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>Canon LXXXI.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p2.1"></span>Whereas</span> we have heard that in
some places in the hymn Trisagion there is added after “Holy and
Immortal,” “Who was crucified for us, have mercy upon us,” and since
this as being alien to piety was by the ancient and holy Fathers cast
out of the hymn, as also the violent heretics who inserted these new
words were cast out of the Church; we also, confirming the things which
were formerly piously established by our holy Fathers, anathematize
those who after this present decree allow in church this or any other
addition to the most sacred hymn; but if indeed he who has transgressed
is of the sacerdotal order, we command that he be deprived of his
priestly dignity, but if he be a layman or monk let him be cut off.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXI.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p5"></span>Whoever adds to the hymn Trisagion
these words “Who wast crucified” shall be deemed heterodox.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p6"></span>The addition of the phrase condemned
by this canon was probably made first by Peter Fullo, and although
indeed it was capable of a good meaning, if the whole hymn was
understood as being addressed to Christ, and although this was admitted
by very many of the orthodox, yet as it was chiefly used by the
Monophysites and with an undoubtedly heretical intention, it was finally
ousted from this <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-Page_401"></span>position and its adherents were
styled Theopaschites.  From all this it came about that by 518 it was a
source of disagreement among the Catholics, some affirming the
expression, as looked at by itself, to be a touchstone of orthodoxy. 
The Emperor Justinian tried to have it approved by Pope Hormisdas, but
unsuccessfully, the pontiff only declaring that it was unnecessary, and
even dangerous.  Fulgentius of Ruspe and Dionysius Exiguus had declared
it orthodox.  Pope John II. almost came to the point of approving the
phrase “one of the Trinity suffered,” nor did his successor Agapetus I.
speak any more definitely on the point, but the Fifth Ecumenical Council
directly approved the formula.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p7"></span>But this, of course, did not touch
the point of its introduction into the Trisagion or, more accurately, of
the introduction of the words “who was crucified for us.”

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p8"></span>It should have been noted that at a
Home Synod in 478, Peter Fullo had been deposed for the insertion of
this clause, because he intended to imply that the true God had suffered
death upon the cross.  This sentence was a confirmation of one already
pronounced against him by a synod held at Antioch which had raised a
man, Stephen by name, to its episcopal throne.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxii-p9"></span>Such is the history of a matter
which, while it seemed at first as of little moment, yet for many years
was a source of trouble in the Church.  (*Vide* Hefele, *History of the
Councils*, Vol. III., pp. 454, 457; Vol. IV., p. 26.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXXXII](2140466.md)
