[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140051)  [Next](2140053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span> <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="vii.ix-Page_53"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>The Synodal Letter.</span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>*(Found in Gelasius,* Historia Concilii
Nicæni*, lib.* *II, cap. xxxiii.; Socr.,* H. E., *lib.* *I., cap. 6;
Theodor.,* H. E*., Lib. I., cap. 9.)*

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>To the Church of Alexandria, by the grace of
<span class="sc"><span id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>God</span>, holy and
great; and to our well-beloved brethren, the orthodox clergy and laity
throughout Egypt, and Pentapolis, and Lybia, and every nation under
heaven, the holy and great synod, the bishops assembled at Nicea, wish
health in the <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.ix-p3.2"></span>Lord</span>.

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as the great and holy Synod,
which was assembled at Niece through the grace of Christ and our most
religious Sovereign Constantine, who brought us together from our
several provinces and cities, has considered matters which concern the
faith of the Church, it seemed to us to be necessary that certain things
should be communicated from us to you in writing, so that you might have
the means of knowing what has been mooted and investigated, and also
what has been decreed and confirmed.

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span>First of all, then, in the presence of our
most religious Sovereign Constantine, investigation was made of matters
concerning the impiety and transgression of Arius and his adherents; and
it was unanimously decreed that he and his impious opinion should be
anathematized, together with the blasphemous words and speculations in
which he indulged, blaspheming the Son of God, and saying that he is
from things that are not, and that before he was begotten he was not,
and that there was a time when he was not, and that the Son of God is by
his free will capable of vice and virtue; saying also that he is a
creature.  All these things the holy Synod has anathematized, not even
enduring to hear his impious doctrine and madness and blasphemous
words.  And of the charges against him and of the results they had, ye
have either already heard or will hear the particulars, lest we should
seem to be oppressing a man who has in fact received a fitting
recompense for his own sin.  So far indeed has his impiety prevailed,
that he has even destroyed Theonas of Marmorica and Secundes of
Ptolemais; for they also have received the same sentence as the rest.

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span>But when the grace of God had delivered
Egypt from that heresy and blasphemy, and from the persons who have
dared to make disturbance and division among a people heretofore at
peace, there remained the matter of the insolence of Meletius and those
who have been ordained by him; and concerning this part of our work we
now, beloved brethren, proceed to inform you of the decrees of the
Synod.  The Synod, then, being disposed to deal gently with Meletius
(for in strict justice he deserved no leniency), decreed that he should
remain in his own city, but have no authority either to ordain, or to
administer affairs, or to make appointments; and that he should not
appear in the country or in any other city for this purpose, but should
enjoy the bare title of his rank; but that those who have been placed by
him, after they have been confirmed by a more sacred laying on of hands,
shall on these conditions be admitted to communion:  that they shall
both have their rank and the right to officiate, but that they shall be
altogether the inferiors of all those who are enrolled in any church or
parish, and have been appointed by our most honourable colleague
Alexander.  So that these men are to have no authority to make
appointments of persons who may be pleasing to them, nor to suggest
names, nor to do anything whatever, without the consent of the bishops
of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, who are serving under our most
holy colleague Alexander; while those who, by the grace of God and
through your prayers, have been found in no schism, but on the contrary
are without spot in the Catholic and Apostolic Church, are to have
authority to make appointments and nominations of worthy persons among
the clergy, and in short to do all things according to the law and
ordinance of the Church.  But, if it happen that any of the clergy who
are now in the Church should die, then those who have been lately
received are to succeed to the office of the deceased; always provided
that they shall appear to be worthy, and that the people elect them, and
that the bishop of Alexandria shall concur in the election and ratify
it.  This concession has been made to all the rest; but, on account of
his disorderly conduct from the first, and the rashness and
precipitation of his character, the same decree was not <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="vii.ix-Page_54"></span>made
concerning Meletius himself, but that, inasmuch as he is a man capable
of committing again the same disorders, no authority nor privilege
should be conceded to him.

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span>These are the particulars, which are of
special interest to Egypt and to the most holy Church of Alexandria; but
if in the presence of our most honoured lord, our colleague and brother
Alexander, anything else has been enacted by canon or other decree, he
will himself convey it to you in greater detail, he having been both a
guide and fellow-worker in what has been done.

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span>We further proclaim to you the good news of
the agreement concerning the holy Easter, that this particular also has
through your prayers been rightly settled; so that all our brethren in
the East who formerly followed the custom of the Jews are henceforth to
celebrate the said most sacred feast of Easter at the same time with the
Romans and yourselves and all those who have observed Easter from the
beginning.

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>Wherefore, rejoicing in these wholesome
results, and in our common peace and harmony, and in the cutting off of
every heresy, receive ye with the greater honour and with increased
love, our colleague your Bishop Alexander, who has gladdened us by his
presence, and who at so great an age has undergone so great fatigue that
peace might be established among you and all of us.  Pray ye also for us
all, that the things which have been deemed advisable may stand fast;
for they have been done, as we believe, to the well-pleasing of Almighty
God and of his only Begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Holy
Ghost, to whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Keeping of Easter.](2140053)
