[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140712)  [Next](2140714) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_578">p. 578</span>
<span id="xvi.xviii.i-Page_578"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xviii.i-p1.1"></span>Examination of the Caroline Books.</span>

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p2"></span>I.  *Authorship of the Caroline Books*.

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p3"></span>I find that many writers on the subject
of what they call “image worship,” speak frequently of these “Caroline
Books,” and refer to them with great admiration.  It is also absolutely
certain that many of these writers have never read, possibly never seen,
the books of which they write so eloquently.  I have used the reprint of
Melchior Goldast’s edition (Frankfort, 1608) in Migne’s *Patrologia
Latina*, Tom. xcviij., in this article.

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p4"></span>The work begins thus.  “In the name of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ beginneth the work of the most
illustrious and glorious man Charles, by the will of God, king of the
Franks, Gauls, Germany, etc., against the Synod which in Greek parts
firmly and proudly decreed in favour of adoring (*adorandis*) images,”
then follows immediately what is called “Charlemagne’s Preface.”

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p5"></span>Now of course nobody supposes for a
moment that Charlemagne wrote these books himself.  But Sir William
Palmer (*Treatise on the Church*, Vol. II., p. 204) says that the
prelates of the realm of France “composed a reply to this Synod,” he
further says that “This work was published by the authority and in the
name of the Emperor Charlemagne and with the consent of his bishops, in
790” (p. 205).  I am entirely at a loss to know on what authority these
statements rest.  The authorship of the work has not without great show
of reason, been attributed to Alcuin.  Besides the English tradition
that he had written such a book, there has been pointed out the
remarkable similarity of his commentary on St. John (4, 5, *et seqq*.)
to a passage in Liber IV., cap. vj., of these Caroline Books.  (On this
point see Forster, *General Preface to the Works of Alcuin* n. 10.)  But
after all whether Alcuin was the author or no, matters little, the
statement that the “bishops of France” were in any sense responsible for
it is entirely gratuitous, unless indeed some should think it may be
gathered from the statement of the Preface;

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p6"></span>“We have undertaken this work with the
priests who are prelates of the Catholic flocks in the kingdom which has
been granted to us of God.” <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546)  
But this would not be the only book written at the command of, and set
forth by, a secular prince and yet claiming the authority of the
Church.  I need only give as examples “The Institution of a Christian
Man” and the Second Prayer Book of Edward the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xviii.i-p7.1"></span>VI</span>th.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_546"></span>[578:547](2140713.htm#fr_546) <span
id="xvi.xviii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii.i-p7"></span> It is curious that Michaud *(Sept.
Conciles Œcuméniques,* p. 294) should say “the title priest given to
those who composed the book proves that no one of them was a bishop.” 
The Latin is “Sacerdotum Prælatorum”!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](2140714)
