[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140292)  [Next](2140294.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.xi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xi-p1.1"></span> Excursus on the Words</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi.xi-p1.2"></span>πίστιν ἑπέραν</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p2"></span>It has been held by some and was urged by
the Greeks at the Council of Florence, <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md) and often before and since, as well as
by Pope Leo III., in answer to the ambassadors of Charlemagne, that the
prohibition of the Council of Ephesus to make, hold, or teach any other
faith than that of Nice forbade anyone, even a subsequent General
Council, to add anything to the creed.  This interpretation seems to be
shewn to be incorrect from the following circumstances.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p4"></span>1.  That the prohibition was passed by the
Council immediately after it had heard Charisius read his creed, which
it had approved, and on the strength of which it had received its
author, and after the reading of a Nestorian creed which it condemned. 
From this it seems clear that <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi.xi-p4.1"></span>ἑτέραν</span> must mean “different,”
“contradictory,” and not “another” in the sense of mere explanatory
additions to the already existing creed.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p5"></span>(E. B. Pusey, *On the Clause* “and the
Son,” p. 81.)

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p6"></span>St. Cyril ought to understand the canon,
which he probably himself framed, as presiding over the Council of
Ephesus, as Archbishop of Alexandria and representative of Celestine,
Bishop of Rome.  His signature immediately succeeds the Canon.  We can
hardly think that we understand it better than he who probably framed
it, nay who presided over the Council which passed it.  He, however,
explained that what was not against the Creed was not beside it.  The
Orientals had proposed to him, as terms of communion, that he should “do
away with all he had written in epistles, tomes, or books, and agree
with that only faith which had been defined by our holy Fathers at
Nice.”  But, St. Cyril wrote back:  “We all follow that exposition of
faith which was defined by the holy fathers in the city of Nice, sapping
absolutely nothing of the things contained in it.  For they are all
right and unexceptionable; and anything curious, after it, is not safe. 
But what I have rightly written against the blasphemies of Nestorius no
words will persuade me to say that they were not done well:”  and
against the imputation that he “had received an exposition of faith or
new Creed, as dishonouring that old and venerable Creed,” he says:

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p7"></span>“Neither have we demanded of any an
exposition of faith, nor have we received one newly framed by others. 
For Divine Scripture suffices us, and the prudence of the holy fathers,
and the symbol of faith, framed perfectly as to all right doctrine.  But
since the most holy Eastern Bishops differed from us as to that of
Ephesus and were somehow suspected of being entangled in the meshes of
Nestorius, therefore they very wisely made a defence, to free themselves
from blame, and eager to satisfy the lovers of the blameless faith that
they were minded to have no share in his impiety; and the thing is far
from all note of blame.  If Nestorius himself, when we all held out to
him that he ought to condemn his own dogmas and choose the truth instead
thereof, had made a written confession thereon, who would say that he
framed for us a new exposition of faith?  Why then do they calumniate
the assent of the most holy Bishops of Phœnicia, calling it a new
setting forth of the Creed, whereas they made it for a good and
necessary end, to defend themselves and soothe those <span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span id="x.xvi.xi-Page_233"></span>who
thought that they followed the innovations of Nestorius?  For the holy
Ecumenical Synod gathered at Ephesus provided, of necessity, that no
other exposition of faith besides that which existed, which the most
blessed fathers, speaking in the Holy Ghost, defined, should be brought
into the Churches of God.  But they who at one time, I know not how,
differed from it, and were suspected of not being right-minded,
following the Apostolic and Evangelic doctrines, how should they free
themselves from this ill-report? by silence? or rather by self-defence,
and by manifesting the power of the faith which was in them?  The divine
disciple wrote, ‘be ready always to give an answer to every one who
asketh you an account of the hope which is in you.’  But he who willeth
to do this, innovates in nothing, nor doth he frame any new exposition
of faith, but rather maketh plain to those who ask him, what faith he
hath concerning Christ.” <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md)

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p9"></span>2.  The fathers of the Council of
Chalcedon, by their practice, are authoritative exponents of the Canon
of Ephesus.  For they renewed the prohibition of the Council of Ephesus
to “adduce any other faith,” but, in “the faith” which is not to be set
aside, they included not only the Creeds of Nice and Constantinople, but
the definitions at Ephesus and Chalcedon itself.  The statements of the
faith were expanded, because fresh contradictions of the faith had
emerged.  After directing that both Creeds should be read, the Council
says, “This wise and saving Symbol of Divine grace would have sufficed
to the full knowledge and confirmation of the faith; for it teaches
thoroughly the perfect truth of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
presents to those who receive it faithfully the Incarnation of the
Lord.”  Then, having in detail shewn how both heresies were confuted by
it, and having set forth the true doctrine, they sum up.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p10"></span>“These things being framed by us with all
accuracy and care on every side, the holy and ecumenical Synod defines,
that it shall be lawful for no one to produce or compose, or put
together, or hold, or teach others another faith, and those who venture,
etc.” (as in the Council of Ephesus).

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p11"></span>The Council of Chalcedon enlarged greatly
the terms although not the substance of the faith contained in the
Nicene Creed; and that, in view of the heresies, which had since arisen;
and yet renewed in terms the prohibition of the Canon of Ephesus and the
penalties annexed to its infringement.  It shewed, then, in practice,
that it did not hold the enlargement of the things proposed as *de fide*
to be prohibited, but only the producing of things contradictory to the
faith once delivered to the saints.  Its prohibition, moreover, to
“hold” another faith shews the more that they meant only to prohibit any
contradictory statement of faith.  For if they had prohibited any
additional statement not being a contradiction of its truth, then (as
Cardinal Julian acutely argued in the Council of Florence), any one
would fall under its anathema, who held (as all must) anything not
expressed in set terms in the Nicene Creed; such as that God is eternal
or incomprehensible.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p12"></span>It may not be amiss to remember that the
argument that <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi.xi-p12.1"></span>πίστιν ἑτέραν</span> forbids any addition to
the Creed or any further definition of the faith, was that urged by the
heretics at the Latrocinium, and the orthodox were there condemned on
the ground that they had added to the faith and laid themselves under
the Anathema of Ephesus.  How far this interpretation was from being
that of the Council of Chalcedon is evinced by the fact that it
immediately declared that St. Flavian and Bishop Eusebius had been
unjustly deposed, and proceeded to depose those who had deposed them. 
After stating these facts Dr. Pusey remarks, “Protestants may reject
consistently the authority of all councils; but on what grounds any who
accept their authority can insist on their own private interpretation of
a canon of one council against the authority of another General Council
which rejected that interpretation, I see not.” <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md)

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p14"></span><span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xi-Page_234"></span>4.  The Fifth Ecumenical Council, the
Second of Constantinople, received both the creeds of Nice and that of
Constantinople, as well of the definitions of Ephesus and Chalcedon, and
yet at the end of the fourth Session we find in the acts that the
fathers cried out, with respect to the creed of Theodore of Mopsuestia: 
“This creed Satan composed.  Anathema to him that composed this creed! 
The First Council of Ephesus anathematized this creed and its author. 
We know only one symbol of faith, that which the holy fathers of Nice
set forth and handed down.  This also the three holy Synods handed
down.  Into this we were baptized, and into this we baptize, etc.,
etc.” <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md)  From this it is clearer
than day that these fathers looked upon the creed of Constantinople,
with its additions, to be yet the same creed as that of Nice.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p16"></span>(Le Quien, *Diss. Dam*., n. 37.)

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p17"></span>In the Sixth Council also, no one
objecting, Peter of Nicomedia, Theodore, and other bishops, clerks, and
monks, who had embraced the Monothelite heresy, openly recited a Creed
longer and fuller than the Nicene.

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p18"></span>In the Seventh Synod also, another was
read written by Theodore of Jerusalem: and again, Basil of Ancyra, and
the other Bishops, who had embraced the errors of the Iconoclasts, again
offered another, although the Canon of Ephesus pronounced, that “it
should not be lawful to offer to heretics, who wished to be converted to
the Church, any other creed than the Nicene.”  In this same Synod, was
read another profession of faith, which Tarasius had sent to the
Patriarchs of the Eastern sees.  It contains the Nicene, or
Constantinopolitan Creed, variously enlarged and interpolated.  But of
the Holy Spirit it has specifically this:  “And in the Holy Spirit, the
Lord, the Giver of Life, which proceedeth from the Father through the
Son.”  But since the Greeks at the Council of Florence said, that these
were individual, not common, formulæ of faith, here are others, which
are plainly common and solemn, which are contained in their own
rituals.  They do not baptize a Hebrew or a Jew, until he have
pronounced a profession of Christian Faith, altogether different from
the Creed of Constantinople, as may be seen in the Euchologion.  In the
consecration of a Bishop, the Bishop elect is first bidden to recite the
Creed of Constantinople; and then, as if this did not suffice, a second
and a third are demanded of him; of which the last contains that
aforesaid symbol, intermingled with various declarations.  Nay, Photius
himself is pointed out to be the author of this interpolated
symbol. <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md)   I pass by other
formulæ, which the Greeks have framed for those who return to the Church
from divers heresies or sects, although the terms of the Canon of
Ephesus are, that “it is unlawful to propose any other faith to those
who wish to be converted to the Church, from heathenism, or Judaism, or
any heresy whatever.”

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p20"></span>The Judgment of the same Holy Synod,
pronounced on the petition presented to it by the Bishops of Cyprus:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[232:267](2140293.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="x.xvi.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p3"></span> Hefele, *Conciliengesch*. XLVIII., § 810.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[233:268](2140293.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="x.xvi.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p8"></span> Cyril. Alex., *Ep*. xxxv., *Ad Acac.
Melit*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[233:269](2140293.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="x.xvi.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p13"></span> E. B. Pusey, *Lib. cit*., p. 86.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[234:270](2140293.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="x.xvi.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p15"></span> Labbe and Cossart, Tom. v., col. 455.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[234:271](2140293.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="x.xvi.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xi-p19"></span> In the Codex Cæsareus, mentioned by
Lambecius, Lib. vii., cod 77.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VIII](2140294.md)
