[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140357)  [Next](2140359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="xii.vii-Page_312"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>The Capitula of the Council.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. V.,
col. 568.)

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p4.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall not confess that the
nature or essence of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is
one, as also the force and the power; \[if anyone does not confess\] a
consubstantial Trinity, one Godhead to be worshipped in three
subsistences or Persons:  let him be anathema.  For there is but one God
even the Father of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ
through whom are all things, and one Holy Spirit in whom are all things.

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p6.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall not confess that the
Word of God has two nativities, the one from all eternity of the Father,
without time and without body; the other in these last days, coming down
from heaven and being made flesh of the holy and glorious Mary, Mother
of God and always a virgin, and born of her:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p7.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the
wonder-working Word of God is one \[Person\] and the Christ that
suffered another; or shall say that God the Word was with the woman-born
Christ, or was in him as one person in another, but that he was not one
and the same our Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, incarnate and made
man, and that his miracles and the sufferings which of his own will he
endured in the flesh were not of the same \[Person\]:  let him be
anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p9.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p10.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the union of
the Word of God to man was only according to grace or energy, or
dignity, or equality of honour, or authority, or relation, or effect, or
power, or according to good pleasure in this sense that God the Word was
pleased with a man, that is to say, that he loved him for his own sake,
as says the senseless Theodorus, or \[if anyone pretends that this union
exists only\] so far as likeness of name is concerned, as the Nestorians
understand, who call also the Word of God Jesus and Christ, and even
accord to the man the names of Christ and of Son, speaking thus clearly
of two persons, and only designating disingenuously one Person and one
Christ when the reference is to his honour, or his dignity, or his
worship; if anyone shall not acknowledge as the Holy Fathers teach, that
the union of God the Word is made with the flesh animated by a
reasonable and living soul, and that such union is made synthetically
and hypostatically, and that therefore there is only one Person, to
wit:  our Lord Jesus Christ, one of the Holy Trinity:  let him be
anathema.  As a matter of fact the word “union” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.vii-p10.2"></span>τῆς ἑνώςεως</span>) has
many meanings, and the partisans of Apollinaris and Eutyches have
affirmed that these natures are confounded *inter se*, and have asserted
a union produced by the mixture of both.  On the other hand the
followers of Theodorus and of Nestorius rejoicing in the division of the
natures, have taught only a relative union.  Meanwhile the Holy Church
of God, condemning equally the impiety of both sorts of heresies,
recognises the union of God the Word with the flesh synthetically, that
is to say, hypostatically.  For in the mystery of Christ the synthetical
union not only preserves unconfusedly the natures which are united, but
also allows no separation.

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p11.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p12.1"></span>If</span> anyone understands the expression
“one only Person of our Lord Jesus Christ” in this sense, that it is the
union of many hypostases, and if he attempts thus to introduce into the
mystery of Christ two hypostases, or two Persons, and, after having
intro<span id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span
id="xii.vii-Page_313"></span>duced two persons, speaks of one Person
only out of dignity, honour or worship, as both Theodorus and Nestorius
insanely have written; if anyone shall calumniate the holy Council of
Chalcedon, pretending that it made use of this expression \[one
hypostasis\] in this impious sense, and if he will not recognize rather
that the Word of God is united with the flesh hypostatically, and that
therefore there is but one hypostasis or one only Person, and that the
holy Council of Chalcedon has professed in this sense the one Person of
our Lord Jesus Christ:  let him be anathema.  For since one of the Holy
Trinity has been made man, viz.:  God the Word, the Holy Trinity has not
been increased by the addition of another person or hypostasis.

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p13.1"></span>VI.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p14.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall not call in a true
acceptation, but only in a false acceptation, the holy, glorious, and
ever-virgin Mary, the Mother of God, or shall call her so only in a
relative sense, believing that she bare only a simple man and that God
the word was not incarnate of her, but that the incarnation of God the
Word resulted only from the fact that he united himself to that man who
was born \[of her\]; <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) if he shall
calumniate the Holy Synod of Chalcedon as though it had asserted the
Virgin to be Mother of God according to the impious sense of Theodore;
or if anyone shall call her the mother of a man (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.vii-p15.1"></span>ἀνθρωποτόκον</span>) or
the Mother of Christ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.vii-p15.2"></span>Χ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.vii-p15.3"></span>ριστοτόκον</span>), as if Christ were not God,
and shall not confess that she is exactly and truly the Mother of God,
because that God the Word who before all ages was begotten of the Father
was in these last days made flesh and born of her, and if anyone shall
not confess that in this sense the holy Synod of Chalcedon acknowledged
her to be the Mother of God:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p16"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p16.1"></span>VII.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p17"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p17.1"></span>If</span> anyone using the expression, “in two
natures,” does not confess that our one Lord Jesus Christ has been
revealed in the divinity and in the humanity, so as to designate by that
expression a difference of the natures of which an ineffable union is
unconfusedly made, \[a union\] in which neither the nature of the Word
was changed into that of the flesh, nor that of the flesh into that of
the Word, for each remained that it was by nature, the union being
hypostatic; but shall take the expression with regard to the mystery of
Christ in a sense so as to divide the parties, or recognising the two
natures in the only Lord Jesus, God the Word made man, does not content
himself with taking in a theoretical manner <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) the difference of the natures which
compose him, which difference is not destroyed by the union between
them, for one is composed of the two and the two are in one, but shall
make use of the number \[two\] to divide the natures or to make of them
Persons properly so called:  let him be anathema. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)

<span id="xii.vii-p20"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p20.1"></span>VIII.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p21.1"></span>If</span> anyone uses the expression “of two
natures,” confessing that a union was made of the Godhead and of the
humanity, or the expression “the one nature made flesh of God the Word,”
and shall not so understand those expressions as the holy Fathers have
taught, to wit:  that of the divine and human nature there was made an
hypostatic union, whereof is one Christ; but from these expressions
shall try to introduce one nature or substance \[made by a mixture\] of
the Godhead and manhood of Christ; let him be anathema.  For in teaching
that the only-begotten Word was united hypostatically \[to humanity\] we
do not mean to say that there was made a mutual confusion of natures,
but rather each \[nature\] remaining what it was, we understand that the
Word was united to the flesh.  Wherefore there is one Christ, both God
and man, consubstantial with the Father as touching his Godhead, and
consubstantial with us as touching his <span id="page_314">p. 314</span>
<span id="xii.vii-Page_314"></span>manhood.  Therefore they are equally
condemned and anathematized by the Church of God, who divide or part the
mystery of the divine dispensation of Christ, or who introduce confusion
into that mystery.

<span id="xii.vii-p22"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p22.1"></span>IX.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p23.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall take the expression,
Christ ought to be worshipped in his two natures, in the sense that he
wishes to introduce thus two adorations, the one in special relation to
God the Word and the other as pertaining to the man; or if anyone to get
rid of the flesh, \[that is of the humanity of Christ,\] or to mix
together the divinity and the humanity, shall speak monstrously of one
only nature or essence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.vii-p23.2"></span>φύσιν ἤγουν οὐσίαν</span>) of the united
(natures), and so worship Christ, and does not venerate, by one
adoration, God the Word made man, together with his flesh, as the Holy
Church has taught from the beginning:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p24"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p24.1"></span>X.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p25.1"></span>If</span> anyone does not confess that our
Lord Jesus Christ who was crucified in the flesh is true God and the
Lord of Glory and one of the Holy Trinity:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p26"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p26.1"></span>XI.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p27"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p27.1"></span>If</span> anyone does not anathematize Arius,
Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutyches and Origen, as
well as their impious writings, as also all other heretics already
condemned and anathematized by the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
and by the aforesaid four Holy Synods and \[if anyone does not equally
anathematize\] all those who have held and hold or who in their impiety
persist in holding to the end the same opinion as those heretics just
mentioned:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p28"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p28.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p29"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p29.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p30"></span>(*Hist. Councils*, Vol. iv., p. 336.)

<span id="xii.vii-p31"></span>Halloix, Garnier, Basnage, Walch and
others suppose, and Vincenzi maintains with great zeal, that the name of
Origen is a later insertion in this anathematism, because (a) Theodore
Ascidas, the Origenist, was one of the most influential members of the
Synod, and would certainly have prevented a condemnation of Origen;
further, (b) because in this anathematism only such heretics would be
named as had been condemned by one of the first four Ecumenical Synods,
which was not the case with Origen; (c) because this anathematism is
identical with the tenth in the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.vii-p31.1"></span>ὁμολογία</span> of the Emperor, but in the
latter the name of Origen is lacking; and, finally, (d) because Origen
does not belong to the group of heretics to whom this anathematism
refers.  His errors were quite different.

<span id="xii.vii-p32"></span>All these considerations seem to me of
insufficient strength, or mere conjecture, to make an alteration in the
text, and arbitrarily to remove the name of Origen.  As regards the
objection in connection with Theodore Ascidas, it is known that the
latter had already pronounced a formal anathema on Origen, and certainly
he did the same this time, if the Emperor wished it or if it seemed
advisable.  The second and fourth objections have little weight.  In
regard to the third (c) it is quite possible that either the Emperor
subsequently went further than in his <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.vii-p32.1"></span>ὁμολογία</span>, or that the bishops at the
fifth Synod, of their own accord, added Origen, led on perhaps by one or
another anti-Origenist of their number.  What, however, chiefly
determines us to the retention of the text is:  (a) that the copy of the
synodal Acts extant in the Roman archives, which has the highest
credibility, and was probably prepared for Vigilius himself, contains
the name of Origen in the eleventh anathematism; and (b) that the monks
of the new Lama in Palestine, who are known to have been zealous
Origenists, withdrew Church communion from the bishops of Palestine
after these had subscribed the Acts of the fifth Synod.  In the anathema
on the Three Chapters these Origenists could find as little ground for
such a rupture as their friends and former colleague Ascidas; it could
only be by the synod attacking their darling Origen.  (c) Finally, only
on the ground that the name of Origen really stood in the eleventh
anathematism, can we explain the widely-circulated ancient rumour that
our Synod anathematized Origen and the Origenists.

<span id="xii.vii-p33"></span><span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="xii.vii-Page_315"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p33.1"></span>XII.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p34"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p34.1"></span>If</span> anyone defends the impious Theodore
of Mopsuestia, who has said that the Word of God is one person, but that
another person is Christ, vexed by the sufferings of the soul and the
desires of the flesh, and separated little by little above that which is
inferior, and become better by the progress in good works and
irreproachable in his manner of life, as a mere man was baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and obtained
by this baptism the grace of the Holy Spirit, and became worthy of
Sonship, and to be worshipped out of regard to the Person of God the
Word (just as one worships the image of an emperor) and that he is
become, after the resurrection, unchangeable in his thoughts and
altogether without sin.  And, again, this same impious Theodore has also
said that the union of God the Word with Christ is like to that which,
according to the doctrine of the Apostle, exists between a man and his
wife, “They twain shall be in one flesh.”  The same \[Theodore\] has
dared, among numerous other blasphemies, to say that when after the
resurrection the Lord breathed upon his disciples, saying, “Receive the
Holy Ghost,” he did not really give them the Holy Spirit, but that he
breathed upon them only as a sign.  He likewise has said that the
profession of faith made by Thomas when he had, after the resurrection,
touched the hands and the side of the Lord, viz.:  “My Lord and my God,”
was not said in reference to Christ, but that Thomas, filled with wonder
at the miracle of the resurrection, thus thanked God who had raised up
Christ.  And moreover (which is still more scandalous) this same
Theodore in his Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles compares Christ
to Plato, Manichæus, Epicurus and Marcion, and says that as each of
these men having discovered his own doctrine, had given his name to his
disciples, who were called Platonists, Manicheans, Epicureans and
Marcionites, just so Christ, having discovered his doctrine, had given
the name Christians to his disciples.  If, then, anyone shall defend
this most impious Theodore and his impious writings, in which he vomits
the blasphemies mentioned above, and countless others besides against
our Great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, and if anyone does not
anathematize him or his impious writings, as well as all those who
protect or defend him, or who assert that his exegesis is orthodox, or
who write in favour of him and of his impious works, or those who share
the same opinions, or those who have shared them and still continue unto
the end in this heresy:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p35"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p35.1"></span>XIII.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p36"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p36.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall defend the impious
writings of Theodoret, directed against the true faith and against the
first holy Synod of Ephesus and against St. Cyril and his XII.
Anathemas, and \[defends\] that which he has written in defence of the
impious Theodore and Nestorius, and of others having the same opinions
as the aforesaid Theodore and Nestorius, if anyone admits them or their
impiety, or shall give the name of impious to the doctors of the Church
who profess the hypostatic union of God the Word; and if anyone does not
anathematize these impious writings and those who have held or who hold
these sentiments, and all those who have written contrary to the true
faith or against St. Cyril and his XII. Chapters, and who die in their
impiety:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.vii-p37"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.vii-p37.1"></span>XIV.</span>

<span id="xii.vii-p38"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.vii-p38.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall defend that letter
which Ibas is said to have written to Maris the Persian, in which he
denies that the Word of God incarnate of Mary, the Holy Mother of God
and ever-virgin, was made man, but says that a mere man was born of her,
whom he styles a Temple, as though the Word of God was one Person and
the man another person; in which letter also he reprehends St. Cyril as
a heretic, when he teaches the right faith of Christians, and charges
him with writing things like to the wicked Apollinaris.  In addition to
this he vituperates the First Holy Council of Ephesus, affirming that it
deposed Nestorius without discrimination and without examination.  The
aforesaid impious epistle styles the XII. Chapters of Cyril of blessed
memory, impious and contrary <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="xii.vii-Page_316"></span>to the right faith and defends Theodore and
Nestorius and their impious teachings and writings.  If anyone therefore
shall defend the aforementioned epistle and shall not anathematize it
and those who defend it and say that it is right or that a part of it is
right, or if anyone shall defend those who have written or shall write
in its favour, or in defence of the impieties which are contained in it,
as well as those who shall presume to defend it or the impieties which
it contains in the name of the Holy Fathers or of the Holy Synod of
Chalcedon, and shall remain in these offences unto the end:  let him be
anathema.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_308"></span>[313:309](2140358.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xii.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span> The text here is uncertain, and the Latin
and Greek do not agree.  *Vide* Hefele.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[313:310](2140358.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p18"></span> *I.e.* “as an abstraction (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.vii-p18.1"></span>τῇ θεωρίᾳ μόνῃ</span>).”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[313:311](2140358.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p19"></span> The text here is uncertain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the XV. Anathemas Against Origen.](2140359)
