[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140684)  [Next](2140686) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Present Teaching of the Latin
and Greek Churches on the Subject.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiii-p2.1"></span>To</span> set forth the present teaching of
the Latin Church upon the subject of images and the cultus which is due
them, I cite the decree of the Council of Trent and a passage from the
Catechism set forth by the authority of the same synod.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p3"></span>(*Conc. Trid*., Sess. xxv.  December 3d
and 4th, 1563.  \[Buckley’s Trans.\])

<span id="xvi.xiii-p4"></span>The holy synod enjoins on all bishops, and
others sustaining the office and charge of teaching that, according to
the usage of the Catholic and Apostolic Church received from the
primitive times of the Christian religion, and according to the consent
of the holy Fathers, and to the decrees of sacred councils, they
especially instruct the faithful diligently touching the intercession
and invocation of saints; the honour paid to relics; and the lawful use
of images—teaching them, that the saints, who reign together with
Christ, offer up their own prayers to God for men; that it is good and
useful suppliantly to invoke them, and to resort to their prayers, aid
and help, for obtaining benefits from God, through his Son, Jesus Christ
our Lord, who alone is our Redeemer and Saviour; but that they think
impiously, who deny that the saints, who enjoy eternal happiness in
heaven, are to be invoked; or to assert either that they do not pray for
men; or, that the invocation of them to pray for each of  us, even in
particular, is idolatry; or, that it is repugnant to the word of God,
and is opposed to the honour of the *one mediator between God and men,
Christ Jesus*, or, that it is foolish to supplicate, orally or inwardly,
those who reign in heaven.  Also, that the holy bodies of holy martyrs
and of others now living with Christ, which were the living members of
Christ, and *the temples of the Holy Ghost*, and which are by him to be
raised unto eternal life, and to be glorified, are to be venerated by
the faithful, through which \[bodies\] many benefits are bestowed by God
on men; so that they who affirm that veneration and honour are not due
to the relics of saints; or, that these, and other sacred monuments, are
uselessly honoured by the faithful; and that the places dedicated to the
memories of the Saints are vainly visited for the purpose of obtaining
their aid; are wholly to be condemned, as the Church has already long
since condemned, and doth now also condemn them.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p5"></span>Moreover, that the images of Christ, of
the Virgin Mother of God and of the other Saints, are to be had and
retained particularly in temples, and that due honour and veneration are
to be awarded them; not that any divinity or virtue is believed to be in
them, on account of which they are to be worshipped; or that anything is
to be asked of them; or that confidence is to be reposed in images, as
was of old done by Gentiles, who placed their hope in idols; but because
the honour which is shown unto them is referred to the prototypes which
they represent; in such wise that by the images which we kiss, and
before which we uncover the head, and prostrate ourselves, we adore
Christ, and venerate the <span id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span
id="xvi.xiii-Page_552"></span>Saints, whose similitude they bear.  And
this, by the decrees of councils, and especially of the second synod of
Nicæa, has been ordained against the opponents of images.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p6"></span>And the bishops shall carefully teach
this; that, by means of the histories of the mysteries of our
Redemption, depicted by paintings or other representations, the people
are instructed, and strengthened in remembering, and continually
reflecting on the articles of faith; as also that great profit is
derived from all sacred images, not only because the people are thereby
admonished of the benefits and gifts which have been bestowed upon them
by Christ, but also because the miracles of God through the means of the
Saints, and their salutary examples, are set before the eyes of the
faithful; that so, for those things they may give God thanks; may order
their own life and manners in imitation of the Saints; and may be
excited to adore and love God, and to cultivate piety.  But if any one
shall teach or think contrary to these decrees, let him be anathema. 
And if any abuses have crept in amongst these holy and salutary
observances, the holy synod earnestly desires that they be utterly
abolished; in such wise that no images conducive to false doctrine, and
furnishing occasion of dangerous error to the uneducated, be set up. 
And if at times, when it shall be expedient for the unlearned people, it
happen that the histories and narratives of Holy Scripture are
pourtrayed and represented; the people shall be taught, that not thereby
is the Divinity represented, as though it could be perceived by the eyes
of the body, or be depictured by colours or figures.  Moreover, in the
invocation of saints, the veneration of relics, and the sacred use of
images, every superstition shall be removed, all filthy lucre be
abolished, finally, all lasciviousness be avoided; in such wise that
figures shall not be painted or adorned with a wantonness of beauty: 
nor shall men also pervert the celebration of the saints, and the
visitation of relics, into revellings and drunkenness; as if festivals
are celebrated to the honour of the saints by luxury and wantonness. 
Finally, let so great care and diligence be used by bishops touching
these matters, as that there appear nothing disorderly, or unbecomingly
or confusedly arranged, nothing profane, nothing indecorous; *since
holiness becometh the house of God*.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p7"></span>And that these things may be the more
faithfully observed, the holy synod ordains, that it be lawful for no
one to place, or cause to be placed, any unusual image in any place, or
church, howsoever exempted, except it shall have been approved of by the
bishop:  also, that no new miracles are to be admitted, or new relics
received, unless the said bishop has taken cognizance and approved
thereof; who, as soon as he has obtained some certain information in
regard of these matters shall, after having taken advice with
theologians, and other pious men, act therein as he shall judge to be
agreeable to truth and piety.  But if any doubtful, or difficult abuse
is to be extirpated, or, in fine, if any more serious question shall
arise touching these matters, the bishop, before he decides the
controversy, shall await the sentence of the metropolitan and of the
bishops of the same province, in a provincial council; yet so, that
nothing new, or that has not previously been usual in the Church, shall
be decreed, without the most holy Roman Pontiff having been first
consulted.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p8"></span>(Catechism of the Council of Trent. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536)   Pt. IV., Chap. VI.  \[Buckley’s
Trans.\])

<span id="xvi.xiii-p10"></span>Question III.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p11"></span>God and the Saints addressed differently.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p12"></span>From God and from the Saints we implore
assistance not after the same manner:  for we implore God to grant us
the blessing which we want, or to deliver us from evils; but the Saints,
because favourites with God, we solicit to undertake our advocacy with
God, to obtain <span id="page_553">p. 553</span> <span
id="xvi.xiii-Page_553"></span>of him for us those things of which we
stand in need.  Hence we employ two different forms of prayer:  for to
God, we properly say, *Have mercy on us, hear us*; to the saints, *Pray
for us*.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p13"></span>Question IV.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p14"></span>In what Manner we may beseech the Saints
to have mercy on us.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p15"></span>We may, however, also ask the saints
themselves to have mercy on us, for they are most merciful; but we do so
on a different principle, for we may beseech them that, touched with the
misery of our condition, they would interpose, in our behalf, their
favour and intercession with God.  In the performance of this duty, it
is most strictly incumbent on all, to beware lest they transfer to any
creature the right which belongs exclusively to the Deity; and when we
repeat before the image of any Saint the Lord’s Prayer, our idea must
then be to beg of the Saint to pray with us, and ask for us those
favours that are contained in the form of the Lord’s Prayer, to become,
in fine, our interpreter and intercessor with God; for that this is an
office which the saints discharge, St. John the apostle has taught in
the Revelation.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p16"></span>The doctrine of the Eastern Church may be
seen from the following from *The Orthodox Confession of the faith of
the Catholic and Apostolic Church of the East*.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p17"></span>(*Confes. Orthodox*.  P. III. Q. LII.
\[apud Kimmel, *Libri Symbolici Ecclesiæ Orientalis* <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) \].)

<span id="xvi.xiii-p19"></span>Rightly therefore do we honour the Saints
of God, as it is written ([Ps. cxxxix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#017)<span id="xvi.xiii-p19.1"></span>)
“How dear are thy friends unto me, O God.”  And divine assistance we ask
for through them, just as God ordered the friends of Job to go to his
faithful servant, and that he should offer sacrifice and pray for them
that they might obtain remission of sin through their patronage.  And in
the second place this \[First\] commandment forbids men to adore any
creature with the veneration of adoration (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiii-p19.2"></span>λατρείας</span>).  For we do not honour the
Saints as though adoring them, but we call upon them as our brothers,
and as friends of God, and therefore we seek the divine assistance
through these, our brethren.  For they go between the Lord and us for
our advantage.  And this in no respect is opposed to this commandment of
the decalogue.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p20"></span>Wherefore just as the Israelites did not
sin when they called upon Moses to mediate between them and God, so
neither do we sin, when we call for the aid and intercession of the
Saints.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p21"></span>(*Ibid*.  Quæstio LIV.)

<span id="xvi.xiii-p22"></span>This \[Second\] Commandment is separate
from the first.  For that treated of the Unity of the true God,
forbidding and taking away the multitude of gods.  But the present
treats of external religious ceremonies.  For besides the not honouring
of false gods, we ought to dedicate no carved likeness in their honour,
nor to venerate with adoration such things, nor to offer the sacrifices
of adoration to them.  Therefore they sin against this commandment who
venerate idols as gods, and offer sacrifices to them, and place their
whole confidence and hope in them; as also the Psalmist says ([Ps.
cxxxv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.xiii-p22.1"></span>), “The images of the heathen are silver and
gold, etc.”  They also transgress this precept who are given up to
covetousness, etc.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p23"></span>(*Ibid*.  Quæstio LV.)

<span id="xvi.xiii-p24"></span>There is a great distinction between
idols and images (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiii-p24.1"></span>τῶν εἰδώλων καὶ τῶν εἰκόνων</span>).  For
idols are the figments and inventions of men, as the Apostle testifies
when he says ([1 Cor. 8.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.xiii-p24.2"></span><span id="page_554">p. 554</span> <span
id="xvi.xiii-Page_554"></span>), “We know that an idol is nothing in the
world.”  But an image is a representation of a true thing having a real
existence in the world.  Thus, for example, the image of our Saviour
Jesus Christ and of the holy Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints. 
Moreover, the Pagans venerated their idols as gods, and offered to them
sacrifices, esteeming the gold and silver to be God, as did
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p25"></span>But when we honour and venerate the
images, we in no way venerate the colours or the wood of which they are
made; but we glorify with the veneration of dulia (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xiii-p25.1"></span>δουλείας</span>), those
holy beings of which these are the images, making them by this means
present to our minds as if we could see them with our eyes.  For this
reason we venerate the image of the crucifixion, and place before our
minds Christ hung upon the cross for our salvation, and to such like we
bow the head, and bend the knee with thanksgiving.  Likewise we venerate
the image of the Virgin Mary, we lift up our mind to her the most holy
Mother of God, bowing both head and knees before her; calling her
blessed above all men and women, with the Archangel Gabriel.  The
veneration, moreover, of the holy images as received in the orthodox
Church, in no respect transgresses this commandment.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p26"></span>But this is not one and the same with
that we offer to God; nor do the orthodox give it to the art of the
painting, but to those very Saints whom the images represent.  The
Cherubim which overshadowed the mercy-seat, representing the true
Cherubim which stand before God in heaven, the Israelites revered and
honoured without any violation of the commandment of God, and likewise
the children of Israel revered the tabernacle of witness with a suitable
honour ([II Sam. vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.xiii-p26.1"></span>), and yet in no respect sinned nor set at
naught this precept, but rather the more glorified God.  From these
considerations it is evident that when we honour the holy images, we do
not transgress the commandment of the decalogue, but we most especially
praise God, who is “to be admired in his Saints” ([Ps. lxviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)<span id="xvi.xiii-p26.2"></span>). 
But this only we should be careful of, that every image has a label,
telling of what Saint it is, that thus the intention of him who
venerates it may be the more easily fulfilled.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p27"></span>And for the greater establishment of the
veneration of the holy images, the Church of God at the Seventh
Ecumenical Synod anathematized all those who made war against the
images, and set forth the veneration of the august images, and
established it forever, as is evident from the ninth canon of that
synod.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p28"></span>(*Ibid*.  Quæstio LVI.)

<span id="xvi.xiii-p29"></span>Why was he praised in the Old Testament
who broke down the brazen serpent ([2 Kings
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)<span id="xvi.xiii-p29.1"></span>)
which long before Moses had set up on high?  Answer:  Because the Jews
were beginning an apostasy from the veneration of the true God,
venerating that serpent as the true God; and offering to it incense as
the Scripture saith.  Therefore wishing to cut off this evil, lest it
might spread further, he broke up that serpent in order that the
Israelites might have no longer that incentive to idolatry.  But before
they honoured the serpent with the veneration of adoration, no one was
condemned in that respect nor was the serpent broken.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p30"></span>But Christians in no respect honour
images as gods, neither in their veneration do they take anything from
the true adoration due to God.  Nay, rather they are led by the hand, as
it were, by the image to God, while under their visible representations
they honour the Saints with the veneration of dulia (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xiii-p30.1"></span>δουλικῶς</span>) as the
friends of God; asking for their mediation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiii-p30.2"></span>μεσιτεύουσιν</span>) to the Lord.  And if
perchance some have strayed, from their lack of knowledge, in their
veneration, it were better to teach such an one, rather than that the
veneration of the august images should be banished from the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_536"></span>[552:537](2140685.htm#fr_536) <span
id="xvi.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p9"></span> The reader will remember that while of
great weight the Catechism was not set forth by the Council, nor are its
statements *de fide* in the Latin Church.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[553:538](2140685.htm#fr_537) <span
id="xvi.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p18"></span> This is not found in Schaff’s, *The
Creeds of Christendom*, Vol. II., although part of the *Orthodox
Concession* (viz. Pt. I.) is reprinted.  The editor explains (p. 275)
that he has printed “the doctrinal part in full,” and has omitted the
rest because it “belongs to Ethics rather than Symbolics.”  A somewhat
extraordinary opinion to be held by anyone who has read the omitted
parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Holy and Ecumenical Seventh Council.](2140686)
