[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140416)  [Next](2140418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XXXIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Since</span> we know that, in the region
of the Armenians, only those are appointed to the clerical orders who
are of priestly descent (following in this Jewish customs); and some of
those who are even untonsured are appointed to succeed cantors and
readers of the divine law, we decree that henceforth it shall not be
lawful for those who wish to bring any one into the clergy, to pay
regard to the descent of him who is to be ordained; but let them examine
whether they are worthy (according to the decrees set forth in the holy
canons) to be placed on the list of the clergy, so that they may be
ecclesiastically promoted, whether they are of priestly descent or not;
moreover, let them not permit any one at all to read in the ambo,
according to the order of those enrolled in the clergy, unless such an
one have received the priestly tonsure and the canonical benediction of
his own pastor; but if any one shall have been observed to act contrary
to these directions, let him be cut off.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p5"></span>Whoever is worthy of the priesthood
should be ordained whether he is sprung of a priestly line or no.  And
he that has been blessed untonsured shall not read the Holy Scriptures
at the ambo.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxiv-p7"></span>Here not obscurely does the canon
join the clerical tonsure received from the bishop with the office of
Reader, so much so that he that has been tonsured by the bishop is
thought to have received at the same time the tonsure and the order of
lector.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXXIV](2140418)
