[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140180)  [Next](2140182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_132">p. 132</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-Page_132"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>The</span> holy things are not to be
sent into other dioceses at the feast of Easter by way of eulogiæ.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p5"></span>It is not right to send the holy
gifts to another parish.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p7"></span>It was a custom in the ancient
Church, not indeed to consecrate, but to bless such of the several
breads of the same form laid on the altar as were not needed for the
communion, and to employ them, partly for the maintenance of the clergy,
and partly for distributing to those of the faithful who did not
communicate at the Mass.  The breads thus blessed were called
*eulogiæ*.  Another very ancient custom was, that bishops as a sign of
Church fellowship, should send the consecrated bread to one another. 
That the Roman Popes of the first and second centuries did so, Irenæus
testifies in his letter to Pope Victor in Eusebius.  In course of time,
however, instead of the consecrated bread, only bread which had been
blessed, or *eulogiæ*, were sent abroad.  For instance, Paulinus and
Augustine sent one another these *eulogiæ*.  But at Easter the older
custom still prevailed; and to invest the matter with more solemnity,
instead of the *eulogiæ*, the consecrated bread, i.e., the Eucharist,
was sent out.  The Synod of Laodicea forbids this, probably out of
reverence to the holy Sacrament.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p8"></span>Binterim (*Denkwürdegkeiten*, vol.
IV., P. iij., p. 535.) gives another explanation.  He starts from the
fact that, with the Greeks as well as the Latins, the wafer intended for
communion is generally called *sancta* or <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>ἅγια</span> even before the
consecration.  This is not only perfectly true, but a well-known fact;
only it must not be forgotten that these wafers or oblations were only
called *sancta* by anticipation, and because of the *sanctificatio* to
which they were destined.  Binterim then states that by <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p8.2"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p8.3"></span>για</span>in the
canon is to be understood not the breads already consecrated, but those
still unconsecrated.  He further conjectures that these unconsecrated
breads were often sent about instead of the *eulogiæ*, and that the
Synod of Laodicea had forbidden this, not during the whole year, but
only at Easter.  He cannot, however, give any reason, and his statement
is the more doubtful, as he cannot prove that these unconsecrated
communion breads really used before to be sent about as *eulogiæ*.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9"></span>In connection with this, however,
he adds another hypothesis.  It is known that the Greeks only consecrate
a square piece of the little loaf intended for communion, which is first
cut out with the so-called holy spear.  The remainder of the small loaf
is divided into little pieces, which remain on or near the altar during
Mass, after which they are distributed to the non-communicants.  These
remains of the small loaf intended for consecration are called <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>ἀντίδωρα</span> and
Binterim’s second conjecture is, that these <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.3"></span>ντίδωρα</span> might perhaps have been
sent as *eulogiæ* and may be the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.4"></span>ἅγια</span> of this canon.  But he is
unable to prove that these <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.5"></span>ἀντίδωρα</span> were sent about, and
is, moreover, obliged to confess that they are nowhere called *eulogiæ*,
while this canon certainly speaks of *eulogiæ*.  To this must be added
that, as with regard to the unconsecrated wafer, so we see no sufficient
cause why the Synod should have forbidden these <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xv-p9.6"></span>ἀντίδωρα</span>
being sent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XV](2140182)
