[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140580)  [Next](2140582) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p1.1"></span>Canon LVII.  (Greek lxi.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p2"></span>That persons baptized when children
by the Donatists may be ordained clergymen in the Catholic Church.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p3.1"></span>Since</span> in the former council it
was decreed, as your unanimity remembers as well as I do, that those who
as children were baptized by the Donatists, and not yet being able to
know the pernicious character of their error, and afterward when they
had come to the use of reason, had received the knowledge of the truth,
abhorred their former error, and were received, (in accordance with the
ancient order) by the imposition of the hand, into the Catholic Church
of God spread throughout the world, that to such the remembrance of the
error ought to be no impediment to the reception of the clerical
office.  For in coming to faith they thought the true Church to be their
own and there they believed in Christ, and received the sacraments of
the Trinity.  And that all these sacraments are altogether true and holy
and divine is most certain, and in them the whole hope of the soul is
placed, although the presumptuous audacity of heretics, taking to itself
the name of the truth, dares to administer them.  They are but one after
all, as the blessed Apostle tells us, saying:  “One God, one faith, one
baptism,” and it is not lawful to reiterate what once only ought to be
administered.  \[Those therefore who have been so baptized\] having
anathematized their error may be received by the imposition of the hand
into the one Church, the pillar as it is called, and the one mother of
all Christians, where all these Sacraments are received unto salvation
and everlasting life; even the same sacraments which obtain for those
persevering in heresy the heavy penalty of damnation.  So that which to
those who are in the truth lighteneth to the obtaining of eternal life,
the same to them who are in error tends but to darkness and damnation. 
With regard then to those who, having fled from error, acknowledge the
breasts of their mother the Catholic Church, who believe and receive all
these holy mysteries with the love of the truth, and besides the
Sacraments have the testimony of a good life, there is no one who would
not grant that without doubt such persons may be raised to the clerical
office, especially in such necessity as the present.  But there are
others of this sect, who being already clergymen, desire to pass to us
with their peoples and also with their honours, such as for the sake of
office are converts to life, and that they may retain them seek for
salvation \[i.e., enter the Church\].  I think that the question
concerning such may be left to the graver consideration of our
afore<span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-Page_472"></span>said brothers, and that when they
have considered by their more prudent counsel the matter referred to
them, they may vouchsafe to advise us what approves itself to them with
regard to this question.  Only concerning those who as children were
baptized by heretics we decree that they consent, if it seems good, to
our decision concerning the ordination of the same.  All things,
therefore, which we have set forth above with the holy bishops, let your
honourable fraternity with me adjudge to be done.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LVII.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p6"></span>Such as have been while children
baptized by the Donatists may be ordained should they repent,
anathematize their heresy, and be otherwise worthy.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p7"></span>Of the three Introductions to
Carthaginian Councils which precede this canon, the first refers to the
synod held June 26, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397; the second to that held
April 27, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span> 399; and the third to that
of June 15 (or 16), <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p7.3"></span>a.d.</span> 401.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p8"></span>The canon is Canon j. of the Synod
of Carthage of June 15 (or 16), <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.  The eight other canons
of this synod follow in the African Code in their own order.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lviii-p10"></span>See Can. 47, which was made in a
former synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LVIII](2140582)
