[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140437)  [Next](2140439.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.lv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lv-p1.1"></span>Canon LIV.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lv-p2.1"></span>The</span> divine scriptures plainly teach
us as follows, “Thou shalt not approach to any that is near of kin to
thee to uncover their nakedness.”  Basil, the bearer-of-God, has
enumerated in his canons some marriages which are prohibited and has
passed over the greater part in silence, and in both these ways has done
us good service.  For by avoiding a number of disgraceful names (lest by
such words he should pollute his discourse) he included impurities under
general terms, by which course he shewed to us in a general way the
marriages which are forbidden.  But since by such silence, and because
of the difficulty of understanding what marriages are prohibited, the
matter has become confused; it seemed good to us to set it forth a
little more clearly, decreeing that from this time forth he who shall
marry with the daughter of his father; or a father or son with a mother
and daughter; or a father and son with two girls who are <span
id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.lv-Page_391"></span>sisters; or a mother and daughter with
two brothers; or two brothers with two sisters, fall under the canon of
seven years, provided they openly separate from this unlawful union.

<span id="xiv.iii.lv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lv-p3.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lv-p4"></span>*Thou shalt not permit the marriage of a
son of a brother to the daughter of a brother; nor with a daughter and
her mother shall there be the marriage of a son and his father; neither
a mother and a daughter with two brothers; nor brothers with two
sisters.  But should anything of this sort have been done, together with
separation, penance shall be done for seven years.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LV](2140439.md)
