[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140341)  [Next](2140343.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XXIV.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Monasteries</span>, which have once been
consecrated with the consent of the bishop, shall remain monasteries for
ever, and the property belonging to them shall be preserved, and they
shall never again become secular dwellings.  And they who shall permit
this to be done shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p5"></span>A monastery erected with the consent
of the bishop shall be immovable.  And whatever pertains to it shall not
be alienated.  Whoever shall take upon him to do otherwise, shall not be
held guiltless.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p6"></span>Joseph Ægyptius, in turning this into
Arabic, reads:  “And whoever shall turn any monastery into a dwelling
house for himself…let him be cursed and anathema.”  The curious reader
is referred on this whole subject to Sir Henry Spelman’s *History and
Fate of Sacrilege*, or to the more handy book on the subject by James
Wayland Joyce, *The Doom of Sacrilege*. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md)

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p12"></span>The secularization of monasteries
was an evil which grew with their wealth and influence.  At a Council
held by the patriarch Photius in the Apostles’ church at Constantinople,
it is complained that some persons attach the name of “monastery” to
property of their own, and while professing to dedicate it to God, write
themselves down as lords of what has been thus consecrated, and are not
ashamed to claim after such consecration the same power over it which
they had before.  In the West, we find this abuse attracting the
attention of Gregory the Great, who writes to a bishop that “rationalis
ordo” would not allow a layman to pervert a monastic foundation at will
to his own uses (*Epist*. viii., 31).  In ancient Scotland, the
occasional dispersion of religious communities, and, still more, the
clan-principle which assigned chieftain-rights over monasteries to the
descendants of the founder, left at Dunkeld, Brechin, Abernethy, and
elsewhere, “nothing but the mere name of abbacy applied to the lands,
and of abbot borne by the secular lord for the time” (Skene’s *Celtic
Scotland*, ii., 365; *cf*. Anderson’s *Scotland in Early Christian
Times*, p. 235).  So, after the great Irish monastery of Bangor in Down
was destroyed by the Northmen, “non defuit,” says St. Bernard, “qui
illud teneret cure possessionibus suis; nam et constituebantur per
electionem etiam, et abbates appellabantur, servantes nomine, etsi non
re, quod olim exstiterat” (*De Vita S. Malachiæ*, vj.).  So in 1188
Giraldus Cambrensis found a lay abbot in possession of the venerable
church of Llanbadarn Vawr; a “bad custom,” <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> <span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-Page_285"></span>he says, “had grown
up, whereby powerful laymen, at first chosen by the clergy to be
“œconomi” or “patroni et defensores,” had usurped “totum jus,”
appropriated the lands, and left to the clergy nothing but the altars,
with tithes and offerings (*Itin. Camb*. ii., 4).  This abuse must be
distinguished from the corrupt device whereby, in Bede’s later years,
Northumbrian nobles contrived to gain for their estates the immunities
of abbey-lands by professing to found monasteries, which they filled
with disorderly monks, who lived there in contempt of all rule (Bede,
*Ep. to Egbert*, vij.).  In the year of his birth, the first English
synod had forbidden bishops to despoil consecrated monasteries (Bede,
iv., 5).

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p13"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XIX., Quæst.
III., canon iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[284:292](2140342.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p7"></span> The reader may like to see the vow
on this subject taken by King Charles I. of England, and which was made
public by Archbishop Sheldon after the Restoration.  The vow is as
follows:

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p8"></span>“I do here promise and solemnly vow,
in the presence and service of Almighty God, that if it shall please the
Divine Majesty of his infinite goodness to restore me to my just Kingly
rights, and to re-establish me in my throne, I will wholly give back to
his Church all those impropriations which are now held by the Crown; and
what lands soever I do now or should enjoy, which have been taken away
either from any episcopal see or any cathedral or collegiate church,
from any abbey or other religious house, I likewise promise for
hereafter to hold them from the Church under such reasonable fines and
rents as shall be set down by some conscientious persons, whom I propose
to choose with all uprightness of heart to direct me in this
particular.  And I humbly beseech God to accept of this my vow, and to
bless me in the design I have now in hand through Jesus Christ our
Lord.”

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>“Charles R.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p10"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>Oxford</span>, April 13, 1646.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXV](2140343.md)
