[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140004)  [Next](2140006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xv"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>III.  The Number of the Ecumenical
Synods.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>It</span> may not be unjustly expected that
some reasons should be assigned for limiting the number of the
Ecumenical Synods to seven.  There is no need here to enter into any
proof that Nice, I. Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon are
Ecumenical, since so long ago as the time of St. Gregory the Great, that
Saint and Doctor said of them:  “I venerate the first four Ecumenical
Councils equally with the Four Gospels (sicut quatuor Evangelia),” <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) and no one has been found to question that
in so saying he gave expression to the mind of the Church of his day. 
Of the fifth and sixth synods there never was any real doubt, although
there was trouble at first about the reception of the fifth in some
places.  The ecumenical character of the seventh is not disputed by East
or West and has not been for near a thousand years, and full proof of
its ecumenicity will be found in connection with that council.  There is
therefore no possible doubt that these seven must be included, but it
may be asked why certain others are not here also.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>The following is a list of those that might
seem to have a claim:  Sardica (343 circa), Quinisext (692),
Constantinople (869), Lyons (1274), and Florence (1439).

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>The reasons for rejecting the claims of
Sardica will be found in connection with the canons set forth by that
council.  The same is the case with regard to the claims of the Synod in
Trullo.  It is true that IV. Constantinople, holden in <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 869, was for a
short while held as Ecumenical by both East and West, and continues to
be held as such by the Latin Church down to this day, but it was soon
rejected by the East and another synod of Constantinople (879), which
undid much of its work, has for the Greeks taken its place.  However the
Easterns do not claim for this synod an ecumenical character, but
confine the number to seven.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>The Councils of Lyons and Florence both
fail of ecumenicity for the same reason.  At both the East was
represented, and at each an agreement was arrived at, but neither
agreement was subsequently accepted in the East, and the decrees
therefore have failed, as yet, of receiving ecumenical acceptance.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>We are left therefore with Seven Ecumenical
Councils, neither more nor less, and these are fully treated of in the
pages that follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xv:10](2140005.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> Epistle XXIV. of Lib. I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliographical Introduction.](2140006.md)
