[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140257)  [Next](2140259.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="x.vi-Page_199"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.vi-p2.1"></span>Session I.  (Continued).</span>

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 462.)

<span id="x.vi-p4"></span>And after the letter was read, Cyril, the
bishop of Alexandria, said:  This holy and great Synod has heard what I
wrote to the most religious Nestorius, defending the right faith.  I
think that I have in no respect departed from the true statement of the
faith, that is from the creed set forth by the holy and great synod
formerly assembled at Nice.  Wherefore I desire your holiness \[i.e. the
Council\] to say whether rightly and blamelessly and in accordance with
that holy synod I have written these things or no.

<span id="x.vi-p5"></span>\[*A number of bishops then gave their
opinion, all favourable to Cyril; after these individual opinions the
Acts continue* (col. 491):\]

<span id="x.vi-p6"></span>And all the rest of the bishops in the order
of their rank deposed to the same things, and so believed, according as
the Fathers had set forth, and as the Epistle of the most holy
Archbishop Cyril to Nestorius the bishop declared.

<span id="x.vi-p7"></span>Palladius, the bishop of Amasea, said, The
next thing to be done is to read the letter of the most reverend
Nestorius, of which the most religious presbyter Peter made mention; so
that we may understand whether or no it agrees with the exposition of
the Nicene fathers.…

<span id="x.vi-p8"></span>And after this letter was read, Cyril, the
bishop of Alexandria, said, What seems good to this holy and great synod
with regard to the letter just read?  Does it also seem to be consonant
to the faith set forth by the holy Synod assembled in the city of Nice?

<span id="x.vi-p9"></span>\[*The bishops, then as before, individually
express their opinion, and at last the Acts continue* (col. 502):\]

<span id="x.vi-p10"></span>All the bishops cried out together:  Whoever
does not anathematize Nestorius let him be anathema.  Such an one the
right faith anathematizes; such an one the holy Synod anathematizes. 
Whoever communicates with Nestorius let him be anathema!  We
anathematize all the apostles of Nestorius:  we all anathematize
Nestorius as a heretic:  let all such as communicate with Nestorius be
anathema, etc., etc.

<span id="x.vi-p11"></span>Juvenal, the bishop of Jerusalem said:  Let
the letter of the most holy and reverend Cælestine, archbishop of the
Church of Rome, be read, which he wrote concerning the faith.

<span id="x.vi-p12"></span>\[*The letter of Cælestine was read and no
opinion expressed*.\]

<span id="x.vi-p13"></span>Peter the presbyter of Alexandria, and
primicerius of the notaries said:  Altogether in agreement with the
things just read are those which his holiness Cyril our most pious
bishop wrote, which I now have at hand, and will read if your piety so
shall order.

<span id="x.vi-p14"></span>\[*The letter was read which begins thus*:\]

<span id="x.vi-p15"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="x.vi-p15.1"></span>Τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν λέγοντος ἐναργῶς, κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="x.vi-p16"></span>Cum Salvator noster, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Introduction to St. Cyril's Anathematisms.](2140259.md)
