[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140491)  [Next](2140493.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii-Page_413"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Introduction on the Date of the
Council.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p2"></span>(Hefele, *Hist. Councils*, Vol. II., pp.
86 *et seqq*.)

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p3"></span>Our inquiries concerning the Synod of
Sardica must begin with a chronological examination of the date of this
assembly.  Socrates and Sozomen place it expressly in the year 347 <span
class="sc"><span id="xv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, with the more
precise statement that it was held under the Consuls Rufinus and
Eusebius in the eleventh year after the death of Constantine the Great,
therefore after the 22d of May, 347, according to our way of reckoning.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p4"></span>This was the most general view until,
rather more than a hundred years ago, the learned Scipio Maffei
discovered at Verona, the fragment of a Latin translation of an old
Alexandrian chronicle (the *Historia Acephala*), and edited it in the
third volume of the *Osservazioni Litterarii* in 1738.  This fragment
contains the information that on the 24th Phaophi (October 21), under
the Consuls Constantius IV. and Constans II., in the year 346,
Athanasius had returned to Alexandria from his second exile.  As it is
universally allowed, however, as we shall presently show more clearly,
that this return certainly only took place about two years after the
Synod of Sardica, Mansi hence saw the necessity of dating this synod as
early as the year 344.  In this he is confirmed by St. Jerome, in the
continuation of the Eusebian chronicle, who, in accordance with the
*Historia Acephala*, has assigned the return of St. Athanasius to the
tenth year of the reign of the Emperor Constantius, in 346.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p5"></span>Many learned men now followed Mansi, the
greater number blindly; others, again, sought to contradict him, at
first the learned Dominican, Mamachi; then Dr. Wetzer (Professor at
Freiburg); and latterly, we ourselves in a treatise, “Controversen über
die Synode von Sardika,” in the *Tübinger Theol. Quartalschrift*, 1852. 
Soon after there was a fresh discovery.  Some of the *Paschal Letters*
of St. Athanasius, which until then were supposed to be lost, were
discovered in an Egyptian monastery, with a very ancient preface
translated into Syriac, and were published in that language by Cureton
in London, and in the year 1852 in German by Professor Larsow, at the
Grey Friars Convent, in Berlin.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p6"></span>Among these *Festal Letters*, the
nineteenth, intended for Easter 347, and therefore composed in the
beginning of that year, had been rewritten in Alexandria, as the
introduction expressly states.  This confirms the statement of the
*Historia Acephala*, that Athanasius was already returned to Alexandria
in October, 346, and confirms the chief points of Mansi’s hypothesis;
while, on the other hand, it unanswerably refutes, by Athanasius’ own
testimony, the statements of Socrates and Sozomen (which, from their
dependence on each other, only count as one), with reference to the date
347.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p7"></span>As we said, Mansi placed this Synod in
the year 344; but the old preface to the Festal Letters of St.
Athanasius dates it in the year 343, and in fact we can now only
hesitate between the dates 343 and 344.  If the preface were as ancient
and as powerfully convincing as the Festal Letters themselves, then the
question concerning the date of the Council of Sardica would be most
accurately decided.  As, however, this preface contains mistakes in
several places, especially chronological errors—for instance, regarding
the death of Constantine the Great—we cannot unconditionally accept its
statement as to the date 344, but can only do so when it corresponds
with other dates concerning that time.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p8"></span>Let us, at all events, assume that
Athanasius came to Rome about Easter, 340.  As is known, he was there
for three whole years, and in the beginning of the fourth year was
summoned to the Emperor Constans at Milan.  This points to the summer of
343.  From thence he went through Gaul to Sardica, and thus it is quite
possible that that Synod might have begun in the autumn of 343.  It
probably lasted, however, until the spring; for when the two envoys,
Euphrates of Cologne, and Vincent of Capua, who were sent by the Synod
to the Emperor Constans, arrived in Antioch, it was already Easter 344. 
Stephen, the <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii-Page_414"></span>bishop of the latter city, treated them
in a truly diabolical manner; but his wickedness soon became notorious,
and a synod was established, which deposed him after Easter 344.  Its
members were Eusebians, who therefore appointed Leontius Castratus as
Stephen’s successor, and it is indeed no other than this assembly which
Athanasius has in mind, when he says it took place three years after the
*Synod in Encæniis*, and drew up a very explicit Eusebian confession of
faith, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>μακρόστιχος</span>.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p9"></span>The disgraceful behaviour of Bishop
Stephen of Antioch for some time inclined the Emperor to place less
confidence in the Arian party, and to allow Athanasius’s exiled clergy
to return home in the summer of 344.  Ten months later, the
pseudo-bishop, Gregory of Alexandria, died (in June, 345), and
Constantius did not permit any fresh appointment to the see of
Alexandria, but recalled St. Athanasius by three letters, and waited for
him more than a year.  Thus the see of Alexandria remained unoccupied
for more than a year, until the last six months of 346.  At length, in
October, 346, Athanasius returned to his bishopric.

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p10"></span>We see then that by accepting the
distinct statements of the *Paschal Letters* of St. Athanasius and the
preface, we obtain a satisfactory chronological system in which the
separate details cohere well together, and which thus recommends
itself.  One great objection which we formerly raised ourselves against
the date 344 can now be solved.  It is certainly true that in 353 or 354
Pope Librius wrote thus:  “Eight years ago the Eusebian deputies,
Eudoxius and Martyrius (who came to the West with the formula <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>μακρόστικος</span>),
refused to anathematize the Arian doctrine at Milan.”  But the Synod of
Milan here alluded to, and placed about the year 345, was not, as we
before erroneously supposed, held before the Synod of Sardica, but after
it.  We are somewhat less fortunate as regards another difficulty.  The
Eusebians assembled at Philippopolis (the pseudo-synod of Sardica) say,
in their synodal letter:  “Bishop Asclepas of Gaza was deposed from his
bishopric seventeen years ago.”  This deposition occurred at an
Antiochian synod.  If we identified this synod with the well-known one
of 330, by which Eustathius of Antioch also was overthrown, we should,
reckoning the seventeen years, have the year 346 or 347, in which to
place the writing of the Synodal Letter of Philippopolis, and therefore
the Synod of Sardica.  There are, however, two ways of avoiding this
conclusion, either we must suppose that Asclepas has been already
deposed a year or so before the Antiochian Synod of 330; or that the
statement as to the number seventeen in the Latin translation of the
Synodal Letter of Philippopolis (for we no longer possess the original
text) is an error or slip of the pen.  But in no case can this Synodal
Letter alter the fact that Athanasius was again in Alexandria when he
composed his Paschal Letter for the year 347, and that the Synod of
Sardica must therefore have been held several years before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note on the Text of the Canons.](2140493.md)
