[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140716)  [Next](2140718.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xix"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xix-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Council of Frankfort, <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xix-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 794.</span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p2"></span>It has been commonly represented that the
Council of Frankfort, which was a large Synod of the West, with legates
of the Pope present and composed of the bishops of Gaul, Germany, and
Aquitaine, devoted its attention to a consideration of the question of
the ven<span id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span
id="xvi.xix-Page_584"></span>eration due to images and of the claims of
the Second Council of Nice to being an Ecumenical Synod.  I do not know
upon what grounds such statements have rested, but certainly not upon
anything revealed by any remains of the council we possess, for among
these we find but one brief paragraph upon the subject, to wit, the
Second Canon, which reads as follows (Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*,
Tom. vii, col. 1057):

<span id="xvi.xix-p3"></span>“II.  The question was brought forward
concerning the recent synod which the Greeks had held at Constantinople
concerning the adoration of images, that all should be judged as worthy
of anathema who did not pay to the images of the Saints service and
adoration as to the Divine Trinity.  Our most holy fathers rejected with
scorn and in every way such adoration and service, and unanimously
condemned it.”

<span id="xvi.xix-p4"></span>Now in the first place I call the reader’s
attention to the fact that the Conciliabulum of 754 was held at
Constantinople but that the Seventh Council was held at Nice.  It would
seem as if the two had got mixed in the mind of the writer. <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md)

<span id="xvi.xix-p6"></span>In the second place neither of these
synods, nor any other synod, decreed that the “service” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xix-p6.1"></span>λατρεία</span>) and
“adoration” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xix-p6.2"></span>προσκύνησις</span>) due to the holy Trinity was
under pain of anathema to be given to “the images of the Saints.”

<span id="xvi.xix-p7"></span>On this second canon Hefele writes as
follows:

<span id="xvi.xix-p8"></span>(Hefele.  *Concil*., § 398).

<span id="xvi.xix-p9"></span>The second of these canons deserves our
full attention; in it, as we have seen, the Synod of Frankfort expresses
its feeling against the Second Ecumenical Council of Nice, and against
the veneration of images; Eginhard also gives us the information that it
took this action, viz.:  “for it was decided by all \[i.e. at
Frankfort\] that the synod, which a few years before was gathered
together in Constantinople (*sic*) under Irene and her son Constantine,
and is called by them not only the Seventh but also Ecumenical, should
neither be held nor declared to be the Seventh nor ecumenical but wholly
without authority.”

<span id="xvi.xix-p10"></span>Hefele rejects the views of Baronius,
Bellarmine, Surius, and Binius.  I have no intention of defending the
position of any one of these writers but I translate Binius’s note,
merely remarking that it is easier to reject his conclusion than to
answer the arguments upon which it rests.

<span id="xvi.xix-p11"></span>(Severinus Binius, Labbe and Cossart,
*Concilia*, Tom. VII., col. 1070.)

<span id="xvi.xix-p12"></span>Baronius was of opinion that the Second
Council of Nice was condemned by this council; and before him Bellarmine
had taught the same thing.  But two things make me dissent from their
conclusion:

<span id="xvi.xix-p13"></span>First.  That as the history and acts of
this council inform us that the legates of Pope Hadrian (whom Ado in his
chronology names Theophylact and Stephen) were present at this council,
it was not possible that the whole council was ignorant by what
authority the true Seventh Council was assembled at Nice, and what its
decrees had been.  For as this Synod at Nice was assembled under the
same Pontiff, the legates of that same Pontiff could not have been
ignorant of its authority and teaching.  Therefore even if false rumours
concerning the Seventh Synod had been scattered about, as Genebrardus
affirms (on what foundation I know not), the Fathers of the Council of
Frankfort could have been instructed by the papal legates, and been
given information and taught what were the writings of that Seventh
Council.  Moreover since the celebration of that Nicene Council was an
event most celebrated and most widely published throughout the whole
Church, it is not credible that among <span id="page_585">p. 585</span>
<span id="xvi.xix-Page_585"></span>the bishops of all France and
Germany, assembled in this place, no single one was found who had
accurate information concerning the manner in which the Council of Nice
was assembled, or of how it had received the approval of the Supreme
Pontiff.  For as a matter of fact, that error of adoring images as gods
is rather an error of the Gentiles than of any heretics or of any who
profess the faith of Christ.  Therefore in no way is it credible that
the fathers of the Council of Frankfort should have thought this, or
rashly on account of certain rumours have believed this; especially
since at that time in no Church was there the suspicion of any such
error; and the bishops of the council were too pious and Catholic to
allow the suspicion that out of base enmity to the Orientals they were
led to attribute error to the fathers of the most sacred Council of
Nice, or that they would have attached an heretical sense to their
decision.

<span id="xvi.xix-p14"></span>Another reason is this; that the fathers
of this council often made profession of acting under the obedience of
the Roman Pontiffs; and in the book *Sacrosyllabus* at the end, when
they gave sentence against the heretics, they subjoin these words:  “The
privilege of our lord and father the Supreme Pontiff, Hadrian I. Pope of
the most blessed See, being in all respects maintained.”  And this same
principle the same fathers often professed in this council, that they
followed the tradition of their predecessors, and did not depart from
their footsteps; and that Charlemagne, who was present, at this council,
in his letter to the Spanish bishops, said that in the first place he
had consulted the pontiff of the Apostolic See, what he thought
concerning the matter treated of in that council:  and that a little
further on he adds these words:  “I am united to the Apostolic see, and
to the ancient Catholic traditions which have come down from the
beginnings of the new-born Church, with my whole mind, and with complete
alacrity of heart.”

<span id="xvi.xix-p15"></span>Now the fathers of this council could not
make such a profession if they had condemned the Sacrosant Synod of
Nice, which had been confirmed by the Apostolic See.  For as I have
shown above they could not have been misled by false information upon
this point.  If therefore knowingly and through heretical pravity they
did these things, so too they did them out of pertinacity and heresy;
and so concerning the authority of the Apostolic See one way they had
thought and another way spoken.  But in my judgment such things are not
to be imputed to so great and to such an assembly of bishops, for it is
not likely that the fathers of this council, in the presence of the
legates of the Supreme Pontiff and of a Catholic Prince, would have
condemned the Seventh Synod, confirmed as it was by the authority of the
Pontiff and have referred the matter to Hadrian the Supreme Pontiff.

<span id="xvi.xix-p16"></span>Moreover it would have surely come to pass
that if the Nicene Council had been condemned by the authority of this
synod, and so the error of the Iconoclasts had been approved through
erroneous information, before our days some follower of that error would
have tried to back up himself and his opinion by its authority:  but no
one did this, and this is all the more noteworthy since, only shortly
after the time of Charlemagne, Claudius of Turin sprang up in that very
Gaul, and wished to introduce that error into the Western Church, and he
could have confirmed his teaching in the highest manner if he could have
shewn that that plenary council of the West had confirmed his error. 
But as a matter of fact Claudius did not quote it in his favour; nor did
Jonas of Orleans, who wrote against him at that time, and overthrew his
foundations, make any mention in this respect of the Council of
Frankfort in his response.

<span id="xvi.xix-p17"></span>Lastly I add that the Roman Church never
gave its approbation and received any provincial synod, so far as one
part of its action was concerned while in another part it was
persistently heretical.  But this provincial council so far as it
defined concerning the servitude and filiation of Christ was received
and approved by the Church, it is not then credible that in the same
council the Nicene Synod would have been condemned.

<span id="xvi.xix-p18"></span><span id="page_586">p. 586</span> <span
id="xvi.xix-Page_586"></span>I need only add that every proposed theory
is so full of difficulties as to seem to involve more absurdities and
improbabilities than it explains.  The reader is referred especially to
Vasquez (*De adorat. imag*., Lib. II., Dispt. VII., cap. vij.) and to
Suarez (Tom. I, Disp. LIV., Sec. iij.), for learned and instructive
discussions of the whole matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_552"></span>[584:553](2140717.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="xvi.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p5"></span> This has been explained by saying that the
last meeting was in the palace at Constantinople.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Convention said to have been held in Paris, A.D.
825.](2140718.md)
