[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140485)  [Next](2140487.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.ciii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ciii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.ciii-p1.1"></span>Canon CII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ciii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ciii-p2.1"></span>It</span> behoves those who have received
from God the power to loose and bind, to consider the quality of the sin
and the readiness of the sinner for conversion, and to apply medicine
suitable for the disease, lest if he is injudicious in each of these
respects he should fail in regard to the healing of the sick man.  For
the disease of sin is not simple, but various and multiform, and it
germinates many mischievous offshoots, from which much evil is diffused,
and it proceeds further until it is checked by the power of the
physician.  Wherefore he who professes the science of spiritual medicine
ought first of all to consider the disposition of him who has sinned,
and to see whether he tends to health or (on the contrary) provokes to
himself disease by his own behaviour, and to look how he can care for
his manner of life during the interval.  And if he does not resist the
physician, and if the ulcer of the soul is increased by the application
of the imposed medicaments, then let him mete out mercy to him according
as he is worthy of it.  For the whole account is between God and him to
whom the pastoral rule has been delivered, to lead back the wandering
sheep and to cure that which is wounded by the serpent; and that he may
neither cast them down into the precipices of despair, nor loosen the
bridle towards dissolution or contempt of life; but in some way or
other, either by means of sternness and astringency, or by greater
softness and mild medicines, to resist this sickness and exert himself
for the healing of the ulcer, now examining the fruits of his repentance
and wisely managing the man who is called to higher illumination.  For
we ought to know two things, to wit, the things which belong to
strictness and those which belong to custom, and to follow the
traditional form in the case of those who are not fitted for the highest
things, as holy Basil teaches us.

<span id="xiv.iii.ciii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ciii-p3.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon CII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ciii-p4"></span>*The character of a sin must be
considered from all points and conversion expected.  And so let mercy be
meted out.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Synods of Sardica, Carthage, Constantinople,
and Carthage Under St. Cyprian, Which Canons Were Received by the
Council in Trullo and Ratified by II. Nice.](2140487.md)
