[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140005)  [Next](2140007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span> <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="iv-Page_xvii"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv-p1.1"></span>Bibliographical Introduction.</span>

<span id="iv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv-p3"></span>To the student of the ancient synods of the
Church of Christ, the name of William Beveridge must ever stand most
illustrious; and his work on the canons of the undivided Church as
received by the Greeks, published at Oxford in 1672, will remain a
lasting glory to the Anglican Church, as the “Concilia” of Labbe and
Cossart, which appeared in Paris about the same time, must ever redound
to the glory of her sister, the Gallican Church.

<span id="iv-p4"></span>Of the permanent value of Beveridge’s work there
can be no greater evidence than that to-day it is quoted all the world
over, and not only are Anglicans proud of the bishop of St. Asaph, but
Catholics and Protestants, Westerns and Easterns alike quote him as an
authority.  In illustration of this it will be sufficient to mention two
examples, the most extensive and learned work on the councils of our own
day, that by the Roman Catholic bishop Hefele, and the “Compendium of
Canon Law,” by the Metropolitan of the Orthodox Greek Hungarian
Church, <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) in both of which the reader
will find constant reference to Beveridge’s “Synodicon.”

<span id="iv-p6"></span>This great work appeared in two volumes full
folio, with the Greek text, beautifully printed, but of course with the
ligatures so perplexing to the ordinary Greek reader of to-day.  It
should however be noted that the most learned and interesting
*Prolegomena in* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p6.1"></span>Συνοδικὸν</span> *sive Pandectæ Canonum,* as well as
the *Præfationem ad annotationes in Canones Apostolicos,* is reprinted
as an Appendix to Vol. XII. of “The Theological Works of William
Beveridge, sometime lord bishop of St. Asaph,” in the “Library of
Anglo-Catholic Theology,” (published at Oxford, 1848), which also
contains a reprint of the “Codex Canonum Ecclesiæ Primitivæ vindicatus
ac illustratus,” of which last work I shall have something to say in
connection with the Apostolical Canons in the Appendix to this volume.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>Nothing could exceed the value of the
Prolegomena and it is greatly to be wished that this most unique preface
were more read by students.  It contains a fund of out-of-the-way
information which can be found nowhere else collected together, and
while indeed later research has thrown some further light upon the
subject, yet the main conclusions of Bishop Beveridge are still accepted
by the learned with but few exceptions.  I have endeavoured, as far as
possible to incorporate into this volume the most important part of the
learned bishop’s notes and observations, but the real student must
consult the work itself.  The reader will be interested to know that the
greatest English scholars of his day assisted Bishop Beveridge in his
work, among whom was John Pearson, the defender of the Ignatian
Epistles.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>I think I cannot do better than set out in full
the contents of the Synodicon so that the student may know just what he
will find in its pages:

<span id="iv-p9"></span>“<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p9.1"></span>Συνοδικὸν</span> sive Padectæ Canonum SS.
Apostolorum, et Conciliorum ab Ecclesia Græca receptorum; necnon
Canonicorum SS. Patrum Epistolarum:  Unà cum Scholiis Antiquorum
singulis eorum annexis, et scriptis aliis huc spectantibus; quorum
plurima e Biblothecæ Bodleianæ aliarumque <span class="sc"><span
id="iv-p9.2"></span>mss.</span> codicibus nunc primum edita:  reliqua
cum iisdem <span class="sc"><span id="iv-p9.3"></span>mss.</span> summâ
fide et diligentiâ collata.  Totum Opus in duos Tomos divisum,
Guilielmus Beverigius, Ecclesiæ Anglicanæ Presbyter, Recensuit,
Prolegomenis munivit, et Annotationibus auxit.  Oxonii, E Theatro
Sheldoniano.  M.DC.LXXII.”

<span id="iv-p10"></span>Such is the title in full.  I proceed to note
the contents, premising that for all the Greek a Latin translation is
given in a parallel column:

<span id="iv-p11"></span>Volume I.

<span id="iv-p12"></span>The Canons of the Holy Apostles, with the
Ancient Epitome, and the scholia of Balsamon, Zonaras and Aristenus.

<span id="iv-p13"></span>The Canons of the Council of Nice with notes
*ut supra* and so throughout.

<span id="iv-p14"></span><span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="iv-Page_xviii"></span>The Canons of the Council of Constantinople.

<span id="iv-p15"></span>The Canons of the Council of Ephesus.

<span id="iv-p16"></span>The Canons of the Council of Chalcedon.

<span id="iv-p17"></span>The Canons of the Sixth Council in Trullo.

<span id="iv-p18"></span>The Canons of the Seventh Œcumenical Council.

<span id="iv-p19"></span>The Canons of the Council of Constantinople
called the First-and-Second \[in the time of Photius\].

<span id="iv-p20"></span>The Canons of the Council held in the Temple of
Wisdom \[which confirmed the Seventh Œcumenical Synod\].  All these with
notes as before.

<span id="iv-p21"></span>The Canons of the Council of Carthage \[over
which St. Cyprian, the Martyr, presided\] with the notes of Balsamon and
Zonaras.

<span id="iv-p22"></span>The Canons of the Council of Ancyra.

<span id="iv-p23"></span>The Canons of the Council of Neocæsarea.

<span id="iv-p24"></span>The Canons of the Council of Gangra.

<span id="iv-p25"></span>The Canons of the Council of Antioch.

<span id="iv-p26"></span>The Canons of the Council of Laodicea.

<span id="iv-p27"></span>The Canons of the Council of Sardica.  All
these with full notes as before.

<span id="iv-p28"></span>The Canons of the 217 blessed Fathers who met
at Carthage, with the epitome, and scholia by Balsamon and Aristenus,
and on the actual canons by Zonaras also.  To these some epistles are
added, likewise annotated.

<span id="iv-p29"></span>Then, ending Volume I. is a version of Josephus
Æyptius’s Arabic Introduction and Paraphrase on the Canons of the first
four General Councils, bearing the following title:

<span id="iv-p30"></span>Josephi Ægyptii Proæmia et Paraphrasis Arabica
in Quatuor Preorum Generalium Conciliorum Canones, interprete Guilielmo
Beverigio, the Arabic being given in the left hand column.

<span id="iv-p31"></span>Volume II.

<span id="iv-p32"></span>Part I.

<span id="iv-p33"></span>The Canons of Dionysius of Alexandria, with the
scholia of Balsamon and Zonaras.

<span id="iv-p34"></span>The Canons of Peter of Alexandria.

<span id="iv-p35"></span>The Canons of Gregory Thaumaturgus.

<span id="iv-p36"></span>The Canons of St. Athanasius.  All these with
scholia as above.

<span id="iv-p37"></span>The Canons of St. Basil, with the Ancient
Epitome and scholia of Balsamon, Zonaras, and Aristenus.

<span id="iv-p38"></span>The Canons of St. Gregory Nyssen with scholia
of Balsamon.

<span id="iv-p39"></span>The Canonical Answer of Timothy, Bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="iv-p40"></span>The Canons of Theophilus of Alexandria.

<span id="iv-p41"></span>The Canonical Epistles of Cyril of Alexandria.

<span id="iv-p42"></span>Extracts from the metrical poems of St. Gregory
Theologus, concerning what books of the Old and New Testaments should be
read.

<span id="iv-p43"></span>Extracts from the iambics of St. Amphilochius
the bishop to Seleucus on the same subject.

<span id="iv-p44"></span>The Encyclical Letter of Gennadius, Patriarch
of Constantinople.

<span id="iv-p45"></span>The Epistle of Tarasius, Patriarch of
Constantinople, to Adrian, Pope of Rome, concerning simony.  All of
these with Balsamon’s scholia.

<span id="iv-p46"></span>Part II.

<span id="iv-p47"></span>The Synopsis by Alexius Aristenus of the
letters called Canonical.

<span id="iv-p48"></span>The questions of Certain Monks and the Answers
sent by the Synod of Constantinople.  With notes by Balsamon. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md)

<span id="iv-p50"></span>The Alphabetical Syntagma of all that is
contained in the Sacred and Divine Canons, by Mathew Blastares, the
Monk. <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)

<span id="iv-p52"></span>Concerning the Holy and Œcumenical Synod which
restored Photius, the most holy Patriarch to the See of Constantinople,
and dissolved the scandal of the two Churches <span id="page_xix">p.
xix</span> <span id="iv-Page_xix"></span>of Old and New Rome; \[Styled
by some the “Eighth Œcumenical Synod.”\] to which is added the Letter of
the Blessed John Pope of Rome to the most holy Photius, Archbishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iv-p53"></span>An Index Rerum et Verborum of both volumes.

<span id="iv-p54"></span>Beveridge’s own Notes on the Canons of the
Councils.

<span id="iv-p55"></span>An Index Rerum et Verborum of the Notes.

<span id="iv-p56"></span>Such are the contents of Bishop Beveridge’s
great work, and it is impossible to exaggerate its value.  But it will
be noticed that it only covers the disciplinary action of the Councils,
and does not give the dogmatic decrees, these being excluded from the
author’s plan.

<span id="iv-p57"></span>Before leaving the collections of the canons we
must mention the great work of Justellus (the Preface and notes of which
are found reprinted in Migne’s *Pat. Lat.,* Tom. LXVII.); *Canonum
Ecclesiæ Universæ Gr. et Lat. cum Præfatione Notisque Christoph.*
*Justelli.*

<span id="iv-p58"></span>The author was counsellor and secretary to the
King of France, was born in Paris 1580, and died in 1649.  After his
death there appeared at Paris in 1661 a work in 2 volumes folio, with
the following title:  *Bibliotheca juris canonici vetus…ex antiquis
codicibus <span class="sc"><span id="iv-p58.1"></span>mss.</span>*
*Bibliothecæ Christopheri Justelli.…Opera et studio Gul. Voelli et
Henrici Justelli.*

<span id="iv-p59"></span>The Church in Paris had the honour of having
among its Cathedral clergy the first scholar who published a collection
of the Acts of the councils.  James Merlin was Canon and Grand
Penitentiary of the Metropolitan Church, and the first edition of his
work he put out in 1523 in one volume folio.  This work passed through
several editions within a few years, but soon gave place to fuller
collections. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

<span id="iv-p61"></span>In 1538, the Belgian Franciscan Peter Crabbe
(Pierre Grable) issued at Cologne an enlarged collection in two volumes,
and the second edition in 1551 was enlarged to three folio volumes. 
Besides these, there was Lawrence Surius’s still more complete
collection, published in 1557 (4 vols. folio), and the Venice collection
compiled by Domenick Bollanus, O. P., and printed by Dominic Nicolini,
1585 (5 vols. folio).

<span id="iv-p62"></span>But the renowned collection of Professor
Severin Binius surpassed all its predecessors, and its historical and
critical notes are quoted with respect even to-day.  The first edition,
in four volumes folio, was issued at Cologne in 1606, and later
editions, better than the first, in 1618 and 1636.  This last edition
was published at Paris in nine volumes, and made use of the Roman
collection.

<span id="iv-p63"></span>To the learned Jesuit Sirmond belongs the chief
glory of having compiled this Roman collection, and the “Introduction”
is from his pen.  The work was undertaken by the authority of Pope Paul
V., and much of the Greek text, copied from <span class="sc"><span
id="iv-p63.1"></span>mss.</span> in the Vatican Library, was now for the
first time given to the reading public.  This collection contains only
the Ecumenical Councils according to the Roman method of reckoning, and
its compilation took from 1608 to 1612.

<span id="iv-p64"></span>No collection appeared from this date until the
“Collectio Regia,” a magnificent series of thirty-seven volumes folio,
at the royal press at Paris in 1644.  But while it was superb in get up,
it left much to be desired when looked at critically, for many faults of
the Roman edition already pointed out by Sirmond were not corrected.

<span id="iv-p65"></span>And now we have reached the time when the first
really great *Concilia* appeared, which while only filling seventeen
volumes in folio was yet far more complete —Hefele says twenty-five per
cent. more complete—than the great *Collectio Regia* just described. 
This edition was the work of Philip Labbe (Labbeus in Latin), S. J., and
was completed after his death in 1667, by Father Gabriel Cossart of the
same Society—“Almost all the French savants quote from this edition of
Labbe’s with Baluze’s supplement,” <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)
and I have followed their lead, availing myself of the corrections <span
id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span id="iv-Page_xx"></span>made by later
editors.  The title of the edition used in this work is:  “Sacrasancta
Concilia ad Regiam Editionem exacta.  Studio Philip. Labbei et Gabr.
Cossartii, Soc. Jesu Presbyterorum.  Lutetiæ Parisiorum.  MDCLXXI.  Cum
Privilegio Regis Christianissimi.”

<span id="iv-p67"></span>Anything more perfect than these precious
volumes it would be hard to conceive of, and while of course they
contain the errors of chronology *et cetera* of their age, yet their
general accuracy and marvellous completeness leave them even to-day as
the greatest of the great, although the later edition of Hardouin is
more often used by English and American scholars, and is the one quoted
by Pope Benedict XIV. in his famous work *De Synodo Diæcesana*. 
Hardouin’s edition did certainly correct many of the faults of Labbe and
Cossart, yet had itself many faults and defects which are pointed out by
Salmon <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) in a long list, although he
fully acknowledges the value of Hardouin’s improvements and additions. 
Perhaps, not unnaturally, as a Professor at the Sorbonne, he preferred
Labbe and Cossart.  It may not be amiss to add that Hardouin was very
anti-Gallican and ultramontane.

<span id="iv-p69"></span>The Dominican Archbishop of Lucca, Mansi, in
1759, put out his “Concilia” in thirty-one volumes folio at Florence,
styled on the title-page “the most ample” edition ever printed, and
claiming to contain all the old and much new matter.  It was never
finished, only reaching to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv-p69.1"></span>XV</span>th century, has no indices, and (says
Hefele) “is very inferior to Hardouin in accuracy.  The order of the
subjects in the later volumes is sometimes not sufficiently methodical,
and is at variance with the chronology.” <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)

<span id="iv-p71"></span>I shall now present the reader with some
bibliographical notes which I extract *verbatim* from Hefele (Hefele,
*History of the Councils,* Vol. I., p. 74).

<span id="iv-p72"></span>Among the numerous works on the history of the
councils, the most useful to consult are:

<span id="iv-p73"></span>1.  John Cabassutius, *Notitia ecclesiastica
historiarum conciliorum et canonum.*  Lyons 1680, folio.  Very often
reprinted.

<span id="iv-p74"></span>2.  Hermant, *Histoire des Conciles,* Rouen
1730, four volumes, 8vo.

<span id="iv-p75"></span>3.  Labbe, *Synopsis historica Conciliorum,* in
vol. i. of his Collection of Councils.

<span id="iv-p76"></span>4.  Edm. Richer, *Historia conciliorum
generalium* (Paris, 1680), three volumes, 4to.  Reprinted in 8vo. at
Cologne.

<span id="iv-p77"></span>5.  Charles Ludovic Richard, *Analysis
conciliorum generalium et particularium*.  Translated from French into
Latin by Dalmasus.  Four volumes, 8vo, Augsburg, 1778.

<span id="iv-p78"></span>6.  Christ. Wilh. Franz Walch, *Entwurf einer
vollständigen Historie der Kirchenversammlungen,* Leipzig, 1759.

<span id="iv-p79"></span>7.  Fabricius, *Bibliotheca Græca,* edit.
Harless. t. xii., p. 422 sqq., in which is contained an alphabetical
table of all the councils, and an estimate of the value of the principal
collections.

<span id="iv-p80"></span>8.  Alletz, *Concilien-Lexikon,* translated
from French into German by Father Maurus Disch, a Benedictine and
professor at Augsburg, 1843.

<span id="iv-p81"></span>9.  *Dictionnaire universel et complet des
Conciles, tant généraux que particuliers,* etc., rédigé par M. l’abbé
P——, prêtre du Diocese de Paris, published by the Abbé Migne (Paris,
1846), two volumes, 4to.

<span id="iv-p82"></span>In the great works on ecclesiastical
history—for example, in the *Nouvelle Bibliothèque des Auteurs
Ecclesiastiques,* by El. Dupin, and the *Historia Literaria* of Cave,
and particularly in the excellent *Histoire des Auteurs Sacrés,* by Remi
Ceillier—we find matter relating to the history of the councils. 
Salmon, l. c., p. 387, and Walch in his *Historie der
Kirchenversammlungen,* pp. 48–67, have pointed out a large number of
works on the history of the councils.  There are also very valuable
dissertations on the same subject in—

<span id="iv-p83"></span>1.  Christian Lupus, *Synodorum generalium ac
provincialium decreta et canones, scholiis, notis ac historica actorum
dissertatione illustrata,* Louv., 1665; Brussels, 1673; five volumes,
4to.

<span id="iv-p84"></span><span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="iv-Page_xxi"></span>2.  Lud. Thomassin, *Dissertationum in Concilia
generalia et particularia,* t. i., Paris, 1667; reprinted in Rocaberti,
*Bibl. pontificia,* tr. XV.

<span id="iv-p85"></span>3.  Van Espen, *Tractatus Historicus exhibens
scholia in omnes canones conciliorum,* etc., in his complete works.

<span id="iv-p86"></span>4.  Barth. Caranza has written a very complete
and useful abstract of the acts of the councils in his *Summa
Conciliorum,* which has often been re-edited.

<span id="iv-p87"></span>5.  George Daniel Fuchs, deacon of Stuttgart,
has, in his *Bibliothek der Kirchenversammlungen,* four volumes,
Leipsic, 1780–1784, given German translations and abstracts of the acts
of the councils in the fourth and fifth centuries.

<span id="iv-p88"></span>6.  Francis Salmon, Doctor and Librarian of the
Sorbonne, has published an Introduction to the Study of the Councils, in
his *Traité de l’Étude des Conciles et de leurs collections,* Paris,
1724, in 4to, which has often been reprinted.

<span id="iv-p89"></span>To these I would add the following:

<span id="iv-p90"></span>1.  Fleury, *Histoire Ecclesiastique.*  This
work in many volumes, part of which has been translated into English, is
most useful and accurate, and contains a resumé of the separate canons
and definitions as well as the history of the proceedings.

<span id="iv-p91"></span>2.  Denziger, *Enchiridion Symbolorum et
Definitionum quæ de rebus fidei et morum a Conciliis Œcumenicis et
Summis Pontificibus emanarunt.*  A most useful handbook in the original.

<span id="iv-p92"></span>3.  Hefele, *Conciliengeschicte.*  This, the
most recent work upon the subject, is also in some respects the most
satisfactory, and it is a matter of real regret that only the first part
of the work, down to the end of the Seventh Œcumenical Council, has been
translated into English.  The last volume of the author’s revised
edition appeared in 1890.  The first volume of the first edition was
published in 1855, and the seventh and last in 1874.  The entire book
was translated into French some years ago (with full indices) by M.
l’abbé Goschlerand and M. l’abbé Delarc (Paris, Adrien le Clere et
Cie).  It should in fairness, however, be remarked that Bishop Hefele
was one of the minority who opposed the opportuneness of the definition
of Papal infallibility at the Vatican Council, and while indeed
afterwards he submitted to the final decree, yet he has been a somewhat
suspected person since to those who held extreme views on this doctrine.

<span id="iv-p93"></span>So far as I am aware no serious work has been
done upon the councils by any writer using the English tongue in recent
times, with the exception of the useful *Notes on the Canons of the
First Four General Councils,* by Canon Wm. Bright.

<span id="iv-p94"></span>The following is a list of the English
translations which I have consulted or followed:

<span id="iv-p95"></span>John Johnson, *The Clergyman’s Vade-mecum*
(London, 2d Ed., 1714).

<span id="iv-p96"></span>Wm. A. Hammond, *The Definitions of Faith and
Canons of Discipline of the Six Œcumenical Councils,* etc.

<span id="iv-p97"></span>William Lambert, *The Canons of the First Four
General Councils of the Church and those of the Early Greek Synods*
(London, s.d. Preface dated 1868).

<span id="iv-p98"></span>John Fulton, *Index Canonum.*  \[This work ends
with the Council of Chalcedon.\]  (New York, 1872.  3d Ed., 1892.)

<span id="iv-p99"></span>John Mendham, *The Seventh General Council, the
Second of Nice* (London, s. d.).

<span id="iv-p100"></span>H. R. Percival, *The Decrees of the Seven
Ecumenical Synods.*  Appendix I. to *A Digest of Theology* (London,
Masters, 1893).

<span id="iv-p101"></span>It only remains that I mention two other
works.

<span id="iv-p102"></span>Dr. Pusey’s book, *The Councils of the Church
from the Council of Jerusalem <span class="sc"><span
id="iv-p102.1"></span>a.d.</span>* 51 *to the Council of
Constantinople,* 381 (1857) should not be omitted, and certainly the
reader’s attention should be called to that most accurate and valuable
volume by Herm. Theod. Bruns, *Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum
Veterum Selecti* (Berolini, 1839), which has been constantly referred to
in preparing this work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvii:11](2140006.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p5"></span> As one of the few books of the Eastern Church
ever translated into a Western tongue, the reader may be glad to have
its full title.  *<span id="iv-p5.1"></span>Compendium des Kanonischen
Rechtes der einen heiligen, allgemeinen und apostoliochen Kirche
verfaszt von Andreas Freiherrn von Schaguna.  Hermannstadt,
Buchdruckerei des Josef Droklieff*<span id="iv-p5.2"></span>, 1868.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xviii:12](2140006.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p49"></span> According to the Elenchus, in the beginning of
this volume, both of these writings are found in the First Part and not
in the Second Part of the volume.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xviii:13](2140006.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p51"></span> Schœll says that the text is not accurately
given.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xix:14](2140006.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p60"></span> I am indebted to Hefele, *History of the
Councils*, Vol. I., p. 67 *et seqq*., for this account of Merlin’s
*Collection*, as also for most of the statements that follow.  Hefele
says (footnote to page 67):  “The longest details on Merlin’s edition
are found in a work of Salmon, Doctor and Librarian of the Sorbonne,
*Traité de l’Etude des Conciles et de leurs Collections*, etc.  Paris,
1726.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xix:15](2140006.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p66"></span> Hefele, *Hist. Councils*, vol. I, p. 69.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xx:16](2140006.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p68"></span> Salmon, *l. c.*, pp. 315–331, 786–831.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xx:17](2140006.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iv-p70"></span> Hefele, *Hist. Councils*, vol. I, p. 72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appended Note on the Eastern Editions of Synodical
Literature.](2140007.md)
