[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140167)  [Next](2140169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon I.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is right, according to the
ecclesiastical Canon, that the Communion should by indulgence be given
to those who have freely and lawfully joined in second marriages, not
having previously made a secret marriage; after a short space, which is
to be spent by them in prayer and fasting.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon I.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p5"></span>A digamist not secretly married,
after devoting himself for a short time to praying shall be held
blameless afterwards.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p7"></span>Many synods imposed a penance upon
digamists, although the Church never condemned second marriages.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.ii-p8"></span>On this whole subject of second
marriages see notes on Canon VIII. of Nice, on Canons III. and VII. of
Neocæsarea, and on Canon XIX. of Ancyra.  In treating of this canon
Hefele does little but follow Van Espen, who accepts Bishop Beveridge’s
conclusions in opposition to Justellus and refers to him, as follows,
“See this observation of Justellus’ refuted more at length by William
Beveridge in his notes on this canon,” and Bp. Beveridge adopted and
defended the exposition of the Greek commentators, viz.:  there is some
fault and some punishment, they are to be held back from communion for
“a short space,” but after that, it is according to the law of the
Church that they should be admitted to communion.  The phrase “not
having previously made a secret marriage” means that there must not have
been intercourse with the woman before the second marriage was
“lawfully” contracted, for if so the punishment would have been for
fornication, and neither light nor for “a short space.”  The person
referred to in the canon is a real digamist and not a bigamist, this is
proved by the word “lawfully” which could not be used of the second
marriage of a man who already had a living wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon II](2140169.md)
