[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140507)  [Next](2140509) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  I must not fail to
speak of a matter which constantly urgeth me. <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396)   If a bishop be found quick to anger
(which ought not to sway such a man), and he, suddenly moved against a
presbyter or deacon, be minded to cast him out of the Church, provision
must be made that such a one be not condemned too hastily \[or read
<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>ἀθῶον</span>,
if innocent\] and deprived of communion.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p5"></span>All said:  Let him that is cast out
be authorized to take refuge with the bishop of the metropolis of the
same province.  And if the bishop of the metropolis is absent, let him
hasten to the bishop that is nearest, and ask to have his case carefully
examined.  For a hearing ought not to be denied those who ask it.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p6"></span>And that bishop who cast out such a
one, justly or unjustly, ought not to take it ill that examination of
the case be made, and his decision confirmed or revised.  But, until all
the particulars have been examined with care and fidelity, he who is
excluded from communion ought not to demand communion in advance of the
decision of his case.  And if any of the clergy who have met \[to hear
the case\] clearly discern arrogance and pretentiousness in him,
inasmuch as it is not fitting to suffer insolence or unjust censure,
they ought to correct such an one with somewhat harsh and grievous
language, that men may submit to and obey commands that are proper and
right.  For as the bishop ought to manifest sincere love and regard to
his subordinates, so those who are subject to him ought in like manner
to perform the duties of their ministry in sincerity towards their
bishops.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p7"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p8.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  I must not fail to
speak of a matter which further moveth me.  If some bishop is perchance
quick to anger (which ought not to be the case) and, moved hastily and
violently against one of his presbyters or deacons, be minded to cast
him out of the Church, provision must be made that an innocent man be
not condemned or deprived of communion.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p9"></span>Therefore let him that is cast out be
authorized to appeal to the neighbouring bishops and let his case be
heard and examined into more diligently.  For a hearing ought not to be
denied one who asks it.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p10"></span>And let that bishop who cast him
out, justly or unjustly, take it patiently that the matter is discussed,
so that his sentence may either be approved by a number \[of judges\] or
else revised.  Nevertheless, until all the particulars shall be examined
with care and fidelity, no one else ought to presume to admit to
communion him who was excluded therefrom in advance of the decision of
his case.  If, however, those who meet to hear it observe arrogance and
pride in \[such\] clergy, inasmuch as it surely is not fitting for a
bishop to suffer wrong or insult, let them correct them with some
severity of language, that they may obey a bishop whose commands are
proper and right.  For as he \[the bishop\] ought to manifest sincere
love and charity to his clergy, so his ministers ought for their part to
render unfeigned obedience to their bishop.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p11"></span><span id="page_429">p. 429</span>
<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-Page_429"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p13"></span>*One condemned out of anger, if he
asks for assistance, should be heard.  But until \[he shall have asked
for* <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) *\] the assistance let him
remain excommunicated.*

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p15"></span>This is Canon XVII. of the Latin
version.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p16"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p16.1"></span>Van</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p16.2"></span>Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p17"></span>This canon is intended especially to
aid presbyters, deacons, and other clerics, who have been excommunicated
precipitately and without just cause, or suspended by their own bishop
in his anger and fury.…The canon, moreover, admonishes that the bishop
with regard to whose sentence the dispute has arisen shall patiently
consent to the discussion of the matter *de novo*, whether his decision
be sustained by the majority or emended.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p18"></span>And let bishops and other prelates
who have spiritual jurisdiction over the clergy note this, who cannot
bear with equanimity that a word should be said against their decisions,
but exact a kind of blind obedience, even frequently with great
conscientious suffering to their very best ecclesiastics; and in such
cases as do not promptly and blindly obey them, the clergy are traduced
as rebels and even a patient hearing is refused to them.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p19"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, P. II., Causa XI., Q. iij., c.
iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_396"></span>[428:397](2140508.htm#fr_396) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p4"></span> The Greek text of Bev. begins here.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[429:398](2140508.htm#fr_397) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xiv-p14"></span> This is the understanding of
Beveridge’s Latin.  I should have supposed the words to be supplied were
“the reception of.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVIII](2140509)
