[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140538)  [Next](2140540) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Canon XV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p2"></span>*Of the divers orders who serve the
Church, that if any one fall into a criminal business and refused to be
tried by the ecclesiastical court, he ought to be in danger therefor;
and that the sons of bishops (*sacerdotum*) are not to attend worldly
shows.*

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>Moreover</span> it seemed good that if any
bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who had a criminal charge brought against
him or who had a civil cause, refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical
tribunal, but wished to be judged by the secular courts, even if he won
his suit, nevertheless he should lose his office.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p4"></span>This is the law in a criminal suit;
but in a civil suit he shall lose that for the recovery of which he
instituted the proceedings, if he wishes to retain his office.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p5"></span>This also seemed good, that if from
some ecclesiastical judges an appeal was taken to other ecclesiastical
judges who had a superior jurisdiction, this should in no way injure the
reputation of those from whom the appeal was taken, unless it could be
shown that they had given sentence moved by hatred or some other mental
bias, or that they had been in some way corrupted.  But if by the
consent of both parties judges had been chosen, even if they were fewer
in number than is specified, no appeal can be taken.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p6"></span>And \[it seemed good\] that the sons
of bishops should not take part in nor witness secular spectacles.  For
this has always been forbidden to all Christians, so let them abstain
from them, that they may not go where cursing and blasphemy are to be
found.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p8.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p9"></span>A bishop or cleric who has a criminal
suit brought against him, if he leaves the Church and betakes himself to
secular judges even if he had been unjustly used, shall lose his rank. 
And if he was successful in his political affairs, if he follows this,
he shall lose his own grade.  No appeal can be taken from the
ecclesiastical judges, except they be proved to have given their
decision beforehand moved thereto by a bribe or by hatred.  No appeal
can be taken from the decision of judges chosen by each side.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p10"></span>This canon is made up of Canons ix.,
x., and xj. of the Council of Hippo, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xvi-p12"></span>In this canon the African bishops
made bold with the Civil Courts.  To lay such restraints on bishops and
clergymen is, I am sure, very proper, to say no more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVI](2140540)
