[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140249)  [Next](2140251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.x"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.x-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Authority of the Second
Ecumenical Council.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p2"></span>(Hefele, *History of the Councils*, Vol.
II., pp. 370, *et seqq*.)

<span id="ix.viii.x-p3"></span>Lastly, to turn to the question of the
authority of this Council, it appears, first of all, that immediately
after its close, in the same year, 381, several of its acts were
censured by a Council of Latins, namely, the prolongation of the
Meletian schism (by the elevation of Flavian), and the choice of
Nectarius as Bishop of Constantinople, while, as is known, the Westerns
held (the Cynic) Maximus to be the rightful bishop of that city.

<span id="ix.viii.x-p4"></span>In consequence of this, the new Synod
assembled in the following year, 382, at Constantinople, sent the Latins
a copy of the decrees of faith composed the year before, expressly
calling this Synod <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.x-p4.1"></span>οἰκουμενική</span> and at the same time
seeking to justify it in those points which had been censured. 
Photius <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) maintains that soon
afterwards Pope Damasus confirmed this synod; but, as the following will
show, this confirmation could only have referred to the creed and not to
the canons.  As late as about the middle of the fifth century, Pope Leo
I. spoke in a very depreciatory manner of these canons, especially of
the third, which concerned the ecclesiastical rank of Constantinople,
remarking that it was never sent to the See of Rome.  Still later,
Gregory the Great wrote in the same sense:  *Romana autem Ecclesia
eosdam canones vel gesta Synodi illius hactenus non habet, nec accepit;
in hoc autem eam accepit, quod est per eam contra Macedonium
definitum*. <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md)

<span id="ix.viii.x-p7"></span>Thus, as late as the year 600, only the
creed, but not the canons of the Synod of Constantinople were accepted
at Rome; but on account of its creed, Gregory the Great reckons it as
one of the four Ecumenical Councils, which he compares to the four
Gospels.  So also before him the popes Vigilius and Pelagius II,
reckoned this Synod among the Ecumenical Councils.

<span id="ix.viii.x-p8"></span>The question is, from what date the
Council of Constantinople was considered ecumenical by the Latins as
well as by the Greeks.  We will begin with the latter.  Although as we
have seen, the Synod of 382 had already designated this council as
ecumenical, yet it could not for a long time obtain an equal rank with
the Council of Nicæa, for which reason the General Council of Ephesus
mentions that of Nicæa and its creed with the greatest respect, but is
totally silent as to this Synod.  Soon afterwards, the so-called
Robber-Synod in 449, spoke of two (General) Councils, at Nicæa and
Ephesus, and designated the latter as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.x-p8.1"></span>ἡ δευτέρα σύνοδος</span>, as a plain token
that it did not ascribe such a high rank to the assembly <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span id="ix.viii.x-Page_187"></span>at
Constantinople.  It might perhaps be objected that only the
Monophysites, who notoriously ruled the Robber-Synod, used this
language; but the most determined opponent of the Monophysites, their
accuser, Bishop Eusebius of Dorylæum, in like manner also brought
forward only the two Synods of Nicæa and Ephesus, and declared that “he
held to the faith of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers assembled at
Nicæa, and to all that was done at the great and Holy Synod at Ephesus.”

<span id="ix.viii.x-p9"></span>The Creed of Constantinople appears for
the first time to have been highly honoured at the fourth General
Council, which had it recited after that of Nicæa, and thus solemnly
approved it.  Since then this Synod has been universally honoured as
ecumenical by the Greeks, and was mentioned by the Emperor Justinian
with the Councils of Nicæa, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, as of equal
rank. <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md)

<span id="ix.viii.x-p11"></span>But in the West, and especially in Rome,
however satisfied people were with the decree of faith enacted by this
Synod, and its completion of the creed, yet its third canon, respecting
the rank of Constantinople, for a long time proved a hindrance to its
acknowledgment.  This was especially shown at the Council of Chalcedon,
and during the time immediately following.  When at that Council the
creed of Constantinople was praised, repeated, and confirmed the Papal
Legates fully concurred; but when the Council also renewed and confirmed
the third canon of Constantinople, the Legates left the assembly, lodged
a protest against it on the following day, and declared that the rules
of the hundred and fifty bishops at Constantinople were never inserted
among the Synodal canons (which were recognised at Rome).  The same was
mentioned by Pope Leo himself, who, immediately after the close of the
Council of Chalcedon wrote to Bishop Anatolius of Constantinople:  “that
document of certain bishops (*i.e*. the third canon of Constantinople)
was never brought by your predecessors to the knowledge of the Apostolic
See.” <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md)   Leo also, in his 105th
letter to the Empress Pulcheria, speaks just as depreciatingly of this
Council of Constantinople; and Quesnel is entirely wrong in maintaining
that the Papal Legates at the Synod of Chalcedon at first practically
acknowledged the validity of the third canon of Constantinople.  Bishop
Eusebius of Dorylæum was equally mistaken in maintaining at Chalcedon
itself, that the third canon had been sanctioned by the Pope; and we
shall have occasion further on, in the history of the Council of
Chalcedon, to show the untenable character of both statements.

<span id="ix.viii.x-p13"></span>Pope Felix III. took the same view as
Pope Leo, when, in his letter to the monks at Constantinople and
Bithynia in 485, he only spoke of three General Councils at Nicæa,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon; neither did his successor Gelasius (492–496) in
his genuine decree, *De libris recipiendis*, mention this Synod.  It may
certainly be said, on the other hand, that in the sixth century its
ecumenical character had come to be most distinctly acknowledged in the
Latin Church also, and, as we have seen above, had been expressly
affirmed by the Popes Vigilius, Pelagius II., and Gregory the Great. 
But this acknowledgment, even when it is not expressly stated, only
referred to the decrees on faith of the Council of Constantinople, and
not to its canons, as we have already observed in reference to the third
and sixth of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[186:234](2140250.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="ix.viii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p5"></span> Photius, *De Synodis*, p. 1143, ed.
Justelli.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[186:235](2140250.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="ix.viii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p6"></span> Greg., *Epist*., Lib. I., 25.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[187:236](2140250.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="ix.viii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p10"></span> In his edict against the Three
Chapters.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[187:237](2140250.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="ix.viii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.x-p12"></span> Leo, *Epist*. cvi. n., ed. Ballerini,
t. i., p. 1165.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Synodical Letter.](2140251.md)
