[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140478)  [Next](2140480.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p1.1"></span>Canon XCV.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p2.1"></span>Those</span> who from the heretics come
over to orthodoxy, and to the number of those who should be saved, we
receive according to the following order and custom.  Arians,
Macedonians, Novatians, who call themselves Cathari, Aristeri, and
Testareskaidecatitæ, or Tetraditæ, and Apollinarians, we receive on
their presentation of certificates and on their anathematizing every
heresy which does not hold as does the holy Apostolic Church of God: 
then first of all we anoint them with the holy chrism on their
foreheads, eyes, nostrils, mouth and ears; and as we seal them we
say—“The seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p3"></span>But concerning the Paulianists it has
been determined by the Catholic Church that they shall by all means be
rebaptized.  The Eunomeans also, who baptize with one immersion; and the
Montanists, who here are called Phrygians; and the Sabellians, who
consider the Son to be the same as the Father, and are guilty in certain
other grave matters, and all the other heresies—for there are many
heretics here, especially those who come from the region of the
Galatians—all of their number who are desirous of coming to the Orthodox
faith, we receive as Gentiles.  And on the first day we make them
Christians, on the second Catechumens, then on the third day we exorcise
them, at the same time also breathing thrice upon their faces and ears;
and thus we initiate them, and we make them spend time in church and
hear the Scriptures; and then we baptize them.

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p4"></span>And the Manichæans, and Valentinians
and Marcionites and all of similar heresies must give certificates and
anathematize each his own heresy, and also Nestorius, Eutyches,
Dioscorus, Severus, and the other chiefs of such heresies, and those who
think with them, and all the aforesaid heresies; and so they become
partakers of the holy Communion.

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XCV.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p7"></span>Thus we admit those converted from the
heretics.  We anoint with the holy chrism, upon the brow, eyes,
nostrils, mouth, and ears, Arians, Macedonians, Novatians (who are
called Cathari), Aristerians (who are called Quartadecimans or
Tetraditæ), and Apollinarians when they anathematize every heresy; and
sign them with the cross as we say, “The Seal of the gift of the Holy
Ghost.  Amen.”

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p8"></span>Compare with this Canon vij. of
Laodicea, and the so-called vijth. canon of the First Council of
Constantinople.

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p9"></span>The text I have translated is that
ordinarily given, I now present to the reader Hefele’s argument for its
worthlessness.

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p10.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p11"></span>This text is undoubtedly false, for
(a) the baptism of the Gnostics was, according to the recognized
ecclesiastical principle, invalid, and a Gnostic coming into the Church
was required to be baptized anew; (b) besides, it would have us first to
require of a Gnostic an anathema on Nestorius, Eutyches, etc.  More
accurate, therefore, is the text, as it is given by Beveridge, and as
Balsamon had it, to the effect that:  “In the same way (as the
preceding) are the Manichæans, Valentinians, Marcionites, and similar
heretics to be treated (i.e., to be baptized anew); but the Nestorians
must (merely) present certificates, and anathematize their heresy,
Nestorius, Eutyches, etc.”  Here we have only this mis<span
id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.xcvi-Page_406"></span>take, that the Nestorians must
anathematize, among others, also Eutyches, which they would certainly
have done very willingly.  At the best, we must suppose that there is a
gap in the text, and that after, “all of similar heresies,” we must add
“the later heretics must present certificates and anathematize
Nestorius, Eutyches, etc.”

<span id="xiv.iii.xcvi-p12"></span>There seems but little doubt that
whatever may be the truth in the matter, the early theologians and
fathers held that even though the external rite of Holy Baptism might be
validly performed by schismatics and heretics, yet that by it the person
so baptized did not receive the Holy Ghost, and this opinion was not
confined to the East, but was also prevalent in the West.  *Vide*
Rupertus, *De Divinis Officiis*, Lib. X., Cap. xxv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XCVI](2140480.md)
