[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140131)  [Next](2140133.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Epilogue.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p2.1"></span>These</span> things we write, not to cut
off those who wish to lead in the Church of God an ascetic life,
according to the Scriptures; but those who carry the pretence of
asceticism to superciliousness; both exalting themselves above those who
live more simply, and introducing novelties contrary to the Scriptures
and the ecclesiastical Canons.  We do, assuredly, admire virginity
accompanied by humility; and we have regard for continence, accompanied
by godliness and gravity; and we praise the leaving of worldly
occupations, \[when it is made\] with lowliness of mind; \[but at the
same time\] we honour the holy companionship of marriage, and we do not
contemn wealth enjoyed with uprightness and beneficence; and we commend
plainness and frugality in apparel, \[which is worn\] only from
attention, \[and that\] not over-fastidious, to the body; but dissolute
and effeminate excess in dress we eschew; and we reverence the houses of
God and embrace the assemblies held therein as holy and helpful, not
confining religion within the houses, but reverencing every place built
in the name of God; and we approve of gathering together in the Church
itself for the common profit; and we bless the exceeding charities done
by the brethren to the poor, according to the traditions of the Church;
and, to sum up in a word, we wish that all things which have been
delivered by the Holy Scriptures and the Apostolical traditions, may be
observed in the Church.

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p4"></span>This is lacking in the ancient
epitome; and while it occurs after Canon XX. in the versions of
Dionysius Exiguus and of Isidore Mercator, it is not numbered as a
canon.  Moreover in John of Antioch’s *Collection* and in Photius’s
*Nomocanon*, the number of canons is said to be 20.  Only the Greek
Scholiasts number it as Canon XXI., but its genuineness is unquestioned.

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p5"></span>It is curiously enough found in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, divided into two canons!  Gratian’s *Decretum*,
Pars I., Dist. XXX., c. xvj., and Dist. xli., c. v.

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p7"></span>The Fathers of Gangra recognize not
only the Holy Scriptures, but also the Apostolical traditions for the
rule of morals.

<span id="viii.v.iv.xxi-p8"></span>From this \[canon\] it is by no means
doubtful that the fathers of this Synod considered that the Eustathians
had violated some already existing ecclesiastical canons.  Beveridge is
of opinion that these are those commonly called the Canons of the
Apostles (*Synod*. I. 5).  Nor is this unlikely to be true, for there
can be no doubt that the doctrines of the Eustathians condemned by this
synod are directly opposed to those very “Canons of the Apostles”; and
no small argument is drawn for the authority and antiquity of the Canons
of the Apostles from the large number of Eustathian teachings found to
be therein condemned, as Beveridge has pointed out and as can easily be
seen by comparing the two.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Synod of Antioch in Encæniis.](2140133.md)
