[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140039)  [Next](2140041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Canon XV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxii-p2.1"></span>On</span> account of the great disturbance
and discords that occur, it is decreed that the custom prevailing in
certain places contrary to the Canon, must wholly be done away; so that
neither bishop, presbyter, nor deacon shall pass from city to city.  And
if any one, after this decree of the holy and great Synod, shall attempt
any such thing, or continue in any such course, his proceedings shall be
utterly void, and he shall be restored to the Church for which he was
ordained bishop or presbyter.

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p5"></span>Neither bishop, presbyter, nor deacon
shall pass from city to city.  But they shall be sent back, should they
attempt to do so, to the Churches in which they were ordained.

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxii-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p7"></span>The translation of a bishop, priest, or
deacon from one church to another, had already been forbidden in the
primitive Church.  Nevertheless, several translations had taken place,
and even at the Council of Nice several eminent men were present who had
left their first bishoprics to take others:  thus Eusebius, Bishop of
Nicomedia, had been before Bishop of Berytus; Eustathius, Bishop of
Antioch, had been before Bishop of Berrhœa in Syria.  The Council of
Nice thought it necessary to <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxii-Page_33"></span>forbid in future these translations, and
to declare them invalid.  The chief reason of this prohibition was found
in the irregularities and disputes occasioned by such change of sees;
but even if such practical difficulties had not arisen, the whole
doctrinal idea, so to speak, of the relationship between a cleric and
the church to which he had been ordained, namely, the contracting of a
mystical marriage between them, would be opposed to any translation or
change.  In 341 the Synod of Antioch renewed, in its twenty-first canon,
the prohibition passed by the Council of Nice; but the interest of the
Church often rendered it necessary to make exceptions, as happened in
the case of St. Chrysostom.  These exceptional cases increased almost
immediately after the holding of the Council of Nice, so that in 382,
St. Gregory of Nazianzum considered this law among those which had long
been abrogated by custom.  It was more strictly observed in the Latin
Church; and even Gregory’s contemporary, Pope Damasus, declared himself
decidedly in favour of the rule of Nice.

<span id="vii.vi.xxii-p8"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*. *Decretum*, Pars II. Causa VII, Q. 1, c. xix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Translation of Bishops.](2140041)
