[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140523)  [Next](2140525.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-Page_441"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>The Canons of the 217 Blessed Fathers who
assembled at Carthage.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart:  *Concilia*, Tom.
II. Col. 1041<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>; Dionysius Ex., *Codex
Can.* *Eccles*.\[Migne, *Pat. Lat*., Tom. LXVII.\]; Beveridge,
*Synodicon* in loc.)

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Aurelius</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p3.2"></span>the</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p3.3"></span>Bishop</span> said: <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419.md)   You, most blessed brethren, remember
that after the day fixed for the synod we discussed many things while we
were waiting for our brethren who now have been sent as delegates and
have arrived at the present synod, which must be placed in the acts. 
Wherefore let us render thanks to our Lord for the gathering together of
so great an assembly.  It remains that the acts of the Nicene Synod
which we now have, and have been determined by the fathers, as well as
those things enacted by our predecessors here, who confirmed that same
Synod, or which according to the same form have been usefully enacted by
all grades of the clergy, from the highest even to the lowest, should be
brought forward.  The whole Council said:  Let them be brought forward.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p5"></span>Daniel the Notary read:  The profession
of faith or statutes of the Nicene Synod are as follows.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p6"></span>And while he was speaking, Faustinus, a
bishop of the people of Potentia, of the Italian province of Picenum, a
legate of the Roman Church said:  There have been entrusted to us by the
Apostolic See certain things in writings, and certain other things as in
ordinances to be treated of with your blessedness as we have called to
memory in the acts above, that is to say, concerning the canons made at
Nice, that their decrees and customs be observed; for some things are
observed out of decree and canon, but some from custom.  Concerning
these things therefore in the first place let us make enquiry, if it
please your blessedness; and afterwards let the other ordinances which
have been adopted or proposed be confirmed; so that you may be able to
show by your rescripts to the Apostolic See, and that you may declare to
the same venerable Pope, that we have diligently remembered these
things; although the headings of action taken had been already inserted
in the acts. <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420.md)   In this matter we
should act, as I have said above, as shall please your beloved
blessedness.  Let, therefore the commonitorium come into the midst, that
ye may be able to recognize what is contained in it, so that an answer
can be given to each point.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p8"></span>Aurelius said:  Let the commonitorium be
brought forward, which our brethren and fellow-ministers lately placed
in the acts, and let the rest of the things done or to be done, follow
in order.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p9"></span>Daniel the Notary read the
Commonitorium.  To our brother Faustinus and to our sons, the presbyters
Philip and Asellus, Zosimus, the bishop.  You well remember that we
committed to you certain businesses, and now \[we bid you\] carry out
all things as if we ourselves were there (for), indeed, our presence is
there with you; especially since ye have this our commandment, and the
words of the canons which for greater certainty we have inserted in this
our commonitory.  For thus said our brethren in the Council of Nice when
they made these decrees concerning the appeals of bishops:

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p10"></span>“But it seemed good that if a bishop
had been accused, etc.”  \[*Here follows* verbatim *Canon v. of
Sardica*.\]

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p11.1"></span>Ancient Epitome.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p12"></span>If bishops shall have deposed a bishop,
and if he appeal to the Roman bishop, he should be benignantly heard,
the Roman bishop writing or ordering.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p13"></span>And when this had been read, Alypius,
bishop of the Tagastine Church, and legate of the province of Numidia,
said:  On this matter there has been some legislation in <span
id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span id="xv.iv.iv.i-Page_442"></span>former
sessions of our council, and we profess that we shall ever observe what
was decreed by the Nicene Council; yet I remember that when we examined
the Greek copies of this Nicene Synod, we did not find these the words
quoted—Why this was the case, I am sure I do not know.  For this reason
we beg your reverence, holy Pope Aurelius, that, as the authentic record
of the decrees of the Council of Nice are said to be preserved in the
city of Constantinople, you would deign to send messengers with letters
from your Holiness, and not only to our most holy brother the bishop of
Constantinople, but also to the venerable bishops of Alexandria and
Antioch, who shall send to us the decrees of that council with the
authentification of their signatures, so that hereafter all ambiguity
should be taken away, for we failed to find the words cited by our
brother Faustinus; notwithstanding this however we promise to be ruled
by them for a short time, as I have already said, until reliable copies
come to hand.  Moreover the venerable bishop of the Roman Church,
Boniface, should be asked likewise to be good enough to send messengers
to the aforementioned churches, who should have the same copies
according to his rescript, but the copies of the aforementioned Nicene
Council which we have, we place in these Acts.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p14"></span>Faustinus the bishop, legate of the
Roman Church, said:  Let not your holiness do dishonour to the Roman
Church, either in this matter or in any other, by saying the canons are
doubtful, as our brother and fellow-bishop Alypius has vouchsafed to
say:  but do you deign to write these things to our holy and most
blessed pope, so that he seeking out the genuine canons, can treat with
your holiness on all matters decreed.  But it suffices that the most
blessed bishop of the city of Rome should make enquiry just as your
holiness proposes doing on your part, that there may not seem to have
arisen any contention between the Churches, but that ye may the rather
be enabled to deliberate with fraternal charity, when he has been heard
from, what is best should be observed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p15"></span>Aurelius the bishop said:  In addition
to what is set down in the acts, we, by the letters from our
insignificance, must more fully inform our holy brother and
fellow-bishop Boniface of everything which we have considered.
 Therefore if our plan pleases all, let us be informed of this by the
mouth of all.  And the whole council said:  It seems good to us.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p16"></span>Novatus the bishop, legate of
Mauritania Sitifensis, said:  We now call to mind that there is
contained in this commonitory something about presbyters and deacons,
how they should be tried by their own bishops or by those adjoining, a
provision which we find nothing of in the Nicene Council.  For this
cause let your holiness order this part to be read.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p17"></span>Aurelius the bishop said:  Let the
place asked for be read.  Daniel the notary read as follows:  Concerning
the appeals of clergymen, that is of those of inferior rank, there is a
sure answer of this very synod, concerning which thing what ye should
do, we think should be inserted, as follows:

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p18"></span>“Hosius the bishop said:  I should not
conceal what has come into my mind up to this time.  If any bishop
perchance has been quickly angered (a thing what should not happen) and
has acted quickly or sharply against a presbyter or a deacon of his, and
has wished to drive him out of the Church, provision should be made that
the innocent be not condemned, or be deprived of communion:  he that has
been ejected should have the right of appeal to the bishops of the
bordering dioceses, that his case should be heard, and it should be
carried on all the more diligently because to him who asks a hearing it
should not be denied.  And the bishop who either justly or unjustly
rejected him, should patiently allow the affair to be discussed, so that
his sentence be either approved or else emended, etc.”

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p19"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p19.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>Ancient Epitome.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p21"></span>A presbyter or deacon who has been cut
off, has the privilege of appealing to the neighbouring bishops. 
Moreover, he who cut him off should bear with equanimity the conclusion
arrived at.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p22"></span>This is the first part of Canon xiv. of
Sardica, as the canon previously quoted is Canon v. of the same synod.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p23"></span><span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-Page_443"></span>And when this had been read, Augustine,
the bishop of the Church of Hippo of the province of Numidia, said:  We
promise that this shall be observed by us, provided that upon more
careful examination it be found to be of the Council of Nice.  Aurelius
the bishop said.  If this also is pleasing to the charity of you all,
give it the confirmation of your vote.  The whole Council said: 
Everything that has been ordained by the Nicene Council pleases us all. 
Jocundus, the bishop of the Church of Suffitula, legate of the province
of Byzacena, said:  What was decreed by the Nicene Council cannot in any
particular be violated.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p24"></span>Faustinus the bishop, legate of the
Roman Church, said:  So far as has developed by the confession of your
holiness as well as of the holy Alypius, and of our brother Jocundus, I
believe that some of the points have been made weak and others
confirmed, which should not be the case, since even the very canons
themselves have been brought into question.  Therefore, that there may
be harmony between us and your blessedness, let your holiness deign to
refer the matter to the holy and venerable bishop of the Roman Church,
that he may be able to consider whether what St. Augustine vouchsafed to
enact, should be conceded or not, I mean in the matter of appeals of the
inferior grade.  If therefore there still is doubt, on this head it is
right that the bishop of the most blessed see be informed, if this can
be found in the canons which have been approved.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p25.1"></span>Ancient Epitome.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p26"></span>Since the written decrees of the Nicene
Council have not been found, let the Roman bishop deign to write to the
bishop of Constantinople and to him of Alexandria, and let us know what
he receives from them.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p27"></span>Aurelius the bishop said:  As we have
suggested to your charity, pray allow the copies of the statutes of the
Nicene Council to be read and inserted in the acts, as well as those
things what have been most healthfully defined in this city by our
predecessors, according to the rule of that council, and those which now
have been ordained by us.  And the whole council said:  The copies of
the Creed, and the statutes of the Nicene Synod which formerly were
brought to our council through Cæcilean of blessed memory, the
predecessor of your holiness (who was present at it), as well as the
copies of the decrees made by the Fathers in this city following them,
or which now we have decreed by our common consultation, shall remain
inserted in these ecclesiastical acts, so that (as has been already
said) your blessedness may vouchsafe to write to those most venerable
men of the Church of Antioch, and of that of Alexandria, and also of
that of Constantinople, that they would send most accurate copies of the
decrees of the Council of Nice under the authentification of their
signatures, by which, the truth of the matter having become evident,
those chapters which in the commonitory our brother who is present, and
fellow-bishop Faustinus, as well as our fellow-presbyters Philip and
Asellus brought with them, if they be found therein, may be confirmed by
us; or if they be not found, we will hold a synod and consider the
matter further.  Daniel the notary read the profession of faith of the
Council of Nice and its statutes to the African Council.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p28"></span>The Profession of Faith of the Nicene
Council.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p29"></span>We believe in one God, etc.,…and in the
Holy Ghost.  But those who say, etc.,…anathematize them.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p30"></span>The statutes also of the Nicene Council
in twenty heads were likewise read, as are found written before.  Then
what things were promulgated in the African Synods, were inserted in the
present acts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_419"></span>[441:420](2140524.htm#fr_419.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p4"></span> The reader must not complain if he
finds the meaning of the translation often obscure.  So great a scholar
as Hefele says of one of these speeches, “This, I believe, must be the
meaning of the somewhat unintelligible text, etc.,” and again of another
passage he says that it “is even more obscure,” and that “the text is
undoubtedly corrupt.  The sense is probably, etc.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[441:421](2140524.htm#fr_420.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.i-p7"></span> I have followed in this passage the
Greek text as a trifle less incomprehensible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon I](2140525.md)
