[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140022)  [Next](2140024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Canon IV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p2.1"></span>It</span> is by all means proper that a bishop
should be appointed by all the bishops in the province; but should this
be difficult, either on account of urgent necessity or because of
distance, three at least should meet together, and the suffrages of the
absent \[bishops\] also being given and communicated in writing, then
the ordination should take place.  But in every province the
ratification of what is done should be left to the Metropolitan.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p5"></span>A bishop is to be chosen by all the
bishops of the province, or at least by three, the rest giving by letter
their assent; but this choice must be confirmed by the Metropolitan.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p6.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p7"></span>The present Canon might seem to be opposed
to the first canon of the Holy Apostles, for the latter enjoins that a
bishop ordained by two or three bishops, but this by <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="vii.vi.v-Page_12"></span>three, the
absent also agreeing and testifying their assent by writing.  But they
are not contradictory; for the Apostolical canon by ordination (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.v-p7.1"></span>χειροτονίαν</span>) means
consecration and imposition of hands, but the present canon by
constitution (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p7.2"></span>κατάστασιν</span>) and ordination means the
election, and enjoins that the election of a bishop do not take place
unless three assemble, having the consent also of the absent by letter,
or a declaration that they also will acquiesce in the election (or vote,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.v-p7.3"></span>ψήφῳ</span>) made by
the three who have assembled.  But after the election it gives the
ratification or completion of the matter—the imposition of hands and
consecration—to the metropolitan of the province, so that the election
is to be ratified by him.  He does so when with two or three bishops,
according to the apostolical canon, he consecrates with imposition of
hands the one of the elected persons whom he himself selects.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p8.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p9"></span>Also understands <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p9.1"></span>καθίστασθαι</span> to mean election by vote.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p10.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p11"></span>The Greek canonists are certainly in
error when they interpret <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p11.1"></span>χειροτονία</span> of election.  The canon is
akin to the 1st Apostolic canon which, as the canonists admit, must
refer to the consecration of a new bishop, and it was cited in that
sense at the Council of Chalcedon—Session xiii. (Mansi., vii. 307).  We
must follow Rufinus and the old Latin translators, who speak of
“ordinari,” “ordinatio” and “manus impositionem.”

<span id="vii.vi.v-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.v-p12.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.v-p13"></span>The Council of Nice thought it necessary
to define by precise rules the duties of the bishops who took part in
these episcopal elections.  It decided (*a*) that a single bishop of the
province was not sufficient for the appointment of another; (*b*) three
at least should meet, and (*c*) they were not to proceed to election
without the written permission of the absent bishops; it was necessary
(*d*) to obtain afterward the approval of the metropolitan.  The Council
thus confirms the ordinary metropolitan division in its two most
important points, namely, the nomination and ordination of bishops, and
the superior position of the metropolitan.  The third point connected
with this division—namely, the provincial synod—will be considered under
the next canon.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p14"></span>Meletius was probably the occasion of
this canon.  It may be remembered that he had nominated bishops without
the concurrence of the other bishops of the province, and without the
approval of the metropolitan of Alexandria, and had thus occasioned a
schism.  This canon was intended to prevent the recurrence of such
abuses.  The question has been raised as to whether the fourth canon
speaks only of the choice of the bishop, or whether it also treats of
the consecration of the newly elected.  We think, with Van Espen, that
it treats equally of both,—as well of the part which the bishops of the
province should take in an episcopal election, as of the consecration
which completes it.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p15"></span>This canon has been interpreted in two
ways.  The Greeks had learnt by bitter experience to distrust the
interference of princes and earthly potentates in episcopal elections. 
Accordingly, they tried to prove that this canon of Nice took away from
the people the right of voting at the nomination of a bishop, and
confined the nomination exclusively to the bishops of the province.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p16"></span>The Greek Commentators, Balsamon and
others, therefore, only followed the example of the Seventh and
\[so-called\] Eighth Œcumenical Councils in affirming that this fourth
canon of Nice takes away from the people the right previously possessed
of voting in the choice of bishops and makes the election depend
entirely on the decision of the bishops of the province.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p17"></span>The Latin Church acted otherwise.  It is
true that with it also the people have been removed from episcopal
elections, but this did not happen till later, about the eleventh
century; and it was not the people only who were removed, but the
bishops of the province as well, and the election was conducted entirely
by the clergy of the Cathedral Church.  The Latins then interpreted the
canon of Nice as though it said nothing of the rights of the bishops of
the province in the *election* of their future colleague (and it does
not speak of it in a very explicit manner), and as though it determined
these two points only; (*a*) that for the *ordination* of a bishop three
bishops at least are necessary; (*b*) that the right of *confirmation*
rests with the metropolitan.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p18"></span>The whole subject of episcopal elections
is treated fully by Van Espen and by Thomassin, in *Ancienne et Nouvelle
Discipline de l’ Église*, P. II. l. 2.

<span id="vii.vi.v-p19"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I. Dist. LXIV. c. j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140024.md)
