[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140728)  [Next](2140730.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ix"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.ix-p1.1"></span>The Epistle of the Same Athanasius Taken from
the XXXIX. Festal Epistle.</span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p2"></span>(*Found translated in Vol. IV, of* Nicene
and Post-Nicene Fathers (*2d series*), *pp*. 551 *and* 552.)

<span id="xvii.ix-p3"></span>\[*Johnson’s epitome is so unsatisfactory
that I have been compelled to relegate it to a footnote and to make one
in its room of my own*. <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) \]

<span id="xvii.ix-p6"></span>As the heretics are quoting apocryphal
writings, an evil which was rife even as early as when St. Luke wrote
his gospel, therefore I have thought good to set forth clearly what
books have been received by us through tradition as belonging to the
Canon, and which we believe to be divine.  For there are in all
twenty-two books of the Old Testament.  Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy.  After this comes Joshua, and Judges, and Ruth. 
The four books of the Kings, counted as two.  Then Chronicles, counted
the two as one.  Then First and Second Esdras \[i.e. Ezra and
Nehemiah\].  After these Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Cantica. 
To these follow Job, and the Twelve Prophets, counted as one book.  Then
Isaiah, Jeremiah together with the Epistle of Baruch, the Lamentations,
Ezekiel, and Daniel.

<span id="xvii.ix-p7"></span>Of the New Testament these are the books
\[then follows the complete list ending with “the Apocalypse of
John”\].  These are the fountains of salvation, that whoso thirsteth,
may be satisfied by the eloquence which is in them.  In them alone
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xvii.ix-p7.1"></span>ἐν τούτοις
μόνοις</span>) is set forth the doctrine of piety.  Let no one add to
them, nor take aught therefrom.

<span id="xvii.ix-p8"></span>I also add for further accuracy that there
are certain other books, not edited in the Canon, but established by the
Fathers, to be read by those who have just come to us and wish to be
instructed in the doctrine of piety.  The Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom
of Sirach, Esther, Judith, Tobit, the Doctrine (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvii.ix-p8.1"></span>Διδαχή</span>) of the
Apostles and the Pastor.  And let none of the Apocrypha of the heretics
be read among you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[603:595](2140729.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="xvii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p4"></span> Johnson says:  “This contains the Canon of
Scripture as we now receive it in all respects, save that the Epistle of
Baruch is reckoned in the Canon, but Esther is not.  He tells us, there
are other books never reckoned in the Canon but authorized by the
fathers to be read by the Catechumens, viz.:  Wisdom of Solomon, of
Sirach, Esther, Judith, and Tobias, and that which is called *The
Doctrine of the Apostles,* and *Pastor*.  These (says he) are read, the
other reckoned of the Canons:  Apocryphal books are the invention of
heretics.”  To this Johnson appends a note, to wit:  “It is the common
opinion of learned men that the reason why some of the ancients reckoned
the book of Esther not to belong to the Canon, was the Apocryphal
chapters added to it by another hand.  That *The Doctrine of the
Apostles* is a book now lost, see Dr. Grabe’s *Essay* on this subject.”

<span id="xvii.ix-p5"></span>Who these “learned men” may be, I do not
know, but at the time of the writing of St. Athanasius the position of
the Hebrew Esther was not well assured in the restricted Palestinian
Jewish Canon.  On this point the reader should make himself familiar
with *The Canon of the Old Testament* by the Rt. Rev. Tobias Mullen,
Roman Catholic Bishop of Erie, U.S.A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of St. Athanasius to Ruffinian.](2140730.md)
