[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140591)  [Next](2140593.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>Canon LXVIII.  (Greek lxxi.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p2"></span>That the Donatist clergy are to be
received into the Catholic Church as clergymen.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p3.1"></span>It</span> moreover seemed good that
letters be sent to our brethren and fellow-bishops, and especially to
the Apostolic See, over which our aforesaid venerable brother and
colleague Anastasius, presides, that \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p3.2"></span>ἐπειδὴ</span> in the Greek, *quo* in the
Latin\] he may know that Africa is in great need, for the peace and
prosperity of the Church, that those Donatists who were clergymen and
who by good advice had desired to return to Catholic unity, should be
treated according to the will and judgment of each Catholic bishop who
governs the Church in that place; and, if it seem good for Christian
peace, they be received with their honours, as it is clear was done in
the former times of this same division.  And that this was the case the
example of the majority, yea, of nearly all the African Churches in
which this error had sprung up, testify; not that the Council which met
about this matter in foreign parts should be done away, but that it may
remain in force with regard to those who so will to come over to the
Catholic Church that there be procured by them no breaking of unity. 
But those through whom Catholic unity was seen to have been altogether
perfected or assisted by the manifest winning of the souls of their
brethren in the places where they live, there shall not be objected to
them the decree contrary to their honour adopted by a foreign council,
for salvation is shut off to no one, that is to say, that those ordained
by the Donatist party, if having been corrected they have been willing
to return to the Catholic Church, are not to be <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462.md) received in their grades, according to
the foreign council; but they are to be excepted through whom they
received the advice to return to Catholic unity.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVIII.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p7"></span>Those ordained by the Donatists, even
though their reception has been forbidden by a foreign synod, since it
is truly good that all should be saved, if they correct themselves, let
them be received.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p8.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p9"></span>This canon is special, for it seemed
good to the fathers that such of the Donatists as came to the orthodox
faith should be so received as to hold the grade of their holy orders,
even though a transmarine, that is to say an Italian, council had
decreed otherwise.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p10"></span><span id="page_477">p. 477</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-Page_477"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p10.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p11"></span>Those Donatists who are penitent and
anathematize their heresy are to be allowed to remain in their proper
rank, and be numbered among the clergy of the Catholic Church, because
Africa was labouring under a great shortness of clergy.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p12"></span>This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage,
Sept., <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p13.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p14"></span>Whether the Donatists’ clergy should
be re-ordained was only a point of discipline; for the Donatists
retained Episcopacy.  Therefore the African fathers, as they leave other
churches to their liberty, so at the same time they declare that they
would continue their old practice, and leave every bishop to act
according to his own discretion in this matter.  Probably, one great
motive, besides that of peace, which they had to this, was the great
scarcity of clergymen in Africa, of which Aurelius complains in his
speech, inserted into the Acts before Canon 77 (61), and proposes that
they send to the bishops of Rome and Milan for a supply.  And that this
was the true reason, does in some measure appear from the words of the
Latin canon at large, in which the occasion of this decree is said to be
*propter necessitatem*.  And this is the most probable reason why it is
left to the discretion of the bishop, whether to admit Donatist
clergymen as such, if he had occasion for their service.  And after all
it is clear from this very canon, that other churches had determined
this point the contrary way.  Therefore Mr. Calamy exceeds when he
says:  “As for the Donatists, all agree that their orders were
acknowledged.”  Further, he would have it thought probable that orders
were not always conferred among the Donatists by persons superior to
presbyters.  This he would infer from the great number of the bishops of
that faction in Africa, viz., 278, many of which (says he) could be no
more than parish ministers.  But why so?  Were there not above four
hundred Catholic bishops?  And why not as many of one side as the
other?  If our dissenters of any sort had fallen into the Episcopal form
of government, no question but they would have had a bishop in every
city at least, and equalled our church in the number of prelates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_462"></span>[476:463](2140592.htm#fr_462.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxix-p4"></span> The Greek and Beveridge introduce a
second “not.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXIX](2140593.md)
