[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140358)  [Next](2140360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the XV. Anathemas Against
Origen.</span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>That Origen was condemned by name in the
Eleventh Canon of this council there seems no possible reason to doubt. 
I have given in connexion with that canon a full discussion of the
evidence upon which our present text rests.  But there arises a further
question, to wit, Did the Fifth Synod examine the case of Origen and
finally adopt the XV. Anathemas against him which are usually found
assigned to it?  It would seem that with the evidence now in our
possession it would be the height of rashness to give a dogmatic answer
to this question.  Scholars of the highest repute have taken, and do
take to-day, the opposite sides of the case, and each defends his own
side with marked learning and ability.  To my mind the chief difficulty
in supposing these anathematisms to have been adopted by the Fifth
Ecumenical is that nothing whatever is said about Origen in the call of
the council, nor in any of the letters written in connexion with it; all
of which would seem unnatural had there been a long discussion upon the
matter, and had such an important dogmatic definition been adopted as
the XV. Anathemas, and yet on the other hand there is a vast amount of
literature subsequent in date to the council which distinctly attributes
a detailed and careful examination of the teaching of Origen and a
formal condemnation of him and of it to this council.

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>The XV. Anathemas as we now have them were
discovered by Peter Lambeck, the Librarian of Vienna, in the <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.viii-p3.1"></span>XVII</span>th century; and
bear, in the Vienna <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.viii-p3.2"></span>ms.</span>, the heading, “Canons, of the 165
holy Fathers of the holy fifth Synod, held in Constantinople.”  But
despite this, Walch (*Ketzerhist*., Vol. vii., p. 661 *et seqq*. and
671; Vol. viij., p. 281 *et seqq*.); Döllinger (*Church History*, Eng.
Trans., Vol. v., p. 203 *et seqq*.); Hefele (*Hist. Councils*, Vol. iv.,
p. 221 *sq*.), and many others look upon this caption as untrustworthy. 
Evagrius, the historian, distinctly says that Origen was condemned with
special anathemas at this Council, but his evidence is likewise (and, as
it seems to me, too peremptorily) set aside.

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span>Cardinal Noris, in his *Dissertatio
Historica de Synodo Quinta*, is of opinion that Origen was twice
condemned by the Fifth Synod; the first time by himself before the eight
sessions of which alone the acts remain, and again after those eight
sessions, in connexion with two of his chief followers, Didymus the
Blind and the deacon Evagrius.  The Jesuit, John Garnier wrote in
opposition to Noris; but his work, while exceedingly clever, is
considered by the learned to contain (as Hefele says) “many statements
\[which\] are rash, arbitrary, and inaccurate, and on the whole it is
seen to be written in a spirit of opposition to Noris.” <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)   In defence of Noris’s main
contention came forward the learned Ballerini brothers, of Verona.  In
their *Defensio dissertationis Norisianæ de Syn. V. adv. diss. P.
Garnerii*, they expand and amend Noris’s hypothesis.  But after all is
said the matter remains involved in the greatest obscurity, and it is
far easier to bring forward objections to the arguments in defence of
either view than to bring forward a theory which will satisfy all the
conditions of the problem.

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span><span id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span
id="xii.viii-Page_317"></span>Those who deny that the XV. Anathemas were
adopted by the Fifth Synod agree in assigning them to the “Home Synod,”
that is a Synod at Constantinople of the bishops subject to it, in <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.viii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 543.  Hefele
takes this view and advocates it with much cogency, but confesses
frankly, “We certainly possess no strong and decisive proof that the
fifteen anathematisms belong to the Constantinopolitan synod of the year
543; but some probable grounds for the opinion may be adduced.” <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312)   This appears to be a somewhat weak
statement with which to overthrow so much evidence as there can be
produced for the opposite view.  For the traditional view the English
reader will find a complete defence in E. B. Pusey, *What is of Faith
with regard to Eternal Punishment*?

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>Before closing it will be well to call the
attention of the reader to these words now found in the acts as we have
them:

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span>“And we found that many others had been
anathematised after death, also even Origen; and if any one were to go
back to the times of Theophilus of blessed memory or further he would
have found him anathematised after death; which also now your holiness
and Vigilius, the most religious Pope of Old Rome has done in his
case.” <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)   It would seem that this
cannot possibly refer to anything else than a condemnation of Origen by
the Fifth Ecumenical Synod, and so strongly is Vincenzi, Origen’s
defender, impressed with this that he declares the passage to have been
tampered with.  But even if these anathemas were adopted at the Home
Synod before the meeting of the Fifth Ecumenical, it is clear that by
including his name among those of the heretics in the <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.viii-p10.1"></span>XI</span>th Canon, it
practically ratified and made its own the action of that Synod.

<span id="xii.viii-p11"></span>The reader will be glad to know Harnack’s
judgment in this matter.  Writing of the Fifth Council, he says:  “It
condemned Origen, as Justinian desired; it condemned the Three Chapters
and consequently the Antiochene theology, as Justinian desired,” etc.,
and in a foot-note he explains that he agrees with “Noris, the
Ballerini, Möller (R. Encykl., xi., p. 113) and Loofs (pp. 287, 291) as
against Hefele and Vincenzi.” <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314)  
A few pages before, he speaks of this last author’s book as “a big work
which falsifies history to justify the theses of Halloix, to
rehabilitate Origen and Vigilius, and on the other hand to ‘remodel’ the
Council and partly to bring it into contempt.” <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315)   Further on he says:  “The fifteen
anathemas against Origen, on which his condemnation at the council was
based, contained the following points.…Since the ‘Three Chapters’ were
condemned at the same time, Origen and Theodore were both got rid
of.…Origen’s doctrines of the consummation, and of spirits and matter
might no longer be maintained.  The judgment was restored to its place,
and got back even its literal meaning.” <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_311"></span>[316:312](2140359.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. Councils,* Vol. IV., p.
230, note.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[317:313](2140359.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. Councils,* Vol. IV., p.
223.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[317:314](2140359.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span> Speech of Ascidas in the V. Session.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[317:315](2140359.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p12"></span> Harnack.  *Hist. of Dogma,* Vol. IV., n.
249 (Eng. Trans.).

<span id="fn_315"></span>[317:316](2140359.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p13"></span> Ibid., p. 245, note 2.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317:317](2140359.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p14"></span> Ibid., p. 349.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Anathemas Against Origen.](2140360)
