[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140246)  [Next](2140248.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_183">p. 183</span>
<span id="ix.viii.vii-Page_183"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p2"></span>(Probably adopted at a Council held in
Constantinople the next year, 382.  *Vide* Introduction on the number of
Canons.)

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p3.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as many wishing to confuse
and overturn ecclesiastical order, do contentiously and slanderously
fabricate charges against the orthodox bishops who have the
administration of the Churches, intending nothing else than to stain the
reputation of the priests and raise up disturbances amongst the peaceful
laity; therefore it seemed right to the Holy Synod of Bishops assembled
together in Constantinople, not to admit accusers without examination;
and neither to allow all persons whatsoever to bring accusations against
the rulers of the Church, nor, on the other hand, to exclude all.  If
then, any one shall bring a private complaint against the Bishop, that
is, one relating to his own affairs, as, for example, that he has been
defrauded, or otherwise unjustly treated by him, in such accusations no
examination shall be made, either of the person or of the religion of
the accuser; for it is by all means necessary that the conscience of the
Bishop should be free, and that he who says he has been wronged should
meet with righteous judgment, of whatever religion he may be.  But if
the charge alleged against the Bishop be that of some ecclesiastical
offence, then it is necessary to examine carefully the persons of the
accusers, so that, in the first place, heretics may not be suffered to
bring accusations touching ecclesiastical matters against orthodox
bishops.  And by heretics we mean both those who were aforetime cast out
and those whom we ourselves have since anathematized, and also those
professing to hold the true faith who have separated from our canonical
bishops, and set up conventicles in opposition \[to them\].  Moreover,
if there be any who have been condemned for faults and cast out of the
Church, or excommunicated, whether of the clergy or the laity, neither
shall it be lawful for these to bring an accusation against the bishop,
until they have cleared away the charge against themselves.  In like
manner, persons who are under previous accusations are not to be
permitted to bring charges against a bishop or any other clergyman,
until they shall have proved their own innocence of the accusation
brought against them.  But if any, being neither heretics, nor
excommunicate, nor condemned, nor under previous accusation for alleged
faults, should declare that they have any ecclesiastical charge against
the bishop, the Holy Synod bids them first lay their charges before all
the Bishops of the Province, and before them prove the accusations,
whatsoever they may be, which they have brought against the bishop.  And
if the comprovincials should be unable rightly to settle the charges
brought against the bishop, then the parties must betake themselves to a
greater synod of the bishops of that diocese called together for this
purpose; and they shall not produce their allegations before they have
promised in writing to undergo an equal penalty to be exacted from
themselves, if, in the course of the examination, they shall be proved
to have slandered the accused bishop.  And if anyone, despising what has
been decreed concerning these things, shall presume to annoy the ears of
the Emperor, or the courts of temporal judges, or, to the dishonour of
all the Bishops of his Province, shall trouble an Ecumenical Synod, such
an one shall by no means be admitted as an accuser; forasmuch as he has
cast contempt upon the Canons, and brought reproach upon the order of
the Church.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p6"></span>*Even one that is of ill repute, if he
have suffered any injury, let him bring a charge against the bishop.  If
however it be a crime of ecclesiastical matters let him not speak.  Nor
shall another condemned before, speak.  Let not one excommunicated, or
cast forth, or charged with any crimes speak, until he is cleared of
them.  But those who should bring the charge are the orthodox, who are
communicants, uncondemned, unaccused.  Let the case be heard by the
provincials.  If however they are not able to decide the case, let them
have recourse to a greater synod and let them not be heard, without a
written declaration of liability to the same sufferings \[*i.e. *of
their readiness to be tried by the* lex <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> <span id="ix.viii.vii-Page_184"></span>talionis*.\]  But
should anyone contrary to the provisions appeal to the Emperor and
trouble him, let such be cast forth.*

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p7"></span>The phrase “who have the administration
of the Churches,” Hatch in his Bampton Lectures (Lect. I., p. 41)
erroneously supposes to refer only to the administration of the Church’s
alms.  But this, as Dr. Bright well points out (“Notes on the Canons,”
*in loc*.) cannot be the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p7.1"></span>οἰκοναμεῖν</span> when used absolutely as
in this canon.  He says, “When a merely ‘economic’ function is intended,
the context shows it, as in Chalcedon, Canon xxvj.”  He also points out
that in Canon ij., and in Eusebius (*H. E.* iv., 4), and when St. Basil
wishes his brother to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p7.2"></span>οἰκονομεῖν</span> a church suited to his
temperament (*Epist*. xcviij., 2) the meaning of the word is evidently
spiritual stewardship.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p8.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p9"></span>By “those who were cast out of the
Church” are to be understood those who were altogether cut off from the
Church; but by those who were “excommunicated” the holy fathers intend
all those, whether clerics or laymen, who are deprived of communion for
a set time.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p10.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p11"></span>It is evident from the context of this
canon that “Diocese” here does not signify the district or territory
assigned to any one bishop, as we to-day use the word; but for a
district, which not only contained many episcopal districts, as today do
ecclesiastical provinces, but which contained also many provinces, and
this was the meaning of the word at the time of this Council’s session.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p12.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p13"></span>We call Adrianople, for example, or
Philopopolis with the bishops of each a “Province,” but the whole of
Thrace or Macedonia we call a “Diocese.”  When these crimes were brought
forward to be corrected, for the judging of which the provincial bishops
were by no means sufficient, then the Canon orders the bishops of the
diocese to assemble, and determine the charges preferred against the
bishop.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vii-p14.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p15"></span>Both the Canon and the Civil Law
require the accusers to submit themselves to the law of retaliation
(*lex talionis*).  *Vide* Gratian, Pt. II., Causa II., Quæst. III., 2
and 3, where we read from the decree of Pope Hadrian; “Whoever shall not
prove what he advances, shall himself suffer the penalty due the crime
he charged.”  And under the name of Damasus, “The calumniator, if he
fail in proving his accusation, shall receive his tale.”  The Civil Law
is in L. x., Cod. *de Calumniatoribus*, and reads, “Whoso charges a
crime, shall not have licence to lie with impunity, since justice
requires that calumniators shall endure the punishment due the crime
which they failed to prove.”

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p16"></span>The Council wishes that all
accusations of bishops for ecclesiastical offences shall be kept out of
the secular courts, and shall be heard by synods of bishops, in the
manner and form here prescribed, which is in accordance with the
Constitution which under the names of Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian,
the Emperors, is referred to in law xxiij. of the Code of Theodosius,
*De Episcopis et Clericis*.

<span id="ix.viii.vii-p17"></span>Whatever may be said of the meeting of
bishops at which this canon was enacted, this is clear, no mention was
made of the Roman Pontiff, nor of the Council of Sardica, as Fleury
notes in his *Histoire Ecclesiastique*, Lib. xviij., n. 8.  From this it
is evident either that at that time the Orientals did not admit,
especially for bishops, appeals to the Roman Pontiff; nor did they
accept the authority of the Synod of Sardica, in so far as it permitted
that the sentence given in a provincial synod, should be reopened by the
neighbouring bishops together with the bishops of the province, and if
it seemed good, that the cause might be referred to Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Warning to the Reader Touching Canon VII.](2140248.md)
