[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140572)  [Next](2140574) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p1"></span> <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-Page_465"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p1.1"></span>Canon XLIX.  (Greek liii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p2"></span>How many bishops there should be to
ordain a bishop.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p3.1"></span>Honoratus</span> and Urban, the bishops,
said:  We have issued this command, that (because lately two of our
brethren, bishops of Numidia, presumed to ordain a pontiff,) only by the
concurrence of twelve bishops the ordination of bishops be celebrated. 
Aurelius, the bishop, said:  The ancient form shall be preserved, that
not less than three suffice who shall have been designated for ordaining
the bishop.  Moreover, because in Tripoli, and in Arzug the barbarians
are so near, for it is asserted that in Tripoli there are but five
bishops, and out of that number two may be occupied by some necessity;
but it is difficult that all of the number should come together at any
place whatever; ought this circumstance to be an impediment to the doing
of what is of utility to the Church?  For in this Church, to which your
holiness has deigned to assemble <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450)
we frequently have ordinations and nearly every Lord’s day; could I
frequently summon twelve, or ten, or about that number of bishops?  But
it is an easy thing for me to join a couple of neighbours to my
littleness.  Wherefore your charity will agree with me that this cannot
be observed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p7"></span>Fewer than three bishops do not suffice
for the ordination of a bishop.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p8"></span>This is Canon ij., of the Synod of
Carthage, August 28th, 397.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p10"></span>See Can. 13.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p11"></span>The occasion of this canon was a
complaint that two bishops in Numidia had presumed to ordain a third;
upon which it was proposed that not less than twelve should perform this
office:  But Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, desires that the old form
might be observed, and three bishops be sufficient; especially, because
in Tripoli, where there were but five bishops in all, it would be hard
to get more than three together.  And he adds, that though it were no
hard matter for him to get two bishops to assist him in his ordinations
at Carthage, yet it would not be practicable for him to get twelve: 
“For,” says he, “we have frequently, and almost every Sunday, men to be
ordained.”  He must mean bishops for otherwise it had been nothing to
his purpose, because he could ordain priests or deacons by himself,
without the assistance of other bishops:  and yet it is very strange,
that ordinations of bishops should be so frequent as to bear that
expression of “almost every Sunday.”  There were indeed above one
hundred bishoprics in his Province; but these could not occasion above
six or eight ordinations in a year; but it is probable that the
privilege belonging to him, Can. 55, brought very many ordinations to
the church of Carthage; for it is evident, there was a great scarcity of
men fit for the Episcopal office in Africa.  It is further evident from
this canon, that bishops were not ordained in the church of their own
see, but in that of the Primate.  See Can. Ant., 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_450"></span>[465:451](2140573.htm#fr_450) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.l-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.l-p4"></span> Notice the African use of the phrase,
*convenire ad.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon L](2140574)
