[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140691)  [Next](2140693) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p2"></span>Concerning the holding of a local Synod
at the time appointed.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vi-p3.1"></span>Since</span> there is a canon which says,
twice a year in each province, the canonical enquiries shall be made in
the gatherings of the bishops; but because of the inconveniences which
those who thus came together had to undergo in travelling, the holy
fathers of the Sixth Council decreed that once each year, without regard
to place or excuse which might be urged, a council should be held and
the things which are amiss corrected.  This canon we now renew.  And if
any prince be found hindering this being carried out, let him be
excommunicated.  But if any of the metropolitans shall take no <span
id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span id="xvi.xiv.vi-Page_560"></span>care
that this be done, he being free from constraint or fear or other
reasonable excuse, let him be subjected to the canonical penalties. 
While the council is engaged in considering the canons or matters which
have regard to the Gospel, it behoves the assembled Bishops, with all
attention and grave thought to guard the divine and life-giving
commandments of God, for in keeping of them there is great reward;
because our lamp is the commandment, and our light is the law, and trial
and discipline are the way of life, and the commandment of the Lord
shining afar giveth light to the eyes.  It is not permitted to a
metropolitan to demand any of those things which the bishops bring with
them, whether it be a horse or any other gift.  If he be convicted of
doing anything of this sort, he shall restore fourfold.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vi-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vi-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p6"></span>Whenever it is not possible for a synod
to meet according to the decree formulated long ago, twice in each year,
at least let it be held once, as seemed good to the Sixth Synod.  Should
any magistrate forbid such meeting, let him be cast out:  and a bishop
who shall take no pains to assemble it, shall be subject to punishment. 
And when the synod is held, should it appear that the Metropolitan has
taken anything away from any bishop, let him restore four-fold.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vi-p7.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p8"></span>Anastasius remarks on this, that this
ordinance (whether the whole canon or only its last passage must remain
undecided) was not accepted by the Latins.  That this canon did not
forbid the so-called Synodicum, which the metropolitans had lawfully to
receive from the bishops, and the bishops from the priests, is remarked
by Van Espen, l. c. p. 464.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p9"></span>Compare with this (as Balsamon advises)
the eighth canon of the Council in Trullo.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vi-p10"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XVIII., C. vij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140693)
