[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140609)  [Next](2140611.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p1.1"></span>Canon LXXXVI.  (Greek lxxxix.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p2"></span>Of the order of bishops, that
those ordained more recently do not dare to take precedence of those
ordained before them.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p3.1"></span>Valentine</span>, the bishop, said: 
If your good patience will permit, I follow the things which were done
in time past in the Church of Carthage, and which were illustrious
having been confirmed by the subscriptions of the brethren, and I
profess that we <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-Page_484"></span>intend to preserve this.  For this
we know, that ecclesiastical discipline has always remained inviolate: 
therefore let none of the brethren dare to place himself before those
ordained earlier than himself; but by the offices of charity this has
always been shewn to those ordained earlier, which always should be
accepted joyfully by those ordained more recently.  Let your holiness
give command that this order be strengthened by your interlocutions. 
Aurelius, the bishop, said:  It would not be fitting that we should
repeat these things, were it not for the existence of certain
inconsiderate minds, which would induce us to making such statutes; but
this is a common cause about which our brother and fellow bishop has
spoken, that each one of us should recognize the order decreed to him by
God, and that the more recent should defer to the earlier ordained, and
they should presume to do nothing when these have not been consulted. 
Wherefore I say, now that I think of it, that they who think they may
presume to take precedence over those ordained before them, should be
coerced suitably by the great council.  Xantippus, bishop of the first
see of Numidia, said:  All the brethren present have heard what our
brother and fellow bishop Aurelius has said, what answer do we make? 
Datian, the bishop, said:  The decrees made by our ancestors should be
strengthened by our assent, so that the action taken by the Church of
Carthage in past synods should hold fast, being confirmed by the full
assent of all of us.  And all the bishops said:  This order has been
preserved by our fathers and by our ancestors, and shall be preserved by
us through the help of God, the rights of the primacy of Numidia and of
Mauritania being kept intact.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p4"></span>Of the archives and matricula of
Numidia.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p5"></span>Moreover it seemed good to all the
bishops who subscribed in this council that the matricula and the
archives of Numidia should be at the first see and in the Metropolis,
that is Constantina.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p6"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p6.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p7.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon
LXXXVI.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p8"></span>Thou shalt not prefer thyself to
thine elders, but shalt follow them.  For he that spurns those who were
before him should be frowned down upon.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p9"></span>The introduction belongs to the
Synod of Milevis, of August 27, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 402.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p10"></span>This canon (lxxxvj.) is Canon j.,
of the above named Synod.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p11.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvii-p12"></span>From this canon it appears that
the primacy in Africa was ambulatory, and belonged to the senior bishop
of the province.  If the primacy had been fixed to the bishop of any
certain city, as in other countries, there would have been a salvo or
exception for that bishop, as there is in the 24th canon of the Synod of
Bracara \[Braga\] in Spain, which orders that all bishops take place
according to their seniority, with a reserve to the bishop of the
metropolis.  The bishop of Carthage was not included in this canon; for
it is evident that he had a precedence annexed to his see, and that he
was in reality a sort of patriarch.  The reason why Numidia and
Mauritania are particularly mentioned is, that some disputes had been
started there on that subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXXXVII](2140611.md)
