[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140185)  [Next](2140187.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Choir Offices of the
Early Church.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p2"></span>Nothing is more marked in the lives
of the early followers of Christ than the abiding sense which they had
of the Divine Presence.  Prayer was not to them an occasional exercise
but an unceasing practice.  If then the Psalmist sang in the old
dispensation “Seven times a day do I praise thee” ([Ps. cxix.
164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164.md)<span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>), we may be quite certain that the
Christians would never fall behind the Jewish example.  We know that
among the Jews there were the “Hours of Prayer,” and nothing would be,
*à priori*, more likely than that with new and deeper significance these
should pass over into the Christian Church.  I need not pause here to
remind the reader of the observance of “the hour of prayer” which is
mentioned in the New Testament, and shall pass on to my more immediate
subject.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p3"></span>Most liturgiologists have been
agreed that the “Choir Offices” of the Christian Church, that is to say
the recitation of the Psalms of David, with lessons from other parts of
Holy Scripture and collects, <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) was
an actual continuation of the Jewish worship, the melodies even of the
Psalms being carried over and modified through the ages into the plain
song of today.  For this view of the Jewish origin of the Canonical
Hours there is so much to be said that one hesitates to accept a rival
theory, recently set forth with much skill and learning, by a French
priest, who had the inestimable happiness of sitting at the feet of De
Rossi.  M. Pierre Battifol <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) is of
opinion that the Canonical Hours in no way come from the Jewish Hours of
Prayer but are the outgrowth of the Saturday Vigil service, which was
wholly of Christian origin, and which he tells us was divided into three
parts, j., the evening service, or *lucernarium*, which was the service
of Vespers; ij., the midnight service, the origin of the Nocturns or
Mattins; iij., the service at daybreak, the origin of Lauds.  Soon
vigils were kept for all the martyr commemorations; and by the time of
Tertullian, if not before, Wednesdays and Fridays had their vigils. 
With the growth of monasticism they became daily.  This Mr. Battifol
thinks was introduced into Antioch about <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 350, and soon spread all
over the East.  The “little hours,” that is Terce, Sext, and None, he
thinks were monastic in origin and that Prime and Compline were
transferred from the dormitory to the church, just as the martyrology
was transferred from the refectory.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p6"></span>Such is the new theory, which, even
if rejected, at least is valuable in drawing attention to the great
importance of the vigil-service in the Early Church, an importance still
attaching to it in Russia on the night of Easter Even.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p7"></span><span id="page_135">p. 135</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-Page_135"></span>Of the twilight service we
have a most exquisite remains in the hymn to be sung at the lighting of
the lamps.  This is one of the few *Psalmi idiotici* which has survived
the condemnation of such compositions by the early councils, in fact the
only two others are the *Gloria in Excelsis* and the *Te Deum*.  The
hymn at the lighting of the lamps is as follows:

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p8"></span>“O gladsome light

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p9"></span>Of the Father Immortal,

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p10"></span>And of the celestial

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p11"></span>Sacred and blessed

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p12"></span>Jesus, our Saviour!”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p13"></span>“Now to the sunset

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p14"></span>Again hast thou brought us;

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p15"></span>And seeing the evening

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p16"></span>Twilight, we bless thee,

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p17"></span>Praise thee, adore thee!”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p18"></span>“Father omnipotent!

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p19"></span>Son, the Life-giver!

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p20"></span>Spirit, the Comforter!

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p21"></span>Worthy at all times

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p22"></span>Of worship and wonder! <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) ”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p24"></span>Dr. Battifol’s new theory was
promptly attacked by P. Suibbert Bäumer, a learned German Benedictine
who had already written several magazine articles on the subject before
Battifol’s book had appeared.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p25"></span>The title of Bäumer’s book is
*Geschichte des Breviers, Versuch einer quellenmässigen Darstellung der
Entwicklung des altkirchen und des römeschen Officiums bis auf unsere
Tage*. (Freiburg in Briesgau, 1895.)  The following <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) may be taken as a fair *resumé* of the
position taken in this work and most ably defended, a position which (if
I may be allowed to express an opinion) is more likely to prevail as
being most in accordance with the previous researches of the learned.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p27"></span>“The early Christians separated
from the Synagogues about <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p27.1"></span>a.d.</span> 65; that is, about the
same time as the first Epistle to Timothy was written, and at this
moment of separation from the Synagogue the Apostles had already
established, besides the liturgy, at least one, probably two, canonical
hours of prayer, Mattins and Evensong.  Besides what we should call
sermons, the service of these hours was made up of psalms, readings from
Holy Scripture, and extempore prayers.  A few pages on (p. 42) Bäumer
allows that even if this service had been daily in Jerusalem the
Apostles’ times, yet it had become limited to Sundays in the
sub-Apostolic times, when persecution would not allow the Apostolic
custom of daily morning and evening public prayer.  Yet the practice of
private prayer at the third, sixth, and ninth hours continued, based
upon an Apostolic tradition; and thus, when the tyranny of persecution
was overpast, the idea of public prayer at these hours was saved and the
practice carried on.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p28"></span>The student should by no means
omit to read Dom Prosper Guéranger’s *Institutions Liturgiques*, which
while written in a bitter and most partisan spirit, is yet a work of the
most profound learning.  Above all anyone professing any familiarity
with the literature on the subject must have mastered Cardinal Bona’s
invaluable *De Divina Psalmodia*, a mine of wisdom and a wonder of
research.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[134:179](2140186.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p4"></span> Vide Tertullian.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[134:180](2140186.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p5"></span> *Histoire du Bréviaire Romain*
Paris. 1893.  An English translation has since (1898) appeared by the
Rev. A. M. Y. Bayley, which is not in principle changed so far as this
discussion is concerned.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[135:181](2140186.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p23"></span> Longfellow.  *The Golden Legend*
II.  Liddon’s remarks upon this hymn are well worth the reader’s
attention, *Bampton Lectures*, Lect. VII., where Keble’s translation
will be found.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[135:182](2140186.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xx-p26"></span> Taken from the *Church Quarterly
Review*, 1898.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIX](2140187.md)
