[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140372)  [Next](2140374.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>The Sentence Against the Monothelites.</span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.viii-p2.1"></span>Session XIII.</span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>(L. and C., *Concilia*, Tom. VI., col.
943.)

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span>The holy council said:  After we had
reconsidered, according to our promise which we had made to your
highness, the doctrinal letters of Sergius, at one time patriarch of
this royal god-protected city to Cyrus, who was then bishop of Phasis
and to Honorius some time Pope of Old Rome, as well as the letter of the
latter to the same Sergius, we find that these documents are quite
foreign to the apostolic dogmas, to the declarations <span
id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span id="xiii.viii-Page_343"></span>of the
holy Councils, and to all the accepted Fathers, and that they follow the
false teachings of the heretics; therefore we entirely reject them, and
execrate them as hurtful to the soul.  But the names of those men whose
doctrines we execrate must also be thrust forth from the holy Church of
God, namely, that of Sergius some time bishop of this God-preserved
royal city who was the first to write on this impious doctrine; also
that of Cyrus of Alexandria, of Pyrrhus, Paul, and Peter, who died
bishops of this God-preserved city, and were like-minded with them; and
that of Theodore sometime bishop of Pharan, all of whom the most holy
and thrice blessed Agatho, Pope of Old Rome, in his suggestion to our
most pious and God-preserved lord and mighty Emperor, rejected, because
they were minded contrary to our orthodox faith, all of whom we define
are to be subjected to anathema.  And with these we define that there
shall be expelled from the holy Church of God and anathematized Honorius
who was some time Pope of Old Rome, because of what we found written by
him to Sergius, that in all respects he followed his view and confirmed
his impious doctrines.  We have also examined the synodal letter of
Sophronius of holy memory, some time Patriarch of the Holy City of
Christ our God, Jerusalem, and have found it in accordance with the true
faith and with the Apostolic teachings, and with those of the holy
approved Fathers.  Therefore we have received it as orthodox and as
salutary to the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, and have decreed
that it is right that his name be inserted in the diptychs of the Holy
Churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Session XVI.](2140374.md)
