[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140395)  [Next](2140397) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Canon XII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Moreover</span> this also has come to our
knowledge, that in Africa and Libya and in other places the most
God-beloved bishops in those parts do not refuse to live with their
wives, even after consecration, thereby giving scandal and offence to
the people.  Since, therefore, it is our particular care that all things
tend to the good of the flock placed in our hands and committed to
us,—it has seemed good that henceforth nothing of the kind shall in any
way occur.  And we say this, not to abolish and overthrow what things
were established of old by Apostolic authority, but as caring for the
health of the people and their advance to better things, and lest the
ecclesiastical state should suffer any reproach.  For the divine Apostle
says:  “Do all to the glory of God, give none offence, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God, even as I please all
men in all things, not seeking mine own profit but the profit of many,
that they may be saved.  Be ye imitators of me even as I also am of
Christ.”  But if any shall have been observed to do such a thing, let
him be deposed.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p5"></span>Although it has been decreed that
wives are not to be cast forth, nevertheless that we may counsel for the
better, we give command that no one ordained a bishop shall any longer
live with his wife.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p7"></span>The fifth Apostolic canon allows
neither bishop, presbyter, nor deacon to cast forth his wife under
pretext of piety; and assigns penalties for any that shall do so, and if
he will not amend he is to be deposed.  But this canon on the other hand
does not permit a bishop even to live with his wife after his
consecration.  But by this change no contempt is meant to be poured out
upon what had been established by Apostolic authority, but it was made
through care for the people’s health and for leading on to better
things, and for fear <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-Page_371"></span>that the sacerdotal estate might
suffer some wrong.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p9"></span>(*In Can. vi. Apost*.)

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p10"></span>In the time of this canon \[of the
Apostles so called\] not only presbyters and deacons, but bishops also,
it is clear, were allowed by Eastern custom to have their wives; and
Zonaras and Balsamon note that even until the Sixth Council, commonly
called in Trullo bishops were allowed to have their wives.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p11"></span>(*The same on this canon*.)

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p12"></span>But not only do they command \[in
this canon\] that bishops after their consecration no longer have
commerce with their own wives, but further, they prohibit them even to
presume to live with them.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiii-p13.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiii-p14"></span>When the faith first was born and
came forth into the world, the Apostles treated with greater softness
and indulgence those who embraced the truth, which as yet was not
scattered far and wide, nor did they exact from them perfection in all
respects, but made great allowances for their weakness and for the
inveterate force of the customs with which they were surrounded, both
among the heathen and among the Jews.  But now, when far and wide our
religion has been propagated, more strenuous efforts were made to
enforce those things which pertain to a higher and holier life, as our
angelical worship increased day by day, and to insist on by law a life
of continence to those who were elevated to the episcopate, so that not
only they should abstain from their wives, but that they should have
them no longer as bed-fellows; and not only that they no longer admit
them as sharers of their bed, but they do not allow them even to stop
under the same roof or in the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIII](2140397)
