[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140312)  [Next](2140314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="xi.xiii-Page_262"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>The Definition of Faith of the Council of
Chalcedon.</span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. IV.,
col. 562.)

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span>The holy, great, and ecumenical synod,
assembled by the grace of God and the command of our most religious and
Christian Emperors, Marcian and Valentinian, Augusti, at Chalcedon, the
metropolis of the Bithynian Province, in the martyry of the holy and
victorious martyr Euphemia, has decreed as follows:

<span id="xi.xiii-p4"></span>Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, when
strengthening the knowledge of the Faith in his disciples, to the end
that no one might disagree with his neighbour concerning the doctrines
of religion, and that the proclamation of the truth might be set forth
equally to all men, said, “My peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you.”  But, since the evil one does not desist from sowing tares
among the seeds of godliness, but ever invents some new device against
the truth; therefore the Lord, providing, as he ever does, for the human
race, has raised up this pious, faithful, and zealous Sovereign, and has
called together unto him from all parts the chief rulers of the
priesthood; so that, the grace of Christ our common Lord inspiring us,
we may cast off every plague of falsehood from the sheep of Christ, and
feed them with the tender leaves of truth.  And this have we done with
one unanimous consent, driving away erroneous doctrines and renewing the
unerring faith of the Fathers, publishing to all men the Creed of the
Three Hundred and Eighteen, and to their number adding, as their peers,
the Fathers who have received the same summary of religion.  Such are
the One Hundred and Fifty holy Fathers who afterwards assembled in the
great Constantinople and ratified the same faith.  Moreover, observing
the order and every form relating to the faith, which was observed by
the holy synod formerly held in Ephesus, of which Celestine of Rome and
Cyril of Alexandria, of holy memory, were the leaders, we do declare
that the exposition of the right and blameless faith made by the Three
Hundred and Eighteen holy and blessed Fathers, assembled at Nice in the
reign of Constantine of pious memory, shall be pre-eminent:  and that
those things shall be of force also, <span id="page_263">p. 263</span>
<span id="xi.xiii-Page_263"></span>which were decreed by the One Hundred
and Fifty holy Fathers at Constantinople, for the uprooting of the
heresies which had then sprung up, and for the confirmation of the same
Catholic and Apostolic Faith of ours.

<span id="xi.xiii-p5"></span>The Creed of the three hundred and eighteen
Fathers at Nice.

<span id="xi.xiii-p6"></span>We believe in one God, etc.

<span id="xi.xiii-p7"></span>Item, the Creed of the one hundred and
fifty holy Fathers who were assembled at Constantinople.

<span id="xi.xiii-p8"></span>We believe in one God, etc.

<span id="xi.xiii-p9"></span>This wise and salutary formula of divine
grace sufficed for the perfect knowledge and confirmation of religion;
for it teaches the perfect \[doctrine\] concerning Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and sets forth the Incarnation of the Lord to them that
faithfully receive it.  But, forasmuch as persons undertaking to make
void the preaching of the truth have through their individual heresies
given rise to empty babblings; some of them daring to corrupt the
mystery of the Lord’s incarnation for us and refusing \[to use\] the
name Mother of God (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p9.1"></span>Θεοτόκος</span>) in reference to the Virgin,
while others, bringing in a confusion and mixture, and idly conceiving
that the nature of the flesh and of the Godhead is all one, maintaining
that the divine Nature of the Only Begotten is, by mixture, capable of
suffering; therefore this present holy, great, and ecumenical synod,
desiring to exclude every device against the Truth, and teaching that
which is unchanged from the beginning, has at the very outset decreed
that the faith of the Three Hundred and Eighteen Fathers shall be
preserved inviolate.  And on account of them that contend against the
Holy Ghost, it confirms the doctrine afterwards delivered concerning the
substance of the Spirit by the One Hundred and Fifty holy Fathers who
assembled in the imperial City; which doctrine they declared unto all
men, not as though they were introducing anything that had been lacking
in their predecessors, but in order to explain through written documents
their faith concerning the Holy Ghost against those who were seeking to
destroy his sovereignty.  And, <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="xi.xiii-Page_264"></span>on account of those who have taken in hand
to corrupt the mystery of the dispensation \[i.e. the Incarnation\] and
who shamelessly pretend that he who was born of the holy Virgin Mary was
a mere man, it receives the synodical letters of the Blessed Cyril,
Pastor of the Church of Alexandria, addressed to Nestorius and the
Easterns, judging them suitable, for the refutation of the frenzied
folly of Nestorius, and for the instruction of those who long with holy
ardour for a knowledge of the saving symbol.  And, for the confirmation
of the orthodox doctrines, it has rightly added to these the letter of
the President of the great and old Rome, the most blessed and holy
Archbishop Leo, which was addressed to Archbishop Flavian of blessed
memory, for the removal of the false doctrines of Eutyches, judging them
to be agreeable to the confession of the great Peter, and as it were a
common pillar against misbelievers.  For it opposes those who would rend
the mystery of the dispensation into a Duad of Sons; it repels from the
sacred assembly those who dare to say that the Godhead of the Only
Begotten is capable of suffering; it resists those who imagine a mixture
or confusion of the two natures of Christ; it drives away those who
fancy his form of a servant is of an heavenly or some substance other
than that which was taken of us, and it anathematizes those who
foolishly talk of two natures of our Lord before the union, conceiving
that after the union there was only one.

<span id="xi.xiii-p10"></span>Following the holy Fathers we teach with
one voice that the Son \[of God\] and our Lord Jesus Christ is to be
confessed as one and the same \[Person\], that he is perfect in Godhead
and perfect in manhood, very God and very man, of a reasonable soul and
\[human\] body consisting, consubstantial with the Father as touching
his Godhead, and consubstantial with us as touching his manhood; made in
all things like unto us, sin only excepted; begotten of his Father
before the worlds according to his Godhead; but in these last days for
us men and for our salvation born \[into the world\] of the Virgin Mary,
the Mother of God according to his manhood.  This one and the same Jesus
Christ, the only-begotten Son \[of God\] must be confessed to be in two
natures, <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) unconfusedly,
immutably, indivisibly, <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="xi.xiii-Page_265"></span>inseparably \[united\], and that without
the distinction of natures being taken away by such union, but rather
the peculiar property of each nature being preserved and being united in
one Person and subsistence, not separated or divided into two persons,
but one and the same Son and only-begotten, God the Word, our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Prophets of old time have spoken concerning him, and as
the Lord Jesus Christ hath taught us, and as the Creed of the Fathers
hath delivered to us.

<span id="xi.xiii-p12"></span>These things, therefore, having been
expressed by us with the greatest accuracy and attention, the holy
Ecumenical Synod defines that no one shall be suffered to bring forward
a different faith (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p12.1"></span>ἑτέραν πίστιν</span>), nor to write, nor to
put together, nor to excogitate, nor to teach it to others.  But such as
dare either to put together another faith, or to bring forward or to
teach or to deliver a different Creed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p12.2"></span>ἕτερον σύμβολον</span>) to as wish to be
converted to the knowledge of the truth, from the Gentiles, or Jews or
any heresy whatever, if they be Bishops or clerics let them be deposed,
the Bishops from the Episcopate, and the clerics from the clergy; but if
they be monks or laics:  let them be anathematized.

<span id="xi.xiii-p13"></span>After the reading of the definition, all
the most religious Bishops cried out:  This is the faith of the
fathers:  let the metropolitans forthwith subscribe it:  let them
forthwith, in the presence of the judges, subscribe it:  let that which
has been well defined have no delay:  this is the faith of the
Apostles:  by this we all stand:  thus we all believe.

<span id="xi.xiii-p14"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xiii-p14.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xiii-p15.1"></span>Anatolius of Constantinople.</span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p16"></span>(*Ep. to St. Leo*.  Migne, *Pat. Lat*.,
Tom. LIV. \[Leo. M., *Opera*, Tom. I.\] col. 978.)

<span id="xi.xiii-p17"></span>Since after judgment had been delivered
concerning him, there was need that all should agree in the right faith
(for which purpose the most pious emperor had with the greatest pains
assembled the holy Synod) with prayer and tears, your holiness being
present with us in spirit and co-operating with us through those most
God-beloved men whom you had sent to us, having as our protector the
most holy and most comely Martyr Euphemia, we gave ourselves up entirely
to this salutary work, all other matters being laid aside.  And when the
crisis demanded that all the most holy bishops gathered together should
set forth an unanimous definition (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p17.1"></span>σύμφωνον ὅρον</span>) for the explanation and
clearer understanding of our confession of our Lord Jesus Christ, our
Lord God was found appearing to them that sought him not, and even to
them that asked not for him.  And although some from the beginning
contentiously made opposition, he shewed forth nevertheless his truth
and so disposed things that an unanimous and uncontradicted writing was
published by us all, which confirmed the souls of the stable, and
inviting to the way of truth all who had declined therefrom.  And when
we had subscribed with unanimous consent the chart, we all with one
consent, that is our whole synod, entered the martyry of the most holy
and triumphant martyr Euphemia, and when at the prayer of our most pious
and beloved of Christ Emperor Marcian, and of our most pious and in all
respects faithful Empress, our daughter and Augusta Pulcheria, with joy,
and hilarity we placed upon the holy altar the decision which we had
written for the confirmation of the faith of our fathers in accordance
with that holy letter you sent us; and then handed it to their piety,
that they might receive it as they had asked for it.  And when they had
received it they gave glory with us to Christ the Lord, who had driven
away the darkness of wicked opinion, and had illustrated with the
greatest unanimity the word of truth, etc.

<span id="xi.xiii-p18"></span>From this passage can easily be understood
the very obscure passage in the letter of the Council to Leo, where it
says that the definition was delivered by St. Euphemia as her own
confession of faith.  *Vide* note of the Ballerini on this epistle of
Anatolius.

<span id="xi.xiii-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xiii-p19.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p20"></span>(*Hist. of the Councils*. Vol. III., p.
348.)

<span id="xi.xiii-p21"></span>The present Greek text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p21.1"></span>ἐκ δύο φύσεων</span> while
the old Latin translation has, *in duabus naturis*.  After what had been
repeatedly said in this session on the difference between “in two
natures” and “of two natures,” and in opposition to the latter formula,
there can be no doubt whatever that the old Latin translator had the
more accurate text before him, and that it was originally <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p21.2"></span>ἐν δύο φύσεσιν</span>. 
This, however, is not mere supposition, but is expressly testified by
antiquity:  (1) by the famous Abbot Euthymius of Palestine, a
contemporary of the Council of Chalcedon, of whose disciples several
were present as bishops at our Council (cf. Baron. *ad. ann*. 451, n.
152 sq.).  We still have a judgment of his which he gave respecting the
decree of Chalcedon concerning the faith, and in which he repeats the
leading doctrine in the words of the Synod itself.  At our passage he
remarks:  <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p21.3"></span>ἐν δύο
φύσεσι γνωρίζεσθαι ὁμολογεῖ τὸν ἕνα Χριστὸν κ.τ.λ</span>.  The fragment
of his writings on the subject is found in the Vita S. Euthymii Abbatis,
written by his pupil Cyril in the *Analecta Græca* of the monks of St.
Maur, t. i., p. 57, printed in Mansi, t. vii., p. 774 sq.  (2) The
second ancient witness is Severus, from <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xiii-p21.4"></span>a.d.</span> 513 Monophysite patriarch of
Antioch, who represents it as a great reproach and an unpardonable
offence in the fathers of Chalcedon that they had declared:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p21.5"></span>ἐν δύο φύσεσιν ἀδιαιρέτοις
γνωρίζεσθαι τον Χριστὸν</span> (see the *Sententiæ Severi* in Mansi, t.
vii., p. 839).  (3) Somewhat more than a hundred years after the Council
of Chalcedon, Evagrius copied its decree concerning the faith *in
extenso* into his *Church History* (lib. ii., 4), and, in fact, with the
words:  <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p21.6"></span>ἐν δύο
φύσεσιν ἀσυγχύτως κ.τ.λ</span>. (ed. Mog., p. 294).  (4) In the
conference on religion held between the Severians and the orthodox at
Constantinople, <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xiii-p21.7"></span>a.d.</span> 553, the former reproached the
Synod of Chalcedon with having put *in duabus naturis*, instead of *ex
duabus naturis*, as Cyril and the old fathers had taught (Mansi, t.
viii., p. 892; Hardouin, t. ii., p. 1162).  (5) Leontius of Byzantium
maintains quite distinctly, in the year 610, in his work *De Sectis*,
that the Synod taught <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p21.8"></span>ἕνα Χριστὸν ἐν δύο φύτεσιν ὰσυγχύτως
κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="xi.xiii-p22"></span>It is clear that if any doubt had then
existed as to the correct reading, Leontius could not have opposed the
Monophysites with such certainty.  The passage adduced by him is *Actio*
iv., c. 7., in Galland.  *Bibliotheca* *PP*., t. xii., p. 633.  Gieseler
(*Kirchengesch*. i., S. 465), and after him Hahn (*Biblioth. der
Symbole*, S. 118, note 6), cites incorrectly the fourth instead of the
fifth *Actio*.  Perhaps neither of them had consulted the passage
itself.  (6) No less weight is to be attached to the fact that all the
Latin translations, that of Rusticus and those before him, have *in
duabus naturis*; and (7) that the Lateran Synod, <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 649, had the same reading in their
Acts (Hardouin, t. iii., p. 835).  (8) Pope Agatho, also, in his letter
to the Emperor Constans II., which was read in the sixth Ecumenical
Synod, adduced the creed of Chalcedon with the words *in duabus naturis*
(in the Acts of the sixth Ecumenical Council, *Actio* iv.; in Mansi, t.
xi., p. 256; Hardouin, t. iii., p. 1091).  In consequence of this, most
scholars of recent times, *e.g.*, Tillemont, Walch (*Bibloth. symbol
veter*., p. 106), Hahn (l. c.), Gieseler (l. c.), Neander (Abthl. ii., 2
of Bd. iv., S. 988), have declared <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.2"></span>ἐν δύο φύσεσιν</span> to be the original and
correct reading.  Neander adds:  “The whole process of the transactions
of the Council shows this (that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.3"></span>ἐν δύο</span> is the correct reading). 
Evidently the earlier creed, which was more favourable to the Egyptian
doctrine, contained the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.4"></span>ἐκ δύο φύσεων</span> and the favour shown to
the other party came out chiefly in the change of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.5"></span>ἐκ</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.6"></span>ἐν</span>.  The expression
<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.7"></span>ἐκ δύο φύσεων</span>
besides, does not fit the place, the verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.8"></span>γνωριζόμενον</span> points rather to the
original <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.9"></span>ἐν</span>. 
The <span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.10"></span>ἐν δύο
φύσεσιν</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.11"></span>ἐκ δύο φύσεων</span> was the turning-point of
the whole controversy between Monophysitism and Dyophysitism.”  Cf., on
the other side, Baur, *Trinitätslehre*, Bd. i., S. 820, and Dorner
(*Lehre v. der Person Christi*, Thl. ii., S. 129), where it is
maintained that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.12"></span>ἐκ</span> is the correct and original
reading, but that it was from the beginning purposely altered by the
Westerns into *in*; moreover, that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.13"></span>ἐκ</span> fits better than <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.14"></span>ἐν</span> with <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xiii-p22.15"></span>γνωριζόμενον</span>, and
therefore that it had been allowed as a concession to the Monophysites. 
The meaning, moreover, they say, of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.16"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.17"></span>κ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xiii-p22.18"></span>ἐν</span> is essentially the same, and the
one and the other alike excluded Monophysitism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_286"></span>[264:287](2140313.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="xi.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p11"></span> *Vide* parallel note from Hefele.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session VI.](2140314.md)
