[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140025)  [Next](2140027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="vii.vi.viii-Page_15"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>Let</span> the ancient customs in Egypt,
Libya and Pentapolis prevail, that the Bishop of Alexandria have
jurisdiction in all these, since the like is customary for the Bishop of
Rome also.  Likewise in Antioch and the other provinces, let the
Churches retain their privileges.  And this is to be universally
understood, that if any one be made bishop without the consent of the
Metropolitan, the great Synod has declared that such a man ought not to
be a bishop.  If, however, two or three bishops shall from natural love
of contradiction, oppose the common suffrage of the rest, it being
reasonable and in accordance with the ecclesiastical law, then let the
choice of the majority prevail.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p5"></span>The Bishop of Alexandria shall have
jurisdiction over Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis.  As also the Roman
bishop over those subject to Rome.  So, too, the Bishop of Antioch and
the rest over those who are under them.  If any be a bishop contrary to
the judgment of the Metropolitan, let him be no bishop.  Provided it be
in accordance with the canons by the suffrage of the majority, if three
object, their objection shall be of no force.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p6"></span>Many, probably most, commentators have
considered this the most important and most interesting of all the
Nicene canons, and a whole library of works has been written upon it,
some of the works asserting and some denying what are commonly called
the Papal claims.  If any one wishes to see a list of the most famous of
these works he will find it in Phillips’s *Kirchenrecht* (Bd. ii. S.
35).  I shall reserve what I have to say upon this subject to the notes
on a canon which seems really to deal with it, confining myself here to
an elucidation of the words found in the canon before us.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>Hammond, W. A.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p8"></span>The object and intention of this canon
seems clearly to have been, not to introduce any new powers or
regulations into the Church, but to confirm and establish ancient
customs already existing.  This, indeed, is evident from the very first
words of it:  “Let the ancient customs be maintained.”  It appears to
have been made with particular reference to the case of the Church of
Alexandria, which had been troubled by the irregular proceedings of
Miletius, and to confirm the ancient privileges of that see which he had
invaded.  The latter part of it, however, applies to all Metropolitans,
and confirms all their ancient privileges.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>Ffoulkes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p10"></span>(*Dict. Christ. Antiq. voce* Council
of Nicæa).

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p11"></span>The first half of the canon enacts
merely that what had long been customary with respect to such persons in
every province should become law, beginning with the province where this
principle had been infringed; while the second half declares what was in
future to be received as law on two points which custom had not as yet
expressly ruled.…Nobody disputes the meaning of this last half; nor, in
fact, would the meaning of the first half have been questioned, had it
not included Rome.…Nobody can maintain that the bishops of Antioch and
Alexandria were called patriarchs then, or that the jurisdiction they
had then was co-extensive with what they had afterward, when they were
so called.…It is on this clause \[“since the like is customary for the
Bishops of Rome also”\] standing parenthetically between what is decreed
for the particular cases of Egypt and Antioch, and in consequence of the
interpretation given to it by Rufinus, more particularly, that so much
strife has been raised.  Rufinus may rank low as a translator, yet,
being a native of Aquileia, he cannot have been ignorant of Roman ways,
nor, on the other hand, had he greatly misrepresented them, would his
version have waited till the seventeenth century to be impeached.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p13"></span>The sense of the first words of the
canon is as follows:  “This ancient right is assigned to the Bishop of
Alexandria which places under his jurisdiction the *whole* diocese of
Egypt.”  It is without any reason, then, that the French Protestant
Salmasius (Saumaise), the Anglican Beveridge, and the Gallican Launoy,
try to show that the Council of Nice granted to the Bishop of Alexandria
only the rights of ordinary metropolitans.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>Bishop Stillingfleet.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p15"></span>I do confess there was something
peculiar in the case of the Bishop of Alexandria, for all the provinces
of Egypt were under his immediate care, which was Patriarchal as to
extent, but Metropolical in the administration.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p16"></span><span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="vii.vi.viii-Page_16"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>Justellus.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p17"></span>This authority (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>ἐξουσία</span>) is
that of a Metropolitan which the Nicene Fathers decreed to be his due
over the three provinces named in this canon, Egypt, Libya, and
Pentapolis, which made up the whole diocese of Egypt, as well in matters
civil as ecclesiastical.

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p18"></span>On this important question Hefele
refers to the dissertation of Dupin, in his work *De* *Antiqua Ecclesiæ
Disciplina*.  Hefele says:  “It seems to me beyond a doubt that in this
canon there is a question about that which was afterward called the
patriarchate of the Bishop of Alexandria; that is to say that he had a
certain recognized ecclesiastical authority, not only over several civil
provinces, but also over several ecclesiastical provinces (which had
their own metropolitans);” and further on (p. 392) he adds:  “It is
incontestable that the civil provinces of Egypt, Libya, Pentapolis and
Thebaïs, which were all in subjection to the Bishop of Alexandria, were
also ecclesiastical provinces with their own metropolitans; and
consequently it is not the ordinary rights of metropolitans that the
Sixth Canon of Nice confers on the Bishop of Alexandria, but the rights
of a superior Metropolitan, that is, of a Patriarch.”

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p19"></span>There only remains to see what were
the bounds of the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Antioch.  The civil
diocese of Oriens is shown by the Second Canon of Constantinople to be
conterminous with what was afterward called the Patriarchate of
Antioch.  The see of Antioch had, as we know, several metropolitans
subject to it, among them Cæsarea, under whose jurisdiction was
Palestine.  Justellus, however, is of opinion that Pope Innocent I. was
in error when he asserted that all the Metropolitans of Oriens were to
be ordained by him by any peculiar authority, and goes so far as to
stigmatize his words as “contrary to the mind of the Nicene
Synod.” <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[16:62](2140026.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="vii.vi.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.viii-p20"></span> *Contra mentem Synodi Nicæni.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Extent of the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome
Over the Suburbican Churches.](2140027.md)
