[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140359)  [Next](2140361) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span> <span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="xii.ix-Page_318"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>The Anathemas Against Origen.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p2.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p3.1"></span>If</span> anyone asserts the fabulous
pre-existence of souls, and shall assert the monstrous restoration which
follows from it:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p4.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p5.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the creation
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p5.2"></span>τὴυ παραγωγὴν</span>)
of all reasonable things includes only intelligences (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p5.3"></span>νόας</span>) without bodies
and altogether immaterial, having neither number nor name, so that there
is unity between them all by identity of substance, force and energy,
and by their union with and knowledge of God the Word; but that no
longer desiring the sight of God, they gave themselves over to worse
things, each one following his own inclinations, and that they have
taken bodies more or less subtile, and have received names, for among
the heavenly Powers there is a difference of names as there is also a
difference of bodies; and thence some became and are called Cherubims,
others Seraphims, and Principalities, and Powers, and Dominations, and
Thrones, and Angels, and as many other heavenly orders as there may be: 
let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p6.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p7.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the sun, the
moon and the stars are also reasonable beings, and that they have only
become what they are because they turned towards evil:  let him be
anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p8.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p9.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the reasonable
creatures in whom the divine love had grown cold have been hidden in
gross bodies such as ours, and have been called men, while those who
have attained the lowest degree of wickedness have shared cold and
obscure bodies and are become and called demons and evil spirits:  let
him be anathema,.

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p10.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p11.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that a psychic
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p11.2"></span>ψυχικὴν</span>)
condition has come from an angelic or archangelic state, and moreover
that a demoniac and a human condition has come from a psychic condition,
and that from a human state they may become again angels and demons, and
that each order of heavenly virtues is either all from those below or
from those above, or from those above and below:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p12"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p12.1"></span>VI.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p13.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that there is a
twofold race of demons, of which the one includes the souls of men and
the other the superior spirits who fell to this, and that of all the
number of reasonable beings there is but one which has remained unshaken
in the love and contemplation of God, and that that spirit is become
Christ and the king of all reasonable beings, and that he has
created <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) all the bodies which
exist in heaven, on earth, and between heaven and earth; and that the
world which has in itself elements more ancient than itself, and which
exists by themselves, viz.:  dryness, damp, heat and cold, and the image
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p15.6"></span>ιδέαν</span>) to
which it was formed, was so formed, and that the most holy and
consubstantial Trinity did not create the world, but that it was created
by the working intelligence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.7"></span>Ν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.8"></span>οῦς δημιρυργός</span>) which is more ancient
than the world, and which communicates to it its being:  let him be
anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p16"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p16.1"></span>VII.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p17"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p17.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that Christ, of whom
it is said that he appeared in the form of God, and that he was united
before all time with God the Word, and humbled himself in these last
days even to humanity, had (according to their expression) pity upon the
divers falls which had appeared in the spirits united in the same unity
(of which he himself is part), and that to <span id="page_319">p.
319</span> <span id="xii.ix-Page_319"></span>restore them he passed
through divers classes, had different bodies and different names, became
all to all, an Angel among Angels, a Power among Powers, has clothed
himself in the different classes of reasonable beings with a form
corresponding to that class, and finally has taken flesh and blood like
ours and is become man for men; \[if anyone says all this\] and does not
profess that God the Word humbled himself and became man:  let him be
anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p18"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p18.1"></span>VIII.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p19.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall not acknowledge that God
the Word, of the same substance with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and
who was made flesh and became man, one of the Trinity, is Christ in
every sense of the word, but \[shall affirm\] that he is so only in an
inaccurate manner, and because of the abasement (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p19.2"></span>κενώσαντα</span>), as they
call it, of the intelligence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p19.3"></span>νοῦς</span>); if anyone shall affirm that this
intelligence united (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p19.4"></span>συνημμένον</span> ) to God the Word, is the
Christ in the true sense of the word, while the Logos is only called
Christ because of this union with the intelligence, and *e converso*
that the intelligence is only called God because of the Logos:  let him
be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p20"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p20.1"></span>IX.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p21.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that it was not the
Divine Logos made man by taking an animated body with a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p21.2"></span>ψυχὴ῾ λογικὴ</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p21.3"></span>νοερὰ</span>, that he
descended into hell and ascended into heaven, but shall pretend that it
is the <span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p21.4"></span>Ν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p21.5"></span>οῦς</span> which has done
this, that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p21.6"></span>Ν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p21.7"></span>οῦς</span> of which they say (in an impious
fashion) he is Christ properly so called, and that he is become so by
the knowledge of the Monad:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p22"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p22.1"></span>X.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p23.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that after the
resurrection the body of the Lord was ethereal, having the form of a
sphere, and that such shall be the bodies of all after the resurrection;
and that after the Lord himself shall have rejected his true body and
after the others who rise shall have rejected theirs, the nature of
their bodies shall be annihilated:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p24"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p24.1"></span>XI.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p25.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the future
judgment signifies the destruction of the body and that the end of the
story will be an immaterial <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p25.2"></span>ψύσις</span>, and that thereafter there will no
longer be any matter, but only spirit <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p25.3"></span>νοῦς</span>):  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p26"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p26.1"></span>XII.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p27"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p27.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the heavenly
Powers and all men and the Devil and evil spirits are united with the
Word of God in all respects, as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p27.2"></span>Ν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p27.3"></span>οῦς</span> which is by them called Christ and
which is in the form of God, and which humbled itself as they say; and
\[if anyone shall say\] that the Kingdom of Christ shall have an end: 
let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p28"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p28.1"></span>XIII.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p29"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p29.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that Christ \[i.e.,
the <span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p29.2"></span>Ν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p29.3"></span>οῦς</span>\] is in no wise
different from other reasonable beings, neither substantially nor by
wisdom nor by his power and might over all things but that all will be
placed at the right hand of God, as well as he that is called by them
Christ \[the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p29.4"></span>Ν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p29.5"></span>οῦς</span>\], as also they were in the feigned
pre-existence of all things:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p30"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p30.1"></span>XIV.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p31.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that all reasonable
beings will one day be united in one, when the hypostases as well as the
numbers and the bodies shall have disappeared, and that the knowledge of
the world to come will carry with it the ruin of the worlds, and the
rejection of bodies as also the abolition of \[all\] names, and that
there shall be finally an identity of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p31.2"></span>γνῶσις</span> and of the hypostasis; moreover,
that in this pretended apocatastasis, spirits only will continue to
exist, as it was in the feigned pre-existence:  let him be anathema.

<span id="xii.ix-p32"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ix-p32.1"></span>XV.</span>

<span id="xii.ix-p33"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.ix-p33.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall say that the life of the
spirits (<span class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p33.2"></span>νοῶν</span>)
shall be like to the life which was in the beginning while as yet the
spirits had not come down or fallen, so that the end and the beginning
shall be alike, and that the end shall be the true measure of the
beginning:  let him be anathema.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318:318](2140360.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p14"></span> The following is Hefele’s note (*Hist.
Councils*, Vol. IV., p. 226, note 1):

<span id="xii.ix-p15"></span>“<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.1"></span>Παραγαγεῖν</span> can in no way be translated,
as it has hitherto been, by *prætergressus* or ‘passed over’:  ‘That
Christ has gone over to all corporeity on heaven and earth,’ which gives
no sense.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.2"></span>Παράγειν</span> means here, like <span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ix-p15.3"></span>παραγωγή</span> in the
second anathematism, *creare*, *producere*, ‘create,’ ‘bring into
existence.’  Suicer, in his *Thesaurus*, completely overlooked this. 
*Cf*. Stephani, *s. vv.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.4"></span>παράγω</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ix-p15.5"></span>παραγωγή</span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Anathematisms of the Emperor Justinian Against
Origen.](2140361)
