[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140161)  [Next](2140163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p1"></span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>
<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-Page_121"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Canon XXV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p2.1"></span>Let</span> the bishop have power over
the funds of the Church, so as to dispense them with all piety and in
the fear of God to all who need.  And if there be occasion, let him take
what he requires for his own necessary uses and those of his brethren
sojourning with him, so that they may in no way lack, according to the
divine Apostle, who says, “Having food and raiment, let us therewith be
content.”  And if he shall not be content with these, but shall apply
the funds to his own private uses, and not manage the revenues of the
Church, or the rent of the farms, with the consent of the presbyters and
deacons, but shall give the authority to his own domestics and kinsmen,
or brothers, or sons, so that the accounts of the Church are secretly
injured, he himself shall submit to an investigation by the synod of the
province.  But if, on the other hand, the bishop or his presbyters shall
be defamed as appropriating to themselves what belongs to the Church,
(whether from lands or any other ecclesiastical resources), so that the
poor are oppressed, and accusation and infamy are brought upon the
account and on those who so administer it, let them also be subject to
correction, the holy synod determining what is right.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p5"></span>The bishop shall have power over
ecclesiastical goods.  But should he not be content with those things
which are sufficient for him but shall alienate the goods and revenues
of the church, without the advice of the clergy, penalties shall be
exacted from him in the presence of the synod.  But if he has converted
to his own uses what was given for the poor, of this also let him give
an explanation to the synod.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p6"></span>Compare with this canon Apostolic
Canon number XLI.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p7"></span>This Canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XII., Quæst I.,
can. XXIII. and with this should be compared canon XXII. immediately
preceding.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxv-p8"></span>At the end of this canon in Labbe’s
version of Dionysius we find these words added.  “And thirty bishops
signed who were gathered together at this Synod.”  Isidore Mercator has
a still fuller text, viz.:  “I, Eusebius, being present subscribe to all
things constituted by this holy Synod.  Theodore, Nicetas, Macedonius,
Anatolius, Tarcodimantus, Æthereus, Narcissus, Eustachius, Hesychius,
Mauricius, Paulus, and the rest, thirty bishops agreed and signed.”  Van
Espen after noting that this addition is not found in the Greek, nor in
Martin Bracarensis, adds “there is little probability that this clause
is of the same antiquity as the canons.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synod of Laodicea.](2140163)
