[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140062)  [Next](2140064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is likewise decreed that
deacons who have sacrificed and afterwards resumed the conflict, shall
enjoy their other honours, but shall abstain from every sacred ministry,
neither bringing forth the bread and the cup, nor making proclamations. 
Nevertheless, if any of the bishops shall observe in them distress of
mind and meek humiliation, it shall be lawful to the bishops to grant
more indulgence, or to take away \[what has been granted\].

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>For Ancient Epitome see above under
Canon I.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p4"></span>In this canon the work and office
of a deacon as then understood is set forth, viz.:  “to bring forth”
(whatever that may mean) “bread or wine” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>ἄρτον ἢ ποτηριον ἄναφέρειν</span>) and
“to act the herald” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>κηρύσσειν</span>).  There is
considerable difference of opinion as to the meaning of the first of
these expressions.  It was <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-Page_64"></span>always the duty of the deacon to
serve the priest, especially when he ministered the Holy Communion, but
this phrase may refer to one of two such ministrations, either to
bringing the bread and wine to the priest at the offertory, and this is
the view of Van Espen, or to the distribution of the Holy Sacrament to
the people.  It has been urged that the deacon had ceased to administer
the species of bread before the time of this council, but Hefele shews
that the custom had not entirely died out.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p5"></span>If I may be allowed to offer a
suggestion, the use of the disjunctive <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>ἢ</span> seems rather to point to the
administration of the sacrament than to the bringing of the oblations at
the offertory.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>The other diaconal function “to act
the herald” refers to the reading of the Holy Gospel, and to the
numerous proclamations made by the deacons at mass both according to the
Greek and Latin Rite.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>This canon is in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici* united with the foregoing.  *Decretum*., Pars I., Dist. l., c.
xxxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140064)
