[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mab18)  [Next](mab20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z8PY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Mabinogion*, tr. by Lady Charlotte Guest, \[1877\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

<span id="img_31500"></span> ![](img/31500.jpg)

### NOTES TO THE DREAM OF RHONABWY.

<span id="xref_299a">299a</span> MADAWC THE SON OF MAREDUDD.--*Page*
[299](mab18.htm#page_299.md).

MAREDUDD AP BLEDDYN, the father of Madawc, after much contest acquired
possession of the sovereignty of the whole principality of Powys. He
married Hunydd the daughter of Eunydd, chief of one of the fifteen
tribes of North Wales, and Lord of Dyffryn Clwyd and Allington, and died
in 1129; his son Madawc succeeded him in one-half of his possessions,
which thence acquired the name of Powys Fadawc. Maredudd had been one of
the most strenuous and successful opponents of the Normans, celebrated
by the national records. It was he who checked the progress of Henry I.,
who, in one of his invasions of Wales, narrowly escaped being slain by a
body of archers that Maredudd had dispatched to meet him; an arrow shot
by one of their number actually glanced from the breast-plate of the
royal invader. But the son of Maredudd was not distinguished for equal
ardour in his country's cause; on the contrary, Madawc combined with
Henry II. in the attacks he made

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

upon Wales in 1158, and during that monarch's first and unsuccessful
campaign, took the command of the English ships, and ravaged the shores
of Anglesey. In this expedition, however, Madawc was defeated with much
loss. Powell says of him, that he was "euer the king of Englands freend,
and was one that feared God, and releeued the poore." <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_151.md)

He was a prince of more than common talent, and was highly extolled by
contemporary bards and historians. Amongst others, Gwalchmai composed
several poems in his praise. <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_152.md)

Madawc's wonted prudence appears to have forsaken him in the decline of
life. There is an anecdote relating to him which, as it exists only in
MS., is probably not generally known. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_153.md) It is to the effect that in his later
years he took for his second wife an English lady, Matilda Verdun by
name, upon whom, and upon any children he might have by her, he settled
the Lordship of Oswestry. This lady inveigled the prince to Winchester,
where her party was powerful. There, upon some excuse, he was put in
durance, and while in that state was prevailed upon to execute another
deed, whereby he settled the said Lordship of Oswestry upon Matilda, and
any children she might have after his decease. The prince died soon
after the execution of this deed, and his body was conveyed from
Winchester to Meivod, in Montgomeryshire, the burying-place of his
family, where it was deposited in the church of St. Mary, which he
himself had built some years before. His widow, Matilda, scarce took
time to dry her tears before she married John Fitzalan, who thereby
became Lord of "Oswaldstree." <span id="fr_155"></span>[4](#fn_154.md)

By his first wife, Susanna, daughter of Gruffydd ab Conan, Prince of
North Wales, Madawc left several children.

He built the Castle of Oswestry, and a castle at Caer Einion, near
Welshpool. Several places in their neighbourhood, and in that of Meivod
still bear his name.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

<span id="xref_299b">299b</span>POWYS WITHIN ITS BOUNDARIES, &c.--*Page*
[299](mab18.htm#page_299.md).

THAT part of the ancient principality of Powys, which belonged to Madawc
ab Maredudd, extended from the vicinity of Chester to the uplands of
Arwystli, now known as the Plinlimmon range of mountains. This is
expressly stated by Gwalchmai, in his Elegy upon that Prince, in which
he boasts that the sovereignty of his patron reached from the summit of
Plinlimmon to the gates of Caerlleon, or Chester.--Myv. Arch. I. 202.

In more remote times Powys was of much greater extent. Powell tells us,
in his History of Wales, that "Powys before king Offas time reached
Eastward to the riuers of Dee and Seauerne, with a right line from the
end of Broxen hilles to Salop, with all the countrie betweene Wye and
Seauerne, whereof Brochwel yscithroc was possessed: but after the making
of Offas ditch the plaine countrie toward Salop, being inhabited by
Saxons and Normans, Powys was in length from Pulford bridge Northeast,
to the confines of Caerdigan shire, in the parish of Lhanguric in the
Southwest; and in bredth from the furthest part of Cyuelioc Westward, to
Elsmere on the Eastside. This countrie or principalitie of Powys was
appointed by Roderike the Great for the portion of his third sonne
Anarawd, and so continued intierlie vntill the death of Blethyn ap
Convyn. After whom, although the dominion was diminished by limiting
parts in seueraltie amongst his sonnes Meredyth and Cadogan, yet at
length it came wholie to the possession of Meredyth ap Blethyn, who had
issue two sonnes Madoc and Gruffyth, betweene whom the said dominion was
diuided." <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) Madawc's share was
further divided amongst his three children, from whose immediate
descendants it was gained, by fraud or violence, by their Norman
neighbours. Gruffydd's descendants, the first of whom was the celebrated
Owain Cyveiliog, succeeded for three generations, to an unbroken
inheritance, but in the fourth it was distributed among six sons, and
finally passed away to several remote heirs. One, and apparently the
most considerable of them, was represented by the Cheretons, afterwards
Gray, Barons of Powys, from whom are the Vernons of Hodnet and other
illustrious Norman families.

This passage would lead us to consider the Porfoed mentioned in the
Tale, as identical with Pulford, and the locality of this place, added
to the similarity of names, favours the supposition. The
[situation](errata.htm#6.md), however, of Merford, a lordship in the parish
of Gresford, Midway between Wrexham and Chester, and of which the name

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

bears at least an equal resemblance to that of Porfoed, renders it
doubtful which of the two is alluded to in the text. Merford contains
some interesting remains of a British camp, called the Roft, commanding
a most extensive view of the counties of Chester and Salop.

The Gwauan, in Arwystli, spoken of as being at the other extremity of
Powys, may possibly be one of the several spots now bearing the name of
Waun in the Plinlimmon range.

The Cambrian Quarterly gives some ancient lines on the confines of
Powys.

"From Cevn yr Ais, and from Chester to Eisteddva Gurig, and from Garn
Gynnull on the river Conwy to Rhyd Helyg on the river Wye." <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_156.md)

 

<span id="xref_299c">299c</span> IORWERTH THE SON OF MAREDUDD.--*Page*
[299](mab18.htm#page_299.md).

IORWERTH was the son of Maredudd ap Bleddyn, by his second wife Eva,
daughter of Bledrws ab Ednowain Bendew, chief of one of the fifteen
noble tribes. His father bestowed upon him the Lordship of Mochnant,
near Oswestry, and be went by the name of Iorwerth Goch of Mochnant.
Like most princes of his age, Iorwerth was a warrior, and in 1156 he
sided with Henry II. against his neighbour Owain Gwynedd, Prince of
North Wales, and during the contest that ensued between the English and
the Welsh, he took and razed to the ground the castle of Ial or Yale,
which Owain had built only ten years previously. The site of this
fortress is still to be seen on a tumulus called Tomen Rhodwydd, by the
roadside about halfway between Llangollen and Rhuthin. The partiality
evinced by Iorwerth to the English interest, caused his nephews, Owain
Cyveiliog and Owain Vychan, to unite their forces against him, and they,
succeeded in expelling him from his patrimony of Mochnant, which they
divided between them, the former taking possession of Uwch Rhaiadr, and
the latter of Is Rhaiadr. Iorwerth married Maude, the daughter of Roger
de Manley of Cheshire.

It is supposed by some, that the tribe (Gwelygordd) of Iorwerth is
celebrated by Cynddelw, in his poem called Gwelygorddeu Powys, under the
title of Yorwerthyawn.--Myv. Arch. I. 256.

It is also thought that Iorwerth, after his expulsion from Mochnant,
settled on the English side of Offa's dyke, for we find his grandson
(some say his son), Sir Gruffydd Vychan, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_157.md) called by the

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Welsh "Y Marchog
Gwyllt o Gaer Howel," the Wild Knight of Caerhowel, living at a mansion
still known by that name at Edgerly, in the county of Salop, near the
ford on the Vyrnwy, which in this Mabinogi is designated Rhyd y Wilure.
His descendants continued in the same county; and among their number we
find another "Wild Knight," Humphrey Kynaston the Wild, who during his
outlawry, in the reign of Henry VII. was the inhabitant of the cave, in
the bold sandstone rock at Ness Cliff, called after him Kynaston's Cave,
and concerning whose feats many an old wife's tale is still current in
Shropshire.

 

<span id="xref_300a">300a</span> FROM ABER CEIRAWC IN ALLICTWN VER, TO
RHYD Y WILURE.--*Page* [300](mab18.htm#page_300.md).

ABERCEIRAWC, as the name implies, is the point of the confluence of the
river Ceiriog with the Dee, which is not far below the town of Chirk,
and opposite to Wynnstay Park. Allictwn is doubtless to be fixed at
Allington in the immediate vicinity of Pulford, which, as we have
already seen, was the extreme boundary of Madawc's possessions to the
north-east; and Rhyd y Wilure is Rhyd y Vorle, in English Melverley, a
ford upon the Vyrnwy, not far from the spot where that river falls into
the Severn. We find accordingly that, taking Aberceirawc as the centre
of operations, Madawc caused the search for his brother to be made a
considerable way to the south, and as far to the north as his dominion
extended. It is said also that some of the men that were on this quest,
went as far as Nillystan Trevan, which may possibly be Halistan Trevan,
now called Halston, near Whittington, the "Tre wen (or white town) ym
mron y coed" of Llywarch Hên. Haliston was a sanctuary from time
immemorial; if Iorwerth was a fugitive, be might have sought it as a
place of refuge.

The river Vyrnwy, "the forkt Vurnway" of Drayton, is too well known to
need description; but as its name occurs in the text, it May be
permitted to remark, that whenever the bards have occasion to mention
it, they do so in a spirit of affection which its beauty could not fail
to inspire.

 

<span id="xref_300b">300b</span> KYNWRIG VRYCHGOCH, A MAN OF
MAWDDWY.--*Page* [300](mab18.htm#page_300.md).

MAWDDWY was one of the western districts of ancient Powys; it now forms,
in conjunction with Talybont, one of the hundreds of Merionethshire.
This district includes the wild range of mountains of which Aran Fawddwy
is the chief, and was in former times notorious for the wild and lawless
character of its inhabitants, too

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

well known by the appellation of the Gwylliaid Cochion Mawddwy, the
red-headed robbers of Mawddwy. The desperate deeds of these men were the
terror of all the surrounding country, on which they levied a species of
black-mail; and to such an extent did they carry their violence at last,
that it was found necessary in 1554 to issue a commission against them,
under which about a hundred of their number were hanged. Some of their
kinsmen soon after revenged them by the murder of Baron Owen, of
Hengwrt, the chief of the commission, whom they waylaid at Llidiart y
Barwn, on his journey to the assizes at Welshpool. After this, vigorous
means were taken for their extirpation, and they gradually
disappeared.--See Cambro. Briton, I. 184.

Iorwerth Goch, the Iorwerth of the present Mabinogi, had a son named
Madawc Goch of Mawddwy, of whom the following notice occurs in a MS.
Book of Pedigrees, collected by J. G., Esq., in 1697. "One Llywarch ab
Cadfan, an opponent of Prince Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, was slain by this
Madog Goch of Mawddwy; and in reward the Prince gave him the lands of
Llywarch and his Arms, which were, Argent, a Chevron party per pale
Gules and Or, inter 3 Eagles sable, their heads and one leg grey,
trippant, standing on the sable leg: 3 trefoils argent over each head."
A singular piece of heraldry.

It is not impossible that Kynwrig's designation of Vrychgoch may have
been given in allusion to the characteristic complexion of the men of
Mawddwy.

 

<span id="xref_300c">300c</span> MOELVRE IN KYNLLEITH.--*Page*
[300](mab18.htm#page_300.md).

KYNLLEITH is a division of the hundred of Chirk in Denbighshire, and
takes its name from the river Kynlleith. One of the most remarkable
natural features of this district is the isolated mountain Moelvre, the
summit of which, called Cyrn y Moelvre, is more than seventeen hundred
feet above the level of the sea, and rises precipitously from Llyn
Moelvre, a lake about a mile in circumference, situate on the western
side of the mountain. One of the descendants of Madawc ab Maredudd
erected a residence at a place called Moeliwrch, at a considerable
elevation on the southern side of Moelvre; it continued for many
centuries in the possession of his family.

Kynlleith is noticed in Cynddelw's Marwnad Fadawg fab Maredudd. --Myv.
Arc. I. 213.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span id="xref_301a">301a</span> ARGYNGROEG.--*Page*
[301](mab18.htm#page_301.md).

IN following Rhonabwy on his visionary journey, it may be allowable to
suppose him crossing the Vyrnwy at Rhyd y Vorle (Melverley), and then
pursuing his course through the Deuddwr between that river and the
Severn, till we come to the plains of Argyngroeg. The district traversed
is remarkably fertile. The Cambrian pedestrian, David Thomas, in his
metrical description of the Thirteen Counties of Wales, sang its praise
about the year 1720. After naming two places excelling in luxuriance, he
exclaims "Dau le hyfryd," but above all, the "Dolydd Hafren." Upon the
Dolydd Havren it was that Gwalchmai composed his "Gorhoffet," in the
twelfth century, while he and his troop of North-Wallians were guarding
the opposite fords of the Severn against the progress of the English
invaders.--Myv. Arch. I. 193.

That portion of the vale that bears the name of Argyngroeg, modernized
into Cyngrog, and to which this narrative more particularly relates,
consists of two townships, distinguished as Cyngrog vawr, and Cyngrog
vach, the former in the parish of Pool, the latter in that of
Guilsfield, and both side by side stretching to the Severn. When the
Irish and other freebooters were expelled in the fourth century by the
family of Cunedda Wledig, his son Rhuvon had a great part of
Denbighshire awarded him as his portion, which from him was called
Rhuvoniog, a name it retains to the present day. In like manner, it is
not improbable that Cyngar one of Cunedda's descendants had a portion
allotted to him at this place, which by adding the usual termination
*og* to his name would be called Cyngarog, and abbreviated into Cyngrog.
The names of Morganwg and Brycheiniog, from Morgan and Brychan, are of
similar origin. In Cyngrog vawr, lies the site of the Cistercian Abbey
of Ystrad Marchell (Strata Marcella), Alba Domus de Marcella, or Street
Marshall Abbey, as it is vulgarly called. Having probably been built of
wood, no traces of it now remain. The house and farm bearing the name of
"The Abbey" belong to the Earl of Powis. The Abbey was founded and well
endowed by Owain Cyveiliog, Prince of Powys Upper, who, besides much of
the upland and sheep pastures of Cyveiliog, and even of Arwystli,
granted to its inmates half the fish caught in the river Dyvi. The monks
of Marcella were reduced by decimation under Edward I. and finally
expelled by Henry VIII.

From Cyngrog, following the Vale of the Severn, we arrive at the
tributary stream of the Rhiw, whose Aber, or confluence with

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

the main stream, gives name by an ordinary abbreviation to the church
and village of Berriew; and a little lower down occur, "Rhyd-y-Groes ar
Havren," "The Cross, or Ford upon the Severn."

The Ford still remains, but has been from time immemorial converted into
a ferry. At this point was carried on the chief communication between
western Montgomeryshire, and the adjacent district of Merioneth towards
Shrewsbury. Here also are traces of a second way leading westward
towards the Gaer, an evident Roman encampment. The intersection of these
two roads appears to have occurred at no great distance from the ford,
which doubtless derived its distinctive appellation of Y Groes, either
from this circumstance, or from the Rood or Cross often set up both in
crossways and upon the margins of fords.

The name Rhyd y Groes, no longer borne by the ford or ferry, is now
preserved in that of a farm about two miles and a half distant, in the
parish of Fordun near Montgomery, the property of Mr. Price, of Gunley.

Upon the farm itself no remains have been discovered, but several tumuli
are found in its neighbourhood, the principal of which, "Hên Domen"
(formerly Tre' Baldwyn), is of considerable size. There are also British
encampments in the adjacent parishes of Churchstoke and Cherbury. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_158.md)

Rhyd y Groes is mentioned in the Welsh Chronicles, as the scene of
several conflicts between the Welsh and the Saxons; in allusion to which
are those lines of Drayton.

"Here could I else recount the slaughter'd Saxon's gore,  
Our swords at Crossford spilt on Severn's wand'ring shore."  
                                                        Song ix.

Lines in which Drayton may probably have had in mind the victory won
over the Saxons, in the early part of the eleventh century, by Gruffydd
ab Llewelyn, called by way of eminence, "Y tywysog dewr."

The Ford near Montgomery, was named as the place of meeting between
Prince Llewelyn ab Gruffydd, and the commissioners of Edward I.

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span id="xref_302a">302a</span> IDDAWC CORDD PRYDAIN.--*Page*
[302](mab18.htm#page_302.md).

THE treachery of Iddawc or Eiddilig Cordd Prydain, <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_159.md) is the subject of more than one of the
Triads, <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_160.md) where he is said to have
betrayed Arthur by divulging his plans. The meeting between him and
Medrawd, with their men at Nanhwynain before the battle of Camlan, is
spoken of as one of the three traitorous meetings of the Island, for
there they plotted the betrayal of Arthur, which occasioned the strength
of the Saxons. In another place their ascendancy is attributed to
Iddawc's magical arts, which there were not warriors in the Island
capable of withstanding, so that the Saxons prevailed. This magic, for
which he is also greatly celebrated, was taught him by Rhuddlwm Gawr.

The Triad which ranks Iddawc Cordd Prydain amongst the enchanters is
prettily versified by Davydd ap Gwilym, <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_161.md) who speaks of him as an Irishman.

Iddawc was also, with Trystan and Gweirwerydd Vawr, one of the three
stubborn ones, whom none could divert from their purpose; he is supposed
to have afterwards embraced a religious life, probably when he did
penance at Llechlas (possibly Glasgow), in North Britain, as mentioned
in the Tale. His name is found in the Catalogue of the Welsh Saints.
Professor Rees, however, considers this an error for Iddew ab Cawrda ab
Caradawc Vreichvras, arising from the similarity of their names. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_162.md)

 

<span id="xref_302b">302b</span> CAMLAN.--*Page*
[302](mab18.htm#page_302.md).

THE battle of Camlan was the last of Arthur's battles, and that in which
he lost his life. His opponents were headed by Medrawd, his nephew, the
son of his sister Anna and Llew ap Cynvarch.

The Triads assign two different causes for this battle. The one, the
blow given by Gwenhwyvar, Arthur's wife, to Gwenhwyvach; the other, the
blow given to Medrawd by Arthur himself. The events immediately
preceding it, together with the account of the battle itself as related
in the Triads, and by Gruffydd ab Arthur, are briefly as follows,

Lles, emperor of Rome, demanded from Arthur the tribute that

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

his ancestors had paid, from the time of Caswallawn the son of Beli to
that of Cystennin, Arthur's grandsire. The Roman Ambassador, proceeded
to Caerlleon upon Usk, when Arthur not only denied their claim, but on
the ground of the British origin of Brân and Constantine, both Roman
emperors, determined by a counterclaim to retaliate, Medrawd was
appointed Regent of the kingdom, whilst Arthur and his Britons crossed
the sea, and fought a battle in the Cisalpine territory, in which the
Roman emperor was slain, and both parties sustained severe loss. The
result of this encounter encouraged Medrawd to attempt his uncle's
throne. He seized upon the royal residence of Gelliwig, dragged the
queen Gwenhwyvar from her throne (or, according to some versions,
appropriated her as his wife), and strengthening himself by making
treaties with the Saxons, Scots, and Picts, collected a force of eighty
thousand men to oppose his uncle's landing. Arthur, however, disembarked
at Porth Hamwnt, and put his rebellious nephew to flight after a hard
fought engagement. Medrawd retreated to Winchester, whither Arthur,
after remaining three days on the field of battle to bury the dead,
followed him, and gained a second victory; upon this Medrawd fled into
Cornwall, but was overtaken on the banks of the Camlan, supposed to be
the river Camel, in that county. The celebrated battle of Camlan ensued.
Arthur there gained the victory, but received a mortal wound at the hand
of Medrawd, whom, however, he slew upon the field; he did not himself
die on the spot, but was conveyed to Avallach or Avalon, and the crown
descended to Cystennin the son of Kadwr, his kinsman. A mystery hangs
over the final fate of Arthur.

One of the Triads <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_163.md) admits that
Arthur died, and was buried at Avalon, now Glastonbury, in
Somersetshire, where we learn from other authorities that Henry the II.
many years afterwards discovered what were said to be his remains, with
the inscription, <span id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_164.md)

"*Hic jacet Arthurus, rex quondam rexque futurus*." <span
id="fr_166"></span>[3](#fn_165.md)

 

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

They were also visited, and a second time disinterred, by Edward I. and
his queen.

Medrawd, notwithstanding the treachery with which his career ended, had
always been considered a valiant warrior, and in the Triads <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_166.md) he is styled one of the three kingly
knights of Arthur's Court, to whom no one could deny any thing by reason
of their courtliness. The peculiar qualities to which his persuasive
powers were due, were calmness, mildness, and purity.

 

<span id="xref_304a">304a</span> ADAON THE SON OF TALIESIN.--*Page*
[304](mab18.htm#page_304.md).

ADAON or Avaon, son of the chief of the bards, and a bard himself, was
also celebrated for his valour. He was one of those three dauntless
chieftains who feared nothing in the day of the battle and strife, but
rushed onwards regardless of death.--Tr. 73.

This courage and daring supported him through all the dangers of war. He
fell at length by the hand of an assassin Llawgad Trwm Bargawd or
Llawgad Trwm Bargawd Eiddyn, whose name is preserved only as the
perpetrator of this crime.--Tr. 47.

The bold and determined character of Avaon appears to have continued
even after death, for there is a Triad (quoted, [p.
202](mab14.htm#page_202).md) in which Avaon is spoken of as one of the
grave-slaughtering ones, so called from their having avenged their
wrongs from their graves.

None of his poetry is known to be preserved, except the following which
is given in the Englynion y Clyweid.--Myv. Arch. I. 173.

"Hast thou heard what Avaon sang,  
The son of Taliesin, of the recording verse?  
The cheek will not conceal the anguish of the heart."

 

<span id="xref_304b">304b</span> ELPHIN.--*Page*
[304](mab18.htm#page_304.md).

ELPHIN was the son of Gwyddno Garanhir, the unfortunate king whose
possessions were submerged through the intemperance of Seithenin, the
person employed to attend to the sea-banks. Some further particulars
concerning him will be mentioned in a subsequent Mabinogi.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span id="xref_304c">304c</span> BATTLE OF BADON.--*Page*
[304](mab18.htm#page_304.md).

THE battle of Badon or Badon Mount, was one of the later,--Nennius says
the twelfth,--and most successful of the battles fought by Arthur and
the British elders, against the Saxons under Cerdic. The Britons not
only gained the victory, but were by it enabled for some time to hold
the Saxons in check.

The date of the battle has been the subject of dispute. From the persons
engaged in it, it must be placed in the sixth century. A passage in the
Red Book of Hergest, fixes its chronology 128 years after the age of
Vortigern. The later Gildas, named Badonicus, from his birth having
taken place in the year of the battle, has left a passage on the
subject, which Bede appears to have misinterpreted, and from which Mr.
Stevenson, the last editor of Gildas, places the birth of his author,
and therefore the date of the battle, in the year 520.

The site of this conflict is also doubtful. Usher, following Camden,
fixes it at Bath, and Camden, led probably by the similarity of names,
gives his opinion in favour of Banner Down, near that city, upon which,
in common, however, with most of the neighbouring heights, are remains
of entrenchments more or less perfect. Carte prefers what he calls Mount
Badon, in Berkshire. It is remarkable that the latter Gildas speaks of
the battle as "obsessio," a siege. He also places "Mons Badonicus" near
to the mouth of the Severn "prope Sabrinæ ostium"; but this latter
passage has been considered an interpolation. Mr. Freeman, whose
historical and antiquarian learning entitles his opinion to respect,
suggests that Badon way be identical with Badbury Rings, near Wimborne
in Dorsetshire.

To quote more poetical authority, the feats performed by the hero
Arthur, at the battle of Badon Mount, are thus prettily celebrated in
Drayton's verse.

They sung how he himself at Badon bore that day,  
When at the glorious gole his British scepter lay;  
Two daies together how the battel stronglie stood:  
Pendragon's worthie son, who waded there in blood,  
Three hundred Saxons slew with his owne valiant hand."  
                                                       Song iv.

Cynddelw, and others of the Welsh Bards, speak of this fight with
becoming admiration.

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<span id="xref_304d">304d</span> OSLA GYLLELLVAWR.--*Page*
[304](mab18.htm#page_304.md).

OSSA, or Osla, Gyllellvawr has already appeared in the Mabinogi of
Kilhwch, pp. [226](mab16.htm#page_226) and [256](mab16.htm#page_256.md),
where his prowess in the hunt of the Twrch Trwyth, occasioned the loss
of his marvellous knife. From his name, and from the part assigned to
him in this Tale, he was probably a Saxon; the Ossa, it may be, of
Nennius's genealogies. This conjecture is strengthened by the epithet
"Cyllellvawr"; the great or long knife, being in some measure associated
with the Saxon name, owing to the massacre of Stonehenge, commonly
called the "Treachery of the Long Knives," "Brad y Cyllyll
hirion." <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_167.md) Hengist on that occasion
is said to have invited the British Chieftains to a banquet and
conference at Ambresbury, when beside each was placed a Saxon, who, at a
signal agreed upon, drew forth his long knife, and suddenly fell upon
his neighbour. This scheme was so effectually executed that four hundred
and sixty of the British nobles are supposed to have been slaughtered.
They did not, indeed, fall wholly unavenged; some defended themselves
valiantly, and killed many of the Saxons with the stones that lay
around. Eidiol, <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_168.md) earl of
Gloucester, who was fortunate enough to escape the general carnage, slew
seventy Saxons with his own hand; the Triads say six hundred and sixty.
The circle of Stonehenge is said, though with small semblance of
probability, to have been erected by the Britons as a monument of this
massacre upon the spot on which it occurred.

<span id="xref_305a">305a</span> CARADAWC VREICHVRAS.--*Page*
[305](mab18.htm#page_305.md).

CARADAWC, like Trystan, and many other heroes whose names occur in the
Mabinogion, was celebrated both in Welsh and Norman story. He was a son
of Llyr Merini, a prince of Cornwall, and himself chief elder of
Gelliwig; <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_169.md) the royal residence in
that part of the Island. His mother was Gwen, grand-daughter of Brychan,
through whose right he is supposed to have become ruler of the district
of Brycheiniog. <span id="fr_171"></span>[4](#fn_170.md) According to the
Triads, he was one of the battle knights of Britain, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[5](#fn_171.md) and in an Englyn attributed to Arthur
himself, he is styled "Caradawc pillar of the Cymry."

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

His prowess at the battle of Cattraeth, is also sting in the verse of
his contemporary Aneurin, <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_172.md) who
calls several of his fellow-warriors in evidence of his assertion.

"When Caradawc rushed into battle,  
It was like the tearing onset of the woodland boar,  
The bull of combat in the field of slaughter,  
He attracted the wild dogs by the action of his hand.  
My witnesses are Owain the son of Eulat,  
And Gwrien, and Gwynn, and Gwriat.  
From Cattraeth and its carnage,  
From the hostile encounter,  
After the clear bright mead was served,  
He saw no more the dwelling of his father."

From the latter part of this passage, it appears that Caradawc fell in
this battle, and the same is again repeated a few lines further on in
the passage already quoted in the notes to Peredur ab Evrawc. See [p.
125](mab11.htm#page_125.md).

Several Welsh families trace their pedigree to Caradawc.

Caradawc's horse Lluagor is recorded as one of the three battle horses
of the Island. <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_173.md)

Tegau Eurvron, the beautiful wife of Caradawc, was no less renowned for
her virtue than for her charms. In the Triads she is spoken of as one of
the three fair ladies, and one of the three chaste damsels of Arthur's
Court. <span id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_174.md) She possessed three
precious things of which she alone was worthy; her mantle, her goblet of
gold, and her knife. She is frequently alluded to by the bards.

In Anglo-Norman Romance, Caradawc's cognomen of Vreichvras "with the
brawny arm," becomes "Brise Bras" and he himself takes his place as a
principal hero of the Round Table. His wife preserves her British
character and attributes under a Norman garb, and is well known as
"faithful among the faithless" of Arthur's Court, the heroine of the
mantle, "over her decent shoulders drawn." Sir Caradawc's well-founded
confidence in his wife's virtue, enabled him to empty the marvellous
Horn, and carve the tough Boar's head, adventures in which his compeers
failed. In token of the latter of them, the Boar's head, in some form or
other, appears as the armorial bearing of all of his name.

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

The Trouvères have a pretty story <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_175.md)
in reference to the appellation of Brise Bras which they rendered the
"wasted arm." They tell of an enchanter who fixed a serpent upon
Caradawc's arm, from whose wasting tooth he could never be relieved,
until she whom he loved best should consent to undergo the torture in
his stead. His betrothed on learning this, was not to be deterred from
giving him this proof of her devotion. As, however, the serpent was in
the act of springing from the wasted arm of the knight to the fair neck
of the lady, her brother, Kadwr, earl of Cornwall, struck off its head
with his sword, and thus dispelled the enchantment. Caradawc's arm,
however, never recovered its pristine strength and size, and hence,
according to some authorities, the name of Brise Bras.

In the life of St. Collen, two persons of the name are mentioned, one of
whom was the ancestor of St, Collen himself, and was called Vreichvras,
because he broke his arm in the battle of Hiraddig, from which injury
that arm became larger than the other. He is expressly distinguished
from the other Caradawc Vreichvras the son of Llyr Merini.--See Greal,
337.

 

<span id="xref_305b">305b</span> CEVN DIGOLL.---*Page*
[305](mab18.htm#page_305.md).

ON the eastern boundary of Montgomeryshire, we find situated Cevn
Digoll, called also "Hir Vynydd," or the Long Mountain. From its natural
position, it seems to have been considered as a military post of some
importance, and is celebrated as the scene of several remarkable events.
There is a Triad relating to the conflicts that took place between
Cadwallawn, and Edwin, king of Northumbria, on Cevn Digoll, in the early
part of the seventh century, and which is said to have occasioned one of
the three discolourings of the Severn, when that river was discoloured
from its source to its estuary. <span id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_176.md)

These engagements are thus alluded to in an Elegy upon Cadwallawn ab
Cadvan.--Myv. Arch. I. 121.

"It was on Cevn Digoll that the Welsh maintained their last struggle
against Edward I. when Madawc, the son of Llywellyn ab Gruffydd was
defeated and taken prisoner by the Lords Marchers. It was also said that
Henry VII. encamped on this mountain, on his March from Wales to
Bosworth field. On the summit of Cevn Digoll is a circular encampment,
called the Beacon Ring. It is several acres in extent, but there is no
water within its limits."

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<span id="xref_305c">305c</span> MARCH THE SON OF MEIRCHION.--*Page*
[305](mab18.htm#page_305.md).

THIS prince, whose territory is said to have been in Cornwall, was
particularly unfortunate in having such a nephew as Trystan, and such a
wife as Essyllt, the Yseult La Belle of the Trouvères.

As a possessor of ships he has been already noticed, the Triad which
represents him as such having been cited at [p.
193](mab14.htm#page_193.md). His grave is mentioned by the Englynion y
Beddau, Myv. Arch. II. p. 81.

 

<span id="xref_306a">306a</span> KADWR, EARL OF CORNWALL.--*Page*
[306](mab18.htm#page_306.md).

IN the wars of Arthur, as recounted by Gruffydd ab Arthur, Kadwr bore a
conspicuous part. He shared the dangers of the expedition against the
Romans, and was present at the battle in which the emperor of Rome was
slain. He assisted at the coronation of his sovereign at Caerlleon upon
Usk. Kadwr is mentioned in the Triads as one of the three battle
knights, who fled neither for spear, nor arrow, nor sword, and who never
shamed their leader in the day of conflict. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_177.md)

His son Cystennin succeeded Arthur in his kingdom. Tegau Eurvron, the
virtuous wife of Caradawc Vreichvras, and the heroine of the Mantel mal
taillé, appears to have been the sister of Kadwr.

Taliesin alludes to him in his poem entitled the Glaswawd--

He will spare no kindred,  
Neither cousin nor brother;  
At the sound of Kadwr's horn  
Nine hundred are stunned."  
                        Myv. Arch. I. p. 64.

 

<span id="xref_311a">311a</span> OVERLAID WITH FINE SILVER.--*Page*
[311](mab18.htm#page_311.md).

THE words in the original are "Gwedy latteinu ac aryant coeth," being
lattened over with refined silver. Latten, or laton, was a mixed metal
of the colour of brass, and was much employed in the fourteenth century
for monumental effigies. For this and many other purposes it was
prepared in the form of plate, and hence its name seems occasionally to
have been used to express a plate or coating of metal generally, as in
this particular instance of silver.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

It may be remarked, that the term "latten" is still technically applied
to the thinnest manufactured iron plate.

 

<span id="xref_311b">311b</span> RAVENS.--*Page*
[311](mab18.htm#page_311.md).

THE Ravens of Owain have already appeared in the Mabinogi of Iarlles y
Ffynawn, where they are said to have been three hundred in number, and
to have descended to their master from Cynvarch, his paternal grandsire.
It seems from passages in the writings of various bards, that the
tradition of this singular army was familiarly current in the middle
ages. It is alluded to by Bleddynt Vardd, in an Elegy on Davydd, the son
of Gruffydd (and brother to Llewelyn, the last of the Welsh Princes),
who was imprisoned and put to death by Edward I. about 1283.

A man he was with a battered shield and a daring lance, in the field of
battle;  
A man proud to seek the furious trampling;  
A man whose warriors were proud of their stately array;  
A man of the cleaving stroke and broken spear, loving the fight;  
A man who caused the birds to fly upon the hosts \[of slain\]  
Like the ravens of Owain eager for prey."  
                                          Myv. Arch. I. p. 365.

Lewis Glyn Cothi even mentions the particular staff or shaft, by the
uplifting of which the Ravens were inspirited to destroy Arthur's pages
and attendants, as related in the text.

"Owain son of Urien overthrew  
The three towers of Cattraeth of old,  
Arthur dreaded, as the flames,  
Owain, his ravens, and his parti-coloured staff."--Works, I. 140.

Another poem of his has also an allusion to the "Vran a'r vaner
Vraith."--I. 72.

 

<span id="xref_312a">312a</span> SELYV THE SON OF KYNAN GARWYN.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

HE has been already noticed as one of the "grave-slaughtering" warriors
of the Island of Britain, who avenged their wrongs from their
Sepulchres. A satire upon his father, Kynan Garwyn, is printed in the
Myvyrian Archaiology, I. p. 168, among the Poems of Taliesin, to whom it
is assigned.

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

<span id="xref_312b">312b</span> GWGAWN GLEDDYVRUDD.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

WE find the name of this chieftain twice occurring in the Triads. He is
first noticed as one of the three stayers of slaughter <span
id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_178) (ysgymmydd aereu.md), and afterwards, as
one of the sentinels in the battle of Bangor Orchard.--Tr. lxvi.

His grave is alluded to in the Englynion y Beddau. The passage has been
already quoted ([p. 33](mab06.htm#page_33).md).

The name of his horse, which was Buchestom, is preserved in the Trioedd
y Meirch.

 

<span id="xref_312c">312c</span> RHIOGAN.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

THIS prince is mentioned in the graves of the warriors.

"Whose is the grave on the banks of the Rhydnant?  
Rhun was his name, of the steady progress,  
He was a king; Rhiogan slew him."--Myv. Arch. I. p. 82.

 

<span id="xref_312d">312d</span> GWAIR THE SON OF GWESTYL.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

IT would seem that this personage was distinguished as being of a
peculiarly dismal disposition, for we find him referred to as such by
Llywarch ap Llewelyn, <span id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_179.md) in an Elegy
on Hywel ap Gruffydd, (who died in 1216,) where he tells us, that
through grief for his loss, his friends are become like Gwair ah
Gwestyl.--Myv. Arch. I. p. 294.

And Einion Wan, in his Elegy on Madawc ab Gruffydd Maelor, a few years
later, has the same expression in allusion to Madawc.

"The man who has become like Gwair ab Gwestyl."  
                                      Myv. Arch. I. p. 333.

It is not impossible that he is the same person as the Gwevyl mab
Gwestad, of Kilhwch and Olwen, whose melancholy was such that "on the
day that he was sad, he would let one of his lips drop below his waist,
while he turned up the other like a cap upon his head" ([p.
227](mab16.htm#page_227).md).

The variation in the names is perhaps not greater than may be accounted
for by the errors into which the transcribers of the olden time are well
known to have but too frequently fallen.

In one version of the Triads, he is mentioned m one of the

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

three diademed chiefs of the Island, together with Kai, and Trystan mab
Tallwch. <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_180.md) But others substitute for
his name that of Huail, the son of Kaw of Cwm Cawlwyd.

 

<span id="xref_312e">312e</span> TRYSTAN THE SON OF TALLWCH.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

THIS personage is better known as the Tristan of Chivalric, and the Sir
Tristrem of Metrical Romance, than in his proper character as a
chieftain of the sixth century. In the Triads, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_181.md) he is mentioned as one of the three
compeers of Arthur's Court, as one of the diademed Princes, as one of
the three Heralds, and as one of the three stubborn ones, whom no one
could deter from their purpose. His chief celebrity, however, is derived
from his [unfortunate](errata.htm#7.md) attachment to Essyllt, the wife of
his uncle, March ab Meirchion, which gained him the appellation of one
of the three ardent lovers of Britain. It was owing to the circumstance
of his having tended his uncle's swine, whilst he despatched their usual
keeper with a message to this lady, that he became classed as one of the
three swineherds of the Island. There is a further Triad concerning
Trystan, in which he is represented as able to transform himself into
any shape he pleased.--Myv. Arch. II. p. 80.

 

<span id="xref_312f">312f</span> MORYEN.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

A WARRIOR whose name repeatedly occurs in the Gododin.

 

<span id="xref_312g">312g</span> LLACHEU THE SON OF ARTHUR.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

LLACHEU has already been mentioned ([p. 60](mab06.htm#page_60).md) with
Gwalchmai, and Rhiwallon of the broom blossom hair, as one of the
learned ones of the Island of Britain, to whom the elements and material
essence of every thing were known. He was no less renowned for warlike
prowess than for his deep knowledge, and is said to have fallen fighting
bravely for his country, in the battle of Llongborth, so celebrated in
the verse of Llywarch Hên. The death of Llacheu is thus alluded to, in a
curious Dialogue between Gwyn ab Nudd and Gwyddno Garanhir. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[3](#fn_182.md)

"I know where Llacheu the son of Arthur  
Renowned in song was slain,  
When the ravens rushed upon blood."

 

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

 [312h](mab18.htm#xref_312h.md) RHYAWD THE SON OF MORGANT.--*Page*
[312](mab18.htm#page_312.md).

THE Triads celebrate him as one of the three irregular Bards of the
Island of Britain, the other two being Arthur himself, and Cadwallawn
the son of Cadvan. He also ranked with Trystan, and Dalldav mab Kynin
Côv, as one of the three compeers of Arthur's court. Rhuddfrych was the
name of his horse. <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_183.md)

 

<span id="xref_313a">313a</span> GILBERT THE SON OF KADGYFFRO.--*Page*
[313](mab18.htm#page_313.md).

GILBERT the son of Kadgyffro, has already been cited ([p.
332](#page_332).md) with Gwgan Gleddyvrudd and Morvran Eil Tegid, as one of
the three stayers of slaughter. His name occurs again in the Trioedd y
Meirch 3, where his horse is said to have been one of the chief steeds
of the Island of Britain, and to have been known by the designation of
Rhuddfreon Tuthfleidd.

 

<span id="xref_313b">313b</span> GWRTHMWL WLEDIG.--*Page*
[313](mab18.htm#page_313.md).

GWRTHMWL, a prince of North Britain, was the chief elder of Penrhyn
Rhionydd, one of the three tribe-thrones or royal cities of the Island.
The celebrated St. Kentigern was chief Bishop of Penrhyn Rhionydd,
during Gwrthmwl's eldership.--Tr. vii.

Gwrthmwl's history is brief. It may be inferred that be was slain by
Maelwr of Rhiw or Allt Faelwr, in Cardiganshire, since there are notices
in the triads of his sons, Gwair and Clais, and Arthaual, <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_184.md) riding against Maelwr, upon Erch their
horse, to avenge their father's fate. It was one of Maelwr's customs
never to close his gates against a single horse-load, and thus they
gained entrance, and slew him. This was one of the three great
horse-loads of the Island of Britain. The first of the three was a
burthen of seven persons and a half, borne by Du y Moroedd, the horse of
Elidyr Mwynvawr, from Llech Elidyr in the North, to Llech Elidyr in
Anglesey. The seven were Elidyr himself, and Eurgain the daughter of
Maelgwn Gwynedd, his wife, and Gwynda Gyned, and Gwynda Rheimad, and
Mynach Nawmon the counsellor, and Petryleu Venestyr the butler, and
Arianvagyl his servant, and Gellfeinesin his jester, who held on with
his two

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

hands at the horse's crupper and so was the half person. It does not
appear what was the reason of their travelling in so singular a manner.

Gwrthmwl Wledig, was also the possessor of one of the spectre bulls of
the Island of Britain, or as another version has it, one of the spectre
stags; Carw and Tarw, having been evidently confounded by the
copyists. <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_185.md) What these sprites were
is not explained. According to Beddau y Milwyr, his grave was in the
wood of Briavael. <span id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_186.md)

<span id="img_33500"></span> ![](img/33500.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[316:1](mab19.htm#fr_152.md) Page 210.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[316:2](mab19.htm#fr_153.md) Myvyrian Archaiology,
I. p. 200.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[316:3](mab19.htm#fr_154.md) For this anecdote, as
well as for much of the topographical information contained in the notes
to the Tale of Rhonabwy, I am indebted to the kindness of the Rev.
Walter Davies (Gwallter Mechain).

<span id="fn_154"></span>[316:4](mab19.htm#fr_155.md) John's grandson,
Richard Fitzalan, was the first Earl of Arundel of that name. In the
time of Edward III. another Richard Fitzalan, fourth in descent from the
above-mentioned Matilda Verdun, was at the same time Earl of Arundel,
and in right of his mother, Earl Warren and Surrey. He was also Lord of
Clun and Oswaldstree, in Shropshire, and Lord of Bromfield, Yale,
Chirkland, and Dinus Bran, in North Wales.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[317:1](mab19.htm#fr_156.md) Page 211.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[318:1](mab19.htm#fr_157.md) Cambr. Quarterly,
III. 403.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[318:2](mab19.htm#fr_158.md) Sir Gruffydd Vychan
was one of the earliest knights of the military order of St. John of
Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[322:1](mab19.htm#fr_159.md) Acknowledgment should
again be made in this place to the Rev. Walter Davies, for the curious
local information contained in this note.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[323:1](mab19.htm#fr_160.md) Possibly Gordd
Prydain, the hammer of Britain.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[323:2](mab19.htm#fr_161.md) Triads 22, 20, 50,
90, 78.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[323:3](mab19.htm#fr_162.md) Davydd ab Gwilym's
Poems, 207. Cyffelybiad rhwng Morfudd a'r Delyn.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[323:4](mab19.htm#fr_163.md) Welsh Saints, p. 280.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[324:1](mab19.htm#fr_164.md) Myv. Arch. II. p. 4.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[324:2](mab19.htm#fr_165.md) Giraldus Cambrensis,
who says he saw the inscription, gives it thug: "Hic jacet sepultus
inclytus Rex Arthurus in insula Avallonia."

<span id="fn_165"></span>[324:3](mab19.htm#fr_166.md) It may be here
permitted to quote old Lydgate's verges upon Arthur's disappearance and
expected return:--

"He is a King crouned in Fairie,  
  With scepter and sword and with his regally  
Shall resort as Lord and Soveraigne  
  Out of Fairie and reigne in Britaine;  
And repaire again the Round Table.<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>  
  By prophesy Merlin set the date,  
Among Princes King incomparable,  
  His seate againe to Caerlion to translate,  
The Parchas sustren sponne so his fate,  
  His Epitaph recordeth so certaine  
Here lieth K. Arthur that shall raigne againe."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[325:1](mab19.htm#fr_167.md) Triad 118.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[327:1](mab19.htm#fr_168.md) Triad 20.--Gruffydd
ab Arthur. Myv. Arch. II. 254.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[327:2](mab19.htm#fr_169.md) Eidiol is associated
for his strength with Gwrnerth Ergydlym, who slow the largest bear that
ever was seen, with an arrow of straw; and Gwgan Lawgadarn, who rolled
the stone of Maenarch from the valley to the top of the hill, which not
less than thirty oxen could have drawn.--Tr. 60.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[327:3](mab19.htm#fr_170.md) Triad 64.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[327:4](mab19.htm#fr_171.md) Jones's History of
Brecknockshire, I. p. 53.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[327:5](mab19.htm#fr_172.md) Triad 29.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[328:1](mab19.htm#fr_173.md) Myv. Arch. 1. p. 5.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[328:2](mab19.htm#fr_174.md) Trioedd y Meirch,
Myv. Arch. II. p. 20.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[328:3](mab19.htm#fr_175.md) Triads 103, 108.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[329:1](mab19.htm#fr_176.md) See Metrical and
Prose versions of Perceval le Gallois.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[329:2](mab19.htm#fr_177.md) Triad lxxv.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[330:1](mab19.htm#fr_178.md) Myv. Arch. II. p. 80

<span id="fn_178"></span>[332:1](mab19.htm#fr_179.md) The others were
Morvran eil Tegid, and Gilbert mab Cadgyffro.--Tr. xxix.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[332:2](mab19.htm#fr_180.md) Commonly called
Prydydd y Moch.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[333:1](mab19.htm#fr_181.md) Tr. xxiii. Myv. Arch.
II., p. 12.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[333:2](mab19.htm#fr_182.md) Triads 113, 32, 69,
18, 102. See also the dialogue between him and Gwalchmai ([p.
57](mab06.htm#page_57).md).

<span id="fn_182"></span>[333:3](mab19.htm#fr_183.md) Myv. Arch. I. p. 166.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[334:1](mab19.htm#fr_184.md) Triads lxxxix. 113,
and Trioedd y Meirch, 5.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[334:2](mab19.htm#fr_185.md) Myv. Arch. II. 8, 10,
20, 80. In some accounts only two of his sons are said to have been on
this expedition, and one of them is called Achlen.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[335:1](mab19.htm#fr_186.md) Myv. Arch. II. p. 16,
17, 71

<span id="fn_186"></span>[335:2](mab19.htm#fr_187.md) Ib. I. p. 81.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pwyll Prince of Dyved](mab20.md)
