[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mab22)  [Next](mab24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z8PY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Mabinogion*, tr. by Lady Charlotte Guest, \[1877\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

<span id="img_38500"></span> ![](img/38500.jpg)

### NOTES TO BRANWEN THE DAUGHTER OF LLYR.

<span id="xref_369a">369a</span> BENDIGEID VRAN.--*Page*
[369](mab22.htm#page_369.md).

BRAN the son of Llyr Llediaith, and sovereign of Britain, derives,
according to the Welsh authorities, his title of Bendigeid, or the
Blessed, from the circumstance of his having introduced Christianity
into this Island. They tell us that he was the father of the celebrated
Caradawc (Caractacus), whose captivity he is said to have shared; and
proceed to state that having embraced the Christian faith, during his
seven years' detention in Rome, he returned to his native country, and
caused the Gospel to be preached there. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_195.md) The following Triad recites these
events.

"The three blissful Rulers of the Island of Britain, Bran the Blessed,
the son of Llyr Llediaith, who first brought the faith of Christ to the
nation of the Cymry from Rome, where he was seven years a hostage for
his son Caradawc, whom the Romans made prisoner through the craft, and
deceit, and treachery of Aregwedd Fôeddawg \[usually supposed to be
Cartismandua\]. The second was Lleurig ab Coel ab Cyllyn Sant, who was
called Lleufer Mawr, \[the great Light\], and built the ancient church
at Llandaff, which

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

was the first in Britain, and who gave the privileges of land, and of
kindred, and of social rights, and of society to such as were of the
faith of Christ. The third was Cadwaladyr the Blessed, who gave refuge,
with his lands, and with all his goods, to the believers who fled from
the Saxons without faith, and from the aliens who would have slain
them."--Tr. 35.

The benefit which Bran thus conferred upon his country procured for his
family the distinction of being accounted one of the three Holy Tribes;
the families of Cunedda Wledig and Brychan Brycheiniog were the other
two.

All this, however, it may be observed, is much at variance with the
particulars of Caradawc's captivity, and of his family, recorded by
classical writers.

Bran is ranked with Prydain ab Aedd Mawr, and Dyvnwal Moelmud as one of
the three Kings who gave stability to sovereignty by the excellence of
their system of government.--Tr. 36.

Various ancient Welsh documents allude to the incidents recorded of Bran
in the Mabinogi of Branwen. Thus in the curious poem entitled Kerdd am
Veib Llyr ab Brychwel Powys, attributed to Taliesin, are the following
lines,--

I was with Bran in Ireland,  
I saw when Morddwyd Tyllon was slain. <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_196.md)

And there is a Triad upon the story of his head being buried under the
White Tower of London, with the face towards France, intended as a charm
against foreign invasion. Arthur, it appears, proudly disinterred the
head, preferring to hold the Island by his own strength alone, and this
is recorded as one of the fatal disclosures of Britain.

"The three Closures and Disclosures of the Island; First the head of
Bendigeid Vran ab Llyr, which Owain the son of Maxen Wledig buried under
the White Tower in London, and while it was go placed no invasion could
be made upon this Island; the second was the bones of Gwrthevyr the
Blessed \[Vortimer\], which were buried in the chief harbour of the
Island, and while they remained there hidden all invasions were
ineffectual. The third was the dragons buried by Lludd ab Beli, in the
city of Pharaon, in the rocks Of Snowdon. And the three closures were
made under the blessing of God and his attributes, and evil befel from
the time of their disclosure. Gwrtheyrn Gwrtheneu \[Vortigern\],
disclosed the dragons

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

to revenge the displeasure of the Cymry against him, and he invited the
Saxons in the guise of men of defence to fight against the Gwyddyl
Ffychti; and after this he disclosed the bones of Gwrthevyr the Blessed,
through love of Ronwen \[Rowena\], the daughter of the Saxon Hengist.
And Arthur disclosed the head of Bendigeid Vran ab Llyr, because he
chose not to hold the Island except by his own strength. And after the
three disclosures came the chief invasions upon the race of the
Cymry."--Tr. 53.

The name of Bran is of frequent occurrence in the poems of Cynddelw, and
other bards of the middle ages.

 

<span id="xref_369b">369b</span> HARLECH.--*Page*
[369](mab22.htm#page_369.md).

MOST of the localities which occur in the Tale of Branwen are too well
known to need any description; one or two, however, require a slight
notice. Of Harlech, it may be remarked that it is also called Twr
Bronwen, or Branwen's Tower. The name of Caer Collwyn was also bestowed
upon it after Collwyn ab Tangno, chief of one of the fifteen Noble
Tribes of North Wales. It possesses the ruins of a fine castle. Harlech
stands on the sea coast, on the confines of Ardudwy, one of the six
districts of Merionethshire, of which the portion called Dyffryn Ardudwy
is a remnant of the Cantrev y Gwaelod, inundated in the time of Gwyddno
Garanhir.

Edeyrnion, mentioned a little further on in the story, is also situated
in Merionethshire.

Talebolion is a Commot in Anglesey.

Aberffraw, likewise in Anglesey, was the residence of the princes of
Gwynedd from the time of Roderick the Great, in 843, to that of the last
Llywelyn, in 1282.

 

<span id="xref_369c">369c</span> EUROSSWYDD.--*Page*
[369](mab22.htm#page_369.md).

EUROSSWYDD is beyond doubt the Roman general Ostorius, the captor of
Llyr Llediaith, and his family, including Bran and Caradawc
(Caractacus).

He is mentioned as such in Triad L, already quoted.--See [p.
192](mab14.htm#page_192.md).

 

<span id="xref_369d">369d</span> BELI THE SON. OF MANOGAN.--*Page*
[369](mab22.htm#page_369.md).

BELI, surnamed the Great, was king over Britain forty years, and was
succeeded in the sovereignty by his sons, Lludd and Caswallawn, better
known as Cassivelaunus. In the Armes attributed to Taliesin, Beli is
thus addressed,--

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

"Greatly do I honour thee  
Victorious Beli,  
Son of Manogan the king.  
Do thou preserve the glory  
Of the Honey Island <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_197.md) of Beli."  
                       Myv. Arch. I. p. 73.

 

<span id="xref_370a">370a</span> BRANWEN.--*Page*
[370](mab22.htm#page_370.md).

THE beautiful Branwen (or Bronwen, the "white-bosomed," as she is more
frequently called), is one of the most popular heroines of Welsh
romance. No less celebrated for her woes than for her charms, we find
that her eventful story was a favourite theme with the bards and poets
of her nation. Numerous instances might be adduced of the allusions to
her, which their compositions contain; suffice it to refer to the words
of Davydd ab Gwilym, who, in one of his odes addressed to Morvudd,
compares her hue to that of Bronwen, the daughter of Llyr.

The indignities to which Branwen was subjected in Ireland are referred
to in one of the Triads (49).

In 1813, a grave containing a funeral urn was discovered on the banks of
the river Alaw, in Anglesey, in a spot called Ynys Bronwen. The
appearance of the grave, and its remarkable locality, led to the
inference that it might indeed be the "Bedd Petrual," the four-sided
place of burial, in which, according to the text, her sorrowing
companions deposited the remains of the unfortunate heroine of the
Mabinogion. The following account of its discovery was communicated, in
1821, to the Cambro-Briton (and printed in that publication, II. p. 71),
by Sir R. C. Hoare, on the authority of Richard Fenton, Esq., of
Fishguard.

"An Account of the Discovery, in 1813, of an Urn, in which, there is
every reason to suppose, the ashes of *Bronwen* (White Bosom), the
daughter of Llyr, and aunt to the great Caractacus, were deposited.

A farmer, living on the banks of the Alaw, a river in the Isle of
Anglesea, having occasion for stones, to make some addition to his
farm-buildings, and having observed a stone or two peeping through the
turf of a circular elevation on a flat not far from the river, was
induced to examine it, where, after paring off the turf, he came to a
considerable heap of stones, or *carnedd*, covered with earth, which he

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

removed with some degree of caution, and got to a *cist* formed of
coarse flags canted and covered over. On removing the lid, he found it
contained an urn placed with its mouth downwards, full of ashes and
half-calcined fragments of bone. The report of this discovery soon went
abroad, and came to the ears of the parson of the parish, and another
neighbouring clergyman, both fond of, and conversant in, Welsh
antiquities, who were immediately reminded of a passage in one of the
early Welsh romances, called the *Mabinogion* (or juvenile tales), the
same that is quoted in Dr. Davies's Latin and Welsh Dictionary, as well
as in Richards's, under the word *Petrual* (square).

'Bedd petrual a wnaed i Fronwen ferch Lyr ar lan Alaw, ac yno y claddwyd
hi.'

A square grave was made for Bronwen, the daughter of Llyr, on the banks
of the Alaw, and there she was buried.

Happening to be in Anglesea soon after this discovery, I could not
resist the temptation of paying a visit to so memorable a spot, though
separated from it by a distance of eighteen miles. I found it, in all
local respects, exactly as described to me by the clergyman above
mentioned, and as characterised by the cited passage from the romance.
The *tumulus*, raised over the venerable deposit, was of considerable
circuit, elegantly rounded, but low, about a dozen paces from the river
Alaw. <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198.md) The Urn was preserved
entire, with an exception of a small bit out of its lip, was ill-baked,
very rude and simple, having no other ornament than little pricked dots,
in height from about a foot to fourteen inches, and nearly of the
following shape.

<span id="img_38900"></span> ![](img/38900.jpg)

 

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When I saw the
urn, the ashes and half-calcined bones were in it."

Branwen appears to be the Brungwaine or Brangian of romance, though the
character of the Welsh heroine, and the part she sustains, differ widely
from those attributed to the confidante of Tristan and Yseult la Belle.
In like manner Matholwch the Irishman also seems identical with Morholt
the stern king of Ireland of the Trouvères.--See the Romances of
Meliadus of Leonnoys, Tristan, &c.

 

<span id="xref_370b">370b</span> THE ISLAND OF THE MIGHTY.--*Page*
[370](mab22.htm#page_370.md).

YNYS Y KEDYRN, the Island of the Mighty, is one of the many names
bestowed upon Britain by the Welsh. A Triad, in which several more of
these ancient appellations are preserved, asserts that while yet
uninhabited the Island was called Clas Merddin, but that after its
colonization it bore the name of Vel Ynys, which was again changed in
compliment to its conquest by Brut, into Ynys Prydain, or the Island of
Brut. The same Triad states that some authorities attribute the more
modern designation to its conquest by Prydain son of Aedd the
Great.--Myv. Arch. II. p. 1.

 

<span id="xref_372a">372a</span> AN ATONEMENT FOR THE INSULT.--*Page*
[372](mab22.htm#page_372.md).

THE compensation here offered to Matholwch, is strictly in accordance,
except as regards the size of the silver rod, with what was required by
the Laws of Hywel Dda, where the fine for insult to a king is fixed at a
"hundred cows on account of every cantrev in the kingdom, and a silver
rod with three knobs at the top, that shall reach from the ground to the
king's face, when he sits in his chair and as thick as his ring-finger;
and a golden bason, which shall hold fully as much as the king drinks,
of the thickness of a husbandman's nail, who shall have followed
husbandry for seven years, and a golden cover, as broad as the king's
face, equally thick as the bason." In another MS. the payment, instead
of being only partly in gold, is said to have been entirely in that
metal; thus "a golden rod as long as himself, of the thickness of his
little finger, and a golden tablet, as broad as his face, and as thick
as a husbandman's nail."

 

<span id="xref_374a">374a</span> THE CAULDRON.--*Page*
[374](mab22.htm#page_374.md).

THE powers exercised by this family through the influence of the
cauldron, bear a strong resemblance to those possessed by the Tuatha

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

de Danann, a race of necromancers, who once invaded Ireland. This tribe,
whilst sojourning in Asia, were at war with the Syrians, and were
enabled to triumph through the aid of magic, as they had the art of
resuscitating such of their number as fell in fight by sending demons to
animate their corpses, so that the Syrians found to their dismay that
those whom they had slain met them in battle the next day as vigorous as
ever. In this difficulty, they had recourse to the advice of their
priests, who told them to drive a stake of mountain ash through the
bodies of such as they slew, and that, if they had been animated by
demons, they would instantly turn into worms. This counsel was followed,
and the Tuatha de Danann were compelled to quit that country.

An ancient Irish poem contains a series of Triads respecting this race
which remind us of some passages in the Mabinogi of Kilhwch and
Olwen.--See [p. 228](mab16.htm#page_228.md).

"Blackness, obscurity, and darkness were their three cup-bearers;
strength, robustness, and vigour, their three horses; indignation,
pursuit and swiftness, their three bounds, &c."--See Bunting.

 

<span id="xref_377a">377a</span> CARADAWC THE SON OF BRAN.--*Page*
[377](mab22.htm#page_377.md).

THIS Prince, so well known under his Latinized name of Caractacus, is
chiefly remarkable for his captivity in Rome, which, according to Welsh
authorities, was shared by his father Bran, his grandfather Llyr
Llediaith, and all his near kinsfolk. There are several Triads relating
to this principal event of his life. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199.md) From one of these it seems that he was
chosen by his countrymen as their general, or War-king, to repel the
incursions of the Romans, and another corroborates this by styling him
"One of the three Rulers of choice," having been elected by the voice of
the country and the people, although he was not an elder. There is no
doubt of his having stood high in the esteem of his nation; and we are
told that "the men of Britain, from the prince to the slave, became his
followers in their country's need against the progress of the foe and of
destruction. And wheresoever he went in war, all the men of the Island
went in his train, and none desired to remain at home." <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_200.md)

Caradawc is also extolled as one of those brave princes, who, by reason
of their valour, could never be overcome save by treachery;

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

and the treason by which he was cast into the hands of his enemies is
very frequently alluded to. Avarwy ab Lludd ab Beli, and his daughter
Aregwedd Foeddawg, were the traitors, and are mentioned in terms of
disgust and execration. "One of the praiseworthy opposers," is another
of the titles bestowed upon Caradawc, because he resisted the invasion
of the Cæsarians.

 

<span id="xref_381a">381a</span> WHITE MOUNT IN LONDON.--*Page*
[381](mab22.htm#page_381.md).

UNDER the name of the Gwynvryn, or White Mount of the text, allusion is
most probably intended to the Tower of London, in which the Welsh, who
always regarded the capital as a city of their own foundation, appear to
have felt a peculiar interest.

Llywarch ab Llewelyn (Prydydd y Moch), a poet of the twelfth and early
part of the thirteenth century, speaks of it as "The White eminence of
London, a place of splendid fame."--Myv. Arch. I. p. 280.

The keep of the metropolitan fortress of England has in turn been
attributed to Celts, Romans, Saxons, and Normans; now, however, the
"Towers of Julius" are assigned, upon irrefragable evidence, to the
early Norman period.

 

 [382a](mab22.htm#xref_382a.md) CASWALLAWN.--*Page*
[382](mab22.htm#page_382.md).

CASWALLAWN the son of Beli, known more generally by the name of
Cassivelaunus, bestowed on him by the Romans, is a celebrated character
in Welsh history. He is recorded as one of the chiefs chosen to oppose
the invasion of Caesar, and was styled one of the War-kings of
Britain.--Tr. 24.

It is related that Caswallawn led an army of sixty-one thousand men
against Julius Caesar. The charms of Flur, the daughter of Myguach Gorr,
are said to have been the cause of this incursion, She had been carried
off by Mwrchan, a Gaulish prince, in alliance with Caesar, to whom he
intended to present his prize. The expedition which Caswallawn headed
was successful; six thousand of the partisans of Caesar were slain, and
Flur was recovered. Some of the circumstances of this exploit acquired
for Caswallawn the designation of "One of the Three Gold-Shoemakers"
(the other two being Manawyddan mab Llyr, and Llew Llaw Gyffes, as will
be detailed hereafter), and the whole achievement occasioned him to be
ranked among the three faithful lovers of Britain.

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

The army of Caswallawn did not return with their leader, whence it is
called one of the three Emigrant hosts of Britain. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_201.md)

Meinlas was the name of Caswallawn's horse.--Trioedd y Meirch ii.

 

<span id="xref_384a">384a</span> FIVE DIVISIONS OF IRELAND.--*Page*
[384](mab22.htm#page_384.md).

BEFORE the invasion of the Anglo-Normans, in Henry II.'s time, Ireland
was divided into a pentarchy composed of the kingdoms of Munster,
Leinster, Connaught, Ulster, and Meath.

<span id="img_39300"></span> ![](img/39300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[385:1](mab23.htm#fr_196.md) For an account of
Bendigeid Vran, see Professor Rees's Welsh Saints p. 77.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[386:1](mab23.htm#fr_197.md) Myv. Arch. I. p. 66.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[388:1](mab23.htm#fr_198.md) An ancient name for
Britain.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[389:1](mab23.htm#fr_199.md) "This spot is still
called *Ynys Bronwen*, or the Islet of Bronwen, which is a remarkable
confirmation of the genuineness of this discovery."

<span id="fn_199"></span>[391:1](mab23.htm#fr_200.md) Tr. 17, 23, 24, 34,
41, 55.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[391:2](mab23.htm#fr_201) In this Triad (41.md) he
is called one of the exalted servants, and is distinguished as the son
of a Bard.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[393:1](mab23.htm#fr_202.md) The above particulars
with regard to Caswallawn are related in the Triads 14,102,124, and xl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Manawyddan the Son of Llyr](mab24.md)
