[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr04)  [Next](rhr06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE PROPHECY OF PARACELSUS, AND THE UNIVERSAL REFORMATION OF THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD.

PARACELSUS, in the eighth chapter of his "Treatise on Metals," gave
utterance to the following prognostication:--*Quod utilius Deus
patefieri sinet, quod autem majoris momenti est, vulgo adhuc latet usque
ad Eliæ Artistæ adventum, quando is venerit*. "God will permit a
discovery of the highest importance to be made, it must be hidden till
the advent of the artist Elias." In the first chapter of the same work,
he says:--*Hoc item verum est nihil est absconditum quod non sit
retegendum; ideo, post me veniet cujus magnale nundum vivit qui multa
revelabit*. "And it is true, there is nothing concealed which shall not
be discovered; for which cause a marvellous being shall come after me,
who as yet lives not, and who shall reveal many things." These passages
have been claimed as referring to the founder of the Rosicrucian order,
and as prophecies of this character are usually the outcome of a general
desire rather than of an individual inspiration, they are interesting
evidence that then as now many thoughtful people were looking for
another saviour of society. At the beginning of the seventeenth century
"a great and general reformation," says Buhle,--a reformation far more
radical and more directed to the moral improvement of mankind than that
accomplished by Luther,--"was believed to be impending over the human
race, as a necessary

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

forerunner to the day of judgment." The comet of 1572 was declared by
Paracelsus to be "the sign and harbinger of the approaching revolution,"
and it will be readily believed that his innumerable disciples would
welcome a secret society whose vast claims were founded on the
philosophy of the master whom they also venerated, as a supreme factor
in the approaching reformation. Paracelsus, however, had recorded a
still more precise prediction, namely, that "soon after the decease of
the Emperor Rudolph, there would be found three treasures that had never
been revealed before that time." It is claimed that these treasures were
the three works which I proceed to lay before my readers in this and in
the two succeeding chapters.

Somewhere about the year 1614 a pamphlet was published anonymously in
German, called "Die Reformation der Ganzen Weiten Welt," which,
according to De Quincey, contained a distinct proposition to inaugurate
a secret society, having for its object the general welfare of mankind.
This description is simply untrue; the "Universal Reformation" is an
amusing and satirical account of an abortive attempt made by the god
Apollo to derive assistance towards the improvement of the age from the
wise men of antiquity and modern times. It is a fairly literal
translation of Advertisement 77 of Boccalini's "Ragguagli di Parnasso,
Centuria Prima;" its internal connection with Rosicrucianism is not
clear, but it has been generally reprinted with the society's
manifestos, alchemical interpretations have been placed on it, and it is
cited by various authors as the first publication of the Fraternity. I
have determined to include it in this collection of authoritative
documents, and have made use for this purpose three versions already
existing

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

in English. The literal translation from the Italian, made by Henry Earl
of Monmouth, <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) has been taken as the
base. I have compared it with the original, and with the later versions
which appeared in 1704 <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md) and
1706, <span id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39.md) and, where possible, I have
abridged it by the elision of unnecessary and embarrassing prolixities.

It is needless to say that the unfortunate Trajano Boccalini had no
connection himself with the Rosicrucian Brotherhood. The first
"Centuria" appeared in 1612 at Venice, and he met his tragical and
violent death in the following year.

*A Universal Reformation of the Whole Wide World, by order of the God
Apollo, is published by the Seven Sages of Greece and some other
Litterati.*

The Emperor Justinian, that famed compiler of the Digests and Code, the
other day presented to Apollo, for the royal approbation, a new law
against self-murder. Apollo was mightily astonished, and fetching a deep
sigh, he said, "Is the good, government of mankind, Justinian, then
fallen into so great disorder that men do voluntarily kill themselves?
And whereas I have hitherto given pensions to an infinite number of
moral philosophers, only that

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

by their words and writings they may make men less apprehensive of
death, are things now reduced to such calamity that even they will now
live no longer, who could not formerly frame themselves to be content to
die? And am I amongst all the disorders of my Litterati all this while
supinely asleep?" To this Justinian answered, that the law was
necessary, and that many cases of violent deaths having happened by many
men having desperately made themselves away, worse was to be feared if
some opportune remedy were not found out against so great a disorder.

Apollo then began diligently to inform himself, and found that the world
was so impaired, that many valued not their lives nor estate, so they
might be out of it. The disorders necessitated his Majesty to provide
against them with all possible speed, and he absolutely resolved to
institute a society of the men most famous in his dominions for wisdom
and good life. But in the entrance into so weighty a business he met
with insuperable difficulties, for amongst so many philosophers, and the
almost infinite number of vertuosi, he could not find so much as one who
was endowed with half the requisite qualifications to reform his
fellow-creatures, his Majesty knowing well that men are better improved
by the exemplary life of their reformers than by the best rules that can
be given. In this penury of fitting personages, Apollo gave the charge
of the Universal Reformation to the Seven Wise Men of Greece, who are of
great repute in Parnassus, and are conceived by all men to have found
the receipt of washing blackmoors white, which antiquity laboured after
in vain. The Grecians were rejoiced at this news for the honour which
Apollo had done their nation, but the Latins were grieved, thinking
themselves thereby much injured. Wherefore Apollo, well knowing

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

that prejudice against reformers hinders the fruit that is to be hoped
by reformation, and being naturally given to appease his subjects’
imbittered minds more by giving then satisfaction then by that
legislative power with which men are not pleased withal, because they
are bound to obey it, that he might satisfie the Romans, joined in
commission with the Seven Sages of Greece, Marcus and Annæus Seneca, and
in favour to the modern Italian philosophers, he made Jacopo Mazzoni da
Cesena Secretary of the Congregation, and honoured him with a vote in
their consultations.

On the fourteenth of the last month the seven wise men, with the
aforesaid addition, accompanied by a train of the choicest vertuosi of
this State, went to the Delfick Palace, the place appropriated for the
Reformation. The Litterati were well pleased to see the great number of
pedants, who, baskets in hands, went gathering up the sentences and
apothegms which fell from those wise men as they went along. The day
after the solemn entrance they assembled for the first time, and ’tis
said that Thales the Milesian, the first of the Grecian sages, spake
thus:--

"The business, most wise philosophers, about which we are met, is the
greatest that can be treated on by human understanding; and though there
be nothing harder then to set bones that have been long broken, wounds
that are fistuled, and incurable cancers, yet difficulties which are
able to affright others ought not to make us despair, for the
impossibility will increase our glory, and I do assure you that I have
already found out the true antydote against the poyson of these present
corruptions. I am sure we do all believe that nothing hath more
corrupted this age then hidden hatreds, feigned love, impiety, and the
perfidiousness of double-dealers under the specious cloke of simplicity,
love

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

to religion, and charity. Apply yourselves to these, evils, gentlemen;
make use of fire and razor, lay corrosive plasters to these wounds which
I discover unto you, and mankind, which by reason of their vices, that
lead them the highway to death, may be said to be given over by
physitians, will soon be made whole, become sincere and plain in their
proceedings, true in what they say, and such in their sanctity of life
as they were in former times. The true and immediate cure, then, for
these present evils consists in necessitating men to live with candour
of mind and purity of heart, which cannot be better effected then by
making that little window in men's breasts which his Majesty hath often
promised to his most faithful vertuosi; for when those who use such art
in their proceedings shall be forced to speak and act, having a window
whereby one may see into their hearts, they will learn the excellent
virtue of being, and not appearing to be; they will conform deeds to
words, and their tongues to sincerity of heart; all men will banish lies
and falsehood, and the diabolical spirit of hypocrisy will abandon many
who are now possest with so foul a fiend."

The opinion of Thales was so well approved by the whole Congregation
that it was unanimously voted just, and Secretary Mazzoni was commanded
to give Apollo a sudden account thereof, who perfectly approved the
opinion, and commanded that they should begin that very day to make
windows in the breasts of mankind. But at the very instant that the
surgeons took their instruments in hand, Homer, Virgil, Plato,
Aristotle, Averroes, and other eminent Litterati went to Apollo, and
said his Majesty must needs know that the prime means whereby men do
govern the world with facility is the reputation of those who command,
and they hoped his Majesty would be tender of the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

credit which the reverend Philosophical Synod and the honourable Colledg
of Vertuosi had universally obtained for sanctity of life and manners.
If his Majesty should unexpectedly open every man's breast, the
philosophers who formerly were most highly esteemed ran evident hazard
of being shamed, and that he might, peradventure, find fowlest faults in
those whom he had held to be immaculate. Therefore, before a business of
such importance should be taken in hand, they entreated that he would
afford his vertuosi a competent time to wash and cleanse their souls.
Apollo was greatly pleased by the advice of so famous poets and
philosophers, and, by a publick edict, prorogued the day of incision for
eight days, during which everyone did so attend the cleansing of their
souls from all fallacies, hidden vice, hatred, and counterfeit love,
that there was no more honey of roses, succory, cassia, scena, scamony,
nor laxative syrups to be found in any grocer's or apothecary's shop in
all Parnassus; and the more curious did observe that in the parts where
the Platonicks, Peripateticks, and Moral Philosophers did live, there
was then such a stink as if all the privies of the country had been
emptied, whereas the quarters of Latin and Italian poets smelt only of
cabbadg-porrage.

The time allotted for the general purging was already past, when, the
day before the operation was to begin, Hippocrates, Galen, Cornelius,
Celsus, and other the most skilful Physitians of this State, went to
Apollo, and said:--"Is it possible, Sire, you that are the Lord of the
Liberal Sciences, that this Microcosmos must be deformed, which is so
nobly and miraculously framed, for the advantage of a few ignorant
people? For not only the wiser sort of men, but even those of an
indifferent capacity, who have

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

conversed but four daies with any quack-salver, know how to penetrate
even into the inmost bowels."

This memorandum of the physitians wrought so much with Apollo that he
changed his former resolution, and by Ausonius Gallus bad the
philosophers, of the Reformation proceed in delivering their opinions.

Then Solon thus began:--"In my opinion, gentlemen, that which hath put
the present age into so great confusion is the cruel hatred and spiteful
envy which is seen to reign generally amongst men. All hope then for
these present evils is from the infusion of charity, reciprocal
affection, and that sanctified love of our neighbour which is God's
chiefest commandment to mankind. We ought, therefore, to employ all our
skill in removing the occasions of those hatreds which reign in men's
hearts, which, if we be able to effect, men will agree like other
animals, who, by instinct, love their own species, and will,
consequently, drive away all hatred and rancor of mind. I have been long
thinking, my friends, what the true spring's head may be of all human
hatred, and am still more established in my old opinion that it proceeds
from the disparity of means, from the hellish custom of *meum* and
*tuum*, which, if it were introduced among the beasts, even they would
consume and waste themselves with the same hatred wherewith we so much
disquiet ourselves, whereas the equality in which they live, and their
having nothing of their own, are the blessings which preserve that peace
among them which we have cause to envy. Men are likewise creatures, but
rational; this world was created by Almighty God, that mankind might
live thereon in peace, not that the avaritious should divide it amongst
themselves, and should turn what was common into that *meum* and *tuum*
which hath

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

put us all into such confusion. So it clearly appears, that the
depravation of men's souls by avarice, ambition, and tyranny, hath
occasioned the present inequality, and if it be true, as we all confess
it is, that the world is an inheritance left to mankind by one father
and mother, from whom we are all descended like brethren, what justice
is it that men should not all have a brother's share? What greater
disproportion can be imagined then that this world should be such that
some possess more than they can govern, and others have not so much as
they could govern? But that which doth infinitely aggravate this
disorder is, that usually vertuous men are beggars, whereas wicked and
ignorant people are wealthy. From the root of this inequality it then
ariseth, that the rich are injurious to the poor, and that the poor envy
the rich.

"Now, gentlemen, that I have discovered the malady unto you, it is easie
to apply the medicine. To reform the age no better course can be taken
then to divide the world anew, allotting an equal part to everyone, and,
that we may fall no more upon the like disorders, I advise, that, for
the future, all buying and selling be forbidden, to the end that there
may be established that parity of goods, the mother of publick peace,
which my self and other lawmakers have formerly so much laboured to
procure."

Solon's opinion suffered a long debate, and though it was not only
thought good but necessary by Bias, Periander, and Pittacus, it was
gainsaid by all the rest, and Seneca's opinion prevailed, who with
substantial reasons convinced the assembly, that if they should come to
a new division of the world, one great disorder would necessarily
follow; that too much would fall to the share of fools, and too little
to gallant men; and that plague, famine, and war were not

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

God's severest scourges, for the affliction of mankind would be to
enrich villains.

Solon's opinion being laid aside, Chilo argued as follows--"Which of
you, most wise philosophers, doth not know that the immoderate thirst
after gold hath now adaies filled the world with all the mischiefs which
we see and feel. What wickedness, how execrable soever it be, will men
not willingly commit, if thereby they may accumulate riches? Conclude,
therefore, unanimously with me, that no better way can be found out,
whereby to extirpate all the vices with which our age is opprest, then
for ever to banish out of the world the two infamous mettals, gold and
silver, for so the occasion of our present disorders being removed, the
evils will necessarily cease."

Though Chilo's opinion had a very specious appearance, it would not bear
the test, for it was said, that men took so much pains to get gold and
silver because they are the measure and counterpoise of all things, and
that it was requisite for man to have some mettals, or other thing of
price, by which he might purchase what was fitting for him, that if
there were no such thing as gold or silver, he would make use of
something instead of them, which, rising in value, would be equally
coveted, as was plainly seen in the Indies, where cockle-shells were
made use of instead of money, and more vallued than either gold or
silver. Cleobulus, particularly, being very hot in refuting this
opinion, said, with much perturbation of mind: My Masters, banish iron
out of the world, for that is the mettal which hath put us into the
present condition. Gold and silver serve the purpose ordained by God,
whereas iron, which Nature produced for the making of plow-shears,
spades, and mattocks, is by the malice and mischief of

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

men, forged into swords, daggers, and other deadly instruments."

Though Cleobolus his opinion was judged to be very true, yet it was
concluded by the whole Assembly, that, it being impossible to expel iron
but by grasping iron and putting on corslets, it was imprudent to
multiply mischiefs, and to cure one wound with another. ’Twas,
therefore, generally resolved, that the ore of gold and silver should be
still kept, but that the refiners should be directed for the future to
cleanse them well, and not to take them out of the fire till they had
removed from both mettals that vein of turpentine which is the reason
why gold and silver stick so close to the fingers even of good and
honest men.

Then Pittachus, with extraordinary gravity, thus began:--"The world,
most learned philosophers, is fallen into that deplorable condition
which we labour to amend because men in these daies have given over
travailing by the beaten roadway of vertue, and take the bye-waies of
vice, by which, in this corrupted age, they obtain the rewards only due
to vertue. Things are brought to such a woful state, that none can get
entrance into the palace of dignity, honor, or reward by the gate of
merit, but like thieves they climb the windows with ladders of
tergeversation, and some, by the force of gifts and favours, have even
opened the roof to get thereby into the house of honour. If you would
reform this corrupted age, my opinion is, that you should force men to
walk by' the way of vertue, and make severe laws, that whosoever will
take the laborsom journey which leads to supreme dignities must travail
with the waggon of desert, and with the sure guide of vertue.
Consequently, you should order the stopping up of all cross-paths and
crooked lanes, discovered by ambitious men and

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

modern hypocrites, who, multiplying faster then locusts in Africa, have
filled the world with contagion. What greater affront can be put upon
vertue then to see one of these rascals mounted on the throne of
preferment when no man can guess what course he took to reach it? Which
makes many think they have got it by the magick of hypocrisy, whereby
these magicians do inchant the minds even of wise princes."

Pittacus his opinion was not only praised, but greatly admired by the
whole Assembly, and certainly would have been approved as the most
excellent, had not Periander changed their minds by the following
discourse: "Gentlemen, the disorder mentioned by Pittacus is very true;
but the thing we should chiefly consider is why princes, who are so
quick-sighted and interested in their own State-affairs, do not bestow,
in these our daies, their great places (as they were wont to do of old)
on able and deserving men, by whose service they may receive advantage
and reputation, but instead, make use of new fellows raised out of the
mire, and without either worth or honor? The opinion of those who say
that it is fatal for princes to love carrion is so false, that for the
least interest of State they neglect their brethren, and wax cruel even
against their own children, so far are they from ruining themselves by
blind fondness for their servants. Princes do not act by chance, nor
suffer themselves to be guided in their proceedings by their passions;
whatsoever they do is out of interest, and those things which to private
men appear errors and negligence are accurate politick precepts. All
that have written of State-affairs freely confess that the best way to
govern kingdoms well is to confer places of highest dignity upon men of
great merit and known worth and valour.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is a truth
very well known to princes; and though it be clearly seen that they do
not observe it, he is a fool that believes they do not out of
carelessness. I, who have long studied a point of so great weight, am
perswaded that ignorant and raw men, and men of no merit, are preferred
before learned and deserving persons, not out of any fault in the
prince, but (I blush to say it) through default of the vertuosi. I
acknowledge that princes stand in need of learned officers and men of
experienced valor, but they likewise need faithful servants. If
deserving men and men of valor were loyal in proportion to their
capacity, we should not complain of the present disorders in seeing
undeserving dwarfs become great giants in four daies' space, ignorance
seated in the chair of vertue, and folly in valor's tribunal. ’Tis
common to all men to overrate their own worth, but the vertuosi do
presume so much upon their own good parts that they rather pretend to
add to the prince's reputation by accepting preferments then to receive
credit themselves by accepting his munificence. I have known many so
foolishly enamoured of their own works that they have thought it a
greater happiness for a prince to have an occasion of honouring them
then good luck for the other to meet with so liberal a prince. Such men,
acknowledging all favours conferred upon them as debts paid to their
deserts, prove so ungrateful to their benefactors in their necessity
that they are abhorred as perfidious, and are causes of this grievance,
that princes seek fidelity instead of more shining accomplishments, that
they may be secure of gratitude when they stand in need of it."

Periander having finished his discourse, Bias spake thus:--"Most wise
philosophers, all of you sufficiently know that the reason of the
world's depravity is only because

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

mankind hath so shamefully abandoned those holy laws which God gave them
to observe when he bestowed the whole world upon them for a habitation;
nor did he place the French in France, the Spaniards in Spain, the Dutch
in Germany, and bound up the fowl fiend in hell for any other reason but
the advantage of that general peace which he desired might be observed
throughout the whole world. But avarice and ambition (spurs which have
alwaies egged on men to greatest wickedness), causing nations to pass
into other men's countries, have caused these evils which we endeavour
to amend. If it be true, as we all confess it is, that God hath done
nothing in vain, wherefore, think you, hath His Divine Majesty placed
the inaccessible Pyrenean mountains between the Spaniards and Italians,
the rocky Alpes between the Italians and Germans, the dreadful English
Channel between the French and English, the Mediterranean Sea between
Africa and Europe? Why hath he made the infinite spacious rivers of
Euphrates, Indus, Ganges, and the rest, save only that people might be
content to live in their own countries by reason of the difficulties of
fords and passages? And the Divine Wisdom, knowing that the harmony of
universal peace would be out of tune, and that the world would be filled
with incurable diseases, if men should exceed their allotted bounds,
added the multitude and variety of languages to all the fore-mentioned
impediments, without which all men would speak the same tongue, as all
creatures of the same species sing, bark, or bray after one and the same
manner. ’Tis then man's boldness in boaring through mountains, passing
over the broadest and most rapid rivers, and even manifestly and rashly
hazarding himself and all his substance by crossing the largest

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

seas in a little wooden vessel, which caused the ancient Romans, not to
mention any other nations, to ruine other men's affairs and discompose
their own, not being satisfied with their dominion over the whole of
Italy. The true remedy, then, for so great disorder is, first to force
every nation to return to their own countreys, and then, to prevent the
like confusion in future, I am of opinion that all bridges built for the
more commodious passing of rivers should be absolutely broken down, that
the ways over the mountains should be quite destroyed, and the mountains
made more inaccessible by man's industry then originally by nature; and
I would have all navigation forbidden upon severest penalty, not
allowing so much as the least boats to pass over rivers."

Bias his opinion was regarded with unusual attention, but after being
well examined by the best wits of the Assembly, it was found not to be
good, for all those philosophers knew that the greatest enmities between
nation and nation are not national, but occasioned by cunning princes,
who are great masters in the proverb, *Divide et impera*, and that that
perfection of manners being found in all nations joyned together which
was not to be had in any particular one, travel is necessary to acquire
the complete wisdom which adorned the Great Ulysses. Now, this is a
benefit entirely owing to navigation, which is very necessary to
mankind, were it onely for that God, having created this world of an
almost incomprehensible greatness, having filled it with pretious
things, and endowed every province with somewhat of particular
navigation, ’tis by that wonderful art reduced to so small an extent
that the aromatics of Molucca, though above fifteen thousand miles from
Italy, seem to the Italians to grow in their own gardens.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Thus the opinion of Bias was laid aside, when Cleobulus, rising up, and
with a low bow, seeming to crave leave to speak, said thus:--"I clearly
perceive, most wise gentlemen, that the reformation of the present age,
a business of itself very easie, becomes by the diversity and
extravagancy of our opinions rather impossible then difficult. And to
speak with the freedom which becomes this place and the weight of the
business which we have in hand, it grieves my heart to find, even
amongst us, that common defect of ambitious and slight wits, who,
getting up into publike pulpits, labor more to display their ingenuity
by their new and curious conceits, then to profit their auditors by
useful precepts and sound doctrines. To raise man out of the foul mire
whereinto he has fallen, to what purpose is that dangerous operation of
making little windows in their breasts, which Thales advised? And why
should we undertake the laborious business of dividing the world into
equal partitions according to Solon's proposition? Or the course
mentioned by Chilo, of banishing gold and silver out of the world? Or
that of Pittacus, of forcing men to walk in the way of merit and vertue?
Or, lastly, that of Bias, that mountains should be raised higher and
made more difficult then Nature hath made them, and that the miracle of
navigation should be extirpated, the greatest proof of human ingenuity
that was ever given? What are these but chimæras and sophistical
fancies? The chief consideration which reformers ought to have is, that
the remedy proposed be practicable, that it may work its effect soon and
secretly, and that it may be chearfully received by those who are to be
reformed, for, otherwise, we shall rather deform the world then improve
it. There is great reason for this assertion, for that Physitian
deserves to be blamed, who should

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

ordain a medecine for his impatient which is impossible to be used, and
which would afflict him more then his disease. Therefore is it the
requisite duty of reformers to provide a sure remedy before they take
notice of the wound; it is not onely foolishness but impiety to defame
men by publishing their vices, and to shew the world that their maladies
are grown to such a height that they are past cure. Therefore the Great
Tacitus, who always speaks to the purpose if he be rightly understood,
doth in this particular advise men. *Omittere potius prævalida et adulta
vitia, quam hoc assequi, ut palam fieret, quibus flagittiis impares
essemus*. <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) Those who would fell an
old oak are ill-advised if they begin with lopping the top boughs; our
true method, gentlemen, is to lay the axe to the root, as I do now, in
affirming that the reformation of the present age consists wholly in
these few words--REWARD THE GOOD AND PUNISH THE BAD."

Here Cleobulus held his peace, whose opinion Thales Milesius did with
such violence oppose as showed how dangerous a thing it is to offend,
though by speaking the truth, those who have the repute to be good and
wise, for he with a fiery countenance broke forth into these
words:--"Myself, and these gentlemen, most wise Cleobulus, whose
opinions you have been pleased to reject as sophistical and meer
chimeras, did expect from your rare wisdom that you had brought some new
and miraculous Bezoar from the Indies for cure of these present evils,
whereas you have propounded that for the easiest remedy which is the
hardest and most impossible that could ever be fancied by the prime
pretenders to high mysteries, Caius Plinius and Albertus Magnus. There
is not any of us, my Cleobulus, that did not know, before you were
pleased to put us in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

mind of it, that the reformation of the world depends wholly upon
rewarding such as are good and punishing the wicked. But give me leave
to ask you, who are those that in this our age are perfectly good, and
who exactly ill? I would also know whether your eye can discern that
which could never yet be found out by any man living, how to know true
goodness from that which is counterfeit. Do not you know that modern
hypocrites are arrived at that height of cunning that, in this our
unhappy age, those are accounted to be cunningest in their wickedness
who seem most exactly good, and that really perfect men, who live in
sincerity and singleness of soul, with an undisguised and unartificial
goodness, are thought to be scandalous and silly? Every one by natural
instinct loves those that are good and hates those that are wicked, but
princes do it both out of instinct and interest, and when hypocrites or
other cunning cheaters are listened unto by great men, while good men
are suppressed and undervalued, it is not by the princes’ own election
but through the abuse of others. True vertue is known onely and rewarded
by God, by whom also vices are discovered and punished. He onely
penetrates into the depths of men's hearts, and we, by means of the
window I proposed, might also have looked therein had not the enemy of
mankind sown tares in the field where I sowed the grain of good advice.
But new laws, how good and wholesome soever, have alwaies been and ever
will be withstood by those vitious people who are thereby punished."

The reasoning of Thales gave mighty satisfaction to the Assembly, and
all of them turned their eyes upon Periander, who, thinking himself
thereby desired to speak his opinion, began thus: The variety of
opinions which I have heard confirms me in my former tenet, that four
parts

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of five who are sick perish because the physitians know not their
disease; such errors are indeed excusable, because men are easily
deceived in matters of mere conjecture, but that we, who are judged by
Apollo to be the salt of the earth, should not know the evil under which
the present age labours, redounds much to our shame, since the malady
which we ought to cure lies not hidden in the veins, but is so
manifestly known to all men that it self cries aloud for help. And yet,
by all the reasons I have heard alledged, methinks you go about to mend
the arm when it is the heart that is fistula’d. Gentlemen, since it is
Apollo's pleasure that we should do so, since our reputation stands upon
it, and charity to our so afflicted age requires it at our hands, let
us, I beseech you, take from our faces the mask of respect, which hath
been hitherto worn by us all, and let us speak freely. The fatal error
then which has so long confirmed mankind in their unhappiness is this,
that while the vices of the great have brought the world into confusion,
a reformation of private men's faults has been thought sufficient to
retrieve it. But the falshood, avarice, pride and hypocrisie of private
men are not the vices (though I confess them to be hanious evils, which
have so much depraved our age, for fitting punishments being by the law
provided for every fault and foul action, man is so obedient to the laws
and so apprehensive of justice that a few ministers thereof make
millions of men tremble, and men live in such peace that the rich
cannot, without much danger to themselves, oppress the poor, and every
one may walk safely both by day and night with gold in their hand, not
onely in the streets but even in the highways. But the world's most
dangerous infirmities are discovered when publique peace is disturbed,
and we must all of us confess that the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

ambition, avarice, and diabolical engagement which the swords of some
powerful princes have usurped over the states of those less powerful is
the great scandal of the present times. ’Tis this, gentlemen, which hath
filled the world with hatred and suspicion, and hath defiled it with so
much blood, that men, who were created by God with humane hearts and
civil inclinations, are become ravenous wilde beasts, tearing one
another in pieces with all sorts of inhumanity. The ambition of these
men hath changed publike peace into most cruel war, vertue into vice,
the love which we ought to bear our neighbours into such intestine
hatred, that, though lyons appear lyons to their own species, yet the
Scotch to the English, the Italians to the Germans, the French to the
Spaniards, and every nation to another, appear not men and brethren but
creatures of another kind, so that justice being oppressed by the
inexplicable ambition of potent men, our race, which was born, brought
up, and did live long under the government of wholesome laws, waxing now
cruel to itself, lives with the instinct of beasts, ready to oppress the
weaker. Theft which is undoubtedly base, is so persecuted by the laws
that the stealing of an egg is a capital fault, yet powerful men are so
blinded with ambition as to rob another man perfidiously of his whole
state, which is not thought to be an execrable mischief but an noble
occupation, and onely fit for kings. Tacitus, the master of policy, that
he may win the good will of princes, is not ashamed to say, *In summa
Fortuna id æquis quod vallidius, et sua retinere privatæ domus, de
alienis certare, regiam laudem esse*. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) If it be true, as all politicians agree,
that people are the prince's apes, how can those who obey live
vertuously quiet when their commanders do so abound

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

in vice. To bereave a powerful prince of a kingdome is a weighty
business which is not to be done by one man alone. To effect so foul an
intent they muster a multitude of men, who, that they may not fear the
shame of stealing their neighbours’ goods, of murthering men, and of
firing cities, change the name of base thief into that of gallant
souldier and valiant commander. And that which aggravates this evil is
that even good princes are forced to run upon the same rocks to defend
their own estates from the ravenousness of these harpyes, and to regain
what they have lost, and to revenge themselves of those that have
injured them, have in reprizal got possession of their dominions, till,
lured on by gain, they betake themselves to the same shameful trade.
Thus the method of plundering others of their kingdomes is become a
reputable art, and humane wit, made to admire and contemplate the
miracles of Heaven and the wonders of the earth, is wholly turned to
invent stratagems and to plot treasons, while the hands, which were made
to cultivate the earth that feeds us, are employed in the exercise of
arms that we may kill one another. This is the wound which hath brought
our age to its last gasp, and the true way to remedy it is for princes
who use such dealings to amend themselves, and to be content with their
own fortunes, for, certainly, it appears very strange that there should
be any king who cannot satisfie his ambition with the absolute command
over twenty millions of men. Princes, as you all know, were ordained by
God on earth for the good of mankind; therefore, it would do well not
onely to bridle their ambitious lust after the possessions of others,
but I think it necessary that the peculiar engagement which some men
pretend their swords have over all estates, be cut up by the root, and I
advise above all things that the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

greatness of principalities be limited, it being impossible that
overgrown kingdoms should be governed with that exact care and justice
which is requisite to the people's good, and which princes are bound to
observe. There never was a vast monarchy which was not in a short time
lost by the negligence of its governors."

Here Periander ended, whom Solon thus opposed:--"The true cause,
Periander, of our present mischiefs which you have mentioned with such
liberty of speech was not omitted by us out of ignorance, but out of
prudence. The disorders you speak of began when the world was first
peopled, and you know that the most skilful physitian cannot restore
sight to one born blind. I mention this because it is much the same
thing to cure an infirm eye as to reform antiquated errors. For as the
skilful physitian betakes himself to his canters the first day he sees
the distempered eye water, but is forced to leave that patient in
deserved blindness who neglected to seek a cure till his sight was quite
lost, so reformers should oppose abuses with severe remedies the very
first hour that they commence, for when vice and corruption have got
deep rooting, it is wiselier done to tolerate the evil, then to go about
to remedy it out of time, with danger to occasion worse inconveniences,
it being more dangerous to cut an old wen then it is misbecoming to let
it stand. Moreover, we are here to call to mind the disorders of private
men, and to use modesty in so doing, but to be silent in what concerns
princes, for they having no superiours in this world it belongs onely to
God to reform them, He having given them the prerogative to command, us
the glory to obey. Subjects, therefore, should correct the faults of
their rulers onely by their own godly living, for the hearts of princes
being in the hands

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the Almighty, when people deserve ill from His Divine Majestie he
raiseth up Pharoahs against them, and, on the contrary, makes princes
tender-hearted, when people by their fidelity and obedience deserve
God's assistance."

What Solon said was much commended by all the hearers, and then Cato
began thus:--"Your opinions, most wise Grecians, are much to be admired,
and have abundantly justified the profound esteem which all the
Litterati have of you; the vices, corruptions, and ulcerated wounds
under which the age languishes could not be better discovered and
pointed out. Nor are your opinions, which are full of humane knowledge,
gain-said here for that they are not excellent, but for that the malady
is so habituated in the veins, and is even so grounded in the bones,
that the constitution of mankind is worn out, and their vital vertue
yields to the strength of the distemper; in short, the patient spits
nothing but blood and putrefaction, and the hair falls from his head.
The physitian, gentlemen, hath a hard part to play when the sick man's
maladies are many, and one so far differing from another that cooling
medicines, and such as are good for a hot liver, are nought for the
stomach, and weaken it too much. Truly this is just our case, for the
maladies which molest our age equal the stars of heaven, and are more
various than the flowers of the field. I, therefore, think this cure
desperate, and that the patient is totally incapable of humane help. We
must have recourse to prayers and to other divine helps, which in like
case are usually implored from God; this is the true north-star, which,
in the greatest difficulties, leads men into the harbour of perfection,
for *Pauci prudentia, honesta ab deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis
discernunt; plures aliorum eventis docentur*. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md) If we approve this consideration, we shall

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

find that when the world was formerly sunk into the same disorders, it
was God's care that did help it by sending a universal deluge to raze
mankind, full of abominable and incorrigible vice, from off the world.
And, gentlemen, when a man sees the walls of his house all gaping and
ruinous, and its foundations so weakened that, in all appearance, it is
ready to fall, certainly it is more wisely done to pull down the house
and build it anew, then to lose money and time in piecing and patching
it. Therefore, since man's life is so foully depraved with vice that it
is past all human power to restore it to its former health, I do with
all my heart beseech the Divine Majestie, and counsel you to do the
like, that He will again open the cataracts of Heaven, and pour down
upon the earth another deluge, with this restriction, that a new Ark may
be made, wherein all boys not above twelve years of age may be saved,
and that all the female sex, of whatsoever age, be so wholly consumed,
that nothing but their unhappy memory may remain. And I beseech the same
Divine Majestie that as He hath granted the singular benefit to bees,
fishes, beetles, <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) and other animals,
to procreate without the female sex, so He will think men worthy of the
like favour. I have learnt for certain that as long as there shall be
any women in the world men will be wicked."

It is not to be believed how much Cato's discourse displeased the whole
Assembly, who did all so abhor the harsh conceit of a deluge, that,
casting themselves upon the ground, with their hands held up to heaven,
they humbly beseeched Almighty God that He would preserve the excellent
female sex, that He would keep mankind from any more deluges, or that He
would send them on the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

earth onely to extirpate those discomposed and wilde wits, those
untunable and bloodthirsty souls, those heterodox and phantastick
brains, who, being of a depraved judgment, are nothing but mad men,
whose ambition was boundless, and pride without end, and that when
mankind should, through their demerits, become unworthy of any mercy
from the Almighty, He would be pleased to punish them with the scourges
of plague, sword, and famine, rather than to deliver mankind unto the
good will and pleasure of those insolent and wicked rulers, who, being
composed of nothing but blind zeal and diabolical folly, would pull the
world in pieces if they could compass the bestial caprices they hourly
hatch in their heads.

Cato's Opinion had this unlucky end, when Seneca thus began:--"Rough
dealing is not so greatly requisite in reformation as would seem by many
of your discourses, especially when disorders have grown to so great a
height; on the contrary, they ought, like wounds which are subject to
convulsions, to be Brest with a light hand. It is a scandal to the
physitian that the patient should die with his prescriptions in his
body, since all men will conclude that the medecine hath done him more
harm then his I malady. It is a rash advice to go from one extreme to
another, passing by the due medium; man's nature is not capable of
violent mutations, and if it be true that the world hath been falling
many thousand years into the present infirmities, he is a very fool who
thinks to restore it to health in a few days. Moreover, in reformation
the conditions of those who do reform, and the qualities of those that
are to be reformed, ought to be exactly considered. We that are the
reformers are philosophers and men of learning, and if those to be
reformed be onely

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

stationers, printers, such as sell paper, pens, and ink, or other such
things appertaining to learning, we may very well correct their errors,
but if we offer to rectify the faults of other trades, we shall commit
worse errors, and become more ridiculous then the shoemaker who would
judge of colours, and durst censure Apelles his pictures. This, I must
say, is a defect frequent in us Litterati, who, for four *cujus* that we
have in our heads, pretend to know all things, and are not aware that
when we first swerve from our books we run riot, and say a thousand
things from the purpose. I say this, gentlemen, because nothing more
obviates reformations then to walk therein in the dark, which happens
when reformers are not well acquainted with the vices of those with whom
they have to deal. The reason is apparent, for nothing makes men more
obstinate in their errors then when they find their reformers
ill-informed of their defects. Now, which of us is acquainted with the
falsehood of notaries, the prevarications of advocates, the simony of
judges, the tricks of attorneys, the cheats of apothecaries, the
filching of tailors, the roguery of butchers, and the cheating tricks of
a thousand other artificers? And yet all these excesses must be by us
corrected, which are so far from our profession that we shall appear
like so many blind fellows fumbling to stop a leaky cask which spills
the wine on every side. This, gentlemen, is enough to convince you that
reformation is only likely to proceed well when marinors discourse of
navigation, souldiers of war, shepherds of sheep, and herdsmen of
bullocks. It is manifest presumption in us to pretend to know all
things, and meer malice to believe that in every occupation there are
not three or four honest men. My opinion, therefore, is, that we ought
to send for a few of each profession of

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

known probity and worth, and that every one should correct his own
trade; by this means, we shall publish to the world a reformation worthy
of ourselves and of the present exigencies."

Pittachus and Chilo extolled this speech to the skies, and seeing the
other philosophers of a contrary sentiment, protested before God and the
world that they believed it was impossible to find out a better means
for the reformation of mankind, yet did the rest of their companions
abhor it more than Cato's proposition, and with great indignation I told
Seneca they much wondered that he, by taking more reformers into their
number, should so far dishonour Apollo, who had thought them not only
sufficient but excellently fit for that business. It was not wisely
advised to begin the general reformation by publishing their own
weakness, for all resolutions which detract from the credit of the
publishers want that reputation which is the very soul of business. It
was strange a man who was the very prime sage of Latin writers should be
so lavish of authority, which should be guarded more jealously then
women's honor, since the wisest men did all agree that twenty pound of
blood taken from the life-vain was well imployed to gain but one ounce
of jurisdiction.

The whole Assembly were mightily afflicted when, by the reputation of
Seneca's opinion, they found smal hopes of effecting the reformation,
for they relyed little on Mazzoni, who was but a novice; which though
Mazzoni did by many signs perceive, yet, no whit discouraged, he spoke
thus:--"It was not for any merit of mine, most wise philosophers, that I
was admitted by Apollo into this reverend congregation, but out of his
Majestie's special favour; and I very well know that it better becomes
me to use my ears than

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

my tongue, and certainly I should not dare to open my mouth upon any
other occasion; but reformation being the business in hand, and I lately
coming where nothing is spoken of but reformation and reformers, I
desire that every one may hold their peace, and that I alone may be
heard to speak in a business which I am so verst in that I may boast
myself to be the onely Euclid of this mathematick. Give me leave, I
beseech you, to say that you, in relating your opinions, seem to me to
be like those indiscrete physitians who lose time in consulting and
disputing without having seen the sick party, or heard from his own
mouth the account of his disease. Our business, gentlemen, is to cure
the present age of the foul infirmities under which she labours; we have
all laboured to find out the reasons of the maladies and its proper
remedys, but none of us hath been so wise as to visit the sick party. I
therefore advise that we send for the present Age to come hither and be
examined, that we interrogate it of its sickness, and that we see the
ill-affected parts naked, for this will make the cure easie, which you
now think desperate."

The whole Assembly was so pleased at Mazzoni's motion, that the
reformers immediately commanded the Age to be sent for, who was
presently brought in a chair to the Delphick Palace by the four Seasons
of the year. He was a man full of years, but of so great and strong a
complexion that he seemed likely to live yet many ages, onely he was
short breathed, and his voyce was very weak, at which the philosophers,
much wondering, asked him what was the reason that he, whose ruddy face
was a sign of much natural heat and vigor, and of a good stomach, was
nevertheless so feeble? And they told him that a hundred years before
his face was so yellow that he seemed to have the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

jaundice, yet he spoke freely, and seemed to be stronger then he was
now, and since they had sent for him to cure his infirmity, he should
speak freely of his griefs.

The Age answered thus:--"Soon after I was born, gentlemen, I fell into
these maladies under which I now labour. My face is fresh and ruddy
because people have petered it and coloured it with lakes; my sickness
resembles the ebbing and flowing of the sea, which alwaies contains the
same water, though it rises and fals, with this variation
notwithstanding, that when my looks are outwardly good, my malady is
more grievous inwardly (as at this present), but when my face looks ill,
I am best within. As for the infirmities which torment me, do but take
off this gay jacket, wherewith some good people have covered a rotten
carcass, and view me naked as I was made by Nature."

At these words the philosophers stript him in a trice, and found that
this miserable wretch was covered all over four inches thick with a
scurf of appearances. They caused ten razors to be forthwith brought
unto them, and fell to shaving it off with great diligence, but they
found it so far eaten into his very bones that in all the huge colossus
there was not one inch of good live flesh, at which, being struck with
horror and despair, they put on the patient's cloaths again, and dismist
him. Then, convinced that the disease was incurable, they shut
themselves up together, and abandoning the case of publike affairs, they
resolved to provide for the safety of their own reputations. Mazzoni
writ what the rest of the reformers dictated, a Manifesto, wherein they
witnessed to the world the great care Apollo ever had of the virtuous
lives of his Litterati, and of the welfare of all mankind, also what
pains the Reformers had

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

taken in compiling the General Reformation. Then, coming to particulars,
they fixt the prices of sprats, cabbiges, and pumpkins. The Assembly had
already underwritten the Reformation when Thales put them in mind that
certain higlers, who sold pease and black-cherryes, vinted such small
measures that it was a shame not to take order therein. The Assembly
thankt Thales for his advertisement, and added to their reformation that
the measures should be made greater. Then the palace gates were thrown
open, and the General Reformation was read, in the place appointed for
such purposes, to the people assembled in great numbers in the
market-place, and was so generally applauded by every one that all
Parnassus rang with shouts of joy, for the rabble are satisfied with
trifles, while men of judgment know that *vitia erunt donec
homines* <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)--as long as there be men
there will be vices--that men live on earth not indeed well, but as
little ill as they may, and that the height of human wisdom lies in the
discretion to be content with leaving the world as they found it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[36:1](rhr05.htm#fr_37.md) "I. Ragguagli di
Parnasso: or, Advertisements from Parnassus in Two Centuries, with the
Politick Touchstone. Put into English by the Right Honourable Henry Earl
of Monmouth." Fol. 1656.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[36:2](rhr05.htm#fr_38.md) "Advertisements from
Parnassus, Written originally in Italian by the famous Trajano
Boccalini. Newly done into English, and adapted to the Present Times." 3
vols. 8vo. 1704. A poor and paraphrastic rendering.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[36:3](rhr05.htm#fr_39.md) "Advices from Parnassus,
in Two Centuries, with the Politick Touchstone and an Appendix to it.
Written by Trajano Boccalini. Translated by several hands." London. Fol.
1706. The best as regards style, but less literal than the version by
the Earl of Monmouth.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[50:1](rhr05.htm#fr_40.md) Tacitus, Lib. 3, Ann.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[53:1](rhr05.htm#fr_41.md) Tacitus, Lib. V. Ann.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[56:1](rhr05.htm#fr_42.md) Tac., Lib. iv., Ann.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[57:1](rhr05.htm#fr_43.md) See [Additional Note,
No. 3](rhr33.htm#an_n03.md).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[63:1](rhr05.htm#fr_44.md) Tac., Lib. iv., Hist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Fama Fraternitatis](rhr06.md)
