[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr16)  [Next](rhr18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

#### ANTIQUITY OF THE ROSICRUCIAN FRATERNITY.

THE antiquity of the Rose in symbolism and of the Cross in symbolism, as
I have already said, is no proof whatsoever of the antiquity of a
society which we find to be using them at a period subsequent to the
Renaissance; but, according to John Heydon, the Rosicrucians "have been
since Christ;" they "inhabite the suburbs of Heaven," and are "as the
eyes and ears of the great King, seeing and hearing all things." The
existence of a "divine Fraternity" on the astral plane, or in. the
fourth dimension, however "seraphically illuminated," and with whatever
powers they may be invested by the "Generalissimo of the world," is a
point which transcends the investigations of the merely human historian.
His researches, however, have determined that, within his own
limits--that is, on the physical plane of time and space--there are no
vestiges of the Rosicrucians traceable before the beginning of the
seventeenth century, and that the belief in their antiquity originates
in à priori considerations which are concerned with the predilections
and prejudices of thinkers whose faith and imagination have been
favoured by evolution or environment at the expense of their judgment,
and who determine historical questions by the illumination of their own
understandings rather than by the light of facts.

Such persons are beyond the reach of criticism, and, as

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

they are neither numerous nor important, may be left basking in the
sunshine of a pleasing aberration, which is interesting in days of
disillusion. But the existence and occasional prevalence in all ages of
the world of those theosophical ideas, which are at the root of
Rosicrucian philosophy, have caused even serious students to consider
the Fraternity of an almost incredible antiquity--a hypothesis which
wins golden opinions from those who delight in connecting the invisible
threads of the secret societies and tracing them to a single primal
source, of which one and all are ramifications more or less identical in
ceremonies, secrets, and purposes.

Addressing myself to these students, I would say with Buhle that whoever
adopts this hypothesis "is bound to show, in the first place, in what
respect the deduction of this order from modern history is at all
unsatisfactory; and secondly, upon his own assumption of a far elder
origin, to explain how it happened that for sixteen entire centuries no
contemporary writers have made any allusion to it."

Solomon Semler is one of the few writers whose erudition is
unquestionable, and who have supported this view; but the facts which he
cites are entirely inconclusive. He proves the existence in the
fourteenth century of "an association of physicians and alchemists who
united their knowledge and their labours to attain the discovery of the
Philosophic Stone." It is this association to which the alchemist
Raymond Lully <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) apparently refers in
his "Theatrum

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chymicum," <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) printed at Strasbourg in 1613, as a sec
society existing during the fourteenth century in Italy, and the chief
of which was called *Rex Physicorum*. Figulus <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) states it to have been founded in 1410,
and asserts it to have merged in the Rosicrucian Order about the year
1607. The same careful investigator cites an anonymous letter, published
at the end of the sixteenth century, and stating the age of a certain
secret society to be above two thousand years. It is also asserted that
the alchemist Nicholas Barnaud conceived in 1591 a project of
establishing a secret convention of theosophical mystics, who were to
devote themselves to a determined investigation of all Kabbalistic
sciences, and that he scoured both Germany and France with this object.
Finally, the "Echo of the God-illuminated Order of the Brethren R. C."
tells us that in 1597 an attempt was actually made to found such a
society, apparently on the lines laid down by Barnaud, and it is a
remarkable fact that the preface to the Christian Reader which is
prefixed to this curious publication, is dated June 1597, while that
which is addressed to the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brotherhood is
dated 1 Nov. 1615, the book itself not having appeared till 1620.

These facts and statements are of the highest interest and of very
considerable importance within their own, sphere, but the existence of
secret associations even two thousand years old, much less the attempts
occasionally made to establish others, affords no proof that they were
in any way connected, or are to be identified, with the Rosicrucian
Brotherhood, whose violent anti-Papal prejudices and ultra-Protestant
principles are sufficient proof of a post-Lutheran origin.

The only sect or association with which the Rosicrucians may be
pertinently compared, and which we hear of before the year 1610, is the
*Militia Crucifera Evangelica* which assembled at Lunenburg in 1598
under the auspices of the mystic and theosophist, Simon Studion. Its
proceedings are reported in an unprinted work from his pen entitled
"Naometria, seu nuda et prima libri, intus et foris scripti, per clavem
Davidis et calamum (virgæ similem) apertio; in quo non tantum ad
cognoscenda tam S. Scripturæ totius, quam naturæ quoque universæ,
mysteria, brevis fit introductio--verum etiam Prognosticus (stellæ
illius matutinæ, Anno Domini 1572, conspectæ ductu) demonstrator
Adventus ille Christi ante diem novissimum secundus per quem homine
peccati (Papa) cum filio sur perditionis (Mahomedo) divinitus devestato,
ipse ecclesiam suam et principatus mundi restaurabit, ut in iis post hac
sit cum ovili pastor unus. In cruciferæ militiæ Evangelicæ gratiam.
Authore Simone Studione inter Scorpiones. Anno 1604." As this work
exists only in manuscript, and as there is no transcript of this
manuscript to be found in the English public libraries, my chief
knowledge of its contents, and of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

the sect which it represents, is derived from an unsatisfactory notice
by Professor Buhle, who describes the Militia as a Protestant sect
heated by apocalyptic dreams, and declares the object of the assembly to
have been apparently "exclusively connected with religion." But it is
clear from the life of Studion that he was passionately devoted to
alchemy, and the spiritual side of the *magnum opus* was probably the
aim of these enthusiasts, who are otherwise identified in their views
with the illuminati of the Rose-Cross. Like these they believed that the
books of Revelation and of Nature were *intus et foris scripti*, written
within and without, that is, they contain a secret meaning for the
initiates of mystical wisdom; that the unaccountable appearance of new
stars in the sky was significant of important events in the approximate
future; that the last day was at hand; that the Pope was Anti-Christ and
the Man of Sin; and finally, as Buhle himself confesses, the "Naometria"
contains a great deal of mysticism and prophecy about the Rose and the
Cross.

These points of resemblance are, I think, insufficient to establish a
connection between the *Militia Crucifera Evangelica* and the
Rosicrucians in a logical mind, but they are certainly curious and
interesting. It will be shown in the next chapter why the symbolism of
the Rose and the Cross was common to both associations.

The antiquity of the Rosicrucians, as I have hinted, finds few
supporters at the present day, this view being chiefly confined to the
members of pseudo-Rosicrucian societies, and to the pseudo-historian of
the order, Mr Hargrave Jennings. From the fictitious importance
unaccountably ascribed to the ill-considered and worthless work of this
writer, it seems necessary to conclude with a short notice of the
incoherent

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

and visionary ramblings in "The Rosicrucians: their Rites and
Mysteries." Mr Jennings may congratulate himself on being "that
distinguished esoteric *littérateur*," who writes the worst English of
this or any century, but he is a great man, a magician of the first
order, in the important matter of titles. I freely confess that his work
on this subject is so attractively labelled that it exercises an
irresistible charm over the student. "The Rosicrucians: their Rites and
Mysteries, with chapters on the ancient Fire and Serpent Worshippers,
and explanations of the Mystic Symbols represented on the monuments and
talismans of the Primeval Philosophers," is a label not otherwise than
superb. It is a "strong delusion" which tempts the hesitating purchaser,
and has often prompted the too credulous reader, by the subtlety of its
mystic charm, "to believe"--at least the very opposite of what is true.

The book, so far as the Rosicrucians are concerned, begins with an
account of an "historical adventure in Staffordshire," which is
curiously distorted in the interests of an inexpensive sensationalism,
and after much loquacity on "the insufficiency of worldly objects," we
are introduced in the seventh chapter, without preface or apology, to
the "Mythical history of the *Fleur-de-lys*," Druidic Cromlechs, and
Gnostic Abraxas Gems. The rest of the work is Rosicrucian certainly, so
far as the titles of the chapters are concerned, but not further. Thus
we have "The Rosy-Cross in Indian, Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Mediaeval
monuments," "Presence of the Rosicrucians in Christian Architecture,"
&c., but the chapters themselves are devoted to the lingam and the great
pyramid, Persian fire-worship, phallic and serpent symbolism, and
etymological speculations which would have astonished even Godfrey
Higgins,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and which Kenealy himself would disown. Doubtless these things are
connected in the mind of Mr Hargrave Jennings with his mysterious and
ubiquitous Brotherhood, for his diseased imagination perceives
Rosicrucianism everywhere, "as those who believe in witchcraft see
sorcery and enchantment everywhere." This connection, however, he
nowhere attempts to establish, and it is incredible to suppose that the
shallow pretence has ever imposed on anyone. The few statements which he
makes concerning the Fraternity must be rejected as worthless; for
example, he tells us that the alchemists were a physical branch of the
Rosicrucians, whereas the Rosicrucians were a theosophical sect among
the alchemists.

I have deemed it unnecessary to consider the alleged connection between
the Templars and the Brethren of the Rose-Cross, for this hypothesis
depends upon another, now generally set aside, namely, the connection of
the Freemasons with the foregoing orders. It is sufficient to say that
the Templars were not alchemists, that they had no scientific
pretensions, and that their secret, so far as can be ascertained, was a
religious secret of an anti-Christian kind. The Rosicrucians, on the
other hand, were pre-eminently a learned society, and they were also a
Christian sect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[211:1](rhr17.htm#fr_67) This personage is not
to be confused with the author of the "Ars Magna Sciendi," the
illuminated philosopher and evangelist of Parma in Majorca, who united
the saint and the man of science, the metaphysician and the preacher,
the apostle and the itinerant lecturer, the dialectician and the martyr,
in one remarkable individuality. The alchemist Raymond Lully, "one of
the grand and sublime <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> masters of the
science," according to Eliphas Lévi, lived after 1315, the date of the
martyr's death, and nothing is known of his history, except his
astounding transmutations. He is said to have been a native of Ferrago,
and has peen described as "a Jewish neophyte." John Cremer, the abbot of
Westminster, describes his reception by Edward I, King of England, who
gave him an apartment in the Tower to perform his transmutations, but
the welcome guest soon found himself a prisoner, and with difficulty
effected his escape. See "Cremeri Abatis Westmonasteriensis
Testamentum," in the "Museum Hermeticum," 4to, Francfurt, 1677-78.
Camden, in his "Ecclesiastical Monuments," gives also some details of
Lully's sojourn in England.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[212:1](rhr17.htm#fr_68) C. 87, p. 139.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[212:2](rhr17.htm#fr_69) Benedictus Figulus was
the author of "Pandora Magnalium," "Paradisus Aureolus Hermeticus,"
"Rosarium Novum Olympicum et Benedictum," "Thesaurinella Olympica," all
published in 1608.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Case of Johann Valentin Andreas](rhr18)
