[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr17)  [Next](rhr19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span id="img_21700"></span> ![ARMS OF ANDREAS.](img/21700.jpg)

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### THE CASE OF JOHANN VALENTIN ANDREAS.

MOST existing theories as to the authorship of the Rosicrucian
manifestoes are founded upon plausible assumptions or ingenious
conclusions drawn from the doubtful materials of merely alleged facts.
Each investigator has approached the subject with an ambitious
determination to solve the problem connected with the mysterious Order,
but, in the absence of adequate materials, has evolved a new hypothesis,
where the supposititious has transfigured what is certain for the
satisfaction of individual bias. As a simple historian working in the
cause of truth, it is neither my inclination nor my duty to contrive a
fresh theory, but rather to state the facts which are in conflict with
all theories, and to draw no conclusion unwarranted by the direct
evidence in hand.

The Rosicrucian theorists may be broadly divided into three bands--I.
Those who believe that the history of Christian Rosencreutz is true in
fact, and that the society originated in the manner recounted in the
"Fama Fraternitatis." II. Those who regard both the society and its
founder as purely mythical, and consider with [Leibnitz](errata.htm#2),
"*que tout ce que l’on a dit des Frères de la Croix de la Rose, est une
pure invention de quelque personne ingenieuse*." III. Those who, without
accepting the historical truth of the story

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

of Rosencreutz, believe in the existence of the Rosicrucians as a secret
society, which drew attention to the fact of its existence by a singular
and attractive fiction.

In the first division are gathered the men of large imagination and
abundant faith, who, unawed by historical difficulties, unaffected by
discrepancies of fact, and despising the *terra damnata* of frigid
critical methods, are bewitched by romantic associations and the glamour
of impenetrable mystery. They love to contemplate the adepts of the
Rose-Cross moving silently among the ignorant and vulgar multitude,
diffusing light and healing, masters of terrific secrets, having nothing
in appearance and yet possessing all things, ever inscrutable, ever
intangible, ever vanishing suddenly. The sublime dreams produced by
their mystical hachish are undisturbed by the essential shallowness and
commonplace of Rosicrucian manifestoes, for they reject authoritative
documents, or interpret objectionable passages in an inverted sense.

Insuperable difficulties prevent us from supposing that the "Fama" and
"Confessio Fraternitatis" emanated from a secret society whose literal
history is contained in them. These difficulties are, for the most part,
inherent in the nature of the alleged history, which I undertook in the
introduction to prove mythical. It will be unnecessary for this purpose
to consider the scientific foundation of Rosicrucian claims. The purse
of Fortunatus--that is, the Stone of the Philosophers--the power of
transmutation, the existence of elementary spirits, the doctrine of
signatures, ever-burning lamps, and vision at a distance, may be
possibilities, however remote on the horizon of natural science. There
are many things in heaven and on earth which are undreamed of in the
philosophy of Horatio, and occultism

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

is venerable by its antiquity, interesting from its romantic
associations, and replete with visionary splendours; but for all this,
the fiction of the "Fama" is "monstrous, and betrays itself in every
circumstance." <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70)

Suspicion is immediately raised by the suppression of all names, and the
concealment of the headquarters and all "local habitations" of the
supposed Society. C. R. C., the hero of the history, journeys to a
fabulous Oriental city, called Damcar, which is not Damascus, though the
German originals continually confuse it therewith. A great part of this
journey is performed alone by a boy of sixteen, who is described as
possessing such "skill in physic" that he "obtained much favour of the
Turks," and who, after five years’ travelling, returns at the age of
twenty-one years to Europe, fired with an inextinguishable ambition to
correct the errors of all the arts and to reform the whole *philosophia
moralis*. In Germany he erects a mysterious House of the Holy Spirit,
situated apparently in space of three dimensions, besieged by the
"unspeakable concourse of the sick," and yet, for the space of nearly
two hundred years, completely unknown and unseen by the "wicked world"
When the Society was incorporated, and its members despatched on their
wanderings, two brethren always remained with the founder, and eight of
them were present at his death, yet the secret of his burial-place was
completely unknown to the third generation, till its discovery by a
newly-initiated member when he was repairing his house, which,
nevertheless, does not appear to be the House of the Holy Spirit. The
sepulchre has been closed for one hundred and twenty years, and it is
found to contain the *Vocabularium*, *Itinerarium*, and Life of
Paracelsus. Taking 1614 as the year when the Fama"

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

was published, and supposing the discovery of the burial-place to have
ante-dated the manifesto by the shortest possible period, we are brought
back to the year 1494, one year after the birth of Paracelsus, whose
books it is supposed to contain. This point is, of course, conclusive,
and it is unnecessary to comment on the mystery which surrounds the
ultimate fate of the corpse of that "godly and high-illuminated Father,
Brother C. R. C."

Thus it is obvious that the history of Christian Rosencreutz is not
historically true, and that the Society did not originate in the manner
which is described by the "Fama."

The theorists of the second and third divisions are in agreement upon
several important points, and may, therefore, be considered together.
Most of them unite in seeking the author of the Rosicrucian manifestoes
among the literati of the period. On the one side they consider him a
satirist, or the perpetrator of an imposture or elaborate jest; on the
other, they hold him to be the founder of a secret society, or the
mouthpiece of one which was already in existence, and to which they
ascribe a various antiquity in accordance with their predilections and
their knowledge of the true state of the case. The question of this
antiquity has been discussed in the last chapter.

Several authors have been suggested, for the most part on very slender
evidence. Some maintain that the manifestoes were written by Taulerus,
the author of the German Theologia, an obscure writer not to be
identified with the author of the Spiritual Letters, "Institutiones
Divinæ," &c., others by Luther, others again by Wiegel. Joachim
Junge, <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) the celebrated

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

philosopher of the seventeenth century, has secured several partisans.
He was born at Lubeck in 1587, and became an M. A. of Giessen in 1609.
At the very period when the "Fama Fraternitatis" first appeared, about
1614, he was holding numerous conferences with his friends on the
methods of hastening the progress of philosophy, but his plans are
supposed to have been without any immediate result. Subsequently, he
sought to establish at Rostock an academy for the advancement of natural
sciences; "but the rumour spread that this project concealed some evil
designs, and people went so far as to accuse him of being one of the
chiefs of the famous order of the Brothers of the Red-Cross, and he was
forced to renounce a plan whose execution could only have had good
results for his adopted country." <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) He
became rector of the University of Hamburg, and died of apoplexy,
September 23, 1657. He was the author of "Geometria Empirica,"
"Harmonica Theoretica," &c., and appears to have been wholly unconnected
with the alchemical pursuits of the period. A secretary of the Court of
Heidelberg (according to Heidegger, the biographer of Johannes Ludovicus
Fabricius) being, it is supposed, in the secret, is said to have
confirmed in conversation the current report that Junge was the founder
of the Fraternity and the writer of the "Fama Fraternitatis." <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) No reference is made to this matter in the
"Historia Vitæ et Mortis Joachimi Jungii Mathematici summi ceteraque
Incomparabilis Philosophi,"

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

which was written by Martinus Fogelius in 1658. It contains, however,
some account of his attempt to found a philosophical society, but the
*Leges Societatis Ereuneticæ* which are to be found at the end of the
pamphlet, sufficiently distinguish it from the Rosicrucian Brotherhood.
The theosophist, Ægidius Gutmann, is claimed as the true author of the
anonymous manifestoes by others--on what grounds I have not been able to
ascertain; but, according to Buhle, this opinion is "supported by no
other argument than that he was a distinguished mystic in that age of
mysticism."

All these views have manifestly little to recommend them, but that which
attributes the composition of the Rosicrucian manifestoes to Johann
Valentin Andreas is supported by an extraordinary mass of evidence,
which calls for very careful and impartial consideration. This
interesting and singular personage, who is described by Brucker <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) as very learned and of a very elegant
genius, whom the "Bibliothèque Universelle" <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) considers one of the most useful men which
Germany produced in the seventeenth century, and whom all authorities
unite in admiring for his talents and virtues, was a renowned theologian
of Wirtemberg, and a multifarious *littérateur* not uncelebrated, even
at this day, in his own country, as a poet and a satirist. He was born
at Herrenberg, a town in the duchy of Wirtemberg, on the 17th of August
1586. He was the grandson of Jacob Andreas, also a celebrated
theologian. His father was the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

pastor of Herrenberg, his mother, Mary Moseria. The delicacy of his
early years characterised his maturer life, but he was of a shrewd and
cheerful disposition. He received the rudiments of his education from
Michael Beumler <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) Subsequently he
pursued his studies at Tubingen, Buhle informs us that, "besides Greek
and Latin (in which languages he was distinguished for the elegance of
his style), he made himself master of the French, Italian, and Spanish;
was well versed in Mathematics, Natural and Civil History, Geography,
and Historical Genealogy, without at all neglecting his professional
study of divinity." <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77) "I so divided my
time," he tells us, "that during the day I devoted myself to instruction
in the arts; thereto I added long nocturnal studies, passed in the
reading of various authors, and carried to such an extravagant extent
that not only my eyesight suffered, but I made myself subject to the
horrors of sleeplessness, and weakened the strength of memory."

He travelled much within the limits of his own country, visited France,
Switzerland, Italy, including Venice, and twice journeyed into Austria.
He was married on the second of August 1614, to Agnes Elizabeth,
daughter of Josua Grüminger. <span id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78) He
passed through various grades of ecclesiastical dignity, and became
chaplain to the court at Stuttgart. "Here," says Buhle, "he met with so
much thwarting and persecution, that, with his infirm constitution of
body and dejection of mind from witnessing the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

desolation of Germany," the redress of the abuses and evils in which had
been the main object of his life--"it is not to be wondered that he . .
. sank into deep despondency and misanthropy." At his own earnest
importunity he was permitted to resign his post, and died abbot of
Adelberg and Lutheran almoner to the Duke of Wirtemberg in the year
1654, "after a long and painful illness."

All authorities are agreed upon one important point in the character of
Andreas, and that is his predilection in favour of secret societies as
instruments in the reformation of his age and country. According to
Buhle, he had a profound and painful sense of the gross evils and
innumerable abuses which afflicted the German fatherland, and which were
revealed, not eradicated, by the lurid fire-brand of Luther's
reformation. These abuses he sought to redress by means of "secret
societies." The ambition of his boyhood appears to have been the labour
of his after days. "The writings of Andreas, issued during his
life-time, are full of arguments on the necessity of forming a society
solely devoted to the reformation of sciences and manners. . . . Three
of his works, namely, 'Reipublicæ Christianopolitanæ Descriptio';
'Turris Babel, sive Judiciorum de Fraternitate Rosaceæ Crucis Chaos';
'Christianæ Societatis Idea,' all published at Strasbourg in the years
1619 and 1620, offer the clearest indications of his project to form a
secret society. It is impossible not to perceive that he is always
aiming at something of the kind. Some also appeal to his frequent
travels as having no other object. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) A
writer in the "Dictionnaire des Sciences Occultes" speaks with even
greater emphasis. "The works of Andreas, to the number of one hundred,
preach promiscuously

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the necessity of secret societies," <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80)
and Louis Figuier, whose work, entitled "Alchemy and the Alchemists,"
though it does not betray much original research, represents in a French
vestment the opinions and arguments of some high German authorities,
calls Andreas "a fanatical partisan" of the doctrines of
Paracelsus, <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81) declares him to have
been fired with the ambition to fulfil certain predictions of his master
which have been before referred to, and that he took upon himself to
decide that the "Elias Artista," the robust child, to whom the magician
refers, must be understood not of an individual but of a collective body
or association.

It seems clear from these authorities, and from the facts of the case,
that the mature, long-planned purpose of Andreas was the foundation of a
society for the reformation of the age, and we find him cherishing this
hope and apparently elaborating his designs at the very period when the
first rumours of the Rosicrucian Fraternity began to be heard in Europe.
It is, therefore, obviously and incontestably clear that if he had any
hand in the foundation of this society, or in the authorship of the
documents connected with it, that both were undertaken in all
earnestness, and that the "Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis" are not
pieces of frolicsome imposture, and satires on the credulity of the
period. Such a supposition is wholly incompatible with Andreas' zeal and
enthusiasm.

This point being definitely settled, I proceed to lay before

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

my readers an abstract of those considerations which have induced
several erudite investigators to accept Andreas as the author of the
Rosicrucian documents.

I. I have said in the fifth chapter that the whole controversy to some
extent centres in the "Chymical Marriage of Christian Rosencreutz," and
since the publication of Seybold's "Autobiographies of Celebrated Men"
in 1796, and which printed for the first time, albeit in a German
version, the posthumous autobiography of Johann Valentin Andreas, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) there has been no room for doubt as to its
authorship. There he includes it among his earliest productions, states
that it was written at the age of fifteen, and that it was one of a
series of similar juvenilia which, for the most part, had
perished. <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83) Now the "Chymical
Marriage," having remained several years in manuscript, was printed at
Strasbourg in 1616. The C. R. C. of the preceding manifestoes was
immediately identified with the Christian Rosencreutz of the allegorical
romance, and albeit the first

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

edition of the "Confessio Fraternitatis," and seemingly also of the
"Fama," <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) do not describe the society
as that of the Rosie Cross, the edition of 1615, printed at Francfurt,
calls it the *Bruderschafft des Rosen-Creutzes* and it is, therefore,
argued that the three works must have originated from a single source.

II\. The "Chymical Marriage" contains the following passage:--"Hereupon
I prepared myself for the way, put on my white linnen coat, girded my
loyns, with a blood-red ribbon bound *cross-ways* over my shoulder: In
my hat I stuck *four roses*." Elsewhere, he describes himself as a
"brother of the Red-Rosie Cross," and a "Knight of the Golden
Stone"--*eques aurei lapidis*.

Now, the armorial bearings of the family of Andreas contain a St
Andrew's Cross with four roses, one in each of its angles, which
interesting piece of internal evidence indicates the authorship of this
romance independently of the autobiographical statement, and points
irresistibly, it is said, to the conclusion that the founder of the
Rose-Cross Society was the man whose heraldic device was also the Rose
and Cross.

III\. The identity of the principles contained in the acknowledged work
of Andreas, and in the pamphlets which it is sought to attribute to him,
are considered too obvious to need enumeration, and it is sufficient to
point out that all are equally directed against the charlatanic
professors of the *magnum opus*, thriving in countless numbers upon the
credulity and infatuation of the age.

IV\. Arnold, in his "History of the Church and of

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heretics," states
that a comparison between Andreas’ undoubtedly authentic writings and
those of the Rosicrucian manifestoes do not allow any doubt that he is
their author.

V. The earliest edition of Boccalini's "Ragguagli di Parnasso" was
published at Venice in 1612. Andreas is known to have been an Italian
scholar; he was also an omnivorous reader; he is said to have admired
Boccalini, and to have imitated his style; and thence it is argued that
he it was who translated Advertisement 77 of the first centuria, under
the title of the "Universal Reformation of the Whole Wide World."

VI\. An intimate friend of Andreas, Professor Besoldt, positively
declares that the character of the Rosicrucian manifesto is plain
enough, and considers it a marvellous and unexplainable circumstance
that so many persons had mistaken that object. From this it is concluded
that he was a repository of the secret concerning their authorship, and
as he was in the confidence of Andreas, that Andreas was the author.

In this case, the question discussed in the introduction is, of course,
definitely set at rest. The symbolism of the Rose-Cross is of no high
significance as a badge of the secret society. It does not give
expression to the arcana of the alchemical and celestial Dew of the
Wise, nor contain the secret of the menstruum of the Red Dragon. It is
simply the hereditary device of the founder, and its meaning is to be
sought in German heraldry, and not in mysticism.

Those who accredit Andreas with the authorship of the Rosicrucian
manifestoes interpret his reasons very variously. According to Arnold,
he had already written many satirical pamphlets upon the corruptions and
hypocrisy of the period

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

and he considers that the "Fama" and "Confessio" were penned with the
same purpose, namely to lay bare the follies of men's lives, and to set
before them patterns of good and pious living. He quotes an unmentioned
writer as stating that it was necessary that the brethren should be men
of unblemished lives, and zealous preachers, who, under the appearance
of a society, would try to lead the people to God. According to Figuier,
as we have seen, Andreas established the order to fulfil certain
prophecies of Paracelsus, and to pursue scientific researches on purely
Paracelsian principles. But Buhle, with all his shortcomings, and
weighted as he is by an extravagant Masonic hypothesis, is the best
exponent of these views, and it will be necessary to cite his arguments
at considerable length.

"From a close review of his life and opinions, I am not only satisfied
that Andreä wrote the three works which laid the foundation of
Rosicrucianism, but I see clearly *why* he wrote them. The evils of
Germany were then enormous, and the necessity of some great reform was
universally admitted. As a young man without experience, Andrea imagined
that this reform would be easily accomplished. He had the example of
Luther before him, the heroic reformer of the preceding century, whose
memory was yet fresh in Germany, and whose labours seemed on the point
of perishing unless supported by corresponding efforts in the existing
generation. To organise these efforts and direct them to proper objects,
he projected a society composed of the noble, the enlightened, and the
learned--which he hoped to see moving, as under the influence of one
soul, towards the redressing of public evils. Under this hope it was
that he travelled so much: seeking everywhere, no doubt, for the
coadjutors and instruments of his

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

designs. These designs he presented originally in the shape of a
Rosicrucian society; and in this particular project he intermingled some
features that were at variance with its gravity and really elevated
purposes. Young as he was at that time, Andreä knew that men of various
tempers and characters could not be brought to co-operate steadily for
any object so purely disinterested as the elevation of human nature: he
therefore addressed them through the common foible of their age, by
holding out promises of occult knowledge which should invest its
possessor with authority over the powers of Nature, should lengthen his
life, or raise him from the dust of poverty to wealth and high station.
In an age of Theosophy, Cabbalism, and Alchemy, he knew that the popular
ear would be caught by an account, issuing nobody knew whence, of a
great society that professed to be the depository of Oriental mysteries,
and to have lasted two centuries. Many would seek to connect themselves
with such a society: from these candidates he might gradually select the
members of the real society which he projected. The pretensions of the
ostensible society were indeed illusions; but before they could be
detected as such by the new proselytes, those proselytes would become
connected with himself, and (as he hoped) moulded to nobler aspirations.
On this view of Andreä's real intentions, we understand at once the
ground of the contradictory language which he held about astrology and
the transmutation of metals: his satirical works show that he looked
through the follies of his age with a penetrating eye. He speaks with
toleration then of these follies--as an exoteric concession to the age;
he condemns them in his own esoteric character as a religious
philosopher. Wishing to conciliate prejudices, he does not forbear to
*bait* his scheme with these

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

delusions: but he is careful to let us know that they are with his
society mere παρεργα or collateral pursuits, the direct and main one
being true philosophy and religion."

I fully concede the almost overwhelming force of some of the arguments I
have enumerated, but, as a partisan of no particular theory, it is my
duty to set before my readers a plain statement of certain grave
difficulties.

I. The "Chymical Marriage" is called a *ludibrium* by its author, and
Professor Buhle describes it as a comic romance, but those of my readers
who are acquainted with alchemical allegories will discern in this
singular narrative by a prepared student or artist who was
supernaturally and magically elected to participate in the
accomplishment of the *magnum opus*, many matters of grave and occult
significance. They will recognise that the comic episodes are part of a
serious design, and that the work as a whole is in strict accordance
with the general traditions of alchemy. They will question the good
faith of the author in the application of a manifestly incongruous
epithet. Perhaps they will appear to be wise above what is written, but
the position is not really unreasonable, for the passage in which
reference is made by Andreas to the "Nuptiæ Chymicæ" is calculated to
raise suspicion. He was a shrewd and keen observer; he had gauged the
passions and the crazes of his period; he was fully aware that the rage
for alchemy blinded the eyes and drained the purses of thousands of
credulous individuals, who were at the mercy of the most wretched
impostors, and that no pretence was too shallow and no recipe too
worthless to find believers. He could not be ignorant that a work like
the "Chymical Marriage of Christian Rosencreutz" was eminently liable to
impose upon every class of theosophists. When, therefore, he supposes,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

and, by implication, expresses, astonishment that his so-called
*ludibrium* became the object of earnest investigation and of high
esteem, I freely confess that I, for one, cannot interpret him
seriously; in other words, that I reject the statement. This, however,
is only the initial difficulty. The same passage of the "Vita ab ipso
Conscripta" contains another piece of incredible information, namely
that Andreas wrote the "Nuptiæ Chymicæ" before he was sixteen, This
story gives evidence of an acquaintance with the practice and purposes
of alchemy which was absolutely impossible to the most precocious lad.
Moreover, the boldness of its conception and the power which is
displayed in its execution, setting aside the debateable question of its
occult philosophical character, are things utterly transcending the
*cacoethes scribendi* of a youngster barely attained to the age of
puberty. I appeal to the discrimination of my readers whether the
curious and ingenious perplexities propounded at the supper on the third
day are in any way suggestive of "the light fire in the veins of a boy."
The romance supposed to have been written in 1602-3 did not see the
light till 1616, when it appeared in the full tide of the Rosicrucian
controversy. Why did it remain in manuscript for the space of thirteen
years at a period when everything treating of alchemy was devoured with
unexampled avidity? The "Chymical Marriage," in its original draft, may
have been penned at the age of fifteen, but it must have been subjected
to a searching revision, though I confess that it betrays no trace of
subsequent manipulation. These grave difficulties are enhanced by a fact
which is wholly unknown to most Rosicrucian critics, and which was
certainly not to be expected in the jest of a schoolboy, namely, that
the barbarous enigmatical writings

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

which are to be found in several places of "The Hermetick Wedding" are
not an unmeaning hoax, but contain a decipherable and deciphered sense.
The secretary of an English Rosicrucian Society says that the Supreme
Magus of the Metropolitan College can read all three of the enigmas, and
that he himself has deciphered two. Their secret is not a tradition, but
the meaning dawns upon the student after certain researches. The last
point is curious, and, outside the faculty of clairvoyance, the
suggested method does not seem probable, but I give it to be taken at
its worth, and have no reason to doubt the statement.

From these facts and considerations, the conclusion does not seem
unreasonable, and may certainly be tolerated by an impartial mind, that
in spite of the statement of Andreas, and partly because of that
statement, the "Chymical Marriage" is not a *ludibrium*, that it betrays
a serious purpose, and conceals a recondite meaning.

II\. With this criticism the whole theory practically breaks down. We
know that the "Fama Fraternitatis" was published in 1615 as a manifesto
of the *Bruderschafft des löblichen Ordens des Rosen Creutses*. We have
good reason to suppose that the original draft of the "Chymical
Marriage" was tampered with; we do not know that previous to the year
1615 such a work was in existence as the "Chymical Marriage of Christian
Rosencreutz." What we know to have existed was simply the "Nuptiæ
Chymicæ." Now, supposing the "Fama Fraternitatis" to have emanated from
a source independent of Andreas, he would be naturally struck by the
resemblance of the mysterious Rosicrucian device to his own armorial
bearings, and when in the year 1616 he published his so-called comic
romance, this analogy may, not inconceivably, have led him to
re-christen

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

his hero, and to introduce those passages which refer to the Rose Cross.
This, of course, is conjectural, but it is to be remarked that so far as
can be possibly ascertained, the acknowledged symbol of the Fraternity
never was a St Andrew's Cross with four Roses, but was a Cross of the
ordinary shape, with a Red Rose in the centre, or a Cross rising out of
a Rose. There is therefore little real warrant for the identification of
the mystical and the heraldic badge. It is on this identification,
however, that the Andrean claim is greatly based.

III\. We find the "Chymical Marriage," like the "Fama" and "Confessio
Fraternitatis," crusading against the "vagabond cheaters," "runagates
and roguish people," who debased alchemical experiments in the interest
of dishonest speculation; yet the one, under a thin veil of fiction,
describes the proceedings in the accomplishment of the *magnum opus*,
while the other terms transmutation a great gift of God. These points of
resemblance, however, do not necessarily indicate a common authorship,
for a general belief in the facts of alchemy was held at that period by
many intelligent men, who were well aware, and loud in their
condemnation, of the innumerable frauds which disgraced the science. On
the other hand, it is plain that the history of C. R. C., as it is
contained in the "Fama," is not the history, equally fabulous, of that
Knight of the Golden Stone, who is the hero of the "Chymical Marriage."

IV\. It is obviously easy to exaggerate the philological argument, or
rather the argument from the identity of literary style, in the
documents under consideration. This point indeed can only be adequately
treated by a German. At present it rests on a single assertion of
Arnold, which is uncorroborated by any illustrative facts. I think it
will

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

also be plain, even to the casual reader, that the "Chymical Marriage"
is a work of "extraordinary talent," as Buhle justly observes, but that
the "Fama Fraternitatis" is a work of no particular talent, either
inventive or otherwise, while the subsequent "Confession," both in
matter and manner, is simply beneath contempt. Yet we are required to
believe that the first was produced at the age of fifteen, while the
worthless pamphlets are the work of the same writer from seven to
thirteen years subsequently.

V. The connection of the "Universal Reformation" with the other
Rosicrucian manifestoes is so uncertain, that if Andreas could be proved
its translator, his connection with the society would still be doubtful.
The appearance of the "Fama Fraternitatis" and the "Universal
Reformation" in one pamphlet no more proves them to have emanated from a
single source, than the publication of the "Confessio" in the same
volume as the "Secretioris Philosophiæ Consideratio" proves Philippus à
Gabella to have been the author of that document. The practice of
issuing unconnected works within the covers of a single book was common
at the period. But the argument which ascribes the "Universal
Reformation" to Andreas is entirely conjectural.

VI\. There is nothing conclusive in the statement of Professor Besoldt;
it may have been simply an expression of personal opinion; those who
interpret it otherwise in support of the claim of Andreas, to some
extent base their [interpretation](errata.htm#3) on the very point which
is in question, for unless Andreas were the author of the manifestoes,
it is clear that Professor Besoldt is a person of no authority.

These difficulties are of themselves sufficient to cast grave doubt upon
the Andrean theory, but when we pass to the consideration of the motives
which are attributed to the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

reputed author by the chief supporter of his claims, we find them
indefinitely multiplied. Buhle represents him as a young man without
experience who imagined that the evils of his country, enormous as they
confessedly were, could be eradicated easily. But if, by courtesy, we
allow that the "Fama Fraternitatis" was published so early as 1612, then
Andreas was twenty-six years of age, when a man of education and travel
would be neither inexperienced nor Utopian.

What, however, is by implication assumed in this hypothesis is that the
Rosicrucian manifestoes were written at the same age as the "Nuptiæ
Chymicæ," for which there is not a particle of evidence, and that the
object of Andreas’ travels was to find "coadjutors and instruments for
his designs," which is also wholly unsupported. The scheme which is
fathered upon Andreas is a monstrous and incredible absurdity; it
involves, moreover, a pious fraud which is wholly at variance with the
known character of the supposed author. No sane person, much less a man
who "looked through the follies of his age with a penetrating eye,"
could expect anything but failure to result from a gross imposition
practised on the members of a projected association, who being assured
of the possession of the Philosophical Stone, the life-elixir, and
initiation into the secret mysteries of nature, were destined to
receive, instead of these prizes, a barren and impossible commission to
reform the age. What moral reformation could result from any scheme at
once so odious and impracticable?

Let us accept however, for a moment, the repulsive hypothesis of Buhle.
Suppose the Rosicrucian manifestoes to have been written in 1602.
Suppose Andreas to have scoured Germany and also to have visited other
countries in search of appropriate

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

members for his society. It would then be naturally concluded that the
publication of the "Fama Fraternitatis" signified that his designs were
matured. The subsequent conduct of Andreas is, nevertheless, so
completely in the face of this conclusion, that Buhle is obliged to
assume that the manifestoes were printed without the author's consent,
than which nothing could be more gratuitous, and that the uproar of
hostility which followed their publication made it necessary for Andreas
to disavow them if he would succeed in his ultimate designs. The
hostility provoked by the manifestoes bears no comparison with the
welcome they received among all those classes to whom they were
indirectly addressed, namely, the alchemists, theosophists, etc. Had
Andreas projected a society upon the lines laid down by Buhle, nothing
remained but to communicate with the innumerable pamphleteers who wrote
in defence of the order during the years immediately succeeding the
publication of the "Fama Fraternitatis," as well as with those other
persons who in various printed letters offered themselves for admission
therein, after which he could have proceeded in the accomplishment of
his heartless design. That he did not do so when the circumstances were
so favourable is proof positive that he had no such intention. In fact,
at this very period, namely, in the year 1614, we find Andreas immersed
in no dark and mysterious designs for the reformation of the age by
means of a planned imposture, but simply celebrating his nuptials, and
settling down into a tranquil domestic life.

One more gross and ineradicable blemish upon this hypothesis remains to
be noticed. Not only is Andreas represented relinquishing his design at
the very moment when it was possible to put it in force, but diverted at
the universal

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

delusion he had succeeded in creating, he is represented as endeavouring
to foster it, "to gratify his satirical propensities," and when even in
after life he becomes "shocked to find that the delusion had taken firm
root in the public mind," he adopts no adequate measures to dispel it.
Thus not only does Andreas wilfully turn the long-planned purpose of his
life into a wretched fiasco, but to complete the libel on the character
of a great and good man, he is supposed to delude his fellow creatures
no longer for a lofty purpose, but from the lowest motive which it is
possible to attribute to anyone,--a motive indefinitely meaner than any
of personal gain.

The facts of the case untortured by any theory are these. The "Fama
Fraternitatis" was published, say, in 1612. In 1613 a brief Latin
epistle addressed to the venerable Fraternity R. C. is supposed to have
appeared at Francfurt, supplemented the following year by an "Assertio
Fraternitatis R. C. à quodam Fraterni ejus Socio carmine expressa."
These two publications I have been unable to trace, though both are
mentioned by Buhle, and are included by Langlet du Fresnoy in the
Rosicrucian bibliography which is to be found in the third volume of his
"Histoire de la Philosophie Hermétique." In 1615, the Latin original of
the "Confessio Fraternitatis" appeared, as we have seen, in the
alchemical quarto of Philip à Gabella. All these works are attributed to
Andreas, and the year 1616 saw the publication of the "Chymical Nuptials
of Christian Rosencreutz," which work is undoubtedly his. Taking this
view, and comparing these persistent and successive attempts to draw
attention to the secret society with the known character and the known
ambitions of Andreas, we are evidently face to face with an earnest and
determined purpose,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

not to be arrested by a little hostility and not likely to degenerate
into a matter for jest and satire. We must therefore reject the Buhlean
hypothesis, because it fails all along the line, "and betrays itself in
every circumstance." We must reject also that view which attributes the
manifesto to Andreas, but considers them an ingenious jest. It is
universally admitted that this jest had a seriously evil effect, and
Andreas, on this hypothesis, lived to see some of the best and acutest
minds of his time, to say nothing of an incalculable number of honest
and earnest seekers, misled by the vicious and wanton joke which had
been hatched by the perverted talents of his youth. The wickedness and
cruelty of persisting in concealment of the true nature of the case
through all his maturer life, through all his age, and not even making a
posthumous explanation in the "Vita ab ipso Conscripta," is enough to
raise indignation in every breast, and is altogether, and too utterly,
vile and mean to ascribe to any right-minded and honourable person, much
less to a man of the known intellectual nobility of Johann Valentin
Andreas. Buhle says that to have avowed the three books as his own
composition would have defeated his scheme, and that "afterwards he had
still better reasons for disavowing them." He had no such reasons. The
bluntest sense of duty and the feeblest voice of manliness must have
provided him with urgent and unanswerable reasons for acknowledging
them--a course to which no serious penalties could possibly attach.

To dispose of the Andrean claim, a third hypothesis must be briefly
considered. If Andreas was a follower of Paracelsus, a believer in
alchemy, an aspirant towards the spiritual side of the *magnum opus*, or
an adept therein, he would naturally behold with sorrow and disgust the
trickery

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

and imposture with which alchemy was then surrounded, and by which it
has been indelibly disgraced, and it is not unreasonable to suppose that
he may have attempted to reform the science by means of a secret
society, whose manifestoes are directed against those very abuses. But
in spite of the statement of Louis Figuier, I can find no warrant in the
life or writings of Andreas for supposing that he was a profound
student, much less a fanatical partisan of Paracelsus, and it is clear
from his "Turris Babel," "Mythologia Christiana," and other works, that
he considered the Rosicrucian manifestoes a reprehensible hoax. In the
twenty-fifth chapter of the first of these books, the author proposes to
supply the place of the fabulous Rosicrucian Society by his own
Christian Fraternity. Indeed, wherever he speaks of it in his known
writings, it is either with contempt or condemnation. *Nihil cum hac
Fraternitate commune habeo*, says Truth in the "Mythologia Christiana."
"Listen, ye mortals," cries Fama in the "Turris Babel," "you need not
wait any longer for any brotherhood; the comedy is played out; Fama has
put it up, and now destroys it. Fama has said Yes, and now utters No."

My readers are now in possession of the facts of the case, and must draw
their own conclusions. If in spite of the difficulties which I .have
impartially stated, Andreas has any claim upon the authorship of the
Rosicrucian manifestoes, it must be viewed in a different light.
According to Herder, his purpose was to make the secret societies of his
time reconsider their position, and to shew them how much of their aims
and movements was ridiculous, but not to found any society himself.
According to Figuier, he really founded the Rosicrucian Society, but
ended by entire disapproval of its methods, and therefore started his

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian
Fraternity. But the facts of the case are against this hypothesis, for
the "Invitatio Fraternitatis Christi ad Sacri amoris Candidatos" was
published as early as 1617, long before the Rosicrucian Order could have
degenerated from the principles of its master. It is impossible that
Andreas should have projected two associations at the same time.

But in the face of the failure of all these hypotheses, one fact in the
life of their subject remains unexplained. If Andreas did not write the
"Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis," if he had no connection with the
secret society from which they may be supposed to have emanated, if he
did not study Paracelsus, and did not take interest in alchemy, how are
we to account for the existence of the "Chymical Marriage," for its
publication in the centre and heart of the Rosicrucian controversy, and
for its apparently earnest purpose when he describes it as a jest or
*ludibrium?* Without elaborating a new hypothesis, can we suggest a
possible reason for this misnomer? Supposing Andreas to have been
actually connected in his younger days with a certain secret society,
which may have published the more or less misleading Rosicrucian
manifestoes, the oath which all such societies impose upon their
members, would for ever prevent him from divulging anything concerning
it, though he may have withdrawn from its ranks at an early period. This
society may have been identical, or affiliated, with the *Militia
Crucifera Evangelica*, which, from the known character of its founder
was probably saturated with alchemical ideas, in which case it offers at
the end of the sixteenth century a complete parallel in its opinions
with the Rosicrucian Fraternity. Both associations were
ultra-Protestant, both were "heated with Apocalyptic

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

dreams," both sought the *magnum opus* in its transfigured or spiritual
sense, both abhorred the Pope, both called him Antichrist, both coupled
him with the detested name of Mahomet, both expected the speedy
consummation of the age, both studied the secret characters of nature,
both believed in the significance of celestial signs, both adopted as
their characteristic symbols the mystic Rose and Cross, and the reason
which prompted this choice in the one probably guided it in the other.
This reason is not to be sought in the typology of a remote period, nor
even in the alchemical enigmas of mediæval times. It is not to be sought
in the armorial bearings of Johann Valentin Andreas. They bore the Rose
and Cross as their badge, not because they were Brethren of the
Concocted and Exalted Dew, not because they had studied the book called
Zohar, not because they were successors and initiates of the ancient
Wisdom-Religion and the sublime hierarchies of Eld, but because they
were a narrow sect of theosophical dissidents, because the monk Martin
Luther was their idol, prophet, and master, because they were rabidly
and extravagantly Protestant, with an ultra-legitimate violence of
abusive Protestantism, because, in a single word, the device on the seal
of Martin Luther was a Cross-crowned heart rising from the centre of a
Rose, thus--

<span id="img_24200"></span> ![](img/24200.jpg)

I am in a position to maintain that this was the true and esoteric
symbol of the Society, as the Crucified Rose was

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the avowed, exoteric emblem, because in a professedly authoritative work
on the secret *figuren* of the Order--"Geheime Figuren der Rosenkreuzer
ans dem 16<sup>ten</sup> und 17<sup>ten</sup> Jahrhundert"--I find the
following remarkable elaboration of the Lutheran seal, which practically
decides the question.

<span id="img_24300"></span> ![](img/24300.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Taking into
consideration that the "Naometria" of Simon Studion and the original
draft of the "Nuptiæ Chymicæ" both belong to nearly the same period, and
that Andreas was undoubtedly acquainted with the work of the mystical
teacher of Marbach, as a passage in the "Turris Babel" makes evident, it
is not an impossible supposition that the young student of Tübingen came
into personal communication with Studion, who was only some fifty miles
distant in the cheapest days of travelling, and having a natural
inclination to secret societies, became associated with the *Militia
Crucifera Evangelica*. Out of this connection the "Nuptiæ Chymicæ" might
naturally spring, and the subsequent Rosicrucian society was the
*Militia* transfigured after the death of Studion, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) and after the travels and experience

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

of Andreas had divested him of his boyish delusions. Having proved the
hollowness of their pretensions, but still bound by his pledge, he
speaks of them henceforth as a deception and a mockery, and attempts to
replace them by a practical Christian association without mysticism and
symbols, making no pretension to occult knowledge, or to transcendant
powers.

This view is not altogether a new one, and undoubtedly has its
difficulties. It cannot account for the publication of the "Nuptiæ
Chymicæ" in 1616, nor for the revision which it apparently underwent at
the very period when Andreas was projecting the unalchemical Christian
Fraternity; but so far as it extends, it does not torture the facts with
which it professes to deal. I present it not in my character as a
historian, but simply as a hypothesis which may be tolerated. To my own
mind it is far from satisfactory, and, from a careful consideration of
all the available materials, I consider that no definite conclusion can
be arrived at. There is nothing in the internal character of the "Fama"
and "Confessio Fraternitatis" to shew that they are a jest. On the other
hand, they embody a fabulous story. There is no proof that they did or
did not emanate from a secret society. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) The popular argument that the manifestoes
were addressed to "the learned of Europe," but

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the earnest entreaties of the flower of theosophical literati for
admission into the ranks of the Fraternity remained unanswered, is no
proof that the Society itself did not exist, for the statement is
vicious in the extreme. We have absolutely no means of ascertaining with
whom it may have come into communication, or what letters and
applications were answered, because inviolable secrecy would cover the
whole of the proceedings, and those who might have the best reason to
know that the Society existed would be most obliged to hold their peace.
Thus "the meritorious Order of the R. C." still remains shrouded in
mystery, but this mystery is destitute of romance and almost of
interest. The avowed opinions of the Fraternity for ever prevent us from
supposing that they were in possession of any secrets which would be
worth disentombing. To have accomplished the *magnum opus* of the
veritable adept, is to be master of the Absolute and the heir of
Eternity, is to be above all prejudices, all fears, and all sectarian
bitterness. By the aid of an ultra-Horatian philosophy we may conceive
that such men have been, and still are, but they have passed above
"material forms" and the clouded atmosphere of terrestrial ideas; they
inhabit the ideal "city of intelligence and love." They have left the
brawling gutter of religious squabbling, the identification of
Antichrist, the destruction of the Pope by means of nails, and the
number of the beast, to Baxter and Guinness, Cumming and Brothers the
prophet, who may share its squalors and wretchedness with--the
Rosicrucian Fraternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[219:1](rhr18.htm#fr_70) De Quincey,
"Rosicrucians and Freemasons," c. iii.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[220:1](rhr18.htm#fr_71) This writer is not to
be confused with Jung Stilling, whose real name was Johannes Heinrich
Jung, and who is, perhaps, more celebrated in England for his works on
Pneumatology than is the rector of Hamburg for his contributions to
mathematical science.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[221:1](rhr18.htm#fr_72) "Biographie
Universelle," *s.v.* Joachim Junge.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[221:2](rhr18.htm#fr_73) In the "Acta Eruditorum
Lipsiæ," 1698, 4to, p. 172, there is the following passage:--"Natus est
Jo. Ludovicus Fabricius Scaphulsi, Helvetiorum Pago primario, die 29
Julii anni seculi hujus trigesimi secundi, patre Jo. Fabricio anno 1630
vi externa e Palatinatu in exilium ejecto, et a Scaphusanis promtissime
recepto. Fuit vir ille sic satis excultus, quique ut Fabricius noster
familiari in sermone <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> retulit, adversus
Roseæ Crucis Fratres calami quoque telum strinxit, *cujus quidem Sectæ
auctorem fuisse Jungium, Mathematicam Hamburgi professum, eumque librum,
cui titulus est Fama Frabium Rosæ Crucis cudisse, pariter ex ore
Secretarii, rei illius conscii, confirmavit*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[222:1](rhr18.htm#fr_74) "Brukeri Historia Crit.
Philosophiæ," tome ii., p. 740.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[222:2](rhr18.htm#fr_75) Tome ii., p. 126.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[223:1](rhr18.htm#fr_76) "Primam infantiam
afflictissimam habui, ardeo est non nisi bimus in pedes primus erigerer,
quam etiam valetudinis tenuitatem omni vita tolerari, ingenio interim
sagaci et festivo, ut propinquis et amicis voluptati essem . . . .
Literarum rudimenta a Michaele Beumlero accessi viro optimo."--"Vita ab
ipso Conscripts," lib. i.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[223:2](rhr18.htm#fr_77) De Quincey,
"Rosicrucians and Freemasons," c. iii.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[223:3](rhr18.htm#fr_78) See [additional notes,
No. 5](rhr33.htm#an_n05).

<span id="fn_79"></span>[224:1](rhr18.htm#fr_79) "Bibliothèque
Universelle," tome ii., pp. 126-128.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[225:1](rhr18.htm#fr_80) "Dictionnaire des
Sciences Occultes" in the Abbé Migne's "Troisième Encyclopédie
Théologique," t. i., p. 90.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[225:2](rhr18.htm#fr_81) With the characteristic
carelessness of a French reasoner, Figuier stultifies himself on this
point by stating a few pages subsequently that Andreas was devoid of any
doctrinal fanaticism. "L’Alchimie et les Alchimistes," pp. 293-29.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[226:1](rhr18.htm#fr_82) The original Latin text
was not printed till 1849, when it appeared in octavo at Berlin under
the editorship of F. H. Rheinwald.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[226:2](rhr18.htm#fr_83) For the information of
students of the Rosicrucian mystery I append the whole passage which
refers to the juvenile productions of Andreas. "Jam a secundo et tertio
post millesimum sexcentesimum coeperam aliquid exercendi ingenii ergo
pangere, cujus facile prima fuere Esther et Hyacinthus comoediae ad
aemulationem Anglicorum histrionum juvenili ansu factae, e quibus
posterior, quae mihi reliqua est, pro aetate non displicet. Secuta aunt
Veneris detestatio et Lachrymae tribus dialogis satis prolixis, ob
infelicem, de quo postea, casum meum expressae, quae invita me
perierunt. Superfuerunt e contra Nuptiae Chymicae, cum monstrorum
foecundo foetu, ludibrium, quod mireris a nonullis aestimatum et subtili
indagine explicatum, plane futile et quod inanitatem curiosorum prodat.
Invenio etiam in chartis meis titulos Julii Sive Politiae libros tres,
Judicium astroligicum contra astrologiam, Iter, sed quod dudum
interierunt, quid iis consignarim, non memini."--Vita Lib., i. p. 10,
Ed. Rheinwald, 1849.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[227:1](rhr18.htm#fr_84) The title of one of the
earliest editions is quoted by Arnold as follows:--"Fama Fraternitatis,
or Discovery of the Brotherhood of the Worshipful Order of the R. C."

<span id="fn_85"></span>[243:1](rhr18.htm#fr_85) There is one fact which
is too remarkable to be a mere coincidence, and which seems to have been
unnoticed by previous investigators, namely, that Sigmund Richter, who
claims to speak <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> authoritatively,
declares in the year 1710 that one of the Rosicrucian headquarters is at
Nurenberg; that is, at the very place where the *Militia Crucifera
Evangelica* originally met in 1586.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[244:1](rhr18.htm#fr_86) For the sake of
perspicuity, and to avoid forestalling arguments, I have spoken
throughout of the Rosicrucians as of a secret society. In the universal
uncertainty, this view is as good as another, but it does not
necessarily represent my personal opinion. By the term "Rosicrucian
Fraternity" I simply mean to indicate the unknown source of the "Fama"
and "Confessio Fraternitatis."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Progress of Rosicrucianism in Germany](rhr19)
