[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr18)  [Next](rhr20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### PROGRESS OF ROSICRUCIANISM IN GERMANY.

THE immediate result of the "Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis" in
Germany has been so well described by Professor Buhle that I cannot do
better than transcribe this portion of his work as it is interpreted by
Thomas De Quincey.

"The sensation which was produced throughout Germany . . . is
sufficiently evidenced by the repeated editions . . . (of the
manifestoes) which appeared between 1614 and 1617, but still more by the
prodigious commotion which followed in the literary world. In the
library at Göttingen there is a body of letters addressed to the
imaginary order of Father Rosy Cross, from 1614 to 1617, by persons
offering themselves as members. These letters are filled with
complimentary expressions and testimonies of the highest respect, and
are all printed, the writers alleging that, being unacquainted with the
address of the society, they could not send them through any other than
a public channel. As certificates of their qualifications, most of the
candidates have enclosed specimens of their skill in alchemy and
cabbalism. Some of the letters are signed with initials only, or with
fictitious names, but assign real places of address. Many other literary
persons there were at that day who forbore to write letters to the
society, but threw out small pamphlets containing their opinions of the
Order, and of its

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

place of residence. Each successive writer pretended to be better
informed on that point than all his predecessors. Quarrels arose;
partisans started up on all sides; the uproar and confusion became
indescribable; cries of heresy and atheism resounded from every corner;
some were for calling in the secular power; and the more coyly the
invisible society retreated from the public advances so much the more
eager and amorous were its admirers, and so much the more bloodthirsty
its antagonists. Meantime, there were some who, from the beginning, had
escaped the general delusion, and there were many who had gradually
recovered from it. It was remarked that of the many printed letters to
the society, though courteously and often learnedly written, none had
been answered; and all attempts to penetrate the darkness in which the
order was shrouded by its unknown memorialist were successfully baffled.
Hence arose a suspicion that some bad designs lurked under the
ostensible purposes of these mysterious publications. Many vile
impostors arose, who gave themselves out for members of the Rosicrucian
order; and upon the credit which they thus obtained for a season,
cheated numbers of their money by alchemy, or of their health by
panaceas. Three in particular made a great noise at Watzlar, at
Nuremburg, and at Augsburg; all were punished by the magistracy--one
lost his ears in running the gauntlet, and one was hanged. At this
crisis stepped forward a powerful writer, who attacked the supposed
order with much scorn and homely good sense. This was Andrew Libau. He
exposed the impracticability of the meditated reformation, the
incredibility of the legend of Father Rosy Cross, and the hollowness of
the pretended sciences which they professed. He pointed the attention

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

of governments to the confusions which these impostures were producing,
and predicted from them a renewal of the scenes which had attended the
fanaticism of the Anabaptists." <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87)

Andreas Libavius was born at Halle in Saxony about the year 1560. He was
appointed professor of history and poetry at Jena in 1588, practised as
a physician at Rotembourg on the Tauber from 1591 till 1605, when he
became rector of the college of Casimir at Coburg in Franconia, where he
died in 1616. He was the first writer who mentioned the transfusion of
blood from one animal to another, and the property of oxide of gold to
colour glass red. He also invented a chemical preparation, called the
liquor of Libavius, "a highly concentrated muriatic acid, much
impregnated with tin," and which has been long used in laboratories. He
has been falsely represented by M. Hoefer as a follower of Paracelsus,
but appears to have believed in the transmutation of metals, and in the
medical virtues of various auriferous preparations. He is considered to
rank among the first students of chemistry who pursued experimental
researches upon the true method. His "Alchymia Recognita" and his
"History of Metals" are among the best practical manuals of the period.
Though seeking the Philosophick Stone, he attached no credit to the
Rosicrucian manifestoes, and was one of the first writers who attacked
them, in two Latin folios dated 1615, and in a smaller German pamphlet
which appeared in the following year. The first of these works contains
an exhaustive criticism of the Harmonico-Magical Philosophy of the
mysterious Brotherhood. It is entitled "Exercitatio Paracelsica nova de
notandis ex scripto Fraternitatis de

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rosea Cruce," and
forms part of a larger "Examen Philosophiæ Novæ, quæ veteri abrogandæ
Opponitur."

Professor Buhle is one of those interesting literary characters, by no
means uncommonly met with, whose luminous hypotheses completely
transfigure every fact which comes within the range of their radiation.
Few persons who have taken the pains to labour through the ponderous
folios of Libavius would dream of terming him a powerful writer, and
personally I have failed to discern much of that "homely good sense"
which manifested itself so gratuitously before the discerning eyes of
the acute German savant. The criticisms, on the contrary, are weak,
verbose, and tedious, and the investigations, as a whole, appear to have
little *raison d’être*. It may, in fact, be impartially declared that
there is only one thing more barren and wearisome than the host of
pamphlets, elucidations, apologies, epistles, and responses written on
the Rosicrucian side, and that is the hostile criticism of the opposing
party, and the dead level of unprofitable flatness which characterises
its prosaic commonplace is an infliction which I honestly trust will be
spared to all my readers.

Master Andreas Libavius, though he wrote upon Azoth, was a practical
thinker, and he refused to contemplate the projected universal
reformation through the magic spectacles of the Rosicrucian. He had not
read Wordsworth, and he had no definite opinions as to "the light that
never was on land or sea." So he penned what Professor Buhle might call
a searching criticism; he was right in so far as the reformation is
still to come, but in these days we have read Wordsworth, and we prefer
the vague poetry of Rosicrucian aspirations to the perditional dulness
of Master Libavius' prose. Still we respect Professor Buhle, chiefly

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

because we love De Quincey, and we have a thin streak of kindly feeling
for his alchemical *protégé*, so we recommend him as an antidote to Mr
Hargrave Jennings, who has doubtless never read him, and seems only to
have heard by report of such documents as the Fame and Confession of the
meritorious order of the Brethren R. C.

Though he disbelieved in the universal reformation, Libavius did not
reject the signs of the times. "No one doubts that we are in the last
age of the world, by reason of the signs which have preceded nearly
every important event, and are still at this day repeatedly appearing."
He takes exception to the philosophical peregrination of the high
illuminated C. R. C. in Arabia, because it was superfluous to seek
magicians in the east when they abounded at home. Some of his objections
are, however, sufficiently pertinent. "If the society hath been ordained
and commissioned of God, it ought to be in a position to prove its
vocation in some conclusive manner." Incidentally he denounces
astrology. "We have heard and read innumerable astrological theories,
but we have not discovered their rational basis. On the contrary, we are
daily deceived by lying predictions." With regard to the secrecy of the
Order, he flings at it the following text--*Omnis qui male agit, odit
lucent et non venit ad lucem, ne arguantur opera ejus*. Condemning their
anonymous mystery, he asks--"Is their danger greater than Luther's,
threatened by the proscription of the Pope and the Emperor both?"
Representing the Rosicrucians as promising a new Theologia, Physica, and
Mathematica, he asks--"What manner of new theology is this, seeing there
is nothing new under the sun? Again, where is its novelty, if it be that
of the primitive Church? Is it of the Gentile, Mahometan, Jew, Papist,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arian, Anabaptist,
Lutheran, or disciple of Paracelsus? Make unto yourselves also a new
God, with a new heaven, and beware lest you are plunged into the old
perdition! On our part, we will cling to the antiquity of the canonical
Scriptures." And then in regard to the new physics, "If it be after the
fashion of Parcelsus, chew the cud of your own reflections in silence,
and slumber placidly in your absurdity. . . . If ye come with the
cabalistic calculations concerning the fifty gates of understanding,
scrutinising the *mysteriarcham Dei*, take care that ye are not consumed
by the fire which is therein, for those who will become searchers of
majesty shall be overwhelmed with glory."

The "Analysis Confessionis Fraternitatis de Rosea Cruce pro admonitione
et Instructione eorum, qui, quia judicandum sit de ista nova factione
scire cupiant," extracts, after the author's own fashion, the
thirty-seven "reasons of our purpose and intention" which are to be
found hidden in that Rosicrucian manifesto, and criticises the *Viæ
accedendi*, or methods of approaching the Order, which are--I. By a
written petition. II. By the study of the Scriptures and their
interpretation in the cabilistico-magical manner of the Paracelsists.
III. By the writings and precepts of Paracelsus. IV. By the symbolical
characters inscribed on the Macrocosmos.

These two Latin treatises were supplemented by a less tedious German
pamphlet, which appeared at Francfurt in 1616 under the title of
"Well-wishing objections concerning the Fame and Confession of the
Brotherhood of the R. C., and their universal reformation of the whole
world before the day of Judgment, and transformation thereof into an
Earthly Paradise, such as was inhabited by Adam before the fall, and the
restitution of all arts and wisdom as

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

possessed by Adam, Enoch, Salomon, &c. Written with great care, by
desire and command of some superior persons, by Andrew Libavius." It
claims to be inspired by a spirit of friendly criticism, decides that
the Order does exist, advises the accomplishment of a limited and
private reformation, leaving the universal one to God, as the world is
far too corrupt for improvement before the judgment day, and that a
pretension so large will never by any possibility be carried out. Though
posing as a critic, he advises all persons to join the Order, because
there is much to be learned and much wisdom to be attained by so doing.
He praises their sound doctrine in matters of religion, particularly the
denunciation of the Pope and Mahomet, the value they set upon the Bible,
&c. It is evident, in fact, that in spite of his "homely good sense" he
had radically changed his ground. The treatise is divided into
forty-three chapters, and among the subjects discussed are the Spheric
Art, the *Lapis Philosophorum*, and the Magical Language.

What we seek as vainly in the most authoritative Rosicrucian apologists
as in their critics, is any additional information concerning the
society, its members, or its whereabouts. Such information is promised
frequently on the title-pages of the innumerable pamphlets of the
period, but it is not given, and the proffered proofs of the existence
of the Order are confined to abstract considerations devoid of
historical value.

Professor Buhle considers that the attacks of Libavius joined to other
writings "of the same tendency" might possibly have dispelled the
delusion, except for the conduct of Andreas, whom he represents as doing
his best to increase it by the publication of other documents, and for

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

that of the Paracelsists. "With frantic eagerness they had sought to
press into the imaginary order; but, finding themselves lamentably
repulsed in all their efforts, at length they paused; and, turning
suddenly round, they said to one another, 'What need to court this
perverse order any longer? We are ourselves Rosicrucians as to all the
essential marks laid down in the three books. We also are holy persons
of great knowledge; we also make gold, or shall make it; we also, no
doubt, give us but time, shall reform the world: external ceremonies are
nothing: substantially it is clear that we are the Rosicrucian Order.'
Upon this they went on in numerous books and pamphlets to assert that
they were the identical Order instituted by Father Rosycross, and
described in the 'Fama Fraternitatis.' The public mind was now perfectly
distracted; no man knew what to think; and the uproar became greater
than ever."

Here is a dramatic situation well conceived and described; its only
fault is the very slender foundation of actual fact on which it appears
to be based. I have failed altogether to discover those numerous books
and pamphlets wherein the Paracelsists assert that they are to all
intents and purposes identical with the invisible and unapproachable
Brotherhood. Their anxiety to be admitted into its ranks may be freely
granted, but it is remarkable how few of the pamphleteers who wrote
favourably on the Rosicrucian mystery made any claim to be personally
connected therewith.

In the pages which follow I shall give a brief account, arranged in
chronological order, of the most important and interesting publications
that appeared in elucidation of this mystery.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

A work of considerable interest was printed in 1615, under the title
"Echo of the God-illuminated Brotherhood of the Worthy Order R. C., to
wit, an absolute proof that not only all which is stated in the 'Fama'
and 'Confessio' of the R. C. Brotherhood is possible and true, but that
it has been known already for nineteen years and more to a few
God-fearing people, and has been laid down by them in certain secret
writings; as it has all been stated and made public in an excellent
magical letter and pamphlet by the Worshipful Brotherhood R. C., in
print in the German language." The accredited author was Julius Sperber
of Anholt, Dessau. This work was printed at Dantzig by Andreas
Huenfeldts. It maintains that there have been only a few human beings
who have been worthy to become recipients of the wisdom of God, the
reason being that so few have sought it with the necessary earnestness.
When Christ was on the earth he had innumerable listeners, of whom only
a small portion could discern the significance of His teachings. It was
for this cause that He said to his disciples--"To you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
given." Peter, James, and John were the only three of His apostles to
whom he revealed these mysteries, and to them He showed the same sight
that had been vouchsafed by God to Elias and Moses. Only those who
renounce the world and their own fleshly lusts can become worthy to know
such secrets. Nobody who is addicted to mundane wisdom can ever attain
them, for the wisdom of God and the wisdom of this world are
contradictory.

The preface is addressed to the R.C. Brotherhood. It admonishes the
members to persevere in the way they have chosen, and to get possessed
of the secrets of God. It

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

praises their wisdom and knowledge, but says that much of what is stated
in the "Fama" and "Confessio" must appear foolish to the worldly wise.
It calls upon the Brethren to meet together in the name of the Holy
Trinity, and to teach the true light to the world, as it is contained in
the secret meaning of Holy Scripture and of Nature. Some curious
information, not always relevant to the main object, is scattered
throughout the volume. The second preface mentions a certain Petrus
Wirtzigh of Presslau as one of the greatest and wisest men of his time,
who, being by profession a medical man, studied the secret arts with
such zeal that he became master of many wonderful mysteries. He was the
author of many large unpublished volumes which the writer of the "Echo,"
being his great friend, has been allowed to dip into, and he avers that
they contain much wisdom and curious lore. Another wise and God-loving
man was Ægidius Guttmann in Suaria, who wrote a book which he divided
into twenty-four volumes. The author of the "Echo" compares this work,
having regard to the wisdom of its contents, with the seventy volumes
which God dictated by His angel to the prophet.

Like other writers on the Rosicrucian side, the author of the "Echo"
deals in vague generalities, and even the Laws of the Fraternity which
he publishes are worthless as regards information. They run as
follows:--

1\. Love your neighbour.

2\. Talk not badly of him, neither hold him in contempt.

3\. Be faithful.

4\. Be modest and obedient.

5\. Do not ridicule the secret studies.

6\. Keep silent about what you learn from these studies.

7\. Share your fortune with your fellow-creatures.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

According to this apologist of the secret order, "Adam was the first
Rosicrucian of the Old Testament and Simeon the last." The golden chain
of the esoteric tradition was not broken by Christ, who established "a
new college of magic."

In 1615, Julianus de Campis published an "open letter or report,"
addressed to all who have read anything concerning the new Brotherhood
of R. C., or have heard anything of the position of this matter. It
accounts for the Rosicrucians not revealing their whereabouts, "and not
answering the letters addressed to them. He was himself," he said, "a
member of the Order; but in all his travels he had met but three other
members, there being (as he presumed) no more persons on the earth
worthy of being entrusted with its mysteries." It is needless to say
that an initiate of the Fraternity would be accurately acquainted with
its numerical strength, and that the writer's statement on this point
contradicts the "Fama Fraternitatis." The pamphlet otherwise is not of
great importance. "There are many who run for, but few who gain, the
jewel. Therefore I, Julianus de Campis, admonish all who are governed by
a fortunate disposition not to be made obstinate by their own
diffidence, nor by the judgments of ignorant people." Many great secrets
are concealed by Nature, and those who study them are worthy of every
praise. The R. C. are defended against various accusations, and the
theologians who attack them are reminded that the questions raised are
without their province, because they are *theologi* and not *theosophi*.
The secret art of the R. C. is declared to be a matter of fact, and not
an abstract or fanciful thing; and the *profanum vulgus* are assured
that those who are in the possession of such an imperial secret can
dispense with the praise of the world.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

The "Fama Remissa ad Fratres Roseæ Crucis," which appeared in 1616, is
to a great extent an anonymous pamphlet written against the pretensions
and ideas of the Brethren, principally denouncing their impracticable
and Utopian ambition to reform the whole world. It complains bitterly of
their religious opinions, and absolutely declines to acknowledge them as
a good society until they openly accept and subscribe to the Confession
of Augsbourg. A brief Latin appendix incidentally discusses the doctrine
of transubstantiation and to reconcile the words of Jesus, "*Hoc est
corpus meum*," with the statement of this Evangelist, *et ascendit in
cœlum*, it speculates on the distance which intervenes between the earth
and the Empyrean. According to Pencerus the eighth sphere is distant
20081 1/28 semidiameters of the earth, and the distance, according to
the "Fama Remissa," from the Mount of Olives to the Empyrean Heaven is,
in its *summa tota*, 17,266,001 *milliaria Germania!* 

The following year beheld the publication of Brotoffer's curious and
perverse alchemical interpretation of the Universal Reformation, another
edition of the Rosicrucian manifestoes, with additions by Julianus de
Campis and Georg Molthers, and two works from the pen of Michael Maier,
which will be noticed in the next chapter. Among the curious pamphlets
of this year professing to treat of the mysterious Order, must be
included the "'Fraternitatis Rosatæ Crucis Confessio Recepta,' to wit: A
short and well-wishing report concerning the Confession or Faith of the
Brethren of the Rosy Cross, useful to all readers who not only consider
their well-being in this world, but their salvation in the next. Written
by A. O. M T. W." This appeared in defence of the Order, and maintains
that it is a good and useful Society, which is not merely in possession

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

of many and great secrets, but is righteous in the eyes of Almighty God.
The author distinguishes at length between the different ways whereby
God makes Himself known, and declares that it requires much study and
careful research, as well as personal sacrifice, to become the possessor
of transcendental secrets, but that anyone can do so by following the
Divine counsels. He concludes with an admonition to "the highly-wise and
God-beloved R. C." to press on with their sublime work.

About this time a somewhat vicious attack was made on the supposed
Society by a writer calling himself Fredericus G. Menapius, but whose
real name was Johann Valentin Alberti, and who is associated by Buhle
with Irenæus Agnostus as a personal friend of Andreas. It is clear,
however, from the evidence of all the pamphlets, that Agnostus and
Menapius are one and the same person. "Epitimia, F. R. C., to wit: The
final manifestation or discovery and defence of the worthy and
worshipful Order R. C. Also of the true and well-known confession
addressed to all classes of literati and illustrious persons in Europe.
Written by command of the above-mentioned society by Irenaeus Agnostus
(Menapius)." The only edition of this work which I have seen is dated
1619, but it seems to have been originally published about two years
previously. It is a skit written against the R. C. by Menapius, but
pretends to be printed and published by the command of the Order. The
principal purpose of the pamphlet is to prove that the Rosicrucian
Fraternity was founded by the Jesuits for the purpose of the secret
propaganda of their doctrines in opposition to the Protestant religion.
It begins with a lengthy and pseudo-authoritative laudation of the
writer, who is declared to be an eminently learned and godly man,

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

having saved the lives of a number of persons in a miraculous manner,
and disputed victoriously with the most learned Catholic divines. It
proceeds to a vigorous denunciation of the Roman Church for its manifold
corruptions and abuses, citing a good many historical examples of
princes who have expressed themselves in similar terms, and concluding
with an admonition to live well and act uprightly. Speaking in his own
person, the author addresses his supposed *confrères* in the following
fashion:--"I know not, my Brothers of the R. C., what manner of men to
consider you. T have troubled my mind about you this long time, but can
attain to no conclusion, because all that you set down in your writings
has been so long familiar. Could you tell me anything of the unicorn, or
anything more trustworthy than has emanated from Andreas Baccius, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) your productions would be much more
valuable. A number of hooks have been written by you, or have appeared
in your name, but they teem with such violent contradictions that I
should imagine you were yourselves in doubt as to who or what you are,
and as to your own performances." Afterwards he very reasonably declares
that if the Rosicrucians are the depositaries of a beneficial knowledge,
they ought to proclaim it publicly in their own persons and not in
anonymous pamphlets. He upbraids them as magicians who falsely pretend
to great power, says that he has travelled in many countries without
hearing anything concerning them, and concludes by expressing his
conviction that

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

their supposed wisdom is a shallow pretence, and that they are in
reality ignorant people.

This attack was presently followed by a tract entitled "I. Menapius
Roseæ Crucis, to wit: Objections on the part of the unanimous
Brotherhood against the obscure and unknown writer, F. G. Menapius, and
against his being classed among the true brethren. II. A Citation of the
same person to our final Court at Schmejarien contra Florentinus de
Valentia. III. Finally, a convocation of the R. C. Fratres to the same
invisible place. By order of the worshipful society. Written and
published by Theophilus Schweighart. 1619." Here Menapius presents
himself under another name, and poses as his own opponent. The pamphlet
contains a sort of legal process, with citation, defence, &c. One of the
arguments used against the Rosicrucian Fraternity, who believed in the
manufacture of gold from ignoble metals, is as follows:--"A grown up man
is a reasoning being; so is a young boy. A cow is an unreasoning being;
so is a calf. But this does not prove that the cow is a calf; and the
transmutation of ignoble metals into gold is just as easy as to
transform a cow into a calf. of you ask why there is so little gold, it
is for the same reason that there are so few cows, namely, in the one
case, because the young calves are killed, and in the other, because the
ignoble metals are not left long enough in the earth, but are extracted
by avaricious people." Menapius is the most entertaining of the dull
race of Rosicrucian critics, but his analogical arguments are not of a
convincing nature. He concludes with an admonition to all and
several--literati, nobles, merchants, peasants, &c.--to live well and to
do their duty.

Menapius, as I have said, is represented by Buhle as a

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

friend of Andreas, and Andreas is accredited with two Rosicrucian
pamphlets which appeared under the name of "Florentinus de Valentia."
The authority may be questionable or not, but the reference is somewhat
suicidal to the Buhle-Andrean hypothesis, for not only do we discover
the pseudonymous author attacking his personal friend, but hurrying
forward full of zeal to the defence of the Rosicrucian pretensions.
"Rosa Florescens contra F. G. Menapii Calumniis, to wit: A short notice
and refutation of the libels published on June 3, 1617, in Latin, and on
July 15 of the same year in German by F. G. Menapius, against the
Rosicrucian Society. Written by Florentinus de Valentia in great zeal."
It is a reply to the first pamphlet of Menapius, the Latin original of
which I have been unable to trace. It begins by blaming Menapius for his
extravagant self-laudation, then refers to the attack on the secresy of
the Society, and on the anonymous publication of their manifestoes. It
declares any other method than that of secresy to be contrary to the
will of God, and in other ways dangerous, asserting that nobody suffers
by the concealment of their names and places of abode. The writer
further accuses Menapius of blind hatred of the Rosicrucians, when he
compares them to the devils, for the whole intent of the Society is the
welfare of all humanity. He says:--"The opinion of the Fraternity is not
that all men should be made or become equal, because the majority are
too hard and sinful, but that the few who love God, and live to please
Him, should be like Adam in Paradise." The desire of the Order is to
serve God as faithfully as possible, to discover the secrets of Nature,
and to use them in diffusing a true belief in Christ, and for the glory
of God. Therefore, the author requests Menapius to desist from

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

blaming and libelling the members of the Fraternity, but rather to turn
round and to love them, because they are true seekers of the veritable
wisdom.

In a Latin appendix to a tract entitled "Fons Gratiæ," by Irenæus
Agnostus, Johann Valentin Alberti, *alias* F. G. Menapius, *alias*
Theophilus Schweighart, *alias* Irenæus Agnostus, published a short
rejoinder in prose and verse to the defence of Valentia.

"Judicia de Statu Fraternitatis de Rosea Cruce" is a *mélange* of prose
and verse, with addresses *ad venerandos, doctissimos, et
illuminatissimos, viros Dom. Fratres S. Roseæ Crucis conjunctissimos*,
and as the judgment is professedly that of an outsider seeking
initiation, it does not throw any light upon the proceedings of the
Society. It is crammed with extravagant adulation of the pious, learned,
and illuminated Brothers, but is otherwise not inelegantly written, and
has apt classical quotations. A lofty ambition is claimed by the
aspirant to association, who avers that he is in search of no common and
metallic gold, but that Philosophical and Spiritual Treasure, one
particle of which is sufficient to transmute and perfectionise the soul,
and conduct it from illumination to illumination. This is that veritable
gold, says the alchemical enthusiast, none other than the first and
all-containing knowledge, whereby

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Mens pura et nullo mortali pondera pressa,  
Libera terrenis affectibus, atria cœli  
Scandit, et ætherea cum diis versatur in aula.</span>

</div>

None can expect to attain it unless he shall first have expelled--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">A sese omne nefas, purgatus crimine ab omni,  
Quippe habitare negat fœdum Sapientia pectus,  
Impurasque odit, cum sit purissima, mentes.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

Those who believe in the existence and magical endowments of the
Rosicrucian Brethren will hope that this promising pupil received the
recompense so undoubtedly due to the beauty of his aspirations. The
Latin Epistle is supplemented by a *post datum*, which refers to the
"Nuptiæ Chymicæ" as containing "the whole chymical artifice
enigmatically delineated."

"Responsum ad Fratres Rosaceæ Crucis Illustres" is a printed letter
addressed to the Fraternity in the year 1618, by Hercules Ovallodius,
Alsatus; Heermannus Condesyanus; and Martinus à Casa Cegdessa
Marsiliensis. It is a piece of piteous pleading for admission into the
ranks of the Brethren by three writers who believe themselves to have
fallen upon evil times, and know that there is no entrance into the
mystic temple which is filled with the glory and power of God, till the
seven last plagues have been poured out upon the earth. They acknowledge
the *Viri Fratres* as the instruments of the Divine vengeance in the
consummation of the age. *Ipse est malleus noster et arma, vos ipsius
servi*.

A curious Rosicrucian reverie, entitled "F. R. C. Fama e scanzia Redux,"
written in execrable Latin, and printed in a style corresponding with
its literary merits, appeared Anno Christi M.DC.XVIII., as the title has
it. It professes to be the trumpet *Jubilei ultimi*, that is,
presumably, of the last jubilee year among the Jews, and bears for one
of its mottoes, "One woe hath passed; behold, there come yet two other
woes after this one." It is precisely one of those mysterious and
problematical productions which are sometimes supposed to conceal deep
secrets, because they are completely unintelligible and barbarous. It
professes to contain a *Judicium de Fraternitatis R. C. Sigillo et
Buccina et futuræ Reformationis *

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Mysterie*, and is
mystically separated into seven parts or chapters, each terribly
intituled. Thus the seventh is the "voice of the dove speaking
concerning the jawbone of the ass," and the "Judgment" itself is averred
to proceed from a similar quarter "*ex asini mandibula*." The statement
is apparently serious, for this extraordinary local habitation is
parenthetically explained to be the *fons vitæ*, or fount of life. The
whole pamphlet is a raving chaos of scriptural quotations concerning the
Corner Stone, the Keys of David, and the proximity of the *Regnum Dei*.
It concludes with the following triumphant admonition to the reader:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Quisquis de Roseæ dubitas Crucis ordine Fratrum,  
Hoc lege, perlecto carmine certus eris.</span>

</div>

It is needless to say that the whole pamphlet does not contain a single
reference to the Rosicrucians.

"φλενσθιουρεδας. Hoc est Redintegratio," addressed to the "Brotherhood
of the Rose-Cross," appeared in 1619, with the motto, Omnes de Saba
veniunt, aurum et thus deferentes, et laudem Domini annunciantes, and
prefaced by the following lines

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O Roseæ Fratres crucis, O pia turba sophorum,  
  Vestro præsentes esse favore mihi.  
Fama velut cunctis vos respondere paratos  
  Exhibet; Ah ne sint irrita vota precor.  
Fidus amicus ero, fidos quoque gestit amicus  
  Mens mea de musis conciliare novem.  
At, si scripta fient quædam minus apta, flabello  
  Fratrum non Momi sint abigenda, pio.  
Usus enim Famæ potiori ex parte loquelis  
  Fratres propitios hinc mage spero mihi.</span>

</div>

This little pamphlet compares different expressions of opinions by
opposed parties, and concludes that any person may take part with a good
conscience in the Brotherhood,

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

and without prejudice to their Christianly convictions. It cites the
common reproaches cast at the Order, to wit: that they are enemies of
all lawful government, Jesuits, or Calvinists, also the suspicion that
there is no order at all, but that the whole business is a farce,
written for some undefined purpose. It maintains that there is such an
order, and that it is in possession of great secrets, because it
consists of pre-eminently learned men. Finally, the author exhorts all
to join it.

Among the acknowledged works of Andreas which contain satirical
references to the Rosicrucian mystery may be mentioned "Menippus, sive,
Dialogorum Satyricorum Centuria, inanitatum nostratium speculum," 1673,
8vo; "Institutio Magica pro curiosis," and "Turris Babel, sive, Judicium
de Fraternitatis Roseæ crucis Chaos." Argentorati, 1619, 12mo. They
contain absolutely nothing which can be tortured into a confession of
the authorship of the manifestoes, nor any gleam of light on any subject
connected with the Society. They express simply the personal opinions of
Andreas, and those who make a contrary assertion have read their own
hypotheses between the lines of their author.

By the year 1620, the subject of the Rosicrucians was completely
exhausted in Germany. It had been discussed from all standpoints by men
of the most various character, but, in the absence of ascertainable
facts, no man was wiser; and as the Rosicrucians, supposing them to have
existed, kept silent amidst the confusion of opinions and the
unproductive clamour which they had created, making no further sign, the
interest concerning them gradually died away. Seekers for the *magnum
opus*, and persons imbued with the ambition to reform the world, looked
elsewhere for light

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

and assistance. Pseudo-Rosicrucian societies, of course, appeared on the
field, and gangs of miserable tricksters who traded on individual
credulity by the power of the magical name. Buhle cites from the
"Occulta Philosophia" of Ludovicus Conradus Orvius, the unhappy personal
experience of that writer concerning such a society, "pretending to
deduce themselves from Father Rosy-Cross, and who were settled at the
Hague in 1622. After swindling him out of his own and his wife's
fortune, amounting to eleven thousand dollars, they kicked him out of
the order, with the assurance that they would murder him if he revealed
their secrets, 'which secrets,' says he, 'I have faithfully kept, and
for the same reason that women keep secrets--viz., because I have none
to reveal; for their knavery is no secret.'"

Vague rumours of veritable Rosicrucian adepts were occasionally heard,
but in spite of their boasted powers, in spite of their projected
reformation of all the world, and in spite of the seven years’ strife of
tongues which they occasioned, they had no influence whatsoever upon the
thought of their age. An isolated and doubtful transmutation is
occasionally ascribed to them, which is the sum total of their
alchemical achievements. They posed principally as a healing fraternity,
yet their influence on the medical science of their century is less
still than that which they exerted upon alchemy. "In medicine," says
Figuier, "that art which they were pledged to practise wherever they
wandered, according to the first commandment of their master, the
catalogue of their triumphs is speedily exhausted. We have already seen
that they boasted of having cured the leprosy in an English count. They
also claimed to have restored life to a Spanish King after he had been
dead for

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

six hours. Apart from these two cures, the second of which is doubtless
a miracle, but can boast only of their own testimony, their whole
medical history consists in vague allegations and a few unimportant
facts, as, for instance, that which Gabriel Naudé cites in the following
terms:--

"In the year 1615 a certain pilgrim suddenly appeared in a German town,
and assisted, as a doctor, at the prognostication of the death of a
woman whom he had helped by some of his remedies; he assumed to be
proficient in several languages, related what had occurred in the town
during his sojourn at this house; in a word, apart front the doctrine in
which he shone still more, he was in every way similar to that Wandering
Jew described by Cayot in his "Histoire Septenaire"--moderate, reserved,
carelessly clad, never willingly remaining a long time in any one place,
and still less desirous to be taken for what he nevertheless claimed to
be, the third brother of the R.C., as he testified to the doctor
Moltherus, who could not be so certainly persuaded to give credence to
his statements, but has presented us with this history, leaving our
judgment free to decide if it could establish a certain proof of the
existence of this Company." <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)

According to Sprengel, a true Rosicrucian had only to gaze fixedly on a
person, and however dangerous his disease, he was instantaneously
healed; the Brethren claimed to cure all diseases, without the help of
drugs, by means of imagination and faith. But the matter remains at this
day just where the claim originally left it, wholly unsupported by fact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[248:1](rhr19.htm#fr_87) De Quincey,
"Rosicrucians and Freemasons," c. ii.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[259:1](rhr19.htm#fr_88) A voluminous writer on
medicine, philosophy, natural history. and antiquities. The reference is
to a treatise entitled "De Monocerote seu Unicornu ejusque viribus et
usu tractatus per A. B.," afterwards published in Italian, Fiorenza,
1573, 4to. Bacci flourished at the end of the sixteenth century; he was
physician to Sixtus V., and professor of botany at Rome from 1557 to
1600.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[267:1](rhr19.htm#fr_89) "L’Alchimie et les
Alchimistes," p. 301.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Rosicrucian Apologists: Michael Maier](rhr20)
