[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr14)  [Next](rhr16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Seventh Day*.

After eight of clock I awaked, and quickly made myself ready, being
desirous to return again into the tower, but the dark passages in the
wall were so many that I wandered a good while before I could find the
way out. The same happened to the rest, till we all meet in the
nethermost <span class="rmargnote">Hospites deponunt vestes
lugubres.</span> vault, and habits intirely yellow were given us,
together with our golden fleeces. At that time the Virgin declared o us
that we were Knights of the <span id="img_18700"></span> ![Golden
Stone](img/18700.jpg), of which <span class="margnote">Salutantur
equites.</span> we were before ignorant. After we had made ourselves
ready, and taken our breakfast, the old man presented each <span
class="rmargnote">Donantur a sene.</span> of us with a medal of gold. On
the one side stood these words--

AR. NAT. MI.<span class="margnote">Ars naturæ ministra.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On the other
these,

TEM. NA. F.<span class="margnote">Temporis natura filia.</span>

exhorting us to enterprize nothing beyond and against this token of
remembrance. Herewith we went forth to the sea, where our ships lay so
richly equipped that it was not well possible but that such brave things
must first have been brought thither. The ships were twelve in number,
six of ours and six of the old lord's, who caused his to be freighted
with well-appointed soldiers. But he betook himself to us in our ship,
where we were all together. In<span class="margnote">Navis, 1.</span>
the first the musitians seated themselves, of which the old

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

lord had also a great number. They sailed before us to <span
class="margnote">Vexilla 12 sign. Navi autoris libra,
Horolog.</span>shorten the time. Our flags were the twelve celestial
signs, and we sate in Libra. Besids other things our ship had a noble
and curious clock which showed us all the minutes. The sea was so calm
that it was a singular pleasure to sail, but that which surpassed all
was the old man's discourse, who so well knew how <span
class="rmargnote">Facundia senis.</span>to pass away our time with
wonderful histories that I could have been content to sail with him all
my life long. <span class="margnote">Obviatio ex arce.</span>The ships
passed on, and before we had sailed two hours the mariner told us that
he saw the whole lake almost covered with ships, by which we conjectured
they were come out to meet us, which proved true, for as soon as we were
gotten out of the sea into the lake of the forementioned <span
class="rmargnote">500 naves.</span>river, there stood in to us five
hundred ships, one of which sparkled with gold and pretious stones, and
in it sate the King and Queen, with lords, ladies, and virgins of high
birth. As soon as they were well in ken of us the pieces were discharged
on both sides, and there was such a din of <span
class="margnote">Applansus.</span>trumpets, shalms, and kettle-drums,
that all the ships upon the sea capered again. As soon as we came near,
they brought about our ships together and so made a stand. <span
class="rmargnote">Atlas oratione excipit hospices.</span>Old Atlas
stepped forth on the King's behalf, making a short but handsom oration,
wherein he wellcomed us, and demanded whether the royal Presents were in
readiness. The rest of my companions were in an huge amazement whence
this King should arise, for they imagined no other but that they must
again awaken him. We suffered them to continue in their wonderment, and
carried ourselves as <span class="margnote">Atlanti respondet
senex.</span>if it seemed strange to us too. After Atlas' oration out
steps our old man, making somewhat a larger reply, wherein he wished the
King and Queen all happiness and increase,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

after which he delivered a curious small casket, but what was in it I
know not. It was committed to the custody of<span
class="margnote">Regiis conjugibus donum affect Cupido.</span> Cupid,
who hovered between them both. After the oration they again let off a
joyful volle of shot, and so we sailed on a good time together, till we
arrived at another shore, near the first gate at which I first entred.
At this place there attended a great multitude of the King's family,
together with some hundreds of horses. As soon as we were come to shore
and disembarqued, the King and Queen presented their hands to all of us,
one with another, with singular kindness, and so we were to get up on
horseback. Here I desire to have the reader friendly entreated not to
interpret the following narration to any vain glory of mine, but to
credit me that had there been not a special necessity in it, I could
well have concealed the honour which was shewed me. We were all
distributed amongst<span class="rmargnote">Honor delatus autori cum sene
equitat juxta Regem.</span> the lords, but our old lord and I, most
unworthy, were to ride even with the King, each of us bearing a
snow-white ensign with a Red Cross. I indeed was made use of because of
my age, for we both had long grey beards and hair. I had besides
fastened my tokens round about my hat, of which the young King soon took
notice, and demanded if I were he who could at the gate redeem these
tokens. I answered yes in the most humble manner, but he laughed on me,
saying there henceforth needed no ceremony, I was ms Father. Then he
asked me wherewith<span class="margnote">Pater.</span> I had redeemed
them. I answered, "With Water<span class="rmargnote">Tesseras solvit
sale et aqua.</span> and Salt," whereupon he wondred who had made me so
wise, upon which I grew somewhat more confident, and recounted how it
had happened to me with my Bread, the Dove, and the Raven; he was
pleased with it, and said expressly, that it must needs be that God had
herein

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

vouchsafed me a singular happiness. Herewith we came to the first gate,
where the porter with the blew cloaths waited, bearing in his hand a
supplication. As soon as he spied me even with the king, he delivered me
the supplication, most humbly beseeching me to mention his ingenuity
before me towards the King; so, in the first place, I <span
class="margnote">Primus custos. Ob, visam venerem factus
portitor.</span>demanded of his majesty what the condition of this
porter was, who friendly answered me, that he was a very famous and rare
astrologer, always in high regard with the Lord his Father, but having
on a time committed a fault against Venus, and beheld her in her bed of
rest, this punishment was imposed upon him, that he should so long wait
at the gate till some one should release him from thence. I <span
class="rmargnote">Autor ejusdem delicterus traditur à
portitore.</span>replyed, "May he then be released?" "Yes," said the
King, "if anyone can be Found that hath as highly transgressed as
himself, he must stand in his stead, and the other shall be free. This
word went to my heart; conscience convinced me that I was the offender,
yet I held my peace and delivered the supplication. As soon as the King
had read it, he was mightily terrified, so that the Queen, who, with our
virgins and that other queen whom I mentioned at the hanging of the
weights, rid behind us, asked him what the letter might signifie; but
he, putting up the paper, began to discourse of other matters, till in
about three hours we came quite to the Castle, where we alighted and
waited upon the <span class="margnote">Actes in Arce.</span>King into
his hall, who called immediately for the old Atlas to come to him in a
little closet, and showed him the writing. Atlas made no long tarrying,
but rid out to the porter to take better cognizance of the matter, after
which the young King, with his spouse and other Lords, Ladies, and
Virgins <span class="rmargnote">Virg. lucif.</span>sate down. Then began
our Virgin highly to commend the diligence we had used, and the pains
and labour we had undergone,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

requesting we might be royally rewarded, and that she henceforward might
be permitted to enjoy the benefit of her commission. The old lord stood
up too, and attested the truth of all that the Virgin had spoken, and
that it was but equity that we should on both parts be contented.
Hereupon we were to step out a little; it was concluded that each man
should make some possible wish, and were to consider of it till after
supper. Meantime the King and<span class="margnote">Ludus Regis um
Regina.</span> Queen, for recreation's sake, began to play together. It
looked not unlike chesse, only it had other laws, for it was the vertues
and vices one against another, where it might be ingeniously observed
with what plots the vices lay in wait for the vertues, and how to re
encounter them again. This was so properly and artificially performed
that it were<span class="rmargnote">Artificios.</span> to be wished that
we had the like game too. During the game in comes Atlas again, and
makes his report in private, yet I blushed all over, for my conscience
gave me no rest. The King presented me the supplication to read, the
contents<span class="margnote">Supplicatio portitoris traditum
autori.</span> whereof were to this purpose: First, the writer wished
the King prosperity and peace, and that his seed might be spread far and
wide. Afterwards he remonstrated that the time was now come wherein,
according to the royal promise, he ought to be released; because Yen us
was already uncovered by one of his guests, for his observations could
not lie [to](errata.htm#1) him, and that if his Majesty would please to
make strict and diligent enquiry, in case this should not prove to be,
he would remain before the gate all the days of his life. Then he humbly
sued that, upon peril of body and life, he might be present at this
night's supper, being in good hopes to spye out the offender and obtain
his wished freedom. This was handsomly indited, and I could well
perceive his

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

ingenuity, but it was too sharp for me, and I could well have endured
never to have seen it. Casting in my mind whether he might perchance be
helped through my wish, I asked the King whether he might not be
released some other way, but he replyed no, because there was special
consideration in the business, but for this night we might gratifie his
desire, so he sent one forth to fetch him in. <span
class="margnote">Triclinium preciosissimum.</span>Mean time the tables
were prepared in a spatious room, in which we had never before been,
which was so compleat that it is not possible for me to describe it.
Into this we <span class="rmargnote">Cupido iratus ob venerem visam ab
autore.</span>were conducted with singular ceremony. Cupid was not
present, for the disgrace which had happened to his mother had somewhat
angered him. In brieff, my offence, and the supplication which had been
delivered, were the occasion of much sadness, for the King was in
perplexity how to make <span class="margnote">Etiam Rex
condolet.</span>inquisition amongst his guests. He caused the porter
himself to make his strict surveigh, and showed himself as <span
class="rmargnote">Lætitia discumbentium.</span>pleasant as he was able.
Howbeit, at length they began again to be merry, and to bespeak one
another with all sorts of recreative, profitable discourses. The
treatment and other ceremonies then performed it is not necessary to
declare, since it is neither the reader's concern nor serviceable to my
design, but all exceeded more in invention than that we were overcharged
with drinking. This was the last and noblest meal at which I was
present. After the bancket the tables were suddainly taken away, and
certain curious chairs placed round in circle, in which we, together
with the King and Queen, both their old men, the Ladies and Virgins,
were to sit. After this a very handsom Page <span class="margnote">Post
cœnam obligantur equites legibus suis.</span>opened the above mentioned
glorious little book, when Atlas, immediately placing himself in the
midst, bespoke

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

us to the ensuing purpose:--That his Royal Majesty had not yet committed
to oblivion the service we had done him, and therefore by way of
retribution had elected each of us Knights of the Golden Stone. That it
was, therefore, further necessary not only once again to, oblige
ourselves towards his Royal Majesty, but to vow upon the following
articles, and then His Royal Highness would likewise know how to behave
himself towards his high people. Upon which he caused the Page to read
over these articles:--

I. You, my Lords the Knights, shall swear that you will at no time
ascribe your order either unto any Devil or Spirit, but only to God,
your Creator, and His hand-maid Nature.

II\. That you will abominate all whoredom, incontinency, and
uncleanness, and not defile your order with such vices.

III\. That you, through your talents, will be ready to assist all that
are worthy and have need of them.

IV\. That you desire not to employ this honour to worldly pride and high
authority.

V. That you shall not be willing to live longer than God will have you.

At this last article we could not choose but laugh, and it may well have
been placed there for a conceit. Now, being<span
class="margnote">Privilegia.</span> sworn them all by the King's
scepter, we were afterwards, with the usual ceremonies, installed
Knights, and, amongst other privileges, set over ignorance, poverty, and
sickness, to handle them at our pleasure. This was afterwards ratified
in a little chappel, whither we were conducted in procession, and thanks
returned to God for it. There I also at that time, to the honour of God,
hung up my golden fleece

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

and hat, and left them for an eternal memorial. And because every one
was to write his name there, I writ thus:--

*Summa Scientia nihil Scire*,  
*Fr*. CHRISTIANUS ROSENCREUTZ.  
*Eques aurei Lapidis*.  
*Anno*. 1459.

<span class="margnote">Jam postulantur depositiones
optionum.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Others writ differently, each as seemed him good; after which we were
again brought into the hall, where, being sate down, we were admonished
quickly to bethink ourselves what every one would wish. The King and his
party retired into a little closet to give audience to our wishes. Each
man was called in severally, so that I cannot speak of any man's proper
wish; but I thought nothing could be more praiseworthy than, in honour
of my order, to demonstrate some laudable vertue, and found that none at
present could be more famous and cost me more trouble than gratitude;
wherefore, not regarding that I <span class="rmargnote">Autor optat
liberationem portitoris e gratitudine.</span>might well have wished
somewhat more agreeable to myself, I vanquished myself, and concluded,
even with my own peril, to free the porter, my benefactor. Being called
in, I was first demanded whether, having read the supplication, I had
suspected nothing concerning the offendor, upon which I began
undauntedly to relate how all the business had passed, how, through
ignorance, I fell into that mistake, and so offered myself to undergo
all that I had <span class="margnote">Autor reus
confitens.</span>thereby demerited. The King and the rest of the Lords
wondred mightily at so un-hoped for confession, and wished me to step
aside a little; and as soon as I was called in again, Atlas declared to
me that, although it were grievous to the King's Majesty that I, whom he
loved above others, was fallen into such a mischance, yet, because it
was not

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

possible for him to transgress his ancient usages, he knew not how else
to absolve me but that the other must be at liberty and I placed in his
stead; yet he would hope that some other would soon be apprehended, that
so I might be able to go home again. However, no release was to be hoped
for till the marriage feast of his future son. This<span
class="margnote">Audit sententiam.</span> sentence near cost me my life,
and I first hated myself and my twatling tongue in that I could not hold
my peace; yet at last I took courage, and, because I considered there
was no remedy, I related how this porter had bestowed a token on me and
commended me to the other, by whose assistance I stood upon the scale,
and so was made partaker of all the honour and joy already received. And
therefore now it was equal that I should show<span
class="rmargnote">Laus beneficii portitoris.</span> myself grateful to
my benefactor, and was willing gently to sustain inconvenience for his
sake, who had been helpful to me in coming to so high place; but if by
my wish anything might be effected, I wished myself at home again, and
that so he by me, as I by my wish, might be at liberty. Answer was made
me, that the wishing stretched not so far, <span
class="margnote">Laudatur à Rege</span> yet it was very pleasing to his
Royal Majesty that I had behaved myself so generously, but he was
affraid I might still be ignorant into what a miserable condition I had
plunged myself through this curiosity. Hereupon the good man was
pronounced free, and I, with a sad heart, was fain to step aside. The
rest were called for after me, <span class="rmargnote">Reliqui læti
evadunt.</span> and came jocundly out again, which was still more to my
smart, for I imagined no other but that I must finish my life under the
gate. I had also many pensive thoughts<span class="margnote">Autor
melancholiat.</span> running in my head as to what I should yet
undertake, and wherewith to spend the time. At length I considered
that<span class="rmargnote">Spes. Metus.</span> I was now old, and,
according to the course of Nature, had

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

few more years to live, that this anguish and melancholy life would
easily dispatch me, and then my doorkeeping would be at an end, and that
by a most happy sleep I <span class="margnote">Solatium.</span>might
quickly bring myself into the grave. Sometimes it vexed me that I had
seen such gallant things, and must be robbed of them; sometimes it
rejoyced me that before my end I had been accepted to all joy, and
should not be forced so shamefully to depart. Thus this was the last and
worst shock that I sustained. During these my cogitations the rest were
ready, wherefore, after they had received a good night from the King and
Lords, each was conducted into his lodging, but I, most wretched man,
had nobody to show me the way, and yet must suffer myself to be
tormented. That I might be certain of my future function, I was fain to
put on the Ring which the other had worn. Finally, <span
class="rmargnote">Autor accipit annulum.</span>the King exhorted me
that, since this was the last time I was like to see him in this manner,
I should behave myself according to my place, and not against the Order,
upon which he took me in his arms and kissed me, all which I understood
as if in the morning I must sit at my gate. After they had all spoken
friendly to me, and at last presented their hands, committing me to the
divine protection, I was by both the old men--the Lord of the Tower and
<span class="margnote">Auter dormit cum atlante & sene custode
Turris.</span>Atlas--conducted into a glorious lodging, in which stood
three beds, and each of us lay in one of them, where we yet spent almost
two, &c.

*Here are wanting about two leaves in quarto, and he (the author
hereof), whereas he imagined he must in the morning be door-keeper,
returned home*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. On The Connection of the Rosicrucian Claims With
Those of Alchemy and Magic](rhr16)
