[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr10)  [Next](rhr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Third Day.*

As soon as the lovely day was broken, and the bright sun, having raised
himself above the hills, had betaken himself to his appointed office, my
good champions began to rise and leisurely make themselves ready unto
the inquisition. Whereupon, one after another they came again into the
hall, and giving us a good morrow, demanded<span
class="rmargnote">Colloquium surgentium.</span> how we had slept; and
having espied our bonds, some reproved us for being so cowardly, that we
had not, as they, hazarded upon all adventures. Howbeit, some, whose
hearts still smote them, made no loud cry of the business. We excused
ourselves with our ignorance, hoping we should soon be set at liberty
and learn wit by this disgrace, that they also had not altogether
escaped, and perhaps their greatest danger was still to be expected. At
length all being assembled, the trumpets began again to<span
class="margnote">Cantus.</span>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

sound and the kettle-drums to beat, and we imagined that the Bride-groom
was ready to present himself, which, nevertheless, was a huge mistake,
for again it was the <span class="margnote">Virgo lucifera. The Lady
Chamberlain</span>Virgin, who had arrayed herself all in red velvet, and
girded herself with a white scarfe. Upon her head she had a green wreath
of laurel, which much became her. Her train was no more of small tapers,
but consisted of two hundred men in harness, all cloathed, like herself,
in red and white. As soon as they were alighted from the throne, she
comes streight to us prisoners, and, after she had saluted us, said in
few words:--"That some of you have been sensible of your wretched
condition is pleasing to my <span class="rmargnote">Solatur
humiles.</span>most mighty Lord, and he is also resolved you shall fare
the better for it." Having espied me in my habit, she laughed and
spake:--"Good lack! Hast thou also submitted thyself to the yoke! I
imagined thou wouldst have made thyself very snug," which words caused
my eyes to run over. After this she commanded we should be unbound,
cuppled together, and placed in a station where we might well behold the
scales." For," said she, "it may fare better with them than with the
presumptuous who yet stand at liberty."

<span class="margnote">Libra aurea.</span>Meantime the scales, which
were intirely of gold, were hung up in the midst of the hall. There was
also a little <span class="rmargnote">7. Pondera.</span>table covered
with red velvet, and seven weights thereon--first of all stood a pretty
great one, then four little ones, lastly, two great ones severally, and
these weights in proportion to their bulk were so heavy that no man can
<span class="margnote">Satellites.</span>believe or comprehend it. Each
of the harnised men carried a naked sword and a strong rope. They were
distributed according to the number of weights into seven bands, and out
of every band was one chosen for their

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

proper weight, after which the Virgin again sprung up into her high
throne, and one of the pages commanded each to place himself according
to his order, and successively step<span class="margnote">Pendesantur
artifices.</span> into the scale. One of the Emperors, making no
scruple, <span class="rmargnote">1. Cæsar.</span> first bowed himself a
little towards the Virgin, and in all his stately attire went up,
whereupon each captain laid in his weight, which (to the wonder of all)
he stood out. But the last was too heavy for him, so that forth he must,
and that with such anguish that the Virgin herself seemed to pitty him,
yet was the good Emperor bound and delivered to the sixth band. Next him
came forth another Emperor, who stept hautily into the scale, and,
having a<span class="margnote">2. Cæsar.</span> thick book under his
gown, he imagined not to fail; but, being scarce able to abide the third
weight, he was unmercifully slung down, and his book in that
affrightment slipping from him, all the soldiers began to laugh, and he
was delivered up bound to the third band. Thus it went also with some
others of the Emperors, who were all shamefully<span
class="rmargnote">3. Alii Cæsares.</span> laughed at and made captive.
After these comes forth a little short man, with a curled brown beard,
an Emperor too, who, after the usual reverence, got up and<span
class="margnote">4. Cæsar.</span> held out so stedfastly that methought
had there been more weights he would have outstood them. To him the
Virgin immediately arose and bowed before him, causing him to put on a
gown of red velvet, then reaching him a branch of laurel, whereof she
had good store upon her throne, on the steps of which she willed him to
sit down. How after him it fared with the rest of the Emperors, Kings,
and Lords, would be too long to recount; few of those great personages
held out, though sundry eminent vertues were found in many. Everyone who
failed was miserably laughed at by the bands. After the inquisition had
passed over the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

gentry, the learned, and unlearned, in each condition one, it may be,
two, but mostly none, being found perfect, it <span
class="margnote">Proba falsariorum.</span>came to those vagabond
cheaters and rascally *Lapidem Spilalanficum* makers, who were set upon
the scale with such scorn, that for all my grief I was ready to burst my
belly with laughing, neither could the prisoners themselves refrain, for
the most part could not abide that severe trial, but with whips and
scourges were jerked out of the scale. Thus of so pert a throng so few
remained that I am ashamed to discover their number. Howbeit, there were
persons of quality also amongst them who, <span
class="rmargnote">Nobiles nihilominu ornantur.</span>notwithstanding,
were also honoured with velvet robes and wreaths of lawrel.

The inquisition being finished, and none but we poor coupled hounds
standing aside, one of the captains stept forth, and said:--"Gratious
madam, if it please your ladyship, let these poor men, who acknowledged
their misunderstanding, be set upon the scale also without danger of
<span class="margnote">Proba Humilium.</span>penalty, and only for
recreation's sake, if perchance anything right be found among them." At
this I was in great perplexity, for in my anguish this was my only
comfort, that I was not to stand in such ignominy, or be lashed out of
the scale. Yet since the Virgin consented, so it must be, and we being
untied were one after another set up. Now, although the most part
miscarried, they were neither laughed at nor scourged, but peaceably
placed on one side. <span class="rmargnote">Socius Autoris.</span>My
companion was the fifth, who held out bravely, whereupon all, but
especially the captain who made the request for us, applauded him, and
the Virgin showed him the usual respect. After him two more were
despatched in an <span class="margnote">Autor.</span>instant. But I was
the eighth, and as soon as (with trembling) I stepped up, my companion,
who already sat

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

by in his velvet, looked friendly upon me, and the Virgin herself smiled
a little. But, for as much as I outstayed all the weights, the Virgin
commanded them to draw me up by force, wherefore three men moreover hung
on the other-side of the beam, and yet could nothing prevail. Whereupon
one of the pages immediately stood up, and cryed out exceeding loud,
"THAT IS HE," upon which the other<span class="margnote">That is
he.</span> replyed: "Then let him gain his liberty!" which the Virgin
accorded, and being received with due ceremonies, the choice was given
me to release one of the captives, whomsoever I pleased, whereupon I
made no long deliberations, <span
class="rmargnote">Probatissimus.</span> but elected the first Emperor,
whom I had long pittied, who was immediately set free, and with all
respect<span class="margnote">Liberat, 1. Cæsarem.</span> seated among
us. Now, the last being set up the weights proved too heavy for him;
meanwhile the Virgin espied my roses, which I had taken out of my hat
into my hands, and thereupon by her page graciously requested them of
me, <span class="rmargnote">Autor rosam suam donat virgini.</span> which
I readily sent her. And so this first act was finished about ten in the
forenoon. <span class="margnote">Hora, 10. Actus.</span>

The trumpets again began to sound, which, nevertheless, we could not as
yet see. Meantime the bands were to step aside with their prisoners and
expect the judgment, after which a council of the seven captains and
ourselves was set, with the Virgin as president, whereat it was
concluded that all the principal lords should with befitting respect be
led<span class="rmargnote">Judicium de reprobatis.</span> out of the
castle, that others should be stripped and caused to run out naked,
while others yet with rods, whips, or dogs, should be hunted out. Those
who the day before willingly surrendered themselves might be suffered to
depart without any blame, but those presumptuous ones, and they who had
behaved themselves so unseemly at dinner, should be punished in body and
life according to each

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

man's demerit. This opinion pleased the Virgin well, and obtained the
upper hand. There was moreover another dinner vouchsafed them, the
execution itself being deferred till noon. Herewith the senate arose,
and the Virgin, together with her attendants, returned to her usual
quarter. The uppermost table in the room was allotted to us till the
business was fully dispatched, when we should be conducted to the Lord
Bride-groom and Bride, with which we were well content. The prisoners
were again brought into <span class="margnote">Prandium.</span>the hall,
and each man seated according to his quality. They were enjoyned to
behave somewhat more civilly than they had done the day before, which
admonishment they needed not, for they had already put up their pipes,
and this I can boldly say, that commonly those who were of highest rank
best understood how to comport themselves in so unexpected a misfortune.
Their treatment was but indifferent, yet with respect, neither could
they see their <span class="rmargnote">Ministri invisibles
visibles.</span>attendants, who were visible to us, whereat I was
exceeding joyful. Although fortune had exalted us, we took not upon us
more than the rest, advising them to be of good cheer, and comforting
them as well as we could, drinking with them to try if the wine might
make them cheerful. <span class="margnote">Proborum exaltatio.</span>Our
table was covered with red velvet, beset with drinking cups of pure
silver and gold, which the rest could not behold without amazement and
anguish. Ere we had seated ourselves in came the two pages, presenting
every one, in the Bride-groom's behalf, the Golden Fleece with a flying
Lyon, requesting us to wear them at the table, and to observe the
reputation and dignity of the order which his <span
class="rmargnote">Remuneratio a sponso.</span>Majesty had vouchsafed us
and would ratify with sutable ceremonies. This we received with
profoundest submission, promising to perform whatever his Majesty should

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

please. Beside these, the noble page had a schedule wherein we were set
down in order. Now because our entertainment was exceeding stately, we
demanded one of the pages whether we might have leave to send some
choice bit to our friends and acquaintance, who making no difficulty,
every one sent by the waiters; howbeit the receivers saw none of them;
and forasmuch as they knew not whence it came, I was myself desirous to
carry somewhat to one of them, but, as soon as I was risen, one of the
waiters was<span class="margnote">Autori denegatur communicatio erga
reprobos.</span> at my elbow, desiring me to take friendly warning, for
in case one of the pages had seen it, it would have come to the King's
ear, who would certainly take it amiss of me; but since none had
observed it save himself, he purposed not to betray me, and that I must
for the time to come have better regard to the dignity of the order.
With these words, the servant did really so astonish me that for long I
scarce moved upon my seat, yet I returned him thanks for his faithful
warning as well as I was able. Soon after the drums began to beat,
wherefore we prepared ourselves to receive the Virgin, who now came in
with her<span class="rmargnote">Virgo lucifera. The Lady
Chamberlain.</span> train, upon her high seat, one of the pages bearing
before her a very tall goblet of gold, and the other a patent in
parchment. Being now after a marvellous artificial manner alighted from
her seat, she takes the goblet from the page and presents it in the
King's behalf, saying that it was brought from his Majesty, and that in
honour of him we<span class="margnote">Calix obambulans.</span> should
cause it to go round. Upon the cover of this goblet stood Fortune
curiously cast in gold, who had in her hand a red flying ensign, for
which cause I drunk somewhat the more sadly, as having been too well
acquainted with For tune's waywardness. But the Virgin who also was
adorned<span class="rmargnote">Ornatus virginis.</span> with the Golden
Fleece and Lyon, hereupon began to distinguish

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the patent which the other page held into two <span
class="margnote">Reprobi dividuntur.</span>different parts, out of which
thus much was read before the first company:--

<span class="rmargnote">Accusatio unius partis.</span>That they should
confess that they had too lightly given credit to false, fictitious
books, had assumed too much to themselves, and so come into this castle
uninvited, and perhaps designing to make their markets here and <span
class="margnote">Affectibus mundanis</span>afterwards to live in the
greater pride and lordliness. Thus one had seduced another, and plunged
him into disgrace and ignominy, wherefore they were deservedly to be
soundly punished--all which they, with great humility, readily
acknowledged, and gave their hands upon it, after which a severe check
was given to the rest, much to this purpose:--

<span class="rmargnote">Alterius partis.</span>That they were convinced
in their consciences of forging false, fictitious books, had befooled
and cheated others, thereby diminishing regal dignity amongst all. They
knew what ungodly, deceitful figures they had made use of; not even
sparing the Divine Trinity. It was also clear as day with what practices
they had endeavoured to ensnare the guests; in like manner, it was
manifest to all the world that they wallowed in open whoredom, adultery,
gluttony, and other uncleannesses. In brief, they had disparaged Kingly
Majesty, even amongst the common sort, and therefore should confess
themselves to be convicted vagabond-cheats, and rascals, for which they
deserved to be cashiered from the company of civil people, and severely
to be punished.

The. good Artists were loath to come to this confession, but inasmuch as
the Virgin not only herself threatned, and sware their death, but the
other party also vehemently raged at them, crying that they had most
wickedly seduced them out of the Light, they at length, to prevent a
huge

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

misfortune, confessed the same with dolour, yet alledged their actions
should not be animadverted upon in the worst<span
class="margnote">Excusatio.</span> sense, for the Lords were resolved to
get into the castle, and had promised great sums of money to that
effect, each one had used all craft to seize upon something, and so
things were brought to the present pass. Thus they had disserved no more
than the Lords themselves. Their books also sold so mightily that
whoever had no other means to maintain himself was fain to ingage in
this consonage. They hoped, moreover, they should be found no way to
have miscarried, as having behaved towards the Lords, as became
servants, upon their earnest entreaty. But answer was made that his
Royal Majesty had determined to punish<span
class="rmargnote">Refutatio.</span> all, albeit one more severely than
another. For although what they had alledged was partly true, and
therefore the Lords should not wholly be indulged, yet they had good
reason to prepare themselves for death, who had so presumptuously
obtruded themselves, and perhaps seduced the ignorant against their
will. Thereupon many began most<span class="margnote">Dolor de
sententia.</span> pitteously to lament and prostrate themselves, all
which could avail them nothing, and I much marvelled how the Virgin
could be so resolute, when their misery caused our eyes to run over. She
presently dispatched her page, who brought with him all the cuirassiers
which had been appointed at the scales, who were each commanded to take
his own man, and, in an orderly procession, conduct him<span
class="rmargnote">Executio sententiarum</span> into her great garden.
Leave was given to my yesterday companions to go out into the garden
unbound, and be present at the execution of the sentence. When every
man<span class="margnote">Spectatores</span> was come forth, the Virgin
mounted up into her high throne, requesting us to sit down upon the
steps, and appear at the judgment. The goblet was committed to the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

pages’ keeping, and we went forth in our robes upon the throne, which of
itself moved so gently as if we had passed in the air, till we carne
into the garden, where we arose <span
class="margnote">Hortus.</span>altogether. This garden was not
extraordinarily curious, only it pleased me that the trees were planted
in so good order. Besides there ran in it a most costly fountain,
adorned with wonderful figures and inscriptions and strange <span
class="rmargnote">Autor promittit alter librum.</span>characters (which,
God willing, I shall mention in a future book). In this garden was
raised a wooden scaffold, hung with curiously painted figured coverlets.
There were four galleries made one over another; the first was more
glorious than the rest and covered with a white Taffata curtain, so that
we could not perceive who was behind it. The second was empty and
uncovered, while the two last were draped with red and blew Taffata. As
soon as we were come to the scaffold the Virgin bowed herself down to
the ground, at which we were mightily terrified, for we could easily
guess that the King and Queen must not be far off. We also having duely
performed our reverence, the Virgin led us by the winding stairs into
the second gallery, where she placed herself uppermost, and us in our
former order. <span class="margnote">Gratitudo Cæsaris erga
liberatorem.</span>But how the emperor whom I had released behaved
towards me, I cannot relate for fear of slander, for he might well
imagine in what anguish he now should have been, and that only through
me he had attained such dignity and worthiness. Meantime, the virgin who
first brought me the invitation, and whom I had hitherto never since
seen, stepped in, and giving one blast upon her trumpet declared the
sentence with a very loud voice:--

<span class="rmargnote">Oratio ad judicados.</span>"The King's Majesty,
my most gratious Lord, could from his heart wish that all here assembled
had, upon his Majestie's invitation, presented themselves so qualified
that

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

they might have adorned his nuptial and joyous Feast. But since it hath
otherwise pleased Almighty God, he hath not wherewith to murmur, but is
forced, contrary to his inclination, to abide by the antient and
laudable constitutions of this Kingdom, albeit, that his Majesty's
clemency may be celebrated, the usual sentence shall be considerably
lenified. He vouchsafes to the Lords and Potentates not<span
class="margnote">Sententia magnatum</span> only their lives intirely,
but also freely dismisses them, courteously intreating your Lordships
not to take it in evil part that you cannot be present at his Feast of
Honour. Neither is your reputation hereby prejudiced, although you be
rejected by this our Order, since we cannot at once do all things, and
forasmuch as your Lordships have been seduced by base rascals, it shall
not pass unrevenged. Furthermore, his Majesty resolveth shortly to
communicate with you a Catalogue of Hereticks, or Index Expurgatorius,
that you may with better judgment discern between good and evil. And
because his Majesty also purposeth to rummage his library, and offer the
seductive writings to Vulcan, he courteously entreats every one of you
to put the same in execution with your own, whereby it is to be hoped
that all evil and mischief may be remedied. And you are admonished never
henceforth so inconsiderately to covet entrance hither, least the former
excuse of seducers be taken from you. In fine, as the estates of the
Land have still somewhat to demand of your Lordships, his Majesty hopes
that no man will think it much to redeem himself with a chain, or what
else he hath about him, and so, in friendly manner, depart from us.

"The others who stood not at the first, third, and fourth<span
class="rmargnote">Sententia, 2</span> weight, his Majesty will not so
lightly dismiss, but that they also may experience his gentleness, it is
his command

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

to strip them naked, and so send them forth. Those who <span
class="margnote">3</span>in the second and fifth weight were found too
light shall, besides stripping, be noted with one or more brands,
according as each was lighter or heavier. They who were <span
class="rmargnote">4.</span>drawn up by the sixth or seventh shall be
somewhat more gratiously dealt with, and so forward, for unto every
combination there is a certain punishment ordained. They <span
class="margnote">5.</span>who yesterday separated themselves of their
own accord <span class="rmargnote">6.</span>shall go at liberty without
blame. Finally, the convicted vagabond-cheats, who could move up none of
the weights, shall be punished, in body and life, with sword, halter,
water, and rods, and such execution of judgment shall be inviolably
observed for an example unto others."

<span class="margnote">Finis habiti judici.</span>Herewith one virgin
broke her wand; the other, who read the sentence, blew her trumpet, and
stepped with profound reverence towards the curtain. Now this judgment
<span class="rmargnote">Reorum mores.</span>being read over, the Lords
were well satisfied, for which cause they gave more than they were
desired, each one redeeming himself with chains, jewels, gold, monies,
and <span class="margnote">Ministrorum mores.</span>other things, and
with reverence they took leave. Although the King's servants were
forbidden to jear any at his departure, some unlucky birds could not
hold laughing, and certainly it was sufficiently ridiculous to see them
pack away with such speed, without once looking behind them. At the door
was given to each of them a draught of <span class="rmargnote">Haustus
oblivionis.</span>FORGETFULNESS, that he might have no further memory of
misfortune. After these the volunteers departed, who, because of their
ingenuity, were suffered to pass, but so as never to return in the same
fashion, albeit if to them (as likewise to the others) anything further
were revealed, they should be well-come guests.

<span class="margnote">Damnati.</span>Meanwhile, others were stripping,
in which also an

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

inequality, according to demerit, was observed. Some were sent away
naked, without other hurt; others were driven out with small bells; some
again were scourged forth. In brief, the punishments were so various,
that I am not able to recount them all. With the last a somewhat longer
time was spent, for whilst some were hanging, some beheading, some
forced to leap into the water, much time was consumed. Verily, at this
execution my eyes ran over, not indeed in regard of the punishment which
impudency well deserved, but in contemplation of human blindness, in
that we are continually busying ourselves over that which since the
first fall hath been sealed to us. Thus the garden which lately was
quite full was soon emptied.<span class="margnote">Commiserationis
expositio.</span> As soon as this was done, and silence had been kept
for the space of five minutes, there came forward a beautiful snow-white
Unicorn, with<span class="rmargnote">Unicorna.</span> a golden collar,
ingraved with certain letters, about his neck. He bound himself down
upon his fore-feet, as if hereby he had shown honour to the Lyon, who
stood so immoveably upon the fountain that I<span
class="margnote">Leo.</span> took him to be stone or brass, but who
immediately took the naked sword which he bare in his paw, brake it
into<span class="rmargnote">Machæra.</span> two in the middle, the two
pieces whereof sunk into the fountain, after which he so long reared
until a white Dove<span class="margnote">Columba.</span> brought a
branch of olive in her bill, which the Lyon devoured in an instant, and
so was quieted. The Unicorn returned to his place with joy, while our
Virgin led us down by the winding staires from the scaffold, and so we
again made our reverence towards the curtain. We washed<span
class="rmargnote">Discessus ab hoc acta.</span> our hands and heads in
the fountain, and thereby waited in order till the King through a secret
gallery returned into his hall, and then we also, with choice musick,
pomp, state, and pleasant discourse, were conducted into our former

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

lodging. Here, that the time might not seem too long to us, the Virgin
bestowed on each of us a noble Page, not only richly habited but also
exceeding learned, and able aptly to discourse on all subjects, so that
we had reason to be ashamed of ourselves. These were commanded to lead
us up and down the castle, yet only in certain places, and, if possible,
to shorten the time according to our desire. <span
class="margnote">Discessus virgini luciferæ.</span>Meantime, the Virgin
took leave, promising to be with us again at supper, and after that to
celebrate the ceremonies of hanging up the weights, while on the morrow
we should <span class="rmargnote">Hospitum modi in
delectamentis.</span>be presented to the King. Each of us now did what
best pleased him, one part viewing the excellent paintings, which they
copied for themselves, and considered what the wonderful characters
might signify, others recruiting <span
class="margnote">Autoris.</span>themselves with meat and drink. I caused
my Page to conduct me, with my Companion, up and down the castle, of
which walk it will never repent me so long as I live. Besides many other
glorious antiquities, the Royal Sepulcher was shewed me, by which I
learned more than is extant in all books. There in the same place stands
the glorious <span class="rmargnote">Libellus de Phœnice.</span>Phœnix,
of which two years since I published a small discourse, and am resolved,
in case this narrative prove useful, to set forth several treatises
concerning the Lyon, Eagle, Griffon, Falcon, &c., together with their
draughts and inscriptions. It grieves me also for my other consorts that
they neglected such pretious treasures. I indeed reaped the most benefit
by my Page, for according as each one's genius lay, so he led his
intrusted one into the quarters pleasing to him. <span
class="margnote">Usus eorum quæ autor vidit.</span>Now the kyes hereunto
belonging were committed to my Page, and, therefore, this good fortune
happened to me before the rest, for though he invited others to come in,
yet they imagining such tombs to be only in the churchyard,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

thought they should well enough get thither when ever anything was to be
seen there. Neither shall these monuments be with-held from my thankful
schollars. The other thing that was shewed us two was the noble
Library<span class="margnote">Bibliotheca.</span> as it was altogether
before the Reformation, of which I have so much the less to say, because
the catalogue is shortly to be published. At the entry of this room
stands a great Book the like whereof I never saw, in which all the
figures, rooms, portals, writings, riddles, and the like, to be seen in
the whole castle are delineated. In every book stands its author
painted, whereof many were to be burnt, that even their memory might be
blotted out from amongst the righteous. Having taken a full view, and
being scarce gotten forth, there comes another Page, and having
whispered somewhat in our Page's ear, he delivered up the kyes to him,
who immediately carried them up the winding stairs; but our Page was
very much out of countenance, and we, setting hard upon him with
intreaties, he declared to us that the King's Majesty would by no means
permit that either the library or sepulchers should be seen by man, and
he besought us as we tendered his life to discover it not to anyone, he
having already utterly denyed it; whereupon both of us stood hovering
between joy and fear, yet it continued in silence, and no man made
further inquiry about it. Thus in both places we consumed three hours,
and now, although it had struck seven, nothing was hitherto given us to
eat, but our hunger was abated by constant revivings, and I could be
content to fast all my life with such an entertainment. About this time
the curious fountains, mines, and all kind<span
class="rmargnote">Fastidium pulsum egregiis spectaculis.</span> of art
shops were also shown us, of which there was none but surpassed all our
arts even if melted into one mass. Every chamber was built in
semi-circle, that so they might

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="margnote">Officinarum constitutarum finis.</span>have
before their eyes the costly clock-work which was erected upon a fair
turret in the centre, and regulate themselves according to the course of
the planets which were to be seen on it in a glorious manner. At length
I came into a spacious room, in the middle whereof stood a terestrial
<span class="rmargnote">Globus terrenus.</span>globe, whose diameter
contained thirty foot, albeit near half, except a little which was
covered with the steps, was let into the earth. Two men might readily
turn it about, so that more of it was never to be seen but so much as
was above the horizon. I could not understand whereto those ringlets of
gold (which were upon it in several places) served, at which my Page
laughed, and advised me to view them more narrowly, when I found there
my native country noted with gold also, whereupon my companion sought
his and found that too. The same happened to others who stood by, and
the Page told us that it was yesterday declared to the King's Majesty by
their old astronomer Atlas, that all the gilded points did exactly
answer to their native countries, and, therefore, he, as soon as he
perceived that I undervalued myself, but that nevertheless there stood a
point upon my native country, moved one of the captains to intreat for
us to be set upon the scale at all adventures, especially seeing one of
our native countries had a notable good mark. And truly it was not
without cause that he, the Page of greatest power, was bestowed on me.
For this I returned him thanks, and looking more diligently upon my
native country, I found that, besides the ringlets, there were also
certain delicate streaks <span class="margnote">Excellentia patriæ
autoris.</span>upon it. I saw much more even upon this globe than I am
willing to discover. Let each man take into consideration why every city
produceth not a philosopher. After this he led us within the globe, for
on the sea there was a

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

tablet (whereon stood three dedications and the author's name) which a
man might gently lift up, and by a little board go into the center,
which was capable of four persons, being nothing but a round board
whereon we<span class="margnote">Quid in glob.</span> could sit and at
ease by broad daylight (it was now already dark) contemplate the stars,
which seemed like mere carbuncles glittering in an agreeable order, and
moving so gallantly that I had scarce any mind ever to go out again, as
the Page afterwards told the Virgin, and with which she often twitted
me, for it was already supper time and I was almost the last at table.
The waiters treated me with so much reverence and honour that for shame
I durst not<span class="rmargnote">Reverentia in convivio exhibita
auctoris.</span> look up. To speak concerning the musick, or the rest of
that magnificent entertainment, I hold needless, because it is not
possible sufficiently to express it. In brief there was nothing there
but art and amenity. After we had each to other related our employment
since noon (howbeit, not a word was spoken of the library and
monuments), being already merry with wine, the Virgin began
thus:--"My<span class="margnote">The Lady Chamberlain</span> Lords, I
have a great contention with one of my sisters. In our chamber we have
an eagle, whom we cherish with such diligence that each of us is
desirous to be the best<span class="rmargnote">Perplexed speeches, or
intricate questions.</span> beloved, and upon that score have many a
squabble. On a day we concluded to go both together to him, and toward
whom he should show himself most friendly, hers should he properly be.
This we did, and I, as commonly, bare in my hand a branch of lawrel, but
my sister had none. As soon as he espyed us both, he gave my sister
another branch which he had in his beak, and offered at mine, which I
gave him. Each of us hereupon imagined herself best beloved of him.
Which way am I to resolve myself?"

This modest proposal pleased us mightly well, and each

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

one would gladly have heard the solution, but inasmuch as all looked
upon me, and desired to have the beginning from me, my mind was so
extreamly confounded that I knew not what to do but propound another in
its stead, <span class="margnote">Autoris griphus.</span>and said,
therefore:--"Gracious. Lady, your Ladyship's question were easily to be
resolved if one thing did not <span class="rmargnote">The Author's
counter‑demand.</span>perplex me. I had two companions who both loved me
exceedingly; they being doubtful which was most dear to me, concluded to
run to me unawares, and that he whom I should then embrace should be the
right; this they did, yet one of them could not keep pace with the
other, so he staid behind and wept; the other I embraced with amazement.
When they had afterwards discovered the business to me, I knew not how
to resolve, and have hitherto let it rest in this manner till I may find
some good advice herein."

The Virgin wondered at it, and well observed where about I was, upon
which she replied, that we should both be quit, and then desired the
solution from the rest. But I had already made them wise, wherefore the
next began <span class="margnote">Griphus, 3.</span>thus--"In my city a
Virgin was condemned to death, but the judge being pittiful towards her,
proclaimed that if any man desired to be her champion, he should have
free leave. Now she had two lovers; one made himself ready, and came
into the lists to expect his adversary; afterwards the other presented
himself, but coming too late, resolved nevertheless to fight, and suffer
himself to be vanquished that the Virgin's life might be preserved,
which succeeded accordingly. Thereupon each challenged her, and now, my
lords, instruct me to which of them of right she belongeth." The Virgin
could hold no longer, but said:--"I thought to have gained much
information, and am my self gotten into

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the net; yet I would gladly hear whether there be any more behind."
"Yes, that there is," answered the third, "a stranger adventure hath not
been recounted then that which happened to myself. In my youth I loved a
worthy<span class="margnote">Griphus, 4.</span> maid, and that my love
might attain its end I made use of an ancient matron, who easily brought
me to her. Now it happened that the maid's brethren came in upon us as
we three were together, and were in such a rage that they would have
taken my life, but, on my vehement supplication, they at length forced
me to swear to take each of them for a year to my wedded wife. Now, tell
me, my Lords, should I take the old or the young one first?" We all
laughed sufficiently at this riddle, yet none would undertake to unfold
it, and the fourth began. "In a certain<span class="rmargnote">Griphus,
5.</span> city there dwelt an honourable lady, beloved of all, but
especially of a noble young man, who would needs be too importunate with
her. At length she gave him this determination, that in case he would,
in a cold winter, lead her into a fair green garden of Roses, then he
should obtain, but if not he must resolve never to see her more. The
noble man travelled into all countries to find one who might perform
this, till at length he lite upon a little old man who promised to do it
for him, in case he would assure him of half his estate, which he having
consented to the other was as good as his word. Whereupon he invited the
Lady home to his garden, where, contrary to her expectation, she found
all things green, pleasant, and warm; and remembring her promise, she
only requested that she might once more return to her lord, to whom with
sighs and tears she bewailed her lamentable condition. Her lord,
sufficiently perceiving her faithfulness, dispatched her back to her
lover, who had so dearly purchased her, that

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

she might give him satisfaction, when the husband's integrity so
mightily affected the noble man that he thought it a sin to touch so
honest a wife, and sent her home with honour to her lord. The little
man, perceiving such faith in all these, would not, how poor soever he
were, be the least, but restored the noble man all his goods, and went
his way. Now, my lords, which of these persons showed the greatest
ingenuity?" Here our tongues were quite cut off, neither would the
Virgin make any reply but that another should go on; wherefore the fifth
began:--<span class="margnote">Griphus, 6.</span>"I desire not to make
long work. Who hath the greater joy, he that beholdeth what he loveth,
or he that only thinketh on it?" "He that beholdeth it," said the
Virgin. "Nay," answered I, and hereupon rose a contest till the <span
class="rmargnote">7.</span>sixth called out:--"My lords, I am to take a
wife; I have before me a maid, a married wife, and a widdow; ease me of
this doubt, and I will help to order the rest." "It goes well there,"
replied the seventh, "when a man hath his <span
class="margnote">8.</span>choice, but with me the case is otherwise. In
my youth I loved a fair and virtuous virgin, and she me in like manner;
howbeit, because of her friends’ denyal, we could not come together in
wedlock, whereupon she was married to another, who maintained her
honourably and with affection, till she came into the pains of
childbirth, which went so hard with her that all thought she was dead,
so with much state and mourning she was interred. Now, I thought with
myself, during her life thou couldst have no part in this woman, but
dead as she is, thou mayst embrace her sufficiently, whereupon I took my
servant with me, who dug her up by night. Having opened the coffin and
locked her in my arms, I found some little motion in her heart, which
increased from my warmth, till

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I perceived she
was indeed alive. I quietly bore her home, and after I had warmed her
chilled body with a costly bath of herbs, I committed her to my mother
until she brought forth a fair son, whom I caused faithfully to be
nursed. After two days (she being then in a mighty amazement) I
discovered to her all the affair, requesting that for the time to come
she would live with me as a wife, against which she excepted thus, in
case it should be grievous to her husband, who had maintained her well
and honourably, but if it could otherwise be, she was the present
obliged in love to one as well as the other. After two months (being
then to make a journey elsewhere) I invited her husband as a guest, and
amongst other things demanded of him whether if his deceased wife should
come home again he could be content to receive her, and he affirming it
with tears and lamentations, I brought him his wife and son, recounting
all the fore-passed business, and intreating him to ratifie with his
consent my fore-purposed espousals. After a long dispute he could not
beat me from my right, but was fain to leave me the wife. But still the
contest was about the son." Here the Virgin interrupted him and
said:--"It makes me wonder how you could double the afflicted man's
grief." Upon this there arose a dispute amongst us, the most part
affirming he had done but right. "Nay," said he, "I freely returned him
both his wife and son. Now tell me, my lords, was my honesty or this
man's joy the greater?" These words so mightily cheared the Virgin that
she caused a health to go round, after which other proposals went on
somewhat perplexedly, so that I could not retain them all; yet this
comes to my mind, that one told how a few years before he had seen a
physitian, who bought a parcel of wood against winter,<span
class="margnote">9.</span>

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

with which he warmed himself all winter long; but as soon as spring
returned he sold the very same wood again, and so had the use of it for
nothing. "Here must needs be skill," said the Virgin, "but the time is
now past." "Yea," replyed my companion, "whoever understands how to
resolve all the riddles may give notice of it by a proper messenger; I
conceive he will not be denied." At this time they began to say grace,
and we arose altogether from the table rather satisfied and merry than
glutted; it were to be wished that all invitations and feastings were
thus kept. Having taken some few turns up and down the hall, the Virgin
asked us whether we desired to begin <span class="margnote">Virgo
lucifera gratiositas.</span>the wedding. "Yes," said one, "noble and
vertuous lady;" whereupon she privately dispatched a Page, and,
meantime, proceeded in discourse with us. In brief, she was become so
familiar that I adventured and requested her Name. The Virgin smiled at
my curiosity, and replyed:--"My name contains five and fifty, and yet
hath <span class="rmargnote">Ænigma de Nomine.</span>only eight letters;
the third is the third part of the fifth, which added to the sixth will
produce a number, whose root shall exceed the third itself by just the
first, and it is the half of the fourth. Now the fifth and seventh are
equal, the last and first also equal, and make with the second as much
as the sixth hath, which contains four more than the third tripled. Now
tell me, my lord, how am I called?"

The answer was intricate enough, yet I left not off, but said:--"Noble
and vertuous Lady, may I not obtain one only letter?" "Yea," said she,
"that may well be done. "What, then," I proceeded, "may the seventh
contain?" <span class="margnote">60, Sc. quo virgines.</span>"It
contains," said she, "as many as there are lords here." With this I
easily found her Name, at which she was well

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

pleased, saying that much more should yet be revealed to<span
class="margnote">Redduntur pondera choro Virginum.</span> us. Meantime
certain virgins had made themselves ready, and came in with great
ceremony. Two youths carried<span class="rmargnote">2 Juvenes.</span>
lights before them, one of whom was of jocond countenance, sprightly
eyes, and gentile proportion, while the other lookt something angerly,
and whatever he would have must be, as I afterwards perceived. Four
Virgins followed them; one<span class="margnote">4 Virgines.</span>
looked shamefully towards the earth; the second also was a modest,
bashful Virgin; the third, as she entered, seemed amazed at somewhat,
and, as I understood, she cannot well abide where there is too much
mirth. The fourth brought with her certain small wreaths, to manifest
her kindness and liberality. After these four came two somewhat
more<span class="rmargnote">2 Virgines.</span> gloriously apparelled;
they saluted us courteously. One of them had a gown of skeye-colour,
spangled with golden stars: the other's was green, beautified with red
and white stripes. On their heads they had thin flying white tiffaties,
which did most becomingly adorn them. At last came one<span
class="margnote">1 Virgo præstans.</span> alone, wearing a coronet, and
rather looking up towards heaven than towards earth. We all took her for
the Bride, but were much mistaken, although in honour, riches, and state
she much surpassed the bride, and afterwards ruled the whole Wedding. On
this occasion we all followed<span class="rmargnote">The
Dutchess.</span> our Virgin, and fell on our knees; howbeit, she shewed
herself extreamly humble, offering each her hand, and admonishing us not
to be too much surprized at this, which was one of her smallest
bounties, but to lift up our eyes to our Creator and acknowledge his
Omnipotency, and so proceed in our enterprised course, employing this
grace to the praise of God and the good of man. In sum her words were
quite different from those of our Virgin, who was somewhat more worldly.
They pierced even through

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

my bones and marrow. "Thou," said she further to me, "hast received more
than others; see that thou also make a larger return."

This to me was a very strange sermon, for as soon as we <span
class="margnote">Ponderum repositio in locum suum.</span>saw the Virgins
with the musick, we imagined we should fall to dancing. Now the Weights
stood still in the same <span class="rmargnote">The
Dutchess.</span>place, wherefore the Queen (I yet know not who she was)
commanded each Virgin to take up one, but to our Virgin she gave her
own, which was the largest, and commanded us to follow behind. Our
majesty was then somewhat abated, for I observed that our Virgin was but
too good for us, and that we were not so highly reputed as we ourselves
were almost willing to phantsie. We were brought into <span
class="margnote">Reginæ habitatio.</span>the first Chamber, where our
Virgin hung up the Queen's weight, during which an excellent spiritual
hymn was sung. There was nothing costly in this room save certain
curious little Prayer-Books which should never be missing. <span
class="rmargnote">Supellex.</span>In the midst was a pulpit, convenient
for prayer, where in <span class="margnote">The Dutchess.</span>the
Queen kneeled down, and about her we also were fain to kneel and pray
after the Virgin, who read out of a book, that this Wedding might tend
to the honour of God, and our own benefit. We then came into the second
chamber, where the first Virgin hung up her weight also, and so forward
till all the ceremonies were finished, upon which the Queen again
presented her hand to every one, and departed with her Virgins. Our
president staied awhile with us, but <span class="rmargnote">Virgo
lucifera discedit cubitum.</span>because it had been already two hours
night she would then no longer detain us, and, though methought she was
glad of our company, she bid us good night, wishing us quiet <span
class="margnote">Puerorum comitum officium.</span>rest. Our Pages were
well instructed, and shewed every man his chamber, staying with us in
another pallet, in case we wanted any thing. My chamber was royally
furnished

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

with rare tapistries, and hung about with paintings; but<span
class="margnote">Autoris thalamus.</span> above all things I was
delighted in my Page, who was so excellently spoken, and experienced in
the arts, that he yet spent me another hour, and it was half an hour
after three when I fell asleep. This was the first night that I slept in
quiet, and yet a scurvy dream would not suffer me to rest, for I was
troubled with a Door which I could not get open, though at last I did
so. With these phantasies I passed<span class="rmargnote">Somnium
deports difficili.</span> the time, till at length, towards day, I
awaked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fourth Day](rhr12)
