[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr27)  [Next](rhr29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Voyage to the Land of the Rosicrucians*.

We travelled from Sydmouth for London and Spain by the south sea, taking
with us victuals for twelve moneths, and had good winds from the East,
though soft and weake, for five moneths’ space and more. But then the
winds came about into the West, so as we could make little way, and were
sometimes in purpose to turn back. Then again there arose strong and
great winds from the South, with a point East, which carried us up
towards the North, by which time our victuals failed us, and we gave
ourselves for lost men, and prepared for death. We did lift up our
hearts and voices to God, beseeching Him of His mercy that He would
discover land to us, that we might not perish. The

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

next day about evening we saw before us, towards the North, as it were
thick clouds, which did put us in hope of land, knowing that part of the
south sea was utterly unknown, and might have islands or continents
hitherto not come to light. We bent our course thither all that evening,
and in the dawning of the next day discerned a land flat and full of
boscage. After an houre and a half's sayling, we entred into a good
haven, the port of a faire city, not great indeed, but well built, and
that gave a pleasant view from sea. We came close to shore, and offered
to land, but straightwayes we saw divers people with bastons in their
hands forbidding us, yet without any cryes or fierceness, but onely
warning us off by signes that they made, whereupon, being not a little
discomfitted, we were advising with ourselves what we should do, during
which there made forth to us a small boat, with about eight persons in
it, whereof one had in his hand a tipstaff of yellow cane, tipped at
both ends with green, who came aboard without any shew of distrust, and
drew forth a little scroule of parchment, somewhat yellower than our
parchment, and shining like the leaves of writing tables, but otherwise
soft and flexible, and delivered it to our foremost man. In this scroule
were written in antient Hebrew, antient Greeke, good Latine of the
School, and in Spanish, these words:--"Land ye not, none of you, and
provide to be gone from this coast within sixteen dayes, except you have
further time given you. Mean while, if you want fresh water, victual, or
help for your sick, or that your ship needeth repaire, write down your
wants, and you shall have that which belongeth to mercy." This scroule
was signed with a stamp of cherubin's wings, not spread but hanging
downwards, and by them a crosse. This being delivered,

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

the officer returned, and left onely a servant to receive our answer.
Consulting amongst ourselves, the denial of landing, and hasty warning
us away, troubled us much; on the other side, to finde the people had
languages, and were full of humanity, did comfort us; above all, the
signe of the crosse was to us a great rejoycing and a certain presage of
good. Our answer was in the Spanish tongue--that our ship was well, our
sick many, and in very ill case, so that if they were not permitted to
land, they ran in danger of their lives. Our other wants we set down in
particular, adding that we had some little merchandize, which, if it
pleased them to deale for, might supply our wants without being
chargable unto them. We offered some reward in pistolet unto the
servant, and a piece of crimson velvet for the officer, but he took them
not, nor would scarce look upon them, and so left us in another boat
which was sent for him.

About three hours after there came towards us a person of place. He had
a gown with wide sleaves of a kinde of water chamolot, of an excellent
green colour, farre more glossie than ours. His under apparel was green
azure, and so was his hat, being in the form of a turban, daintily made
and not so large as Turkish turbans. The locks of his haire came below
the brims of it. A reverend man was he to behold. He came in a boat
partly gilt, with foure persons more, and was followed by another boat,
wherein were some twenty. When he was within a flight-shot of our ship,
signes were made that we should send some to meet him, which we
presently did in our ship boat, sending the principall man amongst us,
save one, and foure of our number with him. When we were come within six
yards of their boat, they called to us to stay, and thereupon the man
whom I before described stood up, and with a loud voice,

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

in Spanish, asked, "Are ye Christians?" We answered that we were, at
which he lift up his right hand towards Heaven, and drew it softly to
his mouth (which is the gesture they use when they thank God), and then
said, "If ye will swear by the merit of the Saviour that ye are no
pirates, nor have shed blood, lawfully or unlawfully, within forty dayes
past, you may have license to land." We said that we were all ready to
take that oath, whereupon one of those with him, being, as it seemed, a
notarie, made an entrie of this act, which done, another, after his lord
had spoken a little to him, said:--"My lord would have you know that it
is not of pride that he commeth not aboard your ship, but for that you
declare that you have many sick amongst you, he was warned by the
conservation of health that he should keep a distance." We were his
humble servants, and accounted for great honour and singular humanity
towards us that which had been already done, but hoped that the nature
of the sickness was not infectious. So he returned, and a while after
came the notary aboard, holding a fruit like an orange, but of colour
between orange-tawney and scarlet, which cast a most excellent odour. He
used it for a preservative against infection. He gave us our oath, "by
the name of Jesus and His merits," and told us that next day, by six in
the morning, we should be sent to and brought to the strangers’ house,
where we should be accommodated both for our whole and our sick. When we
offered him some pistolets, he smiling said he must not be twice paid
for one labour.

The next morning there came the same officer that came to us at first
with his cane, to conduct us to the strangers’ house. "If you will
follow my advice," said he, "some few will first go with me and see the
place, and how

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

it may be made convenient for you; then you may send for your sick and
the rest of your number." We thanked him, and said that this care which
he took of desolate strangers God would reward, and six of us went
ashore with him. He led us thorow three faire streets, and all the way
there were gathered some people on both sides in a row, but in so civill
a fashion as if it had been not to wonder at us, but to welcome us.
Divers of them as we passed put their arms a little abroad, which is
their gesture when they bid any welcome. The strangers’ house is faire
and spacious, built of brick, and with handsome windows, some of glass,
some of a kind of cambrick oyled. He brought us into a faire parlour
above staires, and then asked what number of persons we were, and how
many sick? We answered that we were in all 250, whereof our sick were
seventeen. He desired us to stay till he came back, which was about an
houre after, and then he led us to see the chambers provided for us,
being in number 250. They cast it that foure of those chambers, which
were better than the rest, might receive foure of our principal men; the
rest were to lodge us. The chambers were handsome, cheerful, and
furnished civilly. Then he led us to a long gallery, where he showed us
along one side seventeen cells, having partitions of cedar, which
gallery and cells, being in all 900, were instituted as an infirmary. He
told us withall that as any one sick waxed well he might be removed to a
chamber, for which purpose there were set forth ten spare chambers. This
done, he brought us back to the parlour, and lifting up his cane a
little, as they doe when they give any command, said to us:--"Ye are to
know that the custom of the land requireth that, after this day and
to-morrow, which we give you for removing your people from your ship,
you are to keep within

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

doores for three dayes; do not think yourselves restrained, but rather
left to your rest. You shall want nothing; there are six of our people
appointed to attend you for any businesse you may have abroad." We gave
him thanks with all affection and respects, and said:--"God surely is
manifested in this land." We offered him also twenty pistolets, but he
smiled, and said:--"What! twice paid!" and so left us. Soon after our
dinner was served in, which was right good viands both for bread, meat,
wine, &c., better than any diet that I have known in Europe. We had
drink of three sorts, ale, beer, syder, all wholesome; wine of the
grape, and another drink of grain, like our mum but more clear, and a
kinde of perry, like the peare juice, made of a fruit of that countrey,
a wonderfull pleasing and refreshing drink. Besides, there were brought
in great store of those scarlet oranges for our sick, which were an
assured remedy for sicknesse taken at sea. There was given us also a box
of small grey pills which they wished our sick should take, one every
night before sleeping, to hasten their recovery. The next day, after
that our trouble of carriage of our men and goods out of our ship was
somewhat settled, I thought good to call our company together, and said
unto them;--"My dear friends, let us know ourselves, and how it standeth
with us. We are cast on land, as Jonas was out of the whale's belly,
when we were as buried in the deep, and now we are on land, we are but
between death and life, for we are beyond both the old world and the
new. Whether ever we shall see Europe God onely knoweth. A kinde of
miracle hath brought us hither, and it must be little lesse that shall
take us hence. Therefore in regard of our deliverance past, and danger
present, let us look to God and every man reform his own

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

wayes. We are come amongst a Christian people, full of piety and
humanity. Let us not bring confusion of face upon ourselves by shewing
our vices or unworthinesse, They have cloistered us for three daies; who
knoweth whether it be not to take some taste of our manners and
conditions, and if they find them bad to banish us straight wayes, if
good to give us further time? For God's love let us so behave ourselves
as we may be at peace with God and may finde grace in the eyes of this
people." Our company with one voice thanked me for my good admonition,
and promised to live soberly and civilly, without giving the least
occasion of offence. We spent our three dayes joyfully, during which
time we had every houre joy of the amendment of our sick.

The morrow after our three dayes, there came to us a new man, cloathed
in azure, save that his turban was white with a small red crosse at the
top. He had also a tippet of fine linnen. He did bend to us a little,
and put his arms broad; we saluting him in a very lowly manner. He
desired to speak with some few of us, whereupon six onely stayed, and
the rest avoided the room. He said: I am by office governour of this
house of strangers, and by vocation a Christian priest of the Order of
the Rosie Crosse, and am come to offer you my service, as strangers and
chiefly as Christians. The State hath given you licence to stay on land
for the space of six weeks, and let it not trouble you if your occasions
ask further time, for the law in this point is not precise. Ye shall
also understand that the strangers’ house is at this time rich and much
afore-hand, for it hath laid up revenue these 36000 years--so long it is
since any stranger arrived in this part. Therefore take ye no care; the
State will defray you all the time

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

you stay. As for any merchandize ye have brought, ye shall be well used,
and have your return either in merchandize or gold and silver, for to us
it is all one. If you have any other request to make, hide it not, onely
this I must tell you that none of you must go above a juld, or karan
(that is with them a mile and an half), from the walls of the city
without especiall leave." We answered, admiring this gracious and
parent-like usage, that we could not tell what to say to expresse our
thanks, and his noble free offers left us nothing to ask. It seemed that
we had before us a picture of our salvation in Heaven, for we that were
awhile since in the jaws of death were now brought into a place where we
found nothing but consolations. For the commandement laid on us, we
would not faile to obey it, though it was impossible but our hearts
should be enflamed to tred further upon this happy and holy ground. Our
tongues should cleave to the roof of our mouth ere we should forget
either his reverend person or this whole nation in our prayers. We also
humbly besought him to accept us as his true servants, presenting both
our persons and all we had at his feet. He said he was a priest and
looked for a priest's reward, which was our brotherly love, and the good
of our souls and bodies. So he went from us, not without tears of
tendernesse in his eyes, and left us confused with joy and kindness,
saying amongst ourselves that we were come into a land of angels.

The next day, about ten of the clock, the governour came to us again,
and, after salutation, said familiarly that he was come to visit us,
called for a chair, and sat him down. We, being some ten of us (the rest
were of the meaner sort, or else gone abroad), sat down with him, when
he began thus:--"We of this island of Apanua or Chrisse in Arabia

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (for so they call
it in their language), by means of our solitary situation, the laws of
secresy which we have for our travellers, and our rare admission of
strangers, know well most part of the habitable world and are ourselves
unknown. Therefore, because he that knoweth least is fittest to ask
questions, it is more reason, for the entertainment of the time, that ye
ask me questions than that I ask you." We humbly thanked him, and
answered that we conceived, by the taste we had already, that there was
no worldly thing more worthy to be known than the state of that happy
land, but since we were met from the several ends of the world, and
hoped assuredly that we should meet one day in the Kingdome of Heaven,
we desired to know (in respect that land was so remote, divided by vast,
unknown seas from where our Saviour walked on earth) who was the apostle
of that nation, and how it was converted to the faith. It appeared in
his face that he took great contentment in this question in the first
place, "for (said he) it sheweth that you first seek the Kingdome of
Heaven.

"About 20 years after the Ascension of our Saviour, it came to passe
that there was seen by the people of Damcar, on the eastern coast of our
island, within night, as it might be some mile into the sea, a great
pillar of light, in form of a column or cylinder rising from the sea a
great way towards Heaven. On the top was a large crosse of light, more
resplendent than the body of the pillar, upon which so strange a
spectacle the people of the city gathered upon the sands to wonder, and
after put into a number of small boats to go neerer this marvellous
sight. But when the boats were come within about 60 yards of the pillar
they found themselves bound and could go no further. They stood all as
in a theatre, beholding this light as an heavenly signe. There

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

was in one of the boats one of the wise men of the Society of the Rosie
Crucians, whose house or colledge is the very eye of this Kingdome, who,
having awhile devoutly contemplated this pillar and crosse, fell down
upon his face, then raised himself upon his knees, and, lifting up his
hands to Heaven, made his prayers in this manner:

"'Lord God of Heaven and earth, Thou hast vouchsafed of Thy grace to
those of our order to know Thy works of creation and the secrets of
them, and to discern (as far as appertaineth to the generation of men)
between divine miracles, works of Nature, works of art, and impostures
and illusions of all sorts. I do here acknowledge and testifie before
this people, that the thing which we now see is Thy finger and a true
miracle. And for as much as we learn in our books that Thou never
workest miracles but to a divine and excellent end (for the laws of
Nature are Thine own laws, and Thou exceedest them not but upon great
cause), we most humbly beseech Thee to prosper this great signe, and to
give us the interpretation and use of it in mercy, which Thou doest in
some part promise by sending it unto us.'

"When he had made his prayer, he presently found the boat he was in
unbound, whereas the rest remained still fast. Taking that for leave to
approach, he caused the boat to be softly rowed towards the pillar, but
ere he came near the pillar and crosse of light brake up, and cast
itself abroad into a firmament of many stars, which also soon vanished,
and there was nothing left but a small ark of cedar, not wet at all with
water, though it swam. In the fore-end of it grew a small green branch
of palme, and when the Rosie Crucian had taken it with all reverence
into his boat, it opened of itself, and there were found a book and
letter, both written in fine parchment, and wrapped in suidons of

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

linnen, the book containing all the canonical books of the Old and New
Testament, according as you have them, while the Apocalypse itself, and
some other books of the New Testament, not at that time written, were,
nevertheless, therein. And for the letter, it was in these words:--

"'I John, a servant of the Highest and Apostle of Jesus Christ, was
warned by an angell, that appeared to me in a vision of glory, that I
should commit this ark to the floods of the sea. Therefore I do testifie
and declare unto that people where God shall ordain this ark to come to
land, that in the same day is come unto them salvation and peace and
goodwill from the Father and from the Lord Jesus.'

"There was also as well in the book as the letter a great miracle
wrought, conform to that of the apostles in the originall gift of
tongues, for there being at that time in this land Hebrews, Persians,
and Indians, <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) besides the natives,
every one read upon the book and the letter as if they had been written
in his own language. Thus was this land saved from infidelity through
the apostolicall and miraculous evangelism of S. John."

Here he paused, and a messenger called him from us, so this was all that
passed in that conference. The next day the same Governour came again to
us immediately after dinner, and after we were set, he said:--"Well, the
questions are on your part." One of our number said, after a little
pause, that there was a matter we were no less desirous to know than
fearful to ask, but encouraged by his rare humanity towards us, we would
take the hardiness to propound it. We well observed those his former
words, that this happy island was known to few, and yet knew most of

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

the nations of the world, which we found to be true, considering they
had the languages of Europe, and knew much of our state and business,
yet we, notwithstanding the remote discoveries of this last age, never
heard the least inkling of this island; we never heard tell of any ship
of theirs that had been seen to arrive upon any shore of Europe. And yet
the marvell rested not in this, for its scituation in the secret
conclave of such a vast sea mought cause it, but that they should have
knowledge of the languages, books, affaires of those that lye such a
distance from them, was a thing we could not tell what to make of, for
it seemed a propriety of divine powers and beings to be hidden to
others, and yet to have others open as in a light to them. At this
speech the Governour gave a gratious smile, and said that we did well to
ask pardon for a question which imported as if we thought this a land of
magicians, that sent forth spirits of the aire into all parts to bring
them intelligence of other countries. It was answered by us in all
possible humblenesse, but yet with a countenance takeing knowledge that
he spake it but merrily, that we were apt enough to think there was
something supernaturall in this island, but rather as angelicall than
magicall; but to let his lordship know truly what made us doubtful to
ask this question, was because we remembred he had given a touch in his
former speech that this land had laws of secresy touching strangers. To
this he said:--"You remember aright, and in that I shall say I must
reserve particulars which it is not lawful to reveal, but there will be
enough left to give you satisfaction. You shall understand that about
three thousand years agoe, the navigation of the world (specially for
remote voyages) was greater than it is now. Whether it was that the
example of the Ark that saved the remnant of men front the universall

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

deluge, gave confidence to adventure, or what it was; but such is the
truth. The Phoenicians and Tyrians had great fleets, so had the
Carthaginians, their colony. To ward the East the shipping  of Ægypt and
Palestina was likewise great. China also and America abounded in tall
ships. This island had fifteen hundred of great content. At that time
this land was known and frequented by ships and vessels of all the
nations before named, and they had many times men of other countries
that were no saylers, that came with them--as Persians, Chaldeans,
Egyptians, and Grecians, so as almost all nations resorted hither, of
whom we have some stirps with us at this day. Our own ships went sundry
voyages.

"At the same time, the inhabitants of the Holy Land did flourish. For
though the narration and discription made by a great man with you, that
the descendants of Neptune planted there, and of the magnificent temple,
palace, city, and hill (see my *Rosie Crucian Infallible Axiometa*), and
the manifold navigable rivers (which as so many chains environed the
site and temple), and the severall degrees of ascent whereby men did
climb up to the same as if it had been a *Scala Cœli*, be all poeticall
and fabulous, yet so much is true that the said country of Judea, as
well as Peru, then called Coya--Mexico, then named Tyrambel--were
mighty, proud kingdomes in arms, shipping, and riches., At one time both
made two great expeditions, they of Tyrambel through Judea to the
Mediterrane sea, and they of Coya through the South Sea upon this our
island. For the former of these, which was into Europe, the same author
amongst you had some relations from his Beata (see the "Harmony of the
World," lib. i., the Preface). Assuredly such a thing there was, but
whether the ancient Athenians

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

had the glory of the repulse of those forces I can say nothing; but
certain it is there never came back either ship or man from that voyage.
Neither had those of Coya had better fortune if they had not met with
enemies of great clemency. The King of this island, by name Phroates,
who was raised three times from death to life, a wise man and great
warrior, knowing his own strength and that of his enemies, handled the
matter so as he cut off their landforces from their ships, and entoyled
both their navy and camp with a greater power than theirs, compelling
them to render themselves without striking stroke. After they were at
his mercy, contenting himself only with their oath that they should no
more beare armes against him, he dismissed them in all safety; but the
Divine revenge overtook, not long after, these proud enterprises, for
within less than the space of one hundred years the island was utterly
destroyed by a particular deluge or inundation, these continents then
having far greater rivers and far higher mountaines to pour down waters
than any part of the Old World. The inundation was not past forty foot
deep in most places, so that, although it destroyed man and beast
generally, yet some few wilde inhabitants of the wood escaped. Birds
also escaped by flying to the high trees and woods. As for men, although
they had buildings in many places higher than the waters, yet that
inundation had a long continuance, whereby they of the vaile that were
not drowned perished for want of food. So marvel you not at the thin
population of America, nor at the rudeness of the people, younger a
thousand years, at the least, then the rest of the world, for there was
so much time between the universal flood and their particular
inundation. The poor remnant of humane seed which remained in their
mountaines peopled the country

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

again slowly, and, being simple and savage, were not able to leave
letters, arts, and civility to their posterity. Having likewise in their
mountainous habitations been used (in respect of the extream cold) to
cloathe themselves with skins of tygers, bears, and great hairy goates,
when they came down into the valley and found the intolerable heats
which are there, they were forced to begin the custome of going naked,
which continueth at this day, onely they take great pride in the
feathers of birds. . . . By this main accident of time we lost our
traffique with the Americans, with whom, in regard they lay nearest to
us, we had most commerce. As for other parts of the world, navigation
did everywhere greatly decay, so that part of entercourse which could be
from other nations to sayle to us hath long since ceased.

But now of the cessation of intercourse which mought be by our sayling
to other nations, I cannot say but our shipping for number, strength,
marriners, pilots, and all things is as great as ever; and, therefore,
why we should set at home I shall now give you au account by itself.
There raigned in this island, about nineteen hundred years agoe, a King
whose memory of all others we most adore, not superstitiously, but as a
divine instrument, though a mortall man. His name was Eugenius
Theodidactus (you may read this at large in our "Idea of the Law"), and
we esteem him as the lawgiver of our nation. This King had a large
heart, inscrutable for good, and was wholly bent to make his kingdome
and people happy. He, therefore, takeing into consideration how
sufficient this land was to maintain itself without any aid of the
forrainer, being 5600 miles in circuit and of rare fertility in the
greatest part thereof; finding also the shipping might be plentifully
set on worke by fishing and by transportation from port to port, and

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

likewise by sayling unto some small islands not farr from us, and under
the Crown and laws of this State; recalling the flourishing estate
wherein this land then was, though nothing wanted to this noble and
heroicall intention but to give perpetuity to that which was so happily
established. Amongst other fundamental) laws of this kingdome, he did
ordaine the interdicts and prohibitions which we have touching entrance
of strangers, doubting novelties and commixture of manners.
Nevertheless, he preserved all points of humanity in making provision
for the relief of strangers distressed, whereof you have tasted," at
which speech we all rose up and bowed ourselves.

He went on:--"That King also still desiring to joyn humanity and policy,
and thinking it against humanity to detaine strangers against their
will, and against policy that they should return to discover their
knowledge of this state, did ordain that of the strangers permitted to
land, as many at all times mought depart as would, but as many as would
stay should have very good conditions, wherein he saw so farr that in so
many ages since the prohibition, we have memory not of one ship that
ever returned, and but of thirteen persons, at severall times, that
chose to return in our bottoms. What those few may have reported abroad,
I know not, but whatever they said could be taken but for a dream. For
our travelling hence, our law-giver thought fit altogether to restrain
it, but this restraint hath one admirable exception, preserving the good
which commeth by communication with strangers, and avoiding the hurt. Ye
shall understand that among the excellent acts of that King one hath the
pre-eminence--the erection and institution of an Order, or Society,
which we call the Temple of the Rosie Crosse, the noblest foundation
that

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

ever was upon earth, and the lanthorne of this Kingdome. It is dedicated
to the study of the works and creatures of God. Some think it beareth
the founder's name a little corrupted, as if it should be F. H. R. C.
his house, but the records write it as it is spoken. I take it to be
denominate of the King of the Hebrews, which is famous with you, and no
stranger to us, for we have some parts of his works which you have lost,
namely, that Rosie Crucian M which he wrote of all things past, present,
or to come, and of all things that have life and motion. This maketh me
think that our King finding himself to symbolize with that King of the
Hebrews, honoured him with The Title of this Foundation, and I finde in
ancient records this Order or Society of the Rosie Crosse is sometimes
called the Holy House, and sometimes the Colledge of the Six Days’
Works, whereby I am satisfied that our excellent King had learned from
the Hebrews that God had created the world and all therein within six
days, and therefore he instituting that House for the finding out of the
one nature of things did give it also that second name. When the King
had forbidden to all his people navigation into any part not under his
crown, he had, nevertheless, this ordinance, that every twelve years
there should be set forth two ships appointed to severall voyages; that
in either of these ships there should be a mission of three of the
Fellows or Brethren of the Holy House, whose errand was to give us
knowledge of the affaires and state of those countries to which they
were designed, and especially of the sciences, arts, manufactures, and
inventions of all the world, and withall to bring unto us books,
instruments, and patterns in every kinde; that the ships after they had
landed the Brethren of the Rosie Crosse should return, and that the
Brethren R. C. should

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

stay abroad till the new mission. These ships were not otherwise fraught
than with store of victualls, and treasure to remaine with the Brethren
for buying such things and rewarding such persons as they should think
fit. Now for me to tell you how the vulgar sort of marriners are
contained from being discovered at land, and how they that must be put
on shore colour themselves under the name of other nations, and to what
places these voyages have been designed, and what rendezvous are
appointed for the new missions, and the like circumstances, I may not do
it, but thus, you see, we maintain a trade, not for gold, silver, or
jewels, nor any commodity of matter, but onely for God's first creature,
which was light, to have light, I say, of the growth of all parts of the
world."

When he had said this he was silent, and so were we all, for we were
astonished to hear so strange things so probably told. He perceiving
that we were willing to say somewhat, but had it not ready, descended to
aske us questions of our voyage and fortunes, and in the end concluded
that we mought do well to think what time of stay we would demand of the
State, for he would procure such time as we desired. Whereupon we all
rose up and presented ourselves to kisse the skirt of his tippet, but he
would not suffer us, and so took his leave. When it came once amongst
our people that the State used to offer conditions to strangers that
would stay, we had worke enough to get any of our men to look to our
ship, and to keep them from going to the Government to crave conditions.

We took ourselves now for freemen, and lived most joyfully, going abroad
and seeing what was to be seen in the city and places adjacent,
obtaining acquaintance with many in the city, at whose hands we found
such humanity as

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

was enough to make us forget all that was dear to us in our own
countries. Continually we met with things right worthy of observation
and relation, as indeed if there be a mirrour in the world worthy to
hold men's eyes, it is that countrey. One day there were two of our
company bidden to a feast of the fraternity, as they call it, and a most
naturall, pious, and reverend custome it is, shewing that nation to be
compounded of all goodnesse. It is granted to any man who shall live to
see thirty persons descended of his body alive together, and all above
three years old, to make this feast, which is done at the cost of the
State. The Father of the fraternity, whom they call the R. C., two days
before the feast taketh to him three of such friends as he liketh to
chuse, and is assisted also by the governour of the city where the feast
is celebrated, and all the persons of the family, of both sexes, are
summoned to attend upon him. Then, if there be any discords or suits,
they are compounded and appeased. Then, if any of the family be
distressed or decayed, order is taken for their relief and competent
means to live. Then, if any be subject to vice, they are reproved and
censured. So, likewise, direction is given touching marriage and the
courses of life. The governour assisteth to put in execution the decrees
of the Tirsan if they should be disobeyed, though that seldome needeth,
such reverence they give to the order of Nature. The Tirsan doth also
then chuse one man from amongst his sons to live in house with him, who
is called ever after the Sonne of the Vine. On the feast day the father,
or Tirsan, commeth forth after Divine Service in to a large room, where
the feast is celebrated, which room hath an half-pace at the upper end.
Against the wall, in the middle of the half-pace, is a chaire

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

placed for him, with a table and carpet before it. Over the chaire is a
slate, made round or ovall, and it is of an ivie somewhat whiter than
ours, like the leaf of a silver aspe, but more shining, for it is green
all winter. The slate is curiously wrought of silver and silk of divers
colours, broyding or binding in the ivie. It is the work of some of the
daughters of the family, and is vailed over at the top with a fine net
of silk and silver, but the substance of it is true ivie, whereof, after
it is taken down, the friends of the family are desirous to have some
leaf to keep. The Tirsan commeth forth with all his generation or
linage, the males before him and the females following him, and if there
be a mother from whose body the whole linage is descended, there is a
traverse placed in a loft above, on the right hand of the chaire, with a
privie doore and a carved window of glass, leaded with gold and blew,
where she sitteth but is not seen. When the Tirsan is come forth, he
sitteth down in the chaire, and all the linage place themselves against
the wall, both at his back and upon the return of the hall, in order of
their yeares, without difference of sex, and stand upon their feet. When
he is set, the roome being alwayes full of company, but without
disorder, after some pause there commeth in from the lower end of the
room a Taratan, or herald, and on either side of him two young lads,
whereof one carrieth a scrowle of their shining yellow parchment, and
the other a cluster of grapes of gold, with a long foot or stalke. The
heralds and children are cloathed with mantles of sea-water green
sattin, but the herald's mantle is streamed with gold and hath a traine.
Then the herald with three curtsies, or rather inclinations, commeth up
as far as the half-pace, and taketh into his hand the scrowle. This is
the King's charter, containing gifts of revenue and

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

many priviledges, exemptions, and points of honour, granted to the
father of the fraternity; it is stiled and directed, "To *such an one*,
our well beloved friend and Creditour," which is a title proper only to
this case, for they say the King is debtor to no man but for propagation
of his subjects. The seal set to the King's charter is R. C., and the
King's image embossed or mouled in gold. This charter the herald readeth
aloud, the father, or Rosie Crucian, standing up, supported by two of
his sons. Then the herald mounteth the half-pace and delivereth the
charter into his hands, and with that there is an acclamation--"Happy
are the people of Apanua!" Then the herald taketh into his hand, from
the other childe, the cluster of grapes, which are daintily enamelled.
If the males of the Holy Island are the greater number, the grapes are
enamelled purple, with a sun set on the top. If the females prevaile,
they are enamelled into a greenish yellow, with a crescent on the top.
The grapes are in number as many as the descendants of the fraternity.
This golden cluster the herald delivereth also to the Rosie Crucian, who
presently delivereth it to that sonne formerly chosen to be in his house
with him, who beareth it before his father as an ensign of honour when
he goeth in publick ever after. After this ceremony, the father, or
Rosie Crucian, retireth, and after some time commeth forth again to
dinner, where he sitteth alone under the slate--none of his descendants
sit with him, except he happ to be of the Holy House. He is served only
by his own male children upon the knee; the women stand about him,
leaning against the wall. The room below the half-pace hath tables on
the sides for the ghests, who are served with great and comely order.
Towards the end of dinner (which in their greatest feasts never lasteth
above an hour and an half)

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

there is an hymne sung, varied according to the invention of him that
composeth it (for they have an excellent poesie), but the subject is
alwayes the praise of Adam, Noah, and Abraham, whereof the two former
peopled the world, and the last was the father of the faithfull,
concluding with a thanksgiving for the nativity of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, in whose birth only the births of all are blessed. Dinner being
done, the R. Crucian, having withdrawne himself into a place where he
maketh some private prayers, commeth forth the third time to give the
blessing with all his descendants, who stand about him as at first. He
calls them forth by one and by one as he pleaseth, though seldome the
order of age be inverted. The person called (the table being before
removed) kneeleth down before the chaire, and the father layeth his hand
upon his or her head, and giveth the blessing in these words:--"Son (or
daughter) of the Holy Island, thy father saith it; the man by whom thou
hast breath and life speaketh the words; the blessing of the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, and the Holy Spirit be upon thee, and make
the dayes of thy pilgrimage good and many." If there be any of his sons
of eminent merit and vertue (so they be not above two), he calleth for
them again, and saith, laying his arm over their shoulders, they
standing; "Sons, it is well ye are borne; give God the praise, and
persevere to the end!" withall delivering to either a jewel made in the
figure of an Bare of wheat, which they ever after doe wear in the front
of their turban, or hat. This done, they fall to musick and dances, and
other recreations. This is the full order of that Feast of the Rosie
Cross.

By that time six or seven dayes were spent, and I was fallen into a
straight acquaintance with a merchant of that

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

city, whose name was Nicholas Walford, and his man, Sede John Booker. He
was a Jew and circumcised, for they have some few stirps of Jews yet
among them, whom they leave to their own religion, which they may the
better doe, because they are of a farr differing disposition from the
Jews in other parts, giving unto our Saviour many high attributes, and
loving the nation of Chassalonia extreamly. This man of whom I speak
would ever acknowledge that Christ was born of a Virgin, and was more
than man; he would tell how God made Him ruler of the Seraphims which
guard His throne (read the "Harmony of the World"). They call Him also
the milken way Emepht, and the Eliah of the Messiah, and many other high
names, which, though they be inferior to His Divine Majesty, are farr
from the language of other Jews. For the country of Apamia, the Holy
Island, or Chassalonia, for it is all one place, this man would make no
end of commending it, being desirous, by tradition amongst the Jews
there, to have it believed that the people were of the generations of
Abraham by another son, whom they call Nachoran, and that Moses by a
secret Cabala (read the "Temple of Wisdome," lib. 4) ordained the Laws
of Jerusalem which they now use, and that when Messiah should come and
sit in His throne at Hierusalem, the King of Chassalonia should sit at
his feet, whereas other kings should keep a great distance. Setting
aside the Jewish dreamer, the man was wise and learned, excellently seen
in the laws and customs of that nation. Amongst other discourses I told
him I was much affected with the relation from some of the company of
their Feast of the Fraternity, and because propagation of families
proceeded from nuptial copulation, I desired to know what laws they had
concerning marriage, and whether they were

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

tyed to one wife. To this he said:--"You have reason to commend that
excellent institution of the Feast of the Family. Those families that
are partakers of its blessing flourish ever after in an extraordinary
manner. You shall understand that there is not under the Heavens so
chast a nation as this of Apamia. It is the virgin of the world. I have
read in one of your books of an holy hermit that desired to see the
spirit of fornication, and there appeared to him a little foule ugly
æthiope. But if he had desired to see the spirit of chastitie of the
Holy Island, it would have appeared in the likenesse of a faire
beautiful cherubin, for there is nothing amongst mortall men more
admirable than the chaste mindes of this people. There are no stewes, no
dissolute houses, no curtisans. They wonder with detestation at you in
Europe which permit such things; they say ye have put marriage out of
office, for marriage is a remedy for unlawfull concupiscence, and
naturall concupiscence seemeth as a spur to marriage; but when men have
at hand a remedy more agreeable to their corrupt will, marriage is
almost expulsed. And therefore there are seen with you infinite men that
marry not, but choose a libertine and impure single life; and many that
do marry, marry late, when the prime and strength of their years is
past. When they do marry, what is marriage to them but a very bargain,
wherein is sought alliance, or portion, or reputation, with some
indifferent desire of issue, and not the faithfull nuptial union of man
and wife that was first instituted? Neither is it possible that those
who have cast away so basely so much of their strength should greatly
esteeme children (being of the same matter) as chaste men doe. So
likewise during marriage is the case much amended, as it ought to be, if
those things were tolerated only for necessity? The

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

haunting of dissolute places, or resort to curtizans, are no more
punished in married men than in batchelors; the depraved custome of
change and the delight in meretricious embracements (where sin is turned
into art), make marriage a dull thing, and a kinde of imposition, or
tax. They hear you defend these things as done to avoid greater evills,
as advoutries, deflowering of virgins, unnaturall lust, and the like,
but these vices and appetites do still remain and abound, unlawfull
lusts being like a furnace; if you stopp the flames altogether, it will
quench; but if you give it any vent, it will rage. As for masculine
love, they have no touch of it, and yet there are not so faithfull and
inviolate friendships in the world as are there. Their usual saying is,
that whosever is unchaste cannot reverence himself, and that the
reverence of a man's self is, next religion, the chiefest bridle of all
vice."

I confessed the righteousnesse of Aquanna was greater than the
righteousnesse of Europe, at which he bowed his head, and went on in
this manner. "They have also many wise and excellent laws touching
marriage. They allow no polygamie. They have ordained that none doe
intermarrie or contract until a month be past from their first
interview. Marriage without consent of parents they do not make void,
but they mulct it in the inheritours, for the children of such marriages
are not admitted to inherit above a third their parents’ inheritance. I
have read, in a book of one of your men, of a faired commonwealth, where
the married couple are permitted before the contract to see one another
naked. This they dislike, for they think it a scorn to give a refusall
after so familiar knowledge; but because of many hidden defects in men
and women's bodies, they have neare every towne a couple of pooles
(which they call Adam

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

and Eve's pooles), where it is permitted to one of the friends of the
man and one of the woman to see them severally bathe naked."

As we were thus in conference, there came one that seemed to be a
messenger, in a rich nuke, that spake with the Jew, whereupon he turned
to me and said, "You will pardon me, for I am commanded away in haste."
The next morning he came to me joyfully, and said--"There is word come
to the Governour of the city that one of the Fathers of the Temple of
the Rosie Crosse, or Holy House, will be here this day seven-night. We
have seen none of them this dozen years. His comming is in state, but
the cause is secret. I will provide you and your fellows of a good
standing to see his entry." I thanked him and said I was most glad of
the news. The day being come, he made his entry. He was a man of middle
stature and age, comely of person, and had an aspect as if he pittied
men. He was cloathed in a robe of fine black cloth, with wide sleeves
and a cape. His under garment was of excellent white linnen, down to the
foot, with a girdle of the same, and a sindon or tippet of the same
about his neck. He had gloves that were curious and set with stones, and
shoes of peach-coloured velvet. His neck was bare to the shoulders; his
hat was like a helmet, or Spanish *montera*, and his locks, of brown
colour, curled below it decently. His beard was cut round and of the
same colour with his haire, somewhat lighter. He was carried in a rich
chariot, without wheels, litter-wise, with two horses at either end,
richly trapped in blew velvet embroydered, and two footmen on each side
in the like attire. The chariot was of cedar, gilt and adorned with
chrystall, save that the fore-end had pannells of sapphire, set in
borders of gold, and

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

the hinder-end the like of emerauds of the Peru colour. There was also a
sun of gold radiant upon the top in the midst, and on the top before a
small cherub of gold with wings displayed. The chariot was covered with
dotts of gold tissued upon blew. He had before him fifty attendants,
young men, all in white satten loose coats to the mid legg, stockings of
white silk, shoes of blew velvet, and hats of the same, with fine plumes
of divers colours set round like hat-bands. Next before the chariot went
two men bare-headed, in linnen garments down to the foot, girt, and
shoes of blew velvet, who carried the one a crosier, the other a
pastorall staff like a sheep-hooke, the crosier being of palme-wood, the
pastorall staff of cedar. Horsemen he had none, as it seemed, to avoid
all tumult and trouble. Behinde his chariot went all the officers and
principals of the companies of the city. He sat alone upon cushions, of
a kinde of excellent blew plush, and under his feet curious carpets of
silk of divers colours, like the Persian but farr finer. He held up his
bare hand, blessing the people in silence. The street was wonderfully
well kept; the windows likewise were not crouded, but everyone stood in
them as if they had been placed. When the shew was past, the Jew said to
me--"I shall not be able to attend you as I would, in regard of some
charge the city hath layd upon me for the entertainment of this Rosie
Crucian." Three days after he came to me again, and said--"Ye are a
happy man; the Father of the Temple of the Rosie Cross taketh notice of
your being here, and commands me to tell you that he will admit all your
company to his presence, and have private conference with one of you
that ye shall choose, and for this hath appointed the day after
to-morrow. And because he meaneth to give you his

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

blessing, he hath appointed it in the forenoon." We came at our day, and
I was chosen for the private accesse. We found him in a faire chamber,
richly hanged, and carpeted underfoot, without any degrees to the state.
He was set upon a low throne, richly adorned, and a rich cloth of state
over his head, of blew sattin embroydered. He had two pages of honour,
on either hand one, finely attired in white. His under garments were
like that he wore in the chariot, but, instead of his gown, he had on
him a mantle with a cape, of the same fine black, fastned about him. We
bowed low at our entrance, and when we were come neare his chair, he
stood up, holding forth his hand ungloved, in posture of blessing, and
every one of us stooped down and kissed the hem of his tippet. That
done, the rest departed, and I remained. Then he warned the pages forth
of the roome, caused me to sit down beside him, and spake thus in the
Spanish tongue:--

"God bless thee, my son; I will give thee the greatest jewel I have; I
will impart unto thee, for the love of God and men, a relation of the
true state of the Rosie Crosse. First, I will set forth the end of our
foundation; secondly, the preparations and instruments we have for our
workes; thirdly, the several functions whereto our fellows are assigned;
and fourthly, the ordinances and rights which we observe. The end of our
foundation is the knowledge of causes and secret motions of things, and
the enlarging of the bounds of Kingdomes to the effecting of all things
possible. The preparations and instruments are these. We have large
caves of several depths, the deepest sunke 36,000 feet. Some are digged
under great hills and mountaines, so that, if you reckon together the
depths of the hill and of the cave, some are above seven miles deep.
These caves

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

we call the lower region, and we use them for all coagulations,
indurations, refrigerations, and conservations of bodies. We use them
likewise for the imitation of natural mines, and the production of new
artificial mettalls by compositions and materials which we lay there for
many years. We use them also sometimes for cureing some diseases, and
for prolongation of life in hermits that choose to live there, well
accomodated of all things necessary, by whom also we learn many things
(read our 'Temple of Wisdome'). We have burialls in several earths,
where we put diverse cements, as the Chineses do their borcellane; but
we have them in greater variety, and some of them more fine. We have
also great variety of composts and soyles for the making of the earth
fruitfull. We have towers, the highest about half a mile in height, and
some of them set upon high mountaines, so that the vantage of the hill
with the tower is, in the highest of them, three miles at least. These
places we call the upper region, accounting the aire between the highest
places and lowest as a middle region. We use these towers, according to
their severall heights and situations, for insolation, refrigeration,
conservation, and the view of divers meteors--as winds, rain, snow,
haile, and some of the fiery meteors also. Upon them, in some places,
are dwellings of hermits, whom we visite sometimes, and instruct what to
observe (Read our 'Harmony of the World'). We have great lakes, both
salt and fresh, whereof we have use for the fish and fowle. We use them
also for burials of some naturall bodies, for we find a difference in
things buried in earth, or in aire below the earth, and things buryed in
the water. We have also pooles, of which some do straine fresh water out
of salt, and others by arts do turne fresh water into salt. We have also
some rocks

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

in the midst of the seas, and some bayes upon the shore, for works
wherein are required the aire and vapour of the sea. We have likewise
violent streams and cataracts which serve us for many motions, and
engines for multiplying and enforcing winds to set on going divers other
motions.

"We have a number of artificiall wells and fountaines, in imitation of
the natural sources; also baths tincted upon vitrioll, sulphur, steell,
brasse, lead, nitre, and other minerals. Again, we have little wells for
infusion of many things, where the waters take the vertue quicker and
better than in vessels or basines; and amongst them we have water which
we call water of Paradise, being, by that we do to it, made very
soveraign for health and prolongation of life.

"We have also great and spacious houses, where we imitate and
demonstrate meteors--as snow, hail, raine, some artificiall raines of
bodies and not of water, thunders, lightnings; also generation of bodies
in the aire--as frogs, flies, and divers others.

"We have certain chambers, which we call Chambers of Health, where we
qualify the aire as we think good and proper for the cure of divers
diseases and preservation of health.

"We have also faire and large baths, of severall mixtures, for the cure
of diseases and the restoring of man's body from arefaction, and others
for the confirming of it in strength of sinews, vitall parts, and the
very juyce and substance of the body.

"We have also large and various orchards (see the epistle to the
'Harmony of the World') and gardens (wherein we do not so much respect
beauty as variety of ground and soyle, proper for diverse trees and
herbs), some very spacious,

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

where trees and berries are set, whereof we make divers kindes of
drinks, besides the vineyards. In these we practise likewise all
conclusions of grafting and inoculating, as well of wild trees as fruit
trees, which produce many effects. We make by art, in the same orchards
and gardens, trees or flowers to come earlier or later than their
seasons, and to beare more speedily than by their naturall course they
do. We make them also by art much greater than their nature, and their
fruit greater, sweeter, and of differing taste, smell, colour, and
figure from their nature. Many of them we so order as they become of
medicinall use.

"We have also means to make divers plants rise by mixtures of earths
without seeds, and to make divers plants differing from the vulgar, and
to make one tree or plant turn into another.

"We have also parks and enclosures of all sorts of beasts and birds,
which we use not only for view or rarenesse, but likewise for
dissections and tryalls, that thereby we may take light what may be
wrought upon the body of man. Herein we finde many strange effects as
the continuing life in them though divers parts, which you account
vitall, be perished and taken forth--resuscitation of some that seem
dead in appearance--and the like. We try also all poysons and other
medecines upon them. By art, likewise, we make them greater or smaller
than their kinde is. We make them more fruitfull, and, contrary-wise,
more barren than their kinde is. We make them differ in colour, shape,
activity. We have commixtures and copulations of divers kindes, which
have produced many new kinds, and them not barren as the generall
opinion is. We make a number of kindes of serpents, worms, flies,
fishes, of putrefaction, whereof some are advanced (in effects) to
perfect creatures,

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

and have sexes and propagate. Neither do we this by chance, but know
beforehand of what matter and commixture what kinde of creatures will
arise. We have also particular pooles where we make trialls upon fishes.

"We have also places for breed and generation of those kinds of worms
and flies which are of speciall use, such as are with you your silkworms
and bees.

"I will not hold you long with recounting of our brew-houses,
bake-houses, and kitchins, where are made divers drinks, breads, and
meats, rare and of speciall effects. Wines we have of grapes, and drinks
of other juyces of fruits, graines, and roots; also of mixtures with
honey, sugar, manna, and fruits dryed and decocted; also of the teases
or wounding of trees, and of the pulp of canes. These drinks are of
several ages, some to the age or last of forty yeares. We have drinkes
also brewed with severall herbs, roots, and spices, yea, with severall
fleshes and white meats; some of the drinks are in effect meat and drink
both, so that divers, especially in age, do desire to live with them,
with little or no meat or bread. Above all we strive to have drinks of
extream thin parts, to insinuate into the body without biting
sharpnesse, or fretting, insomuch as some of them put upon the back of
your hand, will, with a little stay, passe through to the palm and yet
taste milde to the mouth. We have waters which we ripen in that fashion
as they become nourishing. Breads we have of severall grains, roots, and
kernels, some of flesh and fish dried with divers kindes of leavenings
and seasonings so that some doe extreamly more appetite, some nourish so
as divers doe live of them very long without any other meat. For meats,
we have some of them so beaten, made tender, and mortified, yet without
corrupting, as a weake heat of the

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

stomach will turn them into good chylus. We have some meats also, bread
and drinks, which taken by men, enable them to fast long after, and some
others that make the very flesh of men's bodies sensibly more hard and
tough, and their strength far more great than otherwise it would be.

"We have dispensatories, or shops of medicines, wherein you may easily
thinke if we have such variety of plants and living creatures, more than
you have in Europe, the simples, drugs, and ingredients of medecines,
must likewise be in so much the greater variety. We have them of divers
ages and long fermentations; for these preparations we have not only all
manner of exquisite distillations and separations, especially of gentle
heats and percolations through divers strainers, but also exact formes
of compositions, whereby they incorporate almost as they were naturall
simples.

"We have also divers mechanicall arts which you have not, and stuffs
made by them, as papers, linnen, silks, tissues, dainty works of
feathers of wonderfull lusture, excellent dies, and many others--shops
likewise, as well for such as are not brought into vulgar use amongst us
as for those that are, for you must know that of the things fore-cited
many of them are grown into use throughout the kingdome, but yet if they
did flow from our invention, we have of them also for paterns and
principals.

"We have furnaces of great diversities, fierce and quick, strong and
constant, soft and milde, blowne quite dry, moist, and the like. Above
all we have heats in imitation of the sun's and heavenly bodies’ heats,
that pass divers inequalities, and, as it were arts, progresses and
returns, whereby we produce admirable effects. Besides we have heats of
dungs, and of bellies and maws of living creatures,

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

of their bloods and bodies, of hayes and herbs layed up moist, of brine
unquenched, and such like--instruments also which generate heat only by
motion, places for strong insolations, places under the earth which by
nature or art yeeld heat.

"We have also perspective-houses where we make demonstrations of all
lights and radiations, and of all colours; out of things uncoloured and
transparent we can represent unto you severall colours, not in
rain-bows, as it is in gemms and prismes, but of themselves single. We
respect also all multiplications of light, which we carry to great
distances, and make so sharpe as to discern small points and lines, all
colourations of light, all delusions and deceits of the sight in
figures, magnitudes, motions, colours, all demonstrations of shadows. We
finde also divers means, yet unknown to you, of producing light
originally from divers bodies. We procure means of seeing bodies afar
off; as in the heaven, and represent things near as farr off, and things
afarr off as near. We have also helps for the sight farr above
spectacles and glasses, and means to see minute bodies distinctly, as
the shapes and colour of small flies and wormes, observation in urine
and bloods. We make artificial Rainbowes, halos, and circles about
light. We represent also all manner of reflections, refractions, and
multiplications of visuall beams of objects.

"We have also pretious stones of all kinds, many of great beauty, and to
you unknown, crystals likewise and glasses of divers kinds, amongst them
some of mettals vitrificated, and other materials besides those of which
you make glasse; also a number of fossiles and imperfect minerals which
you have not, likewise loadstones of prodigious vertue, and other rare
stones, both naturall and artificiall. We have sound-houses,

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

where we practise and demonstrate all sounds and their generation. We
have harmonies (read the 'Harmony of the World') which you have not, of
quarter and lesser kindes of sounds--divers instruments of musick to you
unknown, some sweeter than any you have, together with bells and rings
that are dainty and sweet. (See my book of 'Geomancy and Telesmes.') We
represent small sounds as great and deep, great sounds as extenuate and
sharpe; we make divers tremblings and warblings of sounds which in their
originall are entire. We represent and imitate all articulate sounds and
letters (read my 'Cabbala, or Art, by which Moses shewed so many signs
in Ægypt'), and the voices and notes of many beasts and birds. We have
certain helps which, set to the ear, do further the hearing greatly. We
have strange and artificiall ecchos, reflecting the voice many times,
and, as it were, to sing it, some that give back the voice louder than
it came, some shriller, some deeper, some rendring the voice differing
in the letters, or articular sound, from that they receive. We have also
means to convey sounds in trunks and pipes, in strange lines and
distances.

"We have also perfume houses, wherewith we joyne all practices of taste.
We multiply smells which may seem strange. We imitate smells, making
them breathe out other mixtures than those that give them. We make
divers imitations of taste, so that they will deceive any man's tastes;
and in this Temple of the Rosie Crosse we contain also a
confiture-house, where we make all sweet-meats, dry and moist, and
pleasant wines, milks, broaths, and sallets, in farr greater variety
than you have.

"We have also engine-houses, where are prepared engines and instruments
for all sorts of motions. There we imitate

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

and practise swifter motions than any you have, and make and multiply
them more easily and with small force, by wheels and other means. We
make them stronger than yours are, exceeding your cannons and basilisks.
We represent also ordinance, instruments of warr, and engines of all
kinds, likewise new mixtures and compositions of gunpouder, wild-fire
burning in water and unquenchable, also fire-works of all variety, both
for pleasure and use. We imitate also flights of birds; we have some
degrees of flying in the aire (read the 'Familiar Spirit'). We have
ships and boats for going under water, also swimming girdles and
supporters. We have curious clocks and other like motions of returne,
and some perpetuall motions We imitate also motions of living creatures,
by images of men, beasts, birds, fishes, and serpents. We have also a
great number of other various motions, strange for equality, finenesse,
and subtility.

"We have also a mathematicall pallace, where are represented all
instruments, as well of geometry, as astronomy, geomancy, and telesmes.

"We have also houses of deceits of the senses, where we represent all
manner of feats of jugling, false apparitions, impostures, illusions,
and their fallacies; and surely you will easily believe that we, that
have so many things truly naturall which induce admiration, could in a
world of particulars deceive the senses, if we would disguise those
things and labour to make them seem more miraculous. But we do hate all
impostures and lyes, insomuch as we have severaly forbidden it to all
our brethren, under pain of ignominy and fines, that they do not show
any naturall worke or thing adorned or swelling, but only pure as it is,
and without all affectation or strangenesse.

"These are, my son, the riches of the Rosie Crucians

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (read our 'Temple
of Wisdome'). For the several employments and offices of our fellowes,
we have twelve that sayle into forrain countries under the names of
other nations, for our own we conceal; but our seal is R. C., and we
meet upon a day altogether. These bring us the books, abstracts, and
patterns of experiments of all other parts. These we call merchants of
light.

"We have three that collect the experiments in all books. These we call
depredatours. We have three that collect the experiments of all
mechanicall arts, liberall sciences, and practices which are not brought
into arts. These we call mystery men. We have three that try new
experiments, such as themselves think good. These we call pioners or
miners. We have three that draw the experiments of the former foure
\[divisions\] into titles and tables, to give the better light for the
drawing of observations and of axioms out of them. These we call
compliers. We have three that band themselves, looking into the
experiments of their fellowes, and cast about how to draw of them things
useful for man's life and knowledge, as well for works as for strange
demonstration of causes, means of natural divinations, and the easie and
cleare discovery of the vertues and parts of bodies. These we call dowry
men or benefactors. Then, after diverse meetings and consults of our
whole number, to consider of the former labours and collections, we have
three that take care out of them to direct new experiments of a higher
light, more penetrating into Nature than the former. These we call
lamps. We have three others that doe execute the experiments so directed
and report them. These we call inoculators. Lastly, we have three that
raise the former discoveries by experiments into greater observations,
axiomes, and aphorismes. These we call interpreters of. Nature.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

"We have also novices and apprentices, that the succession of the former
employed men of our fraternity of the Rosie Crosse do not faile; also
great numbers of servants and attendants, men and women. We have
consultations which of the inventions and experiences shall be published
and which not. We take all an oath of secrecy for the concealing of
those which we think fit to keep secret, though some of those we doe
reveale sometimes to the State. (Read our 'Temple of Wisdom.')

"For our ordinances and rites we have two very long and faire galleries
in the Temple of the Rosie Crosse. In one of these we place patterns and
samples of all manner of the more rare and excellent inventions; in the
other we place the statues of all principal inventours. There we have
the statues of the discoverer of the West Indies, also the invention of
ships, and the monk that was the inventour of ordinance and gunpowder;
the inventours of musick, letters, printing; observations of astronomy,
astromancy, and geomancy; the invention of works in mettal, of glasse,
of silke of the worme; of wine, corn, and bread; the inventour of
sugars, and all these by more certain tradition than you have. Then have
we divers inventours of our own. Upon every invention of value we erect
a statue to the inventour, and give him a liberal and honourable reward.
These statues are some of brasse, some of marble and touchstone, some of
cedar and other speciall woods gilt and adorned, some of iron, some of
silver, some of gold, telesmatically made.

"We have certain hymnes and services, which we say daily, of laud and
thanks to God for His marvellous works; also formes of prayers imploring
His ayde and blessing for the illumination of our labours, and the
turning of them into good and holy uses.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

"Lastly, we have circuits or visits of divers principal cities of the
kingdome, where we doe publish such news, profitable inventions, as we
think good, and we doe also declare natural divinations of diseases,
plagues, swarms of hurtfull creatures, scarcity, tempests, earthquakes,
great inundations, comets, temperature of the year, and divers other
things, and we give counsel thereupon for the prevention and remedy of
them."

When he had said this, he desired me to give him an account of my life,
that he might report it to the Brethren of the Rosie Crosse, after which
he stood up; I kneeled down, and he laid his right hand upon my head,
saying, "God blesse thee, my son, and God blesse these relations which
we have made! I give thee leave to publish them for the good of other
nations, for we are here in God's bosome, a land unknown."

And so he left me, having assigned a value of about two thousand pounds
in gold for a bounty to me and my fellows, for they give great largesses
where they come upon all occasions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[358:1](rhr28.htm#fr_109.md) The island,
notwithstanding, had been unvisited by strangers for the space of 36,000
years. See [p. 354](#page_354.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Rosicrucianism in France](rhr29.md)
