[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr24)  [Next](rhr26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Rosicrucians in England*.

At this day the Rosie Crucians, that have been since Christ, say their
fraternity inhabits the west of England, and they have likewise power to
renew themselves and wax young again, as those did before the birth of
Jesus Christ, as you may read in many books.

Dr F. saith, somewhere there is a castle in the west of England, in the
earth and not on the earth, and there the Rosie Crucians dwell, guarded
without walls, and possessing nothing they enjoy all things. In this
castle are great riches, the halls fair and rich to behold, the chambers
made and composed of white marble. At the end of the hall there is a
chimney, whereof the two pillars that sustain the mantle tree are of
fine jasper, the mantle is of rich calcedony and the lintel is made of
fine emeralds trailed with a wing of fine gold, the grapes of fine
silver. All the pillars in the hall are of red calcedoine, and the
pavement is of fine amber.

The chambers are hanged with rich clothes, and the benches and bedsteads
are all of white ivory, richly garnished with pretious stones; the beds
are richly covered; there are ivory presses, whereon are all manner of
birds cunningly wrought; and in these presses are gowns and robes of
most fine gold, most rich mantles furred with sables, and all manner of
costly garments.

And there is a vault, but it is bigger then that in Germany, which is as
clear as though the sun in the midst of the day had entred in at ten
windows, yet it is sevenscore steps underground. And there are ten
servants of the Rosie Crucians, fair young men. C. B. reports
this:--"When I first came to the Society, I saw a great oven with

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

two mouths, which did cast out great clearness, by which four young men
made paste for bread, and two delivered the loaves to other two, and
they sit them down upon a rich cloath of silk. Then the other two men
took the loaves and delivered them unto one man by two loaves at once,
and he did set them into the oven to bake. At the other mouth of the
oven there was a man that drew out the white loaves and pasts, and
before him was another young man that received them, and put them into
baskets which were richly painted."

C. B. went into another chamber, eighty-one cubits from this, and the
Rosie Crucians welcomed him. He found a table ready set and the cloth
laid; there stood pots of silver and vessels of gold., bordered with
precious stones and pearle, and basons and ewers of gold to wash their
hands. Then we went to dinner. Of all manner of flesh, fowl, and fish,
of all manner of meat in the world, there they had plenty, and pots of
gold, garnished with precious stones, full of wine. This chamber was
made of chrystal, and painted richly with gold and azure; upon the walls
were written and engraven all things past, prevent, and to come, and all
manner of golden medecines for the diseased. Upon the pavement was
spread abroad roses, flowers, and herbs, sweet smelling above all
savours in the world; and in this chamber were divers birds flying about
and singing marvellous sweetly.

In this place have I a desire to live, if it were for no other reason
but what the sophist sometimes applied to the mountains--*Hos primum sol
salutat, ultimosque deserit. Quis locum non amet, dies longiores
habentem*. But of this place I will not speak any more, lest readers
should mistake me, so as to entertain a suspition that I am of this
Order. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

The medical and other recipes which are given on the authority of the
Fraternity may be judged from the following specimens:--

The Rosie Crucians say pearl helpeth swoundings, and withstands the
plague of poysons; and smarge and jacinth help the plague, and heale the
wounds of venomous stings. The water of Nile makes the women of Egypt
quick of conceite and fruitful: sometimes they bear seven children at a
birth, and this is salt-peter-water. There is a wonderful vertue in the
oyl of tobacco, in the tincture of saffron, in the flower of brimston,
in quicksilver, in common salt; and coppress, molten and made a water,
kills the poyson of the toadstool. Juyce of poppy and amber, which is no
stone but a hard, clammy juyce, called bitumen, easeth the labour of
women and the falling-sickness in children.

Now for mettals, if it be true, which all men grant, that precious
stones show such power and vertue of healing, what shall the mixtures of
all these mettals under a fortunate constellation, made in the
conversion of their own planets, do. This mixture they call electrum,
sigil, telesme, saying it will cure the cramp, benumming, palsie,
falling-sickness, gout, leprosie, dropsie, if it be worn on the
heart-finger. Others they make to cause beauty in ladies, &c.

A perfume of R. C. is compounded of the saphirick earth and the æther.
If it be brought to its full exaltation, it will shine like the day-star
in her fresh eastern glories. It hath a fascinating, attractive quality,
for if you expose it to the open air, it will draw to it birds and
beasts, and drive away evil spirits. *Astrum Solis*, or the R. C.
mineral sun, is compounded of the æther, and a bloody, fiery-spirited
earth; it appears in a gummy consistency, but with a fiery, hot, glowing
complexion. It is substantially a certain

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

purple, animated, divine salt, and cureth all manner of venereal
distempers, consumptions, and diseases of the mind.

We give another medecine, which is an azure or skie-coloured water, the
tincture of it is light and bright, it reflects a most beautiful
rainbow, and two drops of this water keeps a man healthy. In it lies a
blood-red earth of great vertue.

In the pages that immediately follow, I shall reprint the stories, and
allegories which are to be found in the works of John Heydon, and which
have reference to the Rosicrucian Order. They may be permitted to speak
for themselves. It is obvious that they are devoid of historical value,
but they are all excessively curious, and the piece which I have
entitled, "Voyage to the Land of the Rosicrucians," and which forms the
general preface to "The Holy Guide," is an interesting romantic fiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[338:1](rhr25.htm#fr_107) This passage is
stolen from Eugenius Philalethes. *Cf*. [p. 313](rhr22.htm#page_313) of
this history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Very True Narrative...](rhr26)
