[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr30)  [Next](rhr32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

#### MODERN ROSICRUCIAN SOCIETIES.

IT is an opinion entertained by the elect in modern theosophical
circles, that the true Rosicrucian Brotherhood migrated into India, and
this notion is said to be countenanced by a Latin pamphlet of Henricus
Neuhusius, published in 1618, under the title "Pia et utilissima
Admonitio de Fratribus Rosæ Crucis," and which was afterwards translated
into French. They have developed into Thibetan Brothers, have exchanged
Protestant Christianity for esoteric Buddhism, and are no longer
interested in the number of the beast. Their violent antipathy to the
pope still remains: they have not yet torn him in pieces with nails, but
probably expect to accomplish this long-cherished project about the
period of the next general cataclysm.

This is an interesting theory which might be debated with profit. I have
not personally discovered much trace of the Rosicrucians in India, but
the absence of historical documents on this point affords a fine field
for the imagination, which writers like Mr Hargrave Jennings should not
allow to lie fallow. In my prosaic capacity as a historian, I have not
been able to follow in the footsteps of the Fraternity further than the
Island of Mauritius. Thanks to the late Mr Frederick Hockley, whose
valuable library of books and manuscripts, treating of all branches of
occultism, has been recently dispersed, I have discovered that a certain

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Comte de Chazal
accomplished the *magnum opus* in that place at the close of the last
century, and that he initiated another artist into the mysteries of the
Rosicrucian Fraternity. The Comte de Chazal was possessed of vision at a
distance, and witnessed the horrors of the French Revolution from a vast
distance, with amazing perspicuity, by means of the mind's eye. The
following curious document will be read with no ordinary interest:--

*Copy of the Admission of Dr Bacstrom into the Society of the Rosa Croix
by Le Comte de Ghazal at the Island of Mauritius, with the Seal of the
Society*.

ISLE OF MAURITIUS, DISTRICT OF PAMPELAVUSO,  
12*th* *Sept*. 1794.

In the name of ‏יְהרָח אלהזִב‎ the True and only God Manifested in
Trinity.

I, Sigismund Bacstrom, do hereby promise, in the most sincere and solemn
manner, faithfully to observe the following articles, during the whole
course of my natural life, to the best of my knowledge and ability;
which articles I hereby confirm by oath and by my proper signature
hereunto annexed.

One of the worthy members of the august, most ancient, and most learned
Society, the Investigators of Divine, Spiritual, and Natural Truth
(which society more than two centuries and a half ago (*i.e.*, in 1490)
did separate themselves from the Free-Masons, but were again united in
one spirit among themselves under the denomination of *Fratres Rosæ
Crucis*, Brethren of the Rosy Cross, *i.e.* the Brethren who believe in
the Grand Atonement made by Jesus Christ on the Rosy Cross, stained and
marked with His blood, for

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

the redemption of Spiritual Natures), having thought me worthy to be
admitted into their august society, in quality of a Member Apprentice
and Brother, and to partake of their sublime knowledge, I do hereby
engage in the most solemn manner--

1\. That I will always, to the utmost of my power, conduct myself as
becomes a worthy member, with sobriety and piety, and to endeavour to
prove myself grateful to the Society for so distinguished a favour as I
now receive, during the whole course of my natural life.

2\. That derision, insult, and persecution of this august society may be
guarded against, I will never openly publish that I am a member, nor
reveal the name or person of such members as I know at present or may
know hereafter.

3\. I solemnly promise that I will never during my whole life publicly
reveal the secret knowledge I receive at present, or may receive at a
future period from the Society, or from one of its members, nor even
privately, but will keep our Secrets sacred.

4\. I do hereby promise that I will instruct for the benefit of good
men, before I depart this life, one person, or two persons at most, in
our secret knowledge, and initiate and, receive such person (or persons)
as a member or apprentice into our Society, in the same manner as I have
been initiated and received; but such person only as I believe to be
truly worthy and of an upright, well-meaning mind, blameless conduct,
sober life, and desirous of knowledge. And as there is no distinction of
sexes in the Spiritual World, neither among the Blessed Angels, nor
among the rational immortal Spirits of the human race; and as we have
had a Semiramis, Queen of Egypt; a Myriam, the

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

prophetess; a Peronella, the wife of Flammel; and, lastly, a Leona
Constantia, Abbess of Clermont, who was actually received as a practical
member and master into our Society in the year 1736; which women are
believed to have been all possessors of the Great Work, consequently
*Sorores Roseæ Crucis*, and members of our Society by possession, as the
possession of this our Art is the key to the most hidden knowledge; and,
moreover, as redemption was manifested to mankind by means of a woman
(the Blessed Virgin), and as Salvation, which is of infinitely more
value than our whole Art, is granted to the female sex as well as to the
male, our Society does not exclude a worthy woman from being initiated,
God himself not having excluded women from partaking of every felicity
in the next life. We will not hesitate to receive a worthy woman into
our Society as a member apprentice (and even as a practical member, or
master, if she does possess our work practically, and has herself
accomplished it), provided she is found, like Peronella, Flammel's wife,
to be sober, pious, discreet, prudent, and reserved, of an upright and
blameless conduct, and desirous of knowledge.

5\. I do hereby declare that I intend, with the permission of God, to
commence our great work with mine own hands as soon as circumstances,
health, opportunity, and time will permit; 1st, that I may do good
therewith as a faithful steward; 2nd, that I may merit the continued
confidence which the Society has placed in me in quality of a member
apprentice.

6\. I do further most solemnly promise that (should I accomplish the
Great Work) I will not abuse the great power entrusted to me by
appearing great and exalted, or seeking to appear in a public character
in the world by

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

hunting after vain titles of nobility and vain glory, which are all
fleeting and vain, but will endeavour to live a sober and orderly life,
as becomes every Christian, though not possessed of so great a temporal
blessing; I will devote a considerable part of my abundance and
superfluity (multipliable infinitely to work of private charity), to
aged and deeply-afflicted people, to poor children, and, above all, to
such as love God and act uprightly, and I will avoid encouraging
laziness and the profession of public beggars.

7\. I will communicate every new or useful discovery relating to our
work to the nearest member of our Society, and hide nothing from him,
seeing he cannot, as a worthy member, possibly abuse it, or prejudice me
thereby; on the other hand, I will hide these secret discoveries from
the world.

8\. I do, moreover, solemnly promise (should I become a master and
possessor) that I will not, on the one hand, assist, aid, or support
with gold or with silver any government, King, or Sovereign, whatever,
except by paying taxes, nor, on the other hand, any populace, or
particular set of men, to enable them to revolt against the government;
I will leave public affairs and arrangements to the government of God,
who will bring about the events foretold in the revelation of St John,
which are fast accomplishing; I will not interfere with affairs of
government.

9\. I will neither build churches, chapels, nor hospitals, and such
public charities, as there is already a sufficient number of such public
buildings and institutions, if they were only properly applied and
regulated. I will not give any salary to a priest or churchman as such,
to make him more proud and insolent than he is already. If I relieve a
distressed worthy clergyman, I will consider him in the light

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

of a private distressed individual only. I will give no charity with the
view of making my name known to the world, but will give my alms
privately and secretly.

10\. I hereby promise that I will never be ungrateful to the worthy
friend and brother who initiated and received me, but will respect and
oblige him as far as lies in my power, in the same manner as he has been
obliged to promise to his friend who received him.

11\. Should I travel either by sea or by land, and meet with any person
who may call himself a Brother of the Rosy Cross, I will examine him
whether he can give me a proper explanation of The Universal Fire of
Nature, and of our magnet for attracting and magnifying the same under
the form of a salt, whether he is well acquainted with our work, and
whether he knows the universal dissolvent and its use. If I find him
able to give satisfactory answers, I will acknowledge him as a member
and brother of our Society. Should I find him superior in knowledge and
experience to myself, I will honour and respect him as a master above
me.

12\. If it should please God to permit me to accomplish our Great Work
with my own hands, I will give praise and thanks to God in humble
prayer, and devote my time to the doing and promoting all the good that
lies in my power, and to the pursuit of true and useful knowledge.

13\. I do hereby solemnly promise that I will not encourage wickedness
and debauchery, thereby offending God by administering the medicine for
the human body, or the *aurum potabile*, to a patient, or patients,
infected with the venereal disease.

14\. I do promise that I will never give the Fermented Metallic Medecine
for transmutation to any person living,

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

no, not a single grain, unless the person is an initiated and received
member and Brother of the Rosy Cross.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

To keep faithfully the above articles as I now receive them from a
worthy member of our Society, as he received them himself, I willingly
agree, and sign this with my name, and affix my seal to the same. So
help me God. Amen. S. BACSTROM, L.S.

I have initiated and received Mr Sigismund Bacstrom, Doctor of Physic,
as a practical member and brother above an apprentice in consequence of
his solid learning, which I certify by my name and seal.--Mauritius, 12
Sept. 1794. DU CHAZEL, F.R.C.

</div>

<span id="img_41400"></span> ![The Philosophic Seal of the Society of
the Rosicrucians](img/41400.jpg.md)

*The Philosophic Seal of the Society of the Rosicrucians*.

Among Mr Hockley's manuscripts there is also the "Diary of a Rosicrucian
Philosopher" during the first period of the work. It describes the
preparation of the first matter, and breaks off abruptly after a few
leaves. Whether this unnamed philosopher was a true Rosicrucian,

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

and whether the Comte de Chazal could lay claim to that distinction, are
problems which cannot be solved. Individual pretenders and fraudulent
associations have occasionally appeared ever since the publication of
the "Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis."

It is certain that a pseudo-society existed in England before the year
1836, for in that year we find Godfrey Higgins saying that he had joined
neither the Templars nor the Rosicrucians. "I have abstained from
becoming a member of them, that I might not have my tongue tied or my
pen restrained by the engagements I must have made on entering the
chapter or encampment. But I have reason to believe that they have now
become, in a very particular manner, what is called exclusively
Christian Orders, and on this account are thought, by many persons, to
be only a bastard kind of masons. They are real masons, and they ought
to be of that . . . universal Christianity or Creestianity, which
included Jews, Buddhists, Brahmins, Mohamedans." He identifies the
Templars and Rosicrucians with Manichæan Buddhists, and asserts the
Rosicrucians of Germany to be ignorant of their origin, "but, by
tradition, they suppose themselves descendants of the ancient Egyptians,
Chaldeans, Magi, and Gymnosophists; and this is probably true."

The present Rosicrucian Society of England, on its remodelling some
thirty years ago, cut off by mutual consent its connection with the few
ancient members then existing, who were probably representatives of the
"Rosicrucians" referred to by Higgins, and established itself as a
public body, in so far as the fact of its existence was not itself a
secret. A previous initiation into Masonry is an indispensable
qualification of candidates, as will be seen in the Ordinances of the
Society. The reason for this regulation

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

is that certain masonic secrets are revealed to the accepted, and it
would otherwise be unfair to Masonry. Thus, on his admission as a
novice, the postulant is required to repeat the Masonic arcana.

I am enabled to present to my readers, from sources hitherto
unpublished, the--

*Rules and Ordinances of the Rosicrucian Society of England*.

The Society of Brethren of the Rosy Cross is totally independent, being
established on its own basis, and as a body is no otherwise connected
with the Masonic Order than by having its members selected from that
fraternity.

I. That the meetings of the Society shall be held in London, at such
house as the majority of members shall select, on the second Thursday in
January, April, July, and October in each year. The brethren shall dine
together once a year, at such time and place as the majority may select.
The first meeting in the year shall be considered as the obligatory
meeting, and any member unable to attend on that occasion, or at the
banquet meeting, shall be required to send a written excuse to the
Secretary-General. Each brother present at the banquet shall pay his
quota towards the expenses thereof.

II\. The Officers of the Society shall consist of the Three Magi, a
Master-general for the first and second orders, a Deputy Master-general,
a Treasurer-general, a Secretary-general, and seven Ancients, who shall
form the Representative Council of the Brotherhood. The Assistant
Officers shall be a Precentor, a Conductor of Novices, an Organist, a
Torch Bearer, a Herald, a Guardian of the Temple, and a Medallist.

III, The Master-general and the Officers shall be elected

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

annually at the obligatory meeting, and shall be inducted into their
several offices on the same evening. The Master-general shall then
appoint the Assistant Officers for the year.

IV\. No brother shall be eligible for election to the office of
Master-general or Deputy Master-general unless he shall have served one
year as an Ancient, and have attained the third Order; and no brother
shall be eligible for the offices of Treasurer-general,
Secretary-general, or Ancient unless he be a member of the second Order.

V. The Society shall, in conformity with ancient usage, be composed of
nine classes or grades; and the number of brethren in each class shall,
in conformity with ancient usage, be restricted as follows:--

|      |             |             |           |
|------|-------------|-------------|-----------|
| 1st, | or grade of | Zelator     | 33        |
| 2nd, | ”           | Theoricus   | 27        |
| 3rd, | ”           | Practicus   | 21        |
| 4th, | ”           | Philosophus | <u>18</u> |
|      |             | Total       | 99        |

The above shall form the First Order.

|      |             |                  |           |
|------|-------------|------------------|-----------|
| 5th, | or grade of | Adeptus Junior   | 15        |
| 6th, | ”           | Adeptus Major    | 12        |
| 7th, | ”           | Adeptus Exemptus | <u> 9</u> |
|      |             | Total            | 36        |

These brethren shall compose the Second Order.

|      |             |                 |           |
|------|-------------|-----------------|-----------|
| 8th, | or grade of | Magister Templi |  6        |
| 9th, | ”           | Magus           | <u> 3</u> |
|      |             | Total           |  9        |

These shall be considered as the Third (or highest) Order, and shall be
entitled to seats in the Council of the Society.

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The senior member
of the ninth grade shall be designated "Supreme Magus," and the other
two members Senior and Junior Substitutes respectively. The grand total
of members shall thus be limited to 144, or the square of 12. The
numbers of registered Novices or Aspirants shall not be restricted, but
members only shall be permitted to be present at the *ceremonial*
meetings of the Society.

VI\. The distinction of Honorary Member may be conferred upon eminent
brethren, provided that their election to such membership shall be
unanimous, and that their number be strictly limited to 16, or the
square of 4. An Honorary President, who must be a nobleman, and three
Vice-Presidents, shall be elected from the honorary members. A Grand
Patron may also be elected in like manner.

VII\. No aspirant shall be admitted into the Society unless he be a
Master Mason, and of good moral character, truthful, faithful, and
intelligent. He must be a man of good abilities, so as to be capable of
understanding the revelations of philosophy and science; possessing a
mind free from prejudice and anxious for instruction. He must be a
believer in the fundamental principles of the Christian doctrine, a true
philanthropist, and a loyal subject, names of aspirants may be submitted
by any member at the meetings of the Society, and if approved after the
usual scrutiny, they shall be placed on the roll of Novices, and
balloted for as vacancies occur in the list of members.

VIII\. Every Novice on admission to the grade of Zelator shall adopt a
Latin motto, to be appended to his signature in all communications
relating to the Society. This motto cannot under any pretence be
afterwards changed, and no two brethren shall be at liberty to adopt the
same motto.

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

IX\. The fee for admission to each Order shall be ten shillings, and the
annual subscription from every member to defray the contingent expenses
of the society shall be five shillings. The registry fee for a novice or
aspirant shall be seven shillings and sixpence.

X. As vacancies occur in each grade, by death, resignation, or
otherwise, the members of such grade shall elect brethren from the next
grade to supply the vacancies thus created.

XI\. The Master-general shall have the superintendence and regulation of
the ordinary affairs of the Society; subject, however, to the veto of
the Magi in matters relating to the ritual. He shall be assisted in the
discharge of his duties by the Council, and shall be empowered to
arrange for the due performance of each ceremony, by appointing
well-qualified brethren to assist as Celebrant, Suffragan, Cantor and
Guards, in the various grades of the first and second Orders. The M. G.
shall preside at the general meetings of the brotherhood, and shall at
all times be received with the honours due to his important office.

XII\. The Deputy Master-general shall, as the representative of the
chief, preside at all meetings in his absence, and in the absence of any
Past Master-general, and on such occasions shall be vested with equal
authority for the time being; subject, however, to appeal being made
from his decisions to the Master-general and his Council.

XIII\. The Treasurer-general shall receive from the Secretary-general
all moneys belonging to the Society, and shall keep an account of his
receipts and disbursements, which shall be audited before the obligatory
meeting in January, by the Ancients, under the supervision of the
Master-general. No expenses shall be incurred without

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

the knowledge of the chief or his deputy. The proceedings of the Society
shall be printed quarterly, under the title of THE ROSICRUCIAN, and a
copy shall be sent to every subscribing and honorary member by the
Secretary-general. The record shall be conducted under the supervision
of the Supreme Magus.

XIV.--The Secretary-general shall convene all meetings of the Council
and general body; record the proceedings in the minute book, register
the names, residences, and mottoes of all members, with dates of
admission to each grade; collect all fees and subscriptions when due,
and forthwith pay them over to the Treasurer.

XV\. The Council of Ancients shall attend the meetings of the Society,
and in the absence of the M. G., P. M. G., and D. M. G., the Senior
Ancient present shall preside. They shall generally assist the Chief in
the discharge of his duties, more especially with reference to the
ceremonials of the several Orders.

XVI\. The Precentor and Organist shall have the direction of all musical
arrangements at the meetings of the Society.

XVII\. The Conductor of Novices shall examine all aspirants, and report
to the Council as to their qualifications for admission to the grade of
Zelator; he shall also perform all the duties appertaining to his office
in the G\*\*\*\* M\*\*\*\*\* C\*\*\*\*\*.

XVIII\. The Torch Bearer shall discharge the peculiar duties allotted to
him, more especially those which relate to the ceremonies in the first
grade.

XIX\. The Herald and Guardian shall defend the entrance of the Temple,
and permit no one to enter without first acquainting the Conductor.

XX\. The Jewels for the Magi, Officers, and Brethren, are to be worn at
all ceremonial meetings.

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

JEWELS OF THE ROSIE CROSS.

*Jewel of the Supreme Magus*.

An ebony Cross, with golden roses at its extremities and the jewel of
the Rosie Cross in the centre. It is surmounted by a crown of gold for
the Supreme Magus alone, as represented in the engraving below, and the
jewel is to be worn round the neck, suspended by a crimson velvet
ribbon.

<span id="img_42100"></span> ![Jewel of the Supreme
Magus](img/42100.jpg.md)

*Jewel of the two Junior Magi*.

As above, but without the crown, and worn in the same manner.

*Jewel of the Grand Officers*.

A lozenge-shaped plate of gold enamelled white, with the Rosie Cross in
the centre, surmounted by a golden mitre, on the rim of which is
enamelled in rose-coloured characters LUX, and in its centre a small
cross of the same colour. This jewel is worn suspended from the
button-hole by a green ribbon an inch in width, and with a cross also

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

embroidered on it in rose-coloured silk, as shown in the engraving
below, which is as nearly as possible one-third of the actual size of
the jewel.

<span id="img_42200"></span> ![Jewel of the Grand
Officers](img/42200.jpg.md)

*Jewel of the Fraternity*.

The lozenge-shaped jewel of the Rosie Cross, as above, without the
mitre, suspended by a green ribbon an inch in width, and without the
embroidered cross.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

This information is transcribed from a secret record of the association,
entitled "The Rosicrucian," which was first published in 1868, appearing
as an infinitesimal quarterly of twelve small pages, and subsequently
continued as a monthly magazine, which subsisted till the year 1879,
when it accomplished another transformation, whose history I have failed
to trace. There is much curious material contained in the two series. An
early number announces the objects of the society which it represents.
It is "calculated to meet the requirements of those worthy Masons who
wish to study the science and antiquities of the Craft, and trace it,
through its successive developments, to the present time; also to cull
information from all the records extant, of those mysterious societies
which had their existence in the dark ages of the world when might meant
right, when every

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

man's hand was against his brother, and when such combinations were
necessary to protect the weak against the strong."

These objects appear to have been fulfilled in a very desultory manner,
so far, at least, as the organ of the association is concerned. Reports
of Masonic meetings, long serial stories of an occult character, and
somewhat feeble poetry by supreme magi and worthy fratres, permanently
occupied a large proportion of an exceedingly limited space for a period
of ten years.

In 1871 the society informed its members that it was entirely
non-masonic in character, with the sole exception that every aspirant
was required to belong to the masonic Brotherhood. The assigned reason
is the numerous points of resemblance between the secrets of
Rosicrucians and Freemasons. The object of the association was then
stated to be purely literary and antiquarian, and the promulgation of a
new masonic rite was by no means intended. "The society is at present
composed of 144 Fratres, and is ruled over by three brethren, who have
attained to the ninth degree, or Supreme Magus, Seventy-two of these
compose the London College, and thirty-six is the statutory number of
each of the two subordinate colleges" at Bristol and Manchester. Every
College, excepting the Metropolitan, was restricted in 1877 to
thirty-six subscribing members, exclusive of those of the ninth grade;
the following numbers being permitted in each grade

<div align="center">

|     |                  |                                          |
|-----|------------------|------------------------------------------|
| 1\. | Magister Templi  | or VIII°.                                |
| 2\. | Adeptus Exemptus | or VII°.                                 |
| 3\. | Adeptus Major    | or VI°.                                  |
| 4\. | Adeptus Minor    | or V°.                                   |
| 5\. | Philosophus      | or IV°.<span id="page_424">p. 424</span> |
| 6\. | Practicus        | or III°.                                 |
| 7\. | Thearicus        | or II°.                                  |
| 8\. | Zelator          | or I°.                                   |

</div>

The numbers were doubled in the Metropolitan College, but these
arrangements were practically abrogated by the admission of
supernumerary members until the occurrence of "substantive vacancies." A
Yorkshire College was consecrated in 1877; a college in Edinburgh to
represent the East of Scotland had been established some time
previously.

The prime mover in this Association was Robert Wentworth Little, who
died in the year 1878, at the age of thirty-eight; he was the Supreme
Magus, and the actual revival of the Rosicrucian Order in England was
owing to his instrumentality. The Honorary Presidentship has been
conferred upon various noblemen, the late Lord Lytton was elected Grand
Patron, and among the most important members must be reckoned the late
Frederick Hockley, Kenneth Mackenzie, and Hargrave Jennings.

The most notable circumstance connected with this society is the
complete ignorance which seems to have prevailed amongst its members
generally concerning everything connected with Rosicrucianism. This is
conspicuous in the magazine which they published. Frater William
Carpenter complains that he has not obtained much light from the work of
Frater Jennings, and that he himself is "an untaught speculator." Frater
William Hughan is acknowledged as an adept, but he does not seem to have
been aware that the "Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis" originally
appeared in Germany. Frater Carpenter inclines to the opinion that the
question had better be left to itself, as "an inquiry into the matter is
destined to get every one who attempts it into an entanglement." He
humbly confesses

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

that it is too wonderful for him, too high, and that he cannot attain
it. At the same time he hazards a new definition of the much-abused term
Rosicrucian, which he believes to have been assumed by the Brotherhood
not because they sought light by the assistance of *ros*, dew, but in
*rus*, solitude, which is conclusive as to the philological abilities of
this "untaught speculator." By the year 1872, the members seems to have
discovered that their organ and indeed their society had scarcely borne
out its original intention, for "the general body of members have done
little to promote the elucidation of Rosicrucian lore;" but, in spite of
resolutions to the contrary, matters continued in much the same
condition, though glowing expectations were entertained on the
initiation of one Frater Kenneth Mackenzie VI°., a burning and a shining
light of occultism, somewhat concealed beneath the bushel of secresy. I
gather from various casual statements that the balance of opinion in the
camp of the "Rosicrucian Brotherhood in Anglia" is to the following
effect--That Andreas was in some way connected with the authorship of
the "Fama" and "Confessio Fraternitatis," that the fraternity of
Christian Rosencreutz as described therein and in the "Chymical
Marriage" had no tangible existence, but that they gave rise to the
philosophic sect of Rosicrucianism, which name became, in the words of
Thomas Vaughan, a generic term, embracing every species of mystical
pretension. <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md)

This harmless association deserves a mild sympathy at the hands of the
students of occultism.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"It has not done much harm, nor yet much good;  
It might have done much better if it would."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

Its character can hardly have deceived the most credulous of its
postulants. Some of its members wrap themselves in darkness and mystery,
proclaiming themselves Rosicrucians with intent to deceive. These
persons find a few--very few--feeble--in truth very feeble--believers
and admirers. Others assert that the Society is a mask to something
else--the last resource of cornered credulity and exposed imposture.
There are similar associations in other parts of Europe and also in
America, *e.g.*, the Societas Rosicruciana of Boston. In concluding this
notice of modern Rosicrucian associations, I beg leave to warn my
readers that all persons, whether within or without the magic circles of
public libraries, who proclaim themselves to be Rosicrucians are simply
members of pseudo-fraternities, and that there is that difference
between their assertion and the facts of the case "in which the essence
of a lie consists."

 

Though the true Rosicrucians, supposing such a society to have had at
any period a tangible and corporate existence, disappeared very suddenly
from the historical plane, the glamour of the mystery which surrounded
them proved a prolific *prima materia* for the alchemical
transfigurations of romance and poetry, and insured them a place in
legend. Two curious traditions are noticed by Hargrave Jennings, but his
mental tortuosity has, in both cases, induced him to pervert the story
which be recounts by the introduction of worthless and untruthful
details manufactured by his own imagination, and prudently ascribed to
other, of course unnamed, sources of information. One of these is the
alleged discovery of the tomb of Rosicrucius. Mr Jennings cites Plot's
"History of Staffordshire" as his authority for this legend; I have
carefully looked through

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

the large folio volume of this "painstaking antiquary," but have failed
to verify the reference; the *Spectator* for May 15, 1712, cites the
story in the words of the original narrator, and this version I present,
for comparison, to the students of the "distinguished esoteric
*littérateur's*" pseudo-history. Mr Hargrave Jennings says that it is
"poor and ineffective," an opinion not uncommon to other interpreters of
history who manipulate their materials in the interests of their private
opinions.

"A certain person having occasion to dig somewhat deep in the ground,
where this philosopher lay interred, met with a small door, having a
wall on each side of it. His curiosity, and the hopes of finding some
hidden treasure, soon prompted him to force open the door. He was
immediately surprised by a sudden blaze of light, and discovered a very
fair vault. At the upper end of it was a statue of a man in armour,
sitting by a table, and leaning on his left arm. He held a truncheon in
his right hand, and had a lamp burning before him. The man had no sooner
set one foot within the vault, than the statue, erecting itself from its
leaning posture, stood bolt upright; and, upon the fellow's advancing
another step, lifted up the truncheon in its right hand. The man still
ventured a third step, when the statue, with a furious blow, broke the
lamp into a thousand pieces, and left his guest in a sudden darkness.

"Upon the report of this adventure, the country people soon came with
lights to the sepulchre, and discovered that the statue, which was made
of brass, was nothing more than a piece of clock-work; that the floor of
the vault was all loose, and underlaid with several springs, which, upon
any man's entering, naturally produced that which had happened.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

"Rosicrucius, say his disciples, made use of this method to show the
world that he had re-invented the ever-burning lamps of the ancients,
though he was resolved no one should reap any advantage from the
discovery."

The second story has suffered still further outrage. Mr Hargrave
Jennings asserts that it is related upon "excellent authority." This
authority is a work by Dr John Campbel, entitled "Hermippus Redivivus;
or, the Sage's Triumph over Old Age and the Grave," and the reference
therein is "Les Memoires Historiques" for the year 1 687, tome i. p.
365, which no one has been able to identify, and which, according to
William Godwin, <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) had perhaps no
other existence than in the fertile brain of the compiler.

"There happened in the year 1687, an odd accident at Venice, that made a
very great stir then, and which I think deserves to be rescued from
oblivion. The great freedom and ease with which all persons, who make a
good appearance, live in that city, is known sufficiently to all who are
acquainted with it; such, therefore, will not be surprised that a
stranger who went by the name of Signor Gualdi, and who made a
considerable figure there, was admitted into the best company, though
nobody knew who or what he was. He remained at Venice some months, and
three things were remarked in his conduct. The first was, that he had a
small collection of fine pictures, which he readily showed to anybody
that desired it; the next, that he was perfectly versed in all arts and
sciences, and spoke on every subject with such readiness and sagacity,
as astonished all who heard him; and it was in the third place observed,
that he never wrote or received any letter; never desired any credit, or
made use of bills of exchange, but paid for every thing in ready-money,
and lived decently, though not in splendour.

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

"This gentleman met one day at the coffee-house with a Venetian
nobleman, who was an extraordinary good judge of pictures: he had heard
of Signor Gualdi's collection, and in a very polite manner desired to
see them, to which the other very readily consented. After the Venetian
had viewed Signor Gualdi's collection, and expressed his satisfaction,
by telling him that he had never seen a finer, considering the number of
pieces of which it consisted, he cast his eyes by chance over the
chamber-door, where hung a picture of this stranger, The Venetian looked
upon it, and then upon him. 'This picture was drawn for you, sir,' says
he to Signor Gualdi; to which the other made no answer but by a low bow.
'You look,' continued the Venetian, 'like a man of fifty, and yet I know
this picture to be of the hand of Titian, who has been dead one hundred
and thirty years, how is this possible?' 'It is not easy,' said Signor
Gualdi gravely, 'to know all things that are possible, but there is
certainly no crime in my being like a picture drawn by Titian.' The
Venetian easily perceived, by his manner of speaking, that he had given
the stranger offence, and therefore took his leave.

"He could not forbear speaking of this in the evening to some of his
friends, who resolved to satisfy themselves by looking upon the picture
the next day. In order to have an opportunity of doing so, they went to
the coffee-house about the time that Signor Gualdi was wont to come
thither; and not meeting him, one of them, who had often conversed with
him, went to his lodgings to enquire after him, where he heard that he
had set out an hour before for Vienna. This affair made a great noise,
and found a place in all the newspapers of that time."

The mysterious Signor Gualdi was "suspected to be a

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rosicrucian." The
acknowledged fictions of a later period occasionally introduce the
Society to the novel-reading public. Among these may be mentioned the
incoherent and worthless romance, entitled "St Irvyne; or, The
Rosicrucian," which was written by Shelley at the age of seventeen; Lord
Lytton's "Zanoni;" "The Rosicrucian's Story," by Paschal R. Randolph, an
American half-breed of no inconsiderable talent, who translated the
"Divine Pomiander," formed an ephemeral Rosicrucian publishing company,
and crowning a chequered existence with a sudden suicide, is still much
respected among certain spiritual circles, occasionally "communicating"
with quite the average veracity of other "controls" performed by the
"choir invisible." The official organ of the English *Societas
Rosicruciana* has also provided its select and esoteric circle of
"antiquarian" illuminati with "Leaves from the Diary of a Rosicrucian,"
a romance of considerable ability by Kenneth Mackenzie, F. R. C., IX°.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[425:1](rhr31.htm#fr_115.md) "Hours with the
Mystics," ii., 104.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[428:1](rhr31.htm#fr_116.md) Preface to "The
Travels of St Leon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](rhr32.md)
