[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/aes013)   
  
[Additions to Esther Index](aes)  
  [Previous](aes012)  [Next](aes014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Additions to Esther Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> The copy of the letters was this: The great king
Artexerxes writeth these things to the princes and governours that are
under him from India unto Ethiopia in an hundred and seven and twenty
provinces.

<span id="002">2</span> After that I became lord over many nations and
had dominion over the whole world, not lifted up with presumption of my
authority, but carrying myself always with equity and mildness, I
purposed to settle my subjects continually in a quiet life, and making
my kingdom peaceable, and open for passage to the utmost coasts, to
renew peace, which is desired of all men.

<span id="003">3</span> Now when I asked my counsellors how this might
be brought to pass, Aman, that excelled in wisdom among us, and was
approved for his constant good will and steadfast fidelity, and had the
honour of the second place in the kingdom,

<span id="004">4</span> Declared unto us, that in all nations throughout
the world there was scattered a certain malicious people, that had laws
contrary to ail nations, and continually despised the commandments of
kings, so as the uniting of our kingdoms, honourably intended by us
cannot go forward.

<span id="005">5</span> Seeing then we understand that this people alone
is continually in opposition unto all men, differing in the strange
manner of their laws, and evil affected to our state, working all the
mischief they can that our kingdom may not be firmly established:

<span id="006">6</span> Therefore have we commanded, that all they that
are signified in writing unto you by Aman, who is ordained over the
affairs, and is next unto us, shall all, with their wives and children,
be utterly destroyed by the sword of their enemies, without all mercy
and pity, the fourteenth day of the twelfth month Adar of this present
year:

<span id="007">7</span> That they, who of old and now also are
malicious, may in one day with violence go into the grave, and so ever
hereafter cause our affairs to be well settled, and without trouble.

<span id="008">8</span> Then Mardocheus thought upon all the works of
the Lord, and made his prayer unto him,

<span id="009">9</span> Saying, O Lord, Lord, the King Almighty: for the
whole world is in thy power, and if thou hast appointed to save Israel,
there is no man that can gainsay thee:

<span id="010">10</span> For thou hast made heaven and earth, and all
the wondrous things under the heaven.

<span id="011">11</span> Thou art Lord of all things, and and there is
no man that can resist thee, which art the Lord.

<span id="012">12</span> Thou knowest all things, and thou knowest,
Lord, that it was neither in contempt nor pride, nor for any desire of
glory, that I did not bow down to proud Aman.

<span id="013">13</span> For I could have been content with good will
for the salvation of Israel to kiss the soles of his feet.

<span id="014">14</span> But I did this, that I might not prefer the
glory of man above the glory of God: neither will I worship any but
thee, O God, neither will I do it in pride.

<span id="015">15</span> And now, O Lord God and King, spare thy people:
for their eyes are upon us to bring us to nought; yea, they desire to
destroy the inheritance, that hath been thine from the beginning.

<span id="016">16</span> Despise not the portion, which thou hast
delivered out of Egypt for thine own self.

<span id="017">17</span> Hear my prayer, and be merciful unto thine
inheritance: turn our sorrow into joy, that we may live, O Lord, and
praise thy name: and destroy not the mouths of them that praise thee, O
Lord.

<span id="018">18</span> All Israel in like manner cried most earnestly
unto the Lord, because their death was before their eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additions to Esther Chapter 14](aes014)
