[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/bar004)  [Sep](../sep/bar004.md) 
[Vul](../vul/bar004.md)   
  
[Baruch Index](bar.md)  
  [Previous](bar003)  [Next](bar005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Baruch Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> This is the book of the commandments of God, and
the law that endureth for ever: all they that keep it shall come to
life; but such as leave it shall die.

<span id="002">2</span> Turn thee, O Jacob, and take hold of it: walk in
the presence of the light thereof, that thou mayest be illuminated.

<span id="003">3</span> Give not thine honour to another, nor the things
that are profitable unto thee to a strange nation.

<span id="004">4</span> O Israel, happy are we: for things that are
pleasing to God are made known unto us.

<span id="005">5</span> Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial of
Israel.

<span id="006">6</span> Ye were sold to the nations, not for \[your\]
destruction: but because ye moved God to wrath, ye were delivered unto
the enemies.

<span id="007">7</span> For ye provoked him that made you by sacrificing
unto devils, and not to God.

<span id="008">8</span> Ye have forgotten the everlasting God, that
brought you up; and ye have grieved Jerusalem, that nursed you.

<span id="009">9</span> For when she saw the wrath of God coming upon
you, she said, Hearken, O ye that dwell about Sion: God hath brought
upon me great mourning;

<span id="010">10</span> For I saw the captivity of my sons and
daughters, which the Everlasting brought upon them.

<span id="011">11</span> With joy did I nourish them; but sent them away
with weeping and mourning.

<span id="012">12</span> Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and
forsaken of many, who for the sins of my children am left desolate;
because they departed from the law of God.

<span id="013">13</span> They knew not his statutes, nor walked in the
ways of his commandments, nor trod in the paths of discipline in his
righteousness.

<span id="014">14</span> Let them that dwell about Sion come, and
remember ye the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the
Everlasting hath brought upon them.

<span id="015">15</span> For he hath brought a nation upon them from
far, a shameless nation, and of a strange language, who neither
reverenced old man, nor pitied child.

<span id="016">16</span> These have carried away the dear beloved
children of the widow, and left her that was alone desolate without
daughters.

<span id="017">17</span> But what can I help you?

<span id="018">18</span> For he that brought these plagues upon you will
deliver you from the hands of your enemies.

<span id="019">19</span> Go your way, O my children, go your way: for I
am left desolate.

<span id="020">20</span> I have put off the clothing of peace, and put
upon me the sackcloth of my prayer: I will cry unto the Everlasting in
my days.

<span id="021">21</span> Be of good cheer, O my children, cry unto the
Lord, and he will deliver you from the power and hand of the enemies.

<span id="022">22</span> For my hope is in the Everlasting, that he will
save you; and joy is come unto me from the Holy One, because of the
mercy which shall soon come unto you from the Everlasting our Saviour.

<span id="023">23</span> For I sent you out with mourning and weeping:
but God will give you to me again with joy and gladness for ever.

<span id="024">24</span> Like as now the neighbours of Sion have seen
your captivity: so shall they see shortly your salvation from our God
which shall come upon you with great glory, and brightness of the
Everlasting.

<span id="025">25</span> My children, suffer patiently the wrath that is
come upon you from God: for thine enemy hath persecuted thee; but
shortly thou shalt see his destruction, and shalt tread upon his neck.

<span id="026">26</span> My delicate ones have gone rough ways, and were
taken away as a flock caught of the enemies.

<span id="027">27</span> Be of good comfort, O my children, and cry unto
God: for ye shall be remembered of him that brought these things upon
you.

<span id="028">28</span> For as it was your mind to go astray from God:
so, being returned, seek him ten times more.

<span id="029">29</span> For he that hath brought these plagues upon you
shall bring you everlasting joy with your salvation.

<span id="030">30</span> Take a good heart, O Jerusalem: for he that
gave thee that name will comfort thee.

<span id="031">31</span> Miserable are they that afflicted thee, and
rejoiced at thy fall.

<span id="032">32</span> Miserable are the cities which thy children
served: miserable is she that received thy sons.

<span id="033">33</span> For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was glad
of thy fall: so shall she be grieved for her own desolation.

<span id="034">34</span> For I will take away the rejoicing of her great
multitude, and her pride shall be turned into mourning.

<span id="035">35</span> For fire shall come upon her from the
Everlasting, long to endure; and she shall be inhabited of devils for a
great time.

<span id="036">36</span> O Jerusalem, look about thee toward the east,
and behold the joy that cometh unto thee from God.

<span id="037">37</span> Lo, thy sons come, whom thou sentest away, they
come gathered together from the east to the west by the word of the Holy
One, rejoicing in the glory of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch Chapter 5](bar005.md)
