[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/bar002)  [Sep](../sep/bar002) 
[Vul](../vul/bar002)   
  
[Baruch Index](bar)  
  [Previous](bar001)  [Next](bar003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Baruch Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> Therefore the Lord hath made good his word,
which he pronounced against us, and against our judges that judged
Israel, and against our kings, and against our princes, and against the
men of Israel and Juda,

<span id="002">2</span> To bring upon us great plagues, such as never
happened under the whole heaven, as it came to pass in Jerusalem,
according to the things that were written in the law of Moses;

<span id="003">3</span> That a man should eat the flesh of his own son,
and the flesh of his own daughter.

<span id="004">4</span> Moreover he hath delivered them to be in
subjection to all the kingdoms that are round about us, to be as a
reproach and desolation among all the people round about, where the Lord
hath scattered them.

<span id="005">5</span> Thus we were cast down, and not exalted, because
we have sinned against the Lord our God, and have not been obedient unto
his voice.

<span id="006">6</span> To the Lord our God appertaineth righteousness:
but unto us and to our fathers open shame, as appeareth this day.

<span id="007">7</span> For all these plagues are come upon us, which
the Lord hath pronounced against us

<span id="008">8</span> Yet have we not prayed before the Lord, that we
might turn every one from the imaginations of his wicked heart.

<span id="009">9</span> Wherefore the Lord watched over us for evil, and
the Lord hath brought it upon us: for the Lord is righteous in all his
works which he hath commanded us.

<span id="010">10</span> Yet we have not hearkened unto his voice, to
walk in the commandments of the Lord, that he hath set before us.

<span id="011">11</span> And now, O Lord God of Israel, that hast
brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and high
arm, and with signs, and with wonders, and with great power, and hast
gotten thyself a name, as appeareth this day:

<span id="012">12</span> O Lord our God, we have sinned, we have done
ungodly, we have dealt unrighteously in all thine ordinances.

<span id="013">13</span> Let thy wrath turn from us: for we are but a
few left among the heathen, where thou hast scattered us.

<span id="014">14</span> Hear our prayers, O Lord, and our petitions,
and deliver us for thine own sake, and give us favour in the sight of
them which have led us away:

<span id="015">15</span> That all the earth may know that thou art the
Lord our God, because Israel and his posterity is called by thy name.

<span id="016">16</span> O Lord, look down from thine holy house, and
consider us: bow down thine ear, O Lord, to hear us.

<span id="017">17</span> Open thine eyes, and behold; for the dead that
are in the graves, whose souls are taken from their bodies, will give
unto the Lord neither praise nor righteousness:

<span id="018">18</span> But the soul that is greatly vexed, which goeth
stooping and feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul, will
give thee praise and righteousness, O Lord.

<span id="019">19</span> Therefore we do not make our humble
supplication before thee, O Lord our God, for the righteousness of our
fathers, and of our kings.

<span id="020">20</span> For thou hast sent out thy wrath and
indignation upon us, as thou hast spoken by thy servants the prophets,
saying,

<span id="021">21</span> Thus saith the Lord, Bow down your shoulders to
serve the king of Babylon: so shall ye remain in the land that I gave
unto your fathers.

<span id="022">22</span> But if ye will not hear the voice of the Lord,
to serve the king of Babylon,

<span id="023">23</span> I will cause to cease out of the cites of
Judah, and from without Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of
joy, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: and the
whole land shall be desolate of inhabitants.

<span id="024">24</span> But we would not hearken unto thy voice, to
serve the king of Babylon: therefore hast thou made good the words that
thou spakest by thy servants the prophets, namely, that the bones of our
kings, and the bones of our fathers, should be taken out of their place.

<span id="025">25</span> And, lo, they are cast out to the heat of the
day, and to the frost of the night, and they died in great miseries by
famine, by sword, and by pestilence.

<span id="026">26</span> And the house which is called by thy name hast
thou laid waste, as it is to be seen this day, for the wickedness of the
house of Israel and the house of Juda.

<span id="027">27</span> O Lord our God, thou hast dealt with us after
all thy goodness, and according to all that great mercy of thine,

<span id="028">28</span> As thou spakest by thy servant Moses in the day
when thou didst command him to write the law before the children of
Israel, saying,

<span id="029">29</span> If ye will not hear my voice, surely this very
great multitude shall be turned into a small number among the nations,
where I will scatter them.

<span id="030">30</span> For I knew that they would not hear me, because
it is a stiffnecked people: but in the land of their captivities they
shall remember themselves.

<span id="031">31</span> And shall know that I am the Lord their God:
for I will give them an heart, and ears to hear:

<span id="032">32</span> And they shall praise me in the land of their
captivity, and think upon my name,

<span id="033">33</span> And return from their stiff neck, and from
their wicked deeds: for they shall remember the way of their fathers,
which sinned before the Lord.

<span id="034">34</span> And I will bring them again into the land which
I promised with an oath unto their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and they shall be lords of it: and I will increase them, and they shall
not be diminished.

<span id="035">35</span> And I will make an everlasting covenant with
them to be their God, and they shall be my people: and I will no more
drive my people of Israel out of the land that I have given them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch Chapter 3](bar003)
