[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/bel001)  [Sep:Bel](../sep/bel001) 
[Sep:BeT](../sep/bet001)   
  
[Bel and the Dragon Index](bel)  
  [Previous](man001)  [Next](lao001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Bel and the Dragon Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> And king Astyages was gathered to his fathers,
and Cyrus of Persia received his kingdom.

<span id="002">2</span> And Daniel conversed with the king, and was
honoured above all his friends.

<span id="003">3</span> Now the Babylons had an idol, called Bel, and
there were spent upon him every day twelve great measures of fine flour,
and forty sheep, and six vessels of wine.

<span id="004">4</span> And the king worshipped it and went daily to
adore it: but Daniel worshipped his own God. And the king said unto him,
Why dost not thou worship Bel?

<span id="005">5</span> Who answered and said, Because I may not worship
idols made with hands, but the living God, who hath created the heaven
and the earth, and hath sovereignty over all flesh.

<span id="006">6</span> Then said the king unto him, Thinkest thou not
that Bel is a living God? seest thou not how much he eateth and drinketh
every day?

<span id="007">7</span> Then Daniel smiled, and said, O king, be not
deceived: for this is but clay within, and brass without, and did never
eat or drink any thing.

<span id="008">8</span> So the king was wroth, and called for his
priests, and said unto them, If ye tell me not who this is that
devoureth these expences, ye shall die.

<span id="009">9</span> But if ye can certify me that Bel devoureth
them, then Daniel shall die: for he hath spoken blasphemy against Bel.
And Daniel said unto the king, Let it be according to thy word.

<span id="010">10</span> Now the priests of Bel were threescore and ten,
beside their wives and children. And the king went with Daniel into the
temple of Bel.

<span id="011">11</span> So Bel's priests said, Lo, we go out: but thou,
O king, set on the meat, and make ready the wine, and shut the door fast
and seal it with thine own signet;

<span id="012">12</span> And to morrow when thou comest in, if thou
findest not that hath eaten up all, we will suffer death, or else
Daniel, that speaketh falsely against us.

<span id="013">13</span> And they little regarded it: for under the
table they had made a privy entrance, whereby they entered in
continually, and consumed those things.

<span id="014">14</span> So when they were gone forth, the king set
meats before Bel. Now Daniel had commanded his servants to bring ashes,
and those they strewed throughout all the temple in the presence of the
king alone: then went they out, and shut the door, and sealed it with
the king's signet, and so departed.

<span id="015">15</span> Now in the night came the priests with their
wives and children, as they were wont to do, and did eat and drinck up
all.

<span id="016">16</span> In the morning betime the king arose, and
Daniel with him.

<span id="017">17</span> And the king said, Daniel, are the seals whole?
And he said, Yea, O king, they be whole.

<span id="018">18</span> And as soon as he had opened the dour, the king
looked upon the table, and cried with a loud voice, Great art thou, O
Bel, and with thee is no deceit at all.

<span id="019">19</span> Then laughed Daniel, and held the king that he
should not go in, and said, Behold now the pavement, and mark well whose
footsteps are these.

<span id="020">20</span> And the king said, I see the footsteps of men,
women, and children. And then the king was angry,

<span id="021">21</span> And took the priests with their wives and
children, who shewed him the privy doors, where they came in, and
consumed such things as were upon the table.

<span id="022">22</span> Therefore the king slew them, and delivered Bel
into Daniel's power, who destroyed him and his temple.

<span id="023">23</span> And in that same place there was a great
dragon, which they of Babylon worshipped.

<span id="024">24</span> And the king said unto Daniel, Wilt thou also
say that this is of brass? lo, he liveth, he eateth and drinketh; thou
canst not say that he is no living god: therefore worship him.

<span id="025">25</span> Then said Daniel unto the king, I will worship
the Lord my God: for he is the living God.

<span id="026">26</span> But give me leave, O king, and I shall slay
this dragon without sword or staff. The king said, I give thee leave.

<span id="027">27</span> Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and
did seethe them together, and made lumps thereof: this he put in the
dragon's mouth, and so the dragon burst in sunder : and Daniel said, Lo,
these are the gods ye worship.

<span id="028">28</span> When they of Babylon heard that, they took
great indignation, and conspired against the king, saying, The king is
become a Jew, and he hath destroyed Bel, he hath slain the dragon, and
put the priests to death.

<span id="029">29</span> So they came to the king, and said, Deliver us
Daniel, or else we will destroy thee and thine house.

<span id="030">30</span> Now when the king saw that they pressed him
sore, being constrained, he delivered Daniel unto them:

<span id="031">31</span> Who cast him into the lions' den: where he was
six days.

<span id="032">32</span> And in the den there were seven lions, and they
had given them every day two carcases, and two sheep: which then were
not given to them, to the intent they might devour Daniel.

<span id="033">33</span> Now there was in Jewry a prophet, called
Habbacuc, who had made pottage, and had broken bread in a bowl, and was
going into the field, for to bring it to the reapers.

<span id="034">34</span> But the angel of the Lord said unto Habbacuc,
Go, carry the dinner that thou hast into Babylon unto Daniel, who is in
the lions' den.

<span id="035">35</span> And Habbacuc said, Lord, I never saw Babylon;
neither do I know where the den is.

<span id="036">36</span> Then the angel of the Lord took him by the
crown, and bare him by the hair of his head, and through the vehemency
of his spirit set him in Babylon over the den.

<span id="037">37</span> And Habbacuc cried, saying, O Daniel, Daniel,
take the dinner which God hath sent thee.

<span id="038">38</span> And Daniel said, Thou hast remembered me, O
God: neither hast thou forsaken them that seek thee and love thee.

<span id="039">39</span> So Daniel arose, and did eat: and the angel of
the Lord set Habbacuc in his own place again immediately.

<span id="040">40</span> Upon the seventh day the king went to bewail
Daniel: and when he came to the den, he looked in, and behold, Daniel
was sitting.

<span id="041">41</span> Then cried the king with a loud voice, saying,
Great art Lord God of Daniel, and there is none other beside thee.

<span id="042">42</span> And he drew him out, and cast those that were
the cause of his destruction into the den: and they were devoured in a
moment before his face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Laodiceans Chapter 1](lao001)
