[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1007)  [Sep](../sep/es1007)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Previous](es1006)  [Next](es1008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> Then Sisinnes the governor of Celosyria and
Phenice, and Sathrabuzanes, with their companions following the
commandments of king Darius,

<span id="002">2</span> Did very carefully oversee the holy works,
assisting the ancients of the Jews and governors of the temple.

<span id="003">3</span> And so the holy works prospered, when Aggeus and
Zacharias the prophets prophesied.

<span id="004">4</span> And they finished these things by the
commandment of the Lord God of Israel, and with the consent of Cyrus,
Darius, and Artexerxes, kings of Persia.

<span id="005">5</span> And thus was the holy house finished in the
three and twentieth day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of Darius
king of the Persians

<span id="006">6</span> And the children of Israel, the priests, and the
Levites, and others that were of the captivity, that were added unto
them, did according to the things written in the book of Moses.

<span id="007">7</span> And to the dedication of the temple of the Lord
they offered an hundred bullocks two hundred rams, four hundred lambs;

<span id="008">8</span> And twelve goats for the sin of all Israel,
according to the number of the chief of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="009">9</span> The priests also and the Levites stood arrayed
in their vestments, according to their kindreds, in the service of the
Lord God of Israel, according to the book of Moses: and the porters at
every gate.

<span id="010">10</span> And the children of Israel that were of the
captivity held the passover the fourteenth day of the first month, after
that the priests and the Levites were sanctified.

<span id="011">11</span> They that were of the captivity were not all
sanctified together: but the Levites were all sanctified together.

<span id="012">12</span> And so they offered the passover for all them
of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for
themselves.

<span id="013">13</span> And the children of Israel that came out of the
captivity did eat, even all they that had separated themselves from the
abominations of the people of the land, and sought the Lord.

<span id="014">14</span> And they kept the feast of unleavened bread
seven days, making merry before the Lord,

<span id="015">15</span> For that he had turned the counsel of the king
of Assyria toward them, to strengthen their hands in the works of the
Lord God of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 8](es1008)
