[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1004)  [Sep](../sep/es1004.md)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1.md)  
  [Previous](es1003)  [Next](es1005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> Then the second, that had spoken of the strength
of the king, began to say,

<span id="002">2</span> O ye men, do not men excel in strength that bear
rule over sea and land and all things in them?

<span id="003">3</span> But yet the king is more mighty: for he is lord
of all these things, and hath dominion over them; and whatsoever he
commandeth them they do.

<span id="004">4</span> If he bid them make war the one against the
other, they do it: if he send them out against the enemies, they go, and
break down mountains walls and towers.

<span id="005">5</span> They slay and are slain, and transgress not the
king's commandment: if they get the victory, they bring all to the king,
as well the spoil, as all things else.

<span id="006">6</span> Likewise for those that are no soldiers, and
have not to do with wars, but use husbundry, when they have reaped again
that which they had sown, they bring it to the king, and compel one
another to pay tribute unto the king.

<span id="007">7</span> And yet he is but one man: if he command to
kill, they kill; if he command to spare, they spare;

<span id="008">8</span> If he command to smite, they smite; if he
command to make desolate, they make desolate; if he command to build,
they build;

<span id="009">9</span> If he command to cut down, they cut down; if he
command to plant, they plant.

<span id="010">10</span> So all his people and his armies obey him:
furthermore he lieth down, he eateth and drinketh, and taketh his rest:

<span id="011">11</span> And these keep watch round about him, neither
may any one depart, and do his own business, neither disobey they him in
any thing.

<span id="012">12</span> O ye men, how should not the king be mightiest,
when in such sort he is obeyed? And he held his tongue.

<span id="013">13</span> Then the third, who had spoken of women, and of
the truth, (this was Zorobabel) began to speak.

<span id="014">14</span> O ye men, it is not the great king, nor the
multitude of men, neither is it wine, that excelleth; who is it then
that ruleth them, or hath the lordship over them? are they not women?

<span id="015">15</span> Women have borne the king and all the people
that bear rule by sea and land.

<span id="016">16</span> Even of them came they: and they nourished them
up that planted the vineyards, from whence the wine cometh.

<span id="017">17</span> These also make garments for men; these bring
glory unto men; and without women cannot men be.

<span id="018">18</span> Yea, and if men have gathered together gold and
silver, or any other goodly thing, do they not love a woman which is
comely in favour and beauty?

<span id="019">19</span> And letting all those things go, do they not
gape, and even with open mouth fix their eyes fast on her; and have not
all men more desire unto her than unto silver or gold, or any goodly
thing whatsoever?

<span id="020">20</span> A man leaveth his own father that brought him
up, and his own country, and cleaveth unto his wife.

<span id="021">21</span> He sticketh not to spend his life with his
wife. and remembereth neither father, nor mother, nor country.

<span id="022">22</span> By this also ye must know that women have
dominion over you: do ye not labour and toil, and give and bring all to
the woman?

<span id="023">23</span> Yea, a man taketh his sword, and goeth his way
to rob and to steal, to sail upon the sea and upon rivers;

<span id="024">24</span> And looketh upon a lion, and goeth in the
darkness; and when he hath stolen, spoiled, and robbed, he bringeth it
to his love.

<span id="025">25</span> Wherefore a man loveth his wife better than
father or mother.

<span id="026">26</span> Yea, many there be that have run out of their
wits for women, and become servants for their sakes.

<span id="027">27</span> Many also have perished, have erred, and
sinned, for women.

<span id="028">28</span> And now do ye not believe me? is not the king
great in his power? do not all regions fear to touch him?

<span id="029">29</span> Yet did I see him and Apame the king's
concubine, the daughter of the admirable Bartacus, sitting at the right
hand of the king,

<span id="030">30</span> And taking the crown from the king's head, and
setting it upon her own head; she also struck the king with her left
hand.

<span id="031">31</span> And yet for all this the king gaped and gazed
upon her with open mouth: if she laughed upon him, he laughed also: but
if she took any displeasure at him, the king was fain to flatter, that
she might be reconciled to him again.

<span id="032">32</span> O ye men, how can it be but women should be
strong, seeing they do thus?

<span id="033">33</span> Then the king and the princes looked one upon
another: so he began to speak of the truth.

<span id="034">34</span> O ye men, are not women strong? great is the
earth, high is the heaven, swift is the sun in his course, for he
compasseth the heavens round about, and fetcheth his course again to his
own place in one day.

<span id="035">35</span> Is he not great that maketh these things?
therefore great is the truth, and stronger than all things.

<span id="036">36</span> All the earth crieth upon the truth, and the
heaven blesseth it: all works shake and tremble at it, and with it is no
unrighteous thing.

<span id="037">37</span> Wine is wicked, the king is wicked, women are
wicked, all the children of men are wicked, and such are all their
wicked works; and there is no truth in them; in their unrighteousness
also they shall perish.

<span id="038">38</span> As for the truth, it endureth, and is alwaYs
strong; it liveth and conquereth for evermore.

<span id="039">39</span> With her there is no accepting of persons or
rewards; but she doeth the things that are just, and refraineth from all
unjust and wicked things; and all men do well like of her works.

<span id="040">40</span> Neither in her judgment is any unrighteousness;
and she is the strength, kingdom, power, and majesty, of all ages.
Blessed be the God of truth.

<span id="041">41</span> And with that he held his peace. And all the
people then shouted, and said, Great is Truth, and mighty above all
things.

<span id="042">42</span> Then said the king unto him, Ask what thou wilt
more than is appointed in the writing, and we will give it thee, because
thou art found wisest; and thou shalt sit next me, and shalt be called
my cousin.

<span id="043">43</span> Then said he unto the king, Remember thy vow,
which thou hast vowed to build Jerusalem, in the day when thou camest to
thy kingdom,

<span id="044">44</span> And to send away all the vessels that were
taken away out of Jerusalem, which Cyrus set apart, when he vowed to
destroy Babylon, and to send them again thither.

<span id="045">45</span> Thou also hast vowed to build up the temple,
which the Edomites burned when Judea was made desolate by the Chaldees.

<span id="046">46</span> And now, O lord the king, this is that which I
require, and which I desire of thee, and this is the princely liberality
proceeding from thyself: I desire therefore that thou make good the vow,
the performance whereof with thine own mouth thou hast vowed to the King
of heaven.

<span id="047">47</span> Then Darius the king stood up, and kissed him,
and wrote letters for him unto all the treasurers and lieutenants and
captains and governors, that they should safely convey on their way both
him, and all those that go up with him to build Jerusalem.

<span id="048">48</span> He wrote letters also unto the lieutenants that
were in Celosyria and Phenice, and unto them in Libanus, that they
should bring cedar wood from Libanus unto Jerusalem, and that they
should build the city with him.

<span id="049">49</span> Moreover he wrote for all the Jews that went
out of his realm up into Jewry, concerning their freedom, that no
officer, no ruler, no lieutenant, nor treasurer, should forcibly enter
into their doors;

<span id="050">50</span> And that all the country which they hold should
be free without tribute; and that the Edomites should give over the
villages of the Jews which then they held:

<span id="051">51</span> Yea, that there should be yearly given twenty
talents to the building of the temple, until the time that it were
built;

<span id="052">52</span> And other ten talents yearly, to maintain the
burnt offerings upon the altar every day, as they had a commandment to
offer seventeen:

<span id="053">53</span> And that all they that went from Babylon to
build the city should have free liberty, as well they as their
posterity, and all the priests that went away.

<span id="054">54</span> He wrote also concerning. the charges, and the
priests' vestments wherein they minister;

<span id="055">55</span> And likewise for the charges of the Levites, to
be given them until the day that the house were finished, and Jerusalem
builded up.

<span id="056">56</span> And he commanded to give to all that kept the
city pensions and wages.

<span id="057">57</span> He sent away also all the vessels from Babylon,
that Cyrus had set apart; and all that Cyrus had given in commandment,
the same charged he also to be done, and sent unto Jerusalem.

<span id="058">58</span> Now when this young man was gone forth, he
lifted up his face to heaven toward Jerusalem, and praised the King of
heaven,

<span id="059">59</span> And said, From thee cometh victory, from thee
cometh wisdom, and thine is the glory, and I am thy servant.

<span id="060">60</span> Blessed art thou, who hast given me wisdom: for
to thee I give thanks, O Lord of our fathers.

<span id="061">61</span> And so he took the letters, and went out, and
came unto Babylon, and told it all his brethren.

<span id="062">62</span> And they praised the God of their fathers,
because he had given them freedom and liberty

<span id="063">63</span> To go up, and to build Jerusalem, and the
temple which is called by his name: and they feasted with instruments of
musick and gladness seven days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 5](es1005.md)
