[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1005)  [Sep](../sep/es1005)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Previous](es1004)  [Next](es1006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 5

<span id="001">1</span> After this were the principal men of the
families chosen according to their tribes, to go up with their wives and
sons and daughters, with their menservants and maidservants, and their
cattle.

<span id="002">2</span> And Darius sent with them a thousand horsemen,
till they had brought them back to Jerusalem safely, and with musical
\[instruments\] tabrets and flutes.

<span id="003">3</span> And all their brethren played, and he made them
go up together with them.

<span id="004">4</span> And these are the names of the men which went
up, according to their families among their tribes, after their several
heads.

<span id="005">5</span> The priests, the sons of Phinees the son of
Aaron: Jesus the son of Josedec, the son of Saraias, and Joacim the son
of Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel, of the house of David, out of the
kindred of Phares, of the tribe of Judah;

<span id="006">6</span> Who spake wise sentences before Darius the king
of Persia in the second year of his reign, in the month Nisan, which is
the first month.

<span id="007">7</span> And these are they of Jewry that came up from
the captivity, where they dwelt as strangers, whom Nabuchodonosor the
king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon.

<span id="008">8</span> And they returned unto Jerusalem, and to the
other parts of Jewry, every man to his own city, who came with
Zorobabel, with Jesus, Nehemias, and Zacharias, and Reesaias, Enenius,
Mardocheus. Beelsarus, Aspharasus, Reelius, Roimus, and Baana, their
guides.

<span id="009">9</span> The number of them of the nation, and their
governors, sons of Phoros, two thousand an hundred seventy and two; the
sons of Saphat, four hundred seventy and two:

<span id="010">10</span> The sons of Ares, seven hundred fifty and six:

<span id="011">11</span> The sons of Phaath Moab, two thousand eight
hundred and twelve:

<span id="012">12</span> The sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty
and four: the sons of Zathul, nine hundred forty and five: the sons of
Corbe, seven hundred and five: the sons of Bani, six hundred forty and
eight:

<span id="013">13</span> The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty and
three: the sons of Sadas, three thousand two hundred twenty and two:

<span id="014">14</span> The sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and
seven: the sons of Bagoi, two thousand sixty and six: the sons of Adin,
four hundred fifty and four:

<span id="015">15</span> The sons of Aterezias, ninety and two: the sons
of Ceilan and Azetas threescore and seven: the sons of Azuran, four
hundred thirty and two:

<span id="016">16</span> The sons of Ananias, an hundred and one: the
sons of Arom, thirty two: and the sons of Bassa, three hundred twenty
and three: the sons of Azephurith, an hundred and two:

<span id="017">17</span> The sons of Meterus, three thousand and five:
the sons of Bethlomon, an hundred twenty and three:

<span id="018">18</span> They of Netophah, fifty and five: they of
Anathoth, an hundred fifty and eight: they of Bethsamos, forty and two:

<span id="019">19</span> They of Kiriathiarius, twenty and five: they of
Caphira and Beroth, seven hundred forty and three: they of Pira, seven
hundred:

<span id="020">20</span> They of Chadias and Ammidoi, four hundred
twenty and two: they of Cirama and Gabdes, six hundred twenty and one:

<span id="021">21</span> They of Macalon, an hundred twenty and two:
they of Betolius, fifty and two: the sons of Nephis, an hundred fifty
and six:

<span id="022">22</span> The sons of Calamolalus and Onus, seven hundred
twenty and five: the sons of Jerechus, two hundred forty and five:

<span id="023">23</span> The sons of Annas, three thousand three hundred
and thirty.

<span id="024">24</span> The priests: the sons of Jeddu, the son of
Jesus among the sons of Sanasib, nine hundred seventy and two: the sons
of Meruth, a thousand fifty and two:

<span id="025">25</span> The sons of Phassaron, a thousand forty and
seven: the sons of Carme, a thousand and seventeen.

<span id="026">26</span> The Levites: the sons of Jessue, and Cadmiel,
and Banuas, and Sudias, seventy and four.

<span id="027">27</span> The holy singers: the sons of Asaph, an hundred
twenty and eight.

<span id="028">28</span> The porters: the sons of Salum, the sons of
Jatal, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Dacobi, the sons of Teta, the
sons of Sami, in all an hundred thirty and nine.

<span id="029">29</span> The servants of the temple: the sons of Esau,
the sons of Asipha, the sons of Tabaoth, the sons of Ceras, the sons of
Sud, the sons of Phaleas, the sons of Labana, the sons of Graba,

<span id="030">30</span> The sons of Acua, the sons of Uta, the sons of
Cetab, the sons of Agaba, the sons of Subai, the sons of Anan, the sons
of Cathua, the sons of Geddur,

<span id="031">31</span> The sons of Airus, the sons of Daisan, the sons
of Noeba, the sons of Chaseba, the sons of Gazera, the sons of Azia, the
sons of Phinees, the sons of Azare, the sons of Bastai, the sons of
Asana, the sons of Meani, the sons of Naphisi, the sons of Acub, the
sons of Acipha, the sons of Assur, the sons of Pharacim, the sons of
Basaloth,

<span id="032">32</span> The sons of Meeda, the sons of Coutha, the sons
of Charea, the sons of Charcus, the sons of Aserer, the sons of Thomoi,
the sons of Nasith, the sons of Atipha.

<span id="033">33</span> The sons of the servants of Solomon: the sons
of Azaphion, the sons of Pharira, the sons of Jeeli, the sons of Lozon,
the sons of Israel, the sons of Sapheth,

<span id="034">34</span> The sons of Hagia, the sons of Pharacareth, the
sons of Sabi, the sons of Sarothie, the sons of Masias, the sons of Gar,
the sons of Addus, the sons of Suba, the sons of Apherra, the sons of
Barodis, the sons of Sabat, the sons of Allom.

<span id="035">35</span> All the ministers of the temple, and the sons
of the servants of Solomon, were three hundred seventy and two.

<span id="036">36</span> These came up from Thermeleth and Thelersas,
Charaathalar leading them, and Aalar;

<span id="037">37</span> Neither could they shew their families, nor
their stock, how they were of Israel: the sons of Ladan, the son of Ban,
the sons of Necodan, six hundred fifty and two.

<span id="038">38</span> And of the priests that usurped the office of
the priesthood, and were not found: the sons of Obdia, the sons of
Accoz, the sons of Addus, who married Augia one of the daughters of
Barzelus, and was named after his name.

<span id="039">39</span> And when the description of the kindred of
these men was sought in the register, and was not found, they were
removed from executing the office of the priesthood:

<span id="040">40</span> For unto them said Nehemias and Atharias, that
they should not be partakers of the holy things, till there arose up an
high priest clothed with doctrine and truth.

<span id="041">41</span> So of Israel, from them of twelve years old and
upward, they were all in number forty thousand, beside menservants and
womenservants two thousand three hundred and sixty.

<span id="042">42</span> Their menservants and handmaids were seven
thousand three hundred forty and seven: the singing men and singing
women, two hundred forty and five:

<span id="043">43</span> Four hundred thirty and five camels, seven
thousand thirty and six horses, two hundred forty and five mules, five
thousand five hundred twenty and five beasts used to the yoke.

<span id="044">44</span> And certain of the chief of their families,
when they came to the temple of God that is in Jerusalem, vowed to set
up the house again in his own place according to their ability,

<span id="045">45</span> And to give into the holy treasury of the works
a thousand pounds of gold, five thousand of silver, and an hundred
priestly vestments.

<span id="046">46</span> And so dwelt the priests and the Levites and
the people in Jerusalem, and in the country, the singers also and the
porters; and all Israel in their villages.

<span id="047">47</span> But when the seventh month was at hand, and
when the children of Israel were every man in his own place, they came
all together with one consent into the open place of the first gate
which is toward the east.

<span id="048">48</span> Then stood up Jesus the son of Josedec, and his
brethren the priests and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and his
brethren, and made ready the altar of the God of Israel,

<span id="049">49</span> To offer burnt sacrifices upon it, according as
it is expressly commanded in the book of Moses the man of God.

<span id="050">50</span> And there were gathered unto them out of the
other nations of the land, and they erected the altar upon his own
place, because all the nations of the land were at enmity with them, and
oppressed them; and they offered sacrifices according to the time, and
burnt offerings to the Lord both morning and evening.

<span id="051">51</span> Also they held the feast of tabernacles, as it
is commanded in the law, and offered sacrifices daily, as was meet:

<span id="052">52</span> And after that, the continual oblations, and
the sacrifice of the sabbaths, and of the new moons, and of all holy
feasts.

<span id="053">53</span> And all they that had made any vow to God began
to offer sacrifices to God from the first day of the seventh month,
although the temple of the Lord was not yet built.

<span id="054">54</span> And they gave unto the masons and carpenters
money, meat, and drink, with cheerfulness.

<span id="055">55</span> Unto them of Zidon also and Tyre they gave
carrs, that they should bring cedar trees from Libanus, which should be
brought by floats to the haven of Joppa, according as it was commanded
them by Cyrus king of the Persians.

<span id="056">56</span> And in the second year and second month after
his coming to the temple of God at Jerusalem began Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel, and Jesus the son of Josedec, and their brethren, and the
priests, and the Levites, and all they that were come unto Jerusalem out
of the captivity:

<span id="057">57</span> And they laid the foundation of the house of
God in the first day of the second month, in the second year after they
were come to Jewry and Jerusalem.

<span id="058">58</span> And they appointed the Levites from twenty
years old over the works of the Lord. Then stood up Jesus, and his sons
and brethren, and Cadmiel his brother, and the sons of Madiabun, with
the sons of Joda the son of Eliadun, with their sons and brethren, all
Levites, with one accord setters forward of the business, labouring to
advance the works in the house of God. So the workmen built the temple
of the Lord.

<span id="059">59</span> And the priests stood arrayed in their
vestments with musical instruments and trumpets; and the Levites the
sons of Asaph had cymbals,

<span id="060">60</span> Singing songs of thanksgiving, and praising the
Lord, according as David the king of Israel had ordained.

<span id="061">61</span> And they sung with loud voices songs to the
praise of the Lord, because his mercy and glory is for ever in all
Israel.

<span id="062">62</span> And all the people sounded trumpets, and
shouted with a loud voice, singing songs of thanksgiving unto the Lord
for the rearing up of the house of the Lord.

<span id="063">63</span> Also of the priests and Levites, and of the
chief of their families, the ancients who had seen the former house came
to the building of this with weeping and great crying.

<span id="064">64</span> But many with trumpets and joy shouted with
loud voice,

<span id="065">65</span> Insomuch that the trumpets might not be heard
for the weeping of the people: yet the multitude sounded marvellously,
so that it was heard afar off.

<span id="066">66</span> Wherefore when the enemies of the tribe of
Judah and Benjamin heard it, they came to know what that noise of
trumpets should mean.

<span id="067">67</span> And they perceived that they that were of the
captivity did build the temple unto the Lord God of Israel.

<span id="068">68</span> So they went to Zorobabel and Jesus, and to the
chief of the families, and said unto them, We will build together with
you.

<span id="069">69</span> For we likewise, as ye, do obey your Lord, and
do sacrifice unto him from the days of Azbazareth the king of the
Assyrians, who brought us hither.

<span id="070">70</span> Then Zorobabel and Jesus and the chief of the
families of Israel said unto them, It is not for us and you to build
together an house unto the Lord our God.

<span id="071">71</span> We ourselves alone will build unto the Lord of
Israel, according as Cyrus the king of the Persians hath commanded us.

<span id="072">72</span> But the heathen of the land lying heavy upon
the inhabitants of Judea, and holding them strait, hindered their
building;

<span id="073">73</span> And by their secret plots, and popular
persuasions and commotions, they hindered the finishing of the building
all the time that king Cyrus lived: so they were hindered from building
for the space of two years, until the reign of Darius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 6](es1006)
