[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1003)  [Sep](../sep/es1003.md)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1.md)  
  [Previous](es1002)  [Next](es1004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> Now when Darius reigned, he made a great feast
unto all his subjects, and unto all his household, and unto all the
princes of Media and Persia,

<span id="002">2</span> And to all the governors and captains and
lieutenants that were under him, from India unto Ethiopia, of an hundred
twenty and seven provinces.

<span id="003">3</span> And when they had eaten and drunken, and being
satisfied were gone home, then Darius the king went into his bedchamber,
and slept, and soon after awaked.

<span id="004">4</span> Then three young men, that were of the guard
that kept the king's body, spake one to another;

<span id="005">5</span> Let every one of us speak a sentence: he that
shall overcome, and whose sentence shall seem wiser than the others,
unto him shall the king Darius give great gifts, and great things in
token of victory:

<span id="006">6</span> As, to be clothed in purple, to drink in gold,
and to sleep upon gold, and a chariot with bridles of gold, and an
headtire of fine linen, and a chain about his neck:

<span id="007">7</span> And he shall sit next to Darius because of his
wisdom, and shall be called Darius his cousin.

<span id="008">8</span> And then every one wrote his sentence, sealed
it, and laid it under king Darius his pillow;

<span id="009">9</span> And said that, when the king is risen, some will
give him the writings; and of whose side the king and the three princes
of Persia shall judge that his sentence is the wisest, to him shall the
victory be given, as was appointed.

<span id="010">10</span> The first wrote, Wine is the strongest.

<span id="011">11</span> The second wrote, The king is strongest.

<span id="012">12</span> The third wrote, Women are strongest: but above
all things Truth beareth away the victory.

<span id="013">13</span> Now when the king was risen up, they took their
writings, and delivered them unto him, and so he read them:

<span id="014">14</span> And sending forth he called all the princes of
Persia and Media, and the governors, and the captains, and the
lieutenants, and the chief officers;

<span id="015">15</span> And sat him down in the royal seat of judgment;
and the writings were read before them.

<span id="016">16</span> And he said, Call the young men, and they shall
declare their own sentences. So they were called, and came in.

<span id="017">17</span> And he said unto them, Declare unto us your
mind concerning the writings. Then began the first, who had spoken of
the strength of wine;

<span id="018">18</span> And he said thus, O ye men, how exceeding
strong is wine! it causeth all men to err that drink it:

<span id="019">19</span> It maketh the mind of the king and of the
fatherless child to be all one; of the bondman and of the freeman, of
the poor man and of the rich:

<span id="020">20</span> It turneth also every thought into jollity and
mirth, so that a man remembereth neither sorrow nor debt:

<span id="021">21</span> And it maketh every heart rich, so that a man
remembereth neither king nor governor; and it maketh to speak all things
by talents:

<span id="022">22</span> And when they are in their cups, they forget
their love both to friends and brethren, and a little after draw out
swords:

<span id="023">23</span> But when they are from the wine, they remember
not what they have done.

<span id="024">24</span> O ye men, is not wine the strongest, that
enforceth to do thus? And when he had so spoken, he held his peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 4](es1004.md)
