[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2011)  [Sep](../sep/es2011.md)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es2010)  [Next](es2012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 11

<span id="001">1</span> Then saw I a dream, and, behold, there came up
from the sea an eagle, which had twelve feathered wings, and three
heads.

<span id="002">2</span> And I saw, and, behold, she spread her wings
over all the earth, and all the winds of the air blew on her, and were
gathered together.

<span id="003">3</span> And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew
other contrary feathers; and they became little feathers and small.

<span id="004">4</span> But her heads were at rest: the head in the
midst was greater than the other, yet rested it with the residue.

<span id="005">5</span> Moreover I beheld, and, lo, the eagle flew with
her feathers, and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt therein.

<span id="006">6</span> And I saw that all things under heaven were
subject unto her, and no man spake against her, no, not one creature
upon earth.

<span id="007">7</span> And I beheld, and, lo, the eagle rose upon her
talons, and spake to her feathers, saying,

<span id="008">8</span> Watch not all at once: sleep every one in his
own place, and watch by course:

<span id="009">9</span> But let the heads be preserved for the last.

<span id="010">10</span> And I beheld, and, lo, the voice went not out
of her heads, but from the midst of her body.

<span id="011">11</span> And I numbered her contrary feathers, and,
behold, there were eight of them.

<span id="012">12</span> And I looked, and, behold, on the right side
there arose one feather, and reigned over all the earth;

<span id="013">13</span> And so it was, that when it reigned, the end of
it came, and the place thereof appeared no more: so the next following
stood up. and reigned, and had a great time;

<span id="014">14</span> And it happened, that when it reigned, the end
of it came also, like as the first, so that it appeared no more.

<span id="015">15</span> Then came there a voice unto it, and said,

<span id="016">16</span> Hear thou that hast borne rule over the earth
so long: this I say unto thee, before thou beginnest to appear no more,

<span id="017">17</span> There shall none after thee attain unto thy
time, neither unto the half thereof.

<span id="018">18</span> Then arose the third, and reigned as the other
before, and appeared no more also.

<span id="019">19</span> So went it with all the residue one after
another, as that every one reigned, and then appeared no more.

<span id="020">20</span> Then I beheld, and, lo, in process of time the
feathers that followed stood up upon the right side, that they might
rule also; and some of them ruled, but within a while they appeared no
more:

<span id="021">21</span> For some of them were set up, but ruled not.

<span id="022">22</span> After this I looked, and, behold, the twelve
feathers appeared no more, nor the two little feathers:

<span id="023">23</span> And there was no more upon the eagle's body,
but three heads that rested, and six little wings.

<span id="024">24</span> Then saw I also that two little feathers
divided themselves from the six, and remained under the head that was
upon the right side: for the four continued in their place.

<span id="025">25</span> And I beheld, and, lo, the feathers that were
under the wing thought to set up themselves and to have the rule.

<span id="026">26</span> And I beheld, and, lo, there was one set up,
but shortly it appeared no more.

<span id="027">27</span> And the second was sooner away than the first.

<span id="028">28</span> And I beheld, and, lo, the two that remained
thought also in themselves to reign:

<span id="029">29</span> And when they so thought, behold, there awaked
one of the heads that were at rest, namely, it that was in the midst;
for that was greater than the two other heads.

<span id="030">30</span> And then I saw that the two other heads were
joined with it.

<span id="031">31</span> And, behold, the head was turned with them that
were with it, and did eat up the two feathers under the wing that would
have reigned.

<span id="032">32</span> But this head put the whole earth in fear, and
bare rule in it over all those that dwelt upon the earth with much
oppression; and it had the governance of the world more than all the
wings that had been.

<span id="033">33</span> And after this I beheld, and, lo, the head that
was in the midst suddenly appeared no more, like as the wings.

<span id="034">34</span> But there remained the two heads, which also in
like sort ruled upon the earth, and over those that dwelt therein.

<span id="035">35</span> And I beheld, and, lo, the head upon the right
side devoured it that was upon the left side.

<span id="036">36</span> Then I head a voice, which said unto me, Look
before thee, and consider the thing that thou seest.

<span id="037">37</span> And I beheld, and lo, as it were a roaring lion
chased out of the wood: and I saw that he sent out a man's voice unto
the eagle, and said,

<span id="038">38</span> Hear thou, I will talk with thee, and the
Highest shall say unto thee,

<span id="039">39</span> Art not thou it that remainest of the four
beasts, whom I made to reign in my world, that the end of their times
might come through them?

<span id="040">40</span> And the fourth came, and overcame all the
beasts that were past, and had power over the world with great
fearfulness, and over the whole compass of the earth with much wicked
oppression; and so long time dwelt he upon the earth with deceit.

<span id="041">41</span> For the earth hast thou not judged with truth.

<span id="042">42</span> For thou hast afflicted the meek, thou hast
hurt the peaceable, thou hast loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings
of them that brought forth fruit, and hast cast down the walls of such
as did thee no harm.

<span id="043">43</span> Therefore is thy wrongful dealing come up unto
the Highest, and thy pride unto the Mighty.

<span id="044">44</span> The Highest also hath looked upon the proud
times, and, behold, they are ended, and his abominations are fulfilled.

<span id="045">45</span> And therefore appear no more, thou eagle, nor
thy horrible wings, nor thy wicked feathers nor thy malicious heads, nor
thy hurtful claws, nor all thy vain body:

<span id="046">46</span> That all the earth may be refreshed, and may
return, being delivered from thy violence, and that she may hope for the
judgment and mercy of him that made her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 12](es2012.md)
