[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2009)  [Sep](../sep/es2009.md)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es2008)  [Next](es2010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 9

<span id="001">1</span> He answered me then, and said, Measure thou the
time diligently in itself: and when thou seest part of the signs past,
which I have told thee before,

<span id="002">2</span> Then shalt thou understand, that it is the very
same time, wherein the Highest will begin to visit the world which he
made.

<span id="003">3</span> Therefore when there shall be seen earthquakes
and uproars of the people in the world:

<span id="004">4</span> Then shalt thou well understand, that the most
High spake of those things from the days that were before thee, even
from the beginning.

<span id="005">5</span> For like as all that is made in the world hath a
beginning and an end, and the end is manifest:

<span id="006">6</span> Even so the times also of the Highest have plain
beginnings in wonder and powerful works, and endings in effects and
signs.

<span id="007">7</span> And every one that shall be saved, and shall be
able to escape by his works, and by faith, whereby ye have believed,

<span id="008">8</span> Shall be preserved from the said perils, and
shall see my salvation in my land, and within my borders: for I have
sanctified them for me from the beginning.

<span id="009">9</span> Then shall they be in pitiful case, which now
have abused my ways: and they that have cast them away despitefully
shall dwell in torments.

<span id="010">10</span> For such as in their life have received
benefits, and have not known me;

<span id="011">11</span> And they that have loathed my law, while they
had yet liberty, and, when as yet place of repentance was open unto
them, understood not, but despised it;

<span id="012">12</span> The same must know it after death by pain.

<span id="013">13</span> And therefore be thou not curious how the
ungodly shall be punished, and when: but enquire how the righteous shall
be saved, whose the world is, and for whom the world is created.

<span id="014">14</span> Then answered I and said,

<span id="015">15</span> I have said before, and now do speak, and will
speak it also hereafter, that there be many more of them which perish,
than of them which shall be saved:

<span id="016">16</span> Like as a wave is greater than a drop.

<span id="017">17</span> And he answered me, saying, Like as the field
is, so is also the seed; as the flowers be, such are the colours also;
such as the workman is, such also is the work; and as the husbandman ls
himself, so is his husbandry also: for it was the time of the world.

<span id="018">18</span> And now when I prepared the world, which was
not yet made, even for them to dwell in that now live, no man spake
against me.

<span id="019">19</span> For then every one obeyed: but now the manners
of them which are created in this world that is made are corrupted by a
perpetual seed, and by a law which is unsearchable rid themselves.

<span id="020">20</span> So I considered the world, and, behold, there
was peril because of the devices that were come into it.

<span id="021">21</span> And I saw, and spared it greatly, and have kept
me a grape of the cluster, and a plant of a great people.

<span id="022">22</span> Let the multitude perish then, which was born
in vain; and let my grape be kept, and my plant; for with great labour
have I made it perfect.

<span id="023">23</span> Nevertheless, if thou wilt cease yet seven days
more, (but thou shalt not fast in them,

<span id="024">24</span> But go into a field of flowers, where no house
is builded, and eat only the flowers of the field; taste no flesh, drink
no wine, but eat flowers only;)

<span id="025">25</span> And pray unto the Highest continually, then
will I come and talk with thee.

<span id="026">26</span> So I went my way into the field which is called
Ardath, like as he commanded me; and there I sat among the flowers, and
did eat of the herbs of the field, and the meat of the same satisfied
me.

<span id="027">27</span> After seven days I sat upon the grass, and my
heart was vexed within me, like as before:

<span id="028">28</span> And I opened my mouth, and began to talk before
the most High, and said,

<span id="029">29</span> O Lord, thou that shewest thyself unto us, thou
wast shewed unto our fathers in the wilderness, in a place where no man
treadeth, in a barren place, when they came out of Egypt.

<span id="030">30</span> And thou spakest saying, Hear me, O Israel; and
mark my words, thou seed of Jacob.

<span id="031">31</span> For, behold, I sow my law in you, and it shall
bring fruit in you, and ye shall be honoured in it for ever.

<span id="032">32</span> But our fathers, which received the law, kept
it not, and observed not thy ordinances: and though the fruit of thy law
did not perish, neither could it, for it was thine;

<span id="033">33</span> Yet they that received it perished, because
they kept not the thing that was sown in them.

<span id="034">34</span> And, lo, it ls a custom, when the ground hath
received seed, or the sea a ship, or any vessel meat or drink, that,
that being perished wherein it was sown or cast into,

<span id="035">35</span> That thing also which was sown, or cast
therein, or received, doth perish, and remaineth not with us: but with
us it hath not happened so.

<span id="036">36</span> For we that have received the law perish by
sin, and our heart also which received it

<span id="037">37</span> Notwithstanding the law perisheth not, but
remaineth in his force.

<span id="038">38</span> And when I spake these things in my heart, I
looked back with mine eyes, and upon the right side I saw a woman, and,
behold, she mourned and wept with a loud voice, and was much grieved in
heart, and her clothes were rent, and she had ashes upon her head.

<span id="039">39</span> Then let I my thoughts go that I was in, and
turned me unto her,

<span id="040">40</span> And said unto her, Wherefore weepest thou? why
art thou so grieved in thy mind?

<span id="041">41</span> And she said unto me, Sir, let me alone, that I
may bewail myself, and add unto my sorrow, for I am sore vexed in my
mind, and brought very low.

<span id="042">42</span> And I said unto her, What aileth thee? tell me.

<span id="043">43</span> She said unto me, I thy servant have been
barren, and had no child, though I had an husband thirty years,

<span id="044">44</span> And those thirty years I did nothing else day
and night, and every hour, but make my, prayer to the Highest.

<span id="045">45</span> After thirty years God heard me thine handmaid,
looked upon my misery, considered my trouble, and gave me a son: and I
was very glad of him, so was my husband also, and all my neighbours: and
we gave great honour unto the Almighty.

<span id="046">46</span> And I nourished him with great travail.

<span id="047">47</span> So when he grew up, and came to the time that
he should have a wife, I made a feast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 10](es2010.md)
