[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2012)  [Sep](../sep/es2012.md)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es2011)  [Next](es2013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> And it came to pass, whiles the lion spake these
words unto the eagle, I saw,

<span id="002">2</span> And, behold, the head that remained and the four
wings appeared no more, and the two went unto it and set themselves up
to reign, and their kingdom was small, and fill of uproar.

<span id="003">3</span> And I saw, and, behold, they appeared no more,
and the whole body of the eagle was burnt so that the earth was in great
fear: then awaked I out of the trouble and trance of my mind, and from
great fear, and said unto my spirit,

<span id="004">4</span> Lo, this hast thou done unto me, in that thou
searchest out the ways of the Highest.

<span id="005">5</span> Lo, yet am I weary in my mind, and very weak in
my spirit; and little strength is there in me, for the great fear
wherewith I was afflicted this night.

<span id="006">6</span> Therefore will I now beseech the Highest, that
he will comfort me unto the end.

<span id="007">7</span> And I said, Lord that bearest rule, if I have
found grace before thy sight, and if I am justified with thee before
many others, and if my prayer indeed be come up before thy face;

<span id="008">8</span> Comfort me then, and shew me thy servant the
interpretation and plain difference of this fearful vision, that thou
mayest perfectly comfort my soul.

<span id="009">9</span> For thou hast judged me worthy to shew me the
last times.

<span id="010">10</span> And he said unto me, This is the interpretation
of the vision:

<span id="011">11</span> The eagle, whom thou sawest come up from the
sea, is the kingdom which was seen in the vision of thy brother Daniel.

<span id="012">12</span> But it was not expounded unto him, therefore
now I declare it unto thee.

<span id="013">13</span> Behold, the days will come, that there shall
rise up a kingdom upon earth, and it shall be feared above all the
kingdoms that were before it.

<span id="014">14</span> In the same shall twelve kings reign, one after
another:

<span id="015">15</span> Whereof the second shall begin to reign, and
shall have more time than any of the twelve.

<span id="016">16</span> And this do the twelve wings signify, which
thou sawest.

<span id="017">17</span> As for the voice which thou heardest speak, and
that thou sawest not to go out from the heads but from the midst of the
body thereof, this is the interpretation:

<span id="018">18</span> That after the time of that kingdom there shall
arise great strivings, and it shall stand in peril of failing:
nevertheless it shall not then fall, but shall be restored again to his
beginning.

<span id="019">19</span> And whereas thou sawest the eight small under
feathers sticking to her wings, this is the interpretation:

<span id="020">20</span> That in him there shall arise eight kings,
whose times shall be but small, and their years swift.

<span id="021">21</span> And two of them shall perish, the middle time
approaching: four shall be kept until their end begin to approach: but
two shall be kept unto the end.

<span id="022">22</span> And whereas thou sawest three heads resting,
this is the interpretation:

<span id="023">23</span> In his last days shall the most High raise up
three kingdoms, and renew many things therein, and they shall have the
dominion of the earth,

<span id="024">24</span> And of those that dwell therein, with much
oppression, above all those that were before them: therefore are they
called the heads of the eagle.

<span id="025">25</span> For these are they that shall accomplish his
wickedness, and that shall finish his last end.

<span id="026">26</span> And whereas thou sawest that the great head
appeared no more, it signifieth that one of them shall die upon his bed,
and yet with pain.

<span id="027">27</span> For the two that remain shall be slain with the
sword.

<span id="028">28</span> For the sword of the one shall devour the
other: but at the last shall he fall through the sword himself.

<span id="029">29</span> And whereas thou sawest two feathers under the
wings passing over the head that is on the right side;

<span id="030">30</span> It signifieth that these are they, whom the
Highest hath kept unto their end: this is the small kingdom and full of
trouble, as thou sawest.

<span id="031">31</span> And the lion, whom thou sawest rising up out of
the wood, and roaring, and speaking to the eagle, and rebuking her for
her unrighteousness with all the words which thou hast heard;

<span id="032">32</span> This is the anointed, which the Highest hath
kept for them and for their wickedness unto the end: he shall reprove
them, and shall upbraid them with their cruelty.

<span id="033">33</span> For he shall set them before him alive in
judgment, and shall rebuke them, and correct them.

<span id="034">34</span> For the rest of my people shall he deliver with
mercy, those that have been pressed upon my borders, and he shall make
them joyful until the coming of the day of judgment, whereof I have
spoken unto thee from the the beginning.

<span id="035">35</span> This is the dream that thou sawest, and these
are the interpretations.

<span id="036">36</span> Thou only hast been meet to know this secret of
the Highest.

<span id="037">37</span> Therefore write all these things that thou hast
seen in a book, and hide them:

<span id="038">38</span> And teach them to the wise of the people, whose
hearts thou knowest may comprehend and keep these secrets.

<span id="039">39</span> But wait thou here thyself yet seven days more,
that it may be shewed thee, whatsoever it pleaseth the Highest to
declare unto thee. And with that he went his way.

<span id="040">40</span> And it came to pass, when all the people saw
that the seven days were past, and I not come again into the city, they
gathered them all together, from the least unto the greatest, and came
unto me, and said,

<span id="041">41</span> What have we offended thee? and what evil have
we done against thee, that thou forsakest us, and sittest here in this
place?

<span id="042">42</span> For of all the prophets thou only art left us,
as a cluster of the vintage, and as a candle in a dark place, and as a
haven or ship preserved from the tempest.

<span id="043">43</span> Are not the evils which are come to us
sufficient?

<span id="044">44</span> If thou shalt forsake us, how much better had
it been for us, if we also had been burned in the midst of Sion?

<span id="045">45</span> For we are not better than they that died
there. And they wept with a loud voice. Then answered I them, and said,

<span id="046">46</span> Be of good comfort, O Israel; and be not heavy,
thou house of Jacob:

<span id="047">47</span> For the Highest hath you in remembrance, and
the Mighty hath not forgotten you in temptation.

<span id="048">48</span> As for me, I have not forsaken you, neither am
I departed from you: but am come into this place, to pray for the
desolation of Sion, and that I might seek mercy for the low estate of
your sanctuary.

<span id="049">49</span> And now go your way home every man, and after
these days will I come unto you.

<span id="050">50</span> So the people went their way into the city,
like as I commanded them:

<span id="051">51</span> But I remained still in the field seven days,
as the angel commanded me; and did eat only in those days of the flowers
of the field, and had my meat of the herbs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 13](es2013.md)
