[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2013)  [Sep](../sep/es2013.md)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es2012)  [Next](es2014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> And it came to pass after seven days, I dreamed
a dream by night:

<span id="002">2</span> And, lo, there arose a wind from the sea, that
it moved all the waves thereof.

<span id="003">3</span> And I beheld, and, lo, that man waxed strong
with the thousands of heaven: and when he turned his countenance to
look, all the things trembled that were seen under him.

<span id="004">4</span> And whensoever the voice went out of his mouth,
all they burned that heard his voice, like as the earth faileth when it
feeleth the fire.

<span id="005">5</span> And after this I beheld, and, lo, there was
gathered together a multitude of men, out of number, from the four winds
of the heaven, to subdue the man that came out of the sea

<span id="006">6</span> But I beheld, and, lo, he had graved himself a
great mountain, and flew up upon it.

<span id="007">7</span> But I would have seen the region or place
whereout the hill was graven, and I could not.

<span id="008">8</span> And after this I beheld, and, lo, all they which
were gathered together to subdue him were sore afraid, and yet durst
fight.

<span id="009">9</span> And, lo, as he saw the violence of the multitude
that came, he neither lifted up his hand, nor held sword, nor any
instrument of war:

<span id="010">10</span> But only I saw that he sent out of his mouth as
it had been a blast of fire, and out of his lips a flaming breath, and
out of his tongue he cast out sparks and tempests.

<span id="011">11</span> And they were all mixed together; the blast of
fire, the flaming breath, and the great tempest; and fell with violence
upon the multitude which was prepared to fight, and burned them up every
one, so that upon a sudden of an innumerable multitude nothing was to be
perceived, but only dust and smell of smoke: when I saw this I was
afraid.

<span id="012">12</span> Afterward saw I the same man come down from the
mountain, and call unto him another peaceable Multitude.

<span id="013">13</span> And there came much people unto him, whereof
some were glad, some were sorry, and some of them were bound, and other
some brought of them that were offered: then was I sick through great
fear, and I awaked, and said,

<span id="014">14</span> Thou hast shewed thy servant these wonders from
the beginning, and hast counted me worthy that thou shouldest receive my
prayer:

<span id="015">15</span> Shew me now yet the interpretation of this
dream.

<span id="016">16</span> For as I conceive in mine understanding, woe
unto them that shall be left in those days and much more woe unto them
that are not left behind!

<span id="017">17</span> For they that were not left were in heaviness.

<span id="018">18</span> Now understand I the things that are laid up in
the latter days, which shall happen unto them, and to those that are
left behind.

<span id="019">19</span> Therefore are they come into great perils and
many necessities, like as these dreams declare.

<span id="020">20</span> Yet is it easier for him that is in danger to
come into these things, than to pass away as a cloud out of the world,
and not to see the things that happen in the last days. And he answered
unto me, and said,

<span id="021">21</span> The interpretation of the vision shall I shew
thee, and I will open unto thee the thing that thou hast required.

<span id="022">22</span> Whereas thou hast spoken of them that are left
behind, this is the interpretation:

<span id="023">23</span> He that shall endure the peril in that time
hath kept himself: they that be fallen into danger are such as have
works, and faith toward the Almighty.

<span id="024">24</span> Know this therefore, that they which be left
behind are more blessed than they that be dead.

<span id="025">25</span> This is the meaning of the vision: Whereas thou
sawest a man coming up from the midst of the sea:

<span id="026">26</span> The same is he whom God the Highest hath kept a
great season, which by his own self shall deliver his creature: and he
shall order them that are left behind.

<span id="027">27</span> And whereas thou sawest, that out of his mouth
there came as a blast of wind, and fire, and storm;

<span id="028">28</span> And that he held neither sword, nor any
instrument of war, but that the rushing in of him destroyed the whole
multitude that came to subdue him; this is the interpretation:

<span id="029">29</span> Behold, the days come, when the most High will
begin to deliver them that are upon the earth.

<span id="030">30</span> And he shall come to the astonishment of them
that dwell on the earth.

<span id="031">31</span> And one shall undertake to fight against
another, one city against another, one place against another, one people
against another, and one realm against another.

<span id="032">32</span> And the time shall be when these things shall
come to pass, and the signs shall happen which I shewed thee before, and
then shall my Son be declared, whom thou sawest as a man ascending.

<span id="033">33</span> And when all the people hear his voice, every
man shall in their own land leave the battle they have one against
another.

<span id="034">34</span> And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered
together, as thou sawest them, willing to come, and to overcome him by
fighting.

<span id="035">35</span> But he shall stand upon the top of the mount
Sion.

<span id="036">36</span> And Sion shall come, and shall be shewed to all
men, being prepared and builded, like as thou sawest the hill graven
without hands.

<span id="037">37</span> And this my Son shall rebuke the wicked
inventions of those nations, which for their wicked life are fallen into
the tempest;

<span id="038">38</span> And shall lay before them their evil thoughts,
and the torments wherewith they shall begin to be tormented, which are
like unto a flame: and he shall destroy them without labour by the law
which is like unto me.

<span id="039">39</span> And whereas thou sawest that he gathered
another peaceable multitude unto him;

<span id="040">40</span> Those are the ten tribes, which were carried
away prisoners out of their own land in the time of Osea the king, whom
Salmanasar the king of Assyria led away captive, and he carried them
over the waters, and so came they into another land.

<span id="041">41</span> But they took this counsel among themselves,
that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a
further country, where never mankind dwelt,

<span id="042">42</span> That they might there keep their statutes,
which they never kept in their own land.

<span id="043">43</span> And they entered into Euphrates by the narrow
places of the river.

<span id="044">44</span> For the most High then shewed signs for them,
and held still the flood, till they were passed over.

<span id="045">45</span> For through that country there was a great way
to go, namely, of a year and a half: and the same region is called
Arsareth.

<span id="046">46</span> Then dwelt they there until the latter time;
and now when they shall begin to come,

<span id="047">47</span> The Highest shall stay the springs of the
stream again, that they may go through: therefore sawest thou the
multitude with peace.

<span id="048">48</span> But those that be left behind of thy people are
they that are found within my borders.

<span id="049">49</span> Now when he destroyeth the multitude of the
nations that are gathered together, he shall defend his people that
remain.

<span id="050">50</span> And then shall he shew them great wonders.

<span id="051">51</span> Then said I, O Lord that bearest rule, shew me
this: Wherefore have I seen the man coming up from the midst of the sea?

<span id="052">52</span> And he said unto me, Like as thou canst neither
seek out nor know the things that are in the deep of the sea: even so
can no man upon earth see my Son, or those that be with him, but in the
day time.

<span id="053">53</span> This is the interpretation of the dream which
thou sawest, and whereby thou only art here lightened.

<span id="054">54</span> For thou hast forsaken thine own way, and
applied thy diligence unto my law, and sought it.

<span id="055">55</span> Thy life hast thou ordered in wisdom, and hast
called understanding thy mother.

<span id="056">56</span> And therefore have I shewed thee the treasures
of the Highest: after other three days I will speak other things unto
thee, and declare unto thee mighty and wondrous things.

<span id="057">57</span> Then went I forth into the field, giving praise
and thanks greatly unto the most High because of his wonders which he
did in time;

<span id="058">58</span> And because he governeth the same, and such
things as fall in their seasons: and there I sat three days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 14](es2014.md)
