[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2010)  [Sep](../sep/es2010)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2009)  [Next](es2011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 10

<span id="001">1</span> And it so came to pass, that when my son was
entered into his wedding chamber, he fell down, and died.

<span id="002">2</span> Then we all overthrew the lights, and all my
neighbours rose up to comfort me: so I took my rest unto the second day
at night.

<span id="003">3</span> And it came to pass, when they had all left off
to comfort me, to the end I might be quiet; then rose I up by night and
fled, and came hither into this field, as thou seest.

<span id="004">4</span> And I do now purpose not to return into the
city, but here to stay, and neither to eat nor drink, but continually to
mourn and to fast until I die.

<span id="005">5</span> Then left I the meditations wherein I was, and
spake to her in anger, saying,

<span id="006">6</span> Thou foolish woman above all other, seest thou
not our mourning, and what happeneth unto us?

<span id="007">7</span> How that Sion our mother is full of all
heaviness, and much humbled, mourning very sore?

<span id="008">8</span> And now, seeing we all mourn and are sad, for we
are all in heaviness, art thou grieved for one son?

<span id="009">9</span> For ask the earth, and she shall tell thee, that
it is she which ought to mourn for the fall of so many that grow upon
her.

<span id="010">10</span> For out of her came all at the first, and out
of her shall all others come, and, behold, they walk almost all into
destruction, and a multitude of them is utterly rooted out.

<span id="011">11</span> Who then should make more mourning than she,
that hath lost so great a multitude; and not thou, which art sorry but
for one?

<span id="012">12</span> But if thou sayest unto me, My lamentation is
not like the earth's, because I have lost the fruit of my womb, which I
brought forth with pains, and bare with sorrows;

<span id="013">13</span> But the earth not so: for the multitude present
in it according to the course of the earth is gone, as it came:

<span id="014">14</span> Then say I unto thee, Like as thou hast brought
forth with labour; even so the earth also hath given her fruit, namely,
man, ever since the beginning unto him that made her.

<span id="015">15</span> Now therefore keep thy sorrow to thyself, and
bear with a good courage that which hath befallen thee.

<span id="016">16</span> For if thou shalt acknowledge the determination
of God to be just, thou shalt both receive thy son in time, and shalt be
commended among women.

<span id="017">17</span> Go thy way then into the city to thine husband.

<span id="018">18</span> And she said unto me, That will I not do: I
will not go into the city, but here will I die.

<span id="019">19</span> So I proceeded to speak further unto her, and
said,

<span id="020">20</span> Do not so, but be counselled. by me: for how
many are the adversities of Sion? be comforted in regard of the sorrow
of Jerusalem.

<span id="021">21</span> For thou seest that our sanctuary is laid
waste, our altar broken down, our temple destroyed;

<span id="022">22</span> Our psaltery is laid on the ground, our song is
put to silence, our rejoicing is at an end, the light of our candlestick
is put out, the ark of our covenant is spoiled, our holy things are
defiled, and the name that is called upon us is almost profaned: our
children are put to shame, our priests are burnt, our Levites are gone
into captivity, our virgins are defiled, and our wives ravished; our
righteous men carried away, our little ones destroyed, our young men are
brought in bondage, and our strong men are become weak;

<span id="023">23</span> And, which is the greatest of all, the seal of
Sion hath now lost her honour; for she is delivered into the hands of
them that hate us.

<span id="024">24</span> And therefore shake off thy great heaviness,
and put away the multitude of sorrows, that the Mighty may be merciful
unto thee again, and the Highest shall give thee rest and ease from thy
labour.

<span id="025">25</span> And it came to pass while I was talking with
her, behold, her face upon a sudden shined exceedingly, and her
countenance glistered, so that I was afraid of her, and mused what it
might be.

<span id="026">26</span> And, behold, suddenly she made a great cry very
fearful: so that the earth shook at the noise of the woman.

<span id="027">27</span> And I looked, and, behold, the woman appeared
unto me no more, but there was a city builded, and a large place shewed
itself from the foundations: then was I afraid, and cried with a loud
voice, and said,

<span id="028">28</span> Where is Uriel the angel, who came unto me at
the first? for he hath caused me to fall into many trances, and mine end
is turned into corruption, and my prayer to rebuke.

<span id="029">29</span> And as I was speaking these words behold, he
came unto me, and looked upon me.

<span id="030">30</span> And, lo, I lay as one that had been dead, and
mine understanding was taken from me: and he took me by the right hand,
and comforted me, and set me upon my feet, and said unto me,

<span id="031">31</span> What aileth thee? and why art thou so
disquieted? and why is thine understanding troubled, and the thoughts of
thine heart?

<span id="032">32</span> And I said, Because thou hast forsaken me, and
yet I did according to thy words, and I went into the field, and, lo, I
have seen, and yet see, that I am not able to express.

<span id="033">33</span> And he said unto me, Stand up manfully, and I
will advise thee.

<span id="034">34</span> Then said I, Speak on, my lord, in me; only
forsake me not, lest I die frustrate of my hope.

<span id="035">35</span> For I have seen that I knew not, and hear that
I do not know.

<span id="036">36</span> Or is my sense deceived, or my soul in a dream?

<span id="037">37</span> Now therefore I beseech thee that thou wilt
shew thy servant of this vision.

<span id="038">38</span> He answered me then, and said, Hear me, and I
shall inform thee, and tell thee wherefore thou art afraid: for the
Highest will reveal many secret things unto thee.

<span id="039">39</span> He hath seen that thy way is right: for that
thou sorrowest continually for thy people, and makest great lamentation
for Sion.

<span id="040">40</span> This therefore is the meaning of the vision
which thou lately sawest:

<span id="041">41</span> Thou sawest a woman mourning, and thou
begannest to comfort her:

<span id="042">42</span> But now seest thou the likeness of the woman no
more, but there appeared unto thee a city builded.

<span id="043">43</span> And whereas she told thee of the death of her
son, this is the solution:

<span id="044">44</span> This woman, whom thou sawest is Sion: and
whereas she said unto thee, even she whom thou seest as a city builded,

<span id="045">45</span> Whereas, I say, she said unto thee, that she
hath been thirty years barren: those are the thirty years wherein there
was no offering made in her.

<span id="046">46</span> But after thirty years Solomon builded the city
and offered offerings: and then bare the barren a son.

<span id="047">47</span> And whereas she told thee that she nourished
him with labour: that was the dwelling in Jerusalem.

<span id="048">48</span> But whereas she said unto thee, That my son
coming into his marriage chamber happened to have a fail, and died: this
was the destruction that came to Jerusalem.

<span id="049">49</span> And, behold, thou sawest her likeness, and
because she mourned for her son, thou begannest to comfort her: and of
these things which have chanced, these are to be opened unto thee.

<span id="050">50</span> For now the most High seeth that thou art
grieved unfeignedly, and sufferest from thy whole heart for her, so hath
he shewed thee the brightness of her glory, and the comeliness of her
beauty:

<span id="051">51</span> And therefore I bade thee remain in the field
where no house was builded:

<span id="052">52</span> For I knew that the Highest would shew this
unto thee.

<span id="053">53</span> Therefore I commanded thee to go into the
field, where no foundation of any building was.

<span id="054">54</span> For in the place wherein the Highest beginneth
to shew his city, there can no man's building be able to stand.

<span id="055">55</span> And therefore fear not, let not thine heart be
affrighted, but go thy way in, and see the beauty and greatness of the
building, as much as thine eyes be able to see:

<span id="056">56</span> And then shalt thou hear as much as thine ears
may comprehend.

<span id="057">57</span> For thou art blessed above many other, and art
called with the Highest; and so are but few.

<span id="058">58</span> But to morrow at night thou shalt remain here;

<span id="059">59</span> And so shall the Highest shew thee visions of
the high things, which the most High will do unto them that dwell upon
the earth in the last days. So I slept that night and another, like as
he commanded me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 11](es2011)
