[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2008)  [Sep](../sep/es2008)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2007)  [Next](es2009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 8

<span id="001">1</span> And he answered me, saying, The most High hath
made this world for many, but the world to come for few.

<span id="002">2</span> I will tell thee a similitude, Esdras; As when
thou askest the earth, it shall say unto thee, that it giveth much mould
whereof earthen vessels are made, but little dust that gold cometh of:
even so is the course of this present world.

<span id="003">3</span> There be many created, but few shall be saved.

<span id="004">4</span> So answered I and said, Swallow then down, O my
soul, understanding, and devour wisdom.

<span id="005">5</span> For thou hast agreed to give ear, and art
willing to prophesy: for thou hast no longer space than only to live.

<span id="006">6</span> O Lord, if thou suffer not thy servant, that we
may pray before thee, and thou give us seed unto our heart, and culture
to our understanding, that there may come fruit of it; how shall each
man live that is corrupt, who beareth the place of a man?

<span id="007">7</span> For thou art alone, and we all one workmanship
of thine hands, like as thou hast said.

<span id="008">8</span> For when the body is fashioned now in the
mother's womb, and thou givest it members, thy creature is preserved in
fire and water, and nine months doth thy workmanship endure thy creature
which is created in her.

<span id="009">9</span> But that which keepeth and is kept shall both be
preserved: and when the time cometh, the womb preserved delivereth up
the things that grew in it.

<span id="010">10</span> For thou hast commanded out of the parts of the
body, that is to say, out of the breasts, milk to be given, which is the
fruit of the breasts,

<span id="011">11</span> That the thing which is fashioned may be
nourished for a time, till thou disposest it to thy mercy.

<span id="012">12</span> Thou broughtest it up with thy righteousness,
and nurturedst it in thy law, and reformedst it with thy judgment.

<span id="013">13</span> And thou shalt mortify it as thy creature, and
quicken it as thy work.

<span id="014">14</span> If therefore thou shalt destroy him which with
so great labour was fashioned, it is an easy thing to be ordained by thy
commandment, that the thing which was made might be preserved.

<span id="015">15</span> Now therefore, Lord, I will speak; touching man
in general, thou knowest best; but touching thy people, for whose sake I
am sorry;

<span id="016">16</span> And for thine inheritance, for whose cause I
mourn; and for Israel, for whom I am heavy; and for Jacob, for whose
sake I am troubled;

<span id="017">17</span> Therefore will I begin to pray before thee for
myself and for them: for I see the falls of us that dwell in the land.

<span id="018">18</span> But I have heard the swiftness of the judge
which is to come.

<span id="019">19</span> Therefore hear my voice, and understand my
words, and I shall speak before thee. This is the beginning of the words
of Esdras, before he was taken up: and I said,

<span id="020">20</span> O Lord, thou that dwellest in everlastingness
which beholdest from above things in the heaven and in the air;

<span id="021">21</span> Whose throne is inestimable; whose glory may
not be comprehended; before whom the hosts of angels stand with
trembling,

<span id="022">22</span> Whose service is conversant in wind and fire;
whose word is true, and sayings constant; whose commandment is strong,
and ordinance fearful;

<span id="023">23</span> Whose look drieth up the depths, and
indignation maketh the mountains to melt away; which the truth
witnesseth:

<span id="024">24</span> O hear the prayer of thy servant, and give ear
to the petition of thy creature.

<span id="025">25</span> For while I live I will speak, and so long as I
have understanding I will answer.

<span id="026">26</span> O look not upon the sins of thy people; but on
them which serve thee in truth.

<span id="027">27</span> Regard not the wicked inventions of the
heathen, but the desire of those that keep thy testimonies in
afflictions.

<span id="028">28</span> Think not upon those that have walked feignedly
before thee: but remember them, which according to thy will have known
thy fear.

<span id="029">29</span> Let it not be thy will to destroy them which
have lived like beasts; but to look upon them that have clearly taught
thy law.

<span id="030">30</span> Take thou no indignation at them which are
deemed worse than beasts; but love them that always put their trust in
thy righteousness and glory.

<span id="031">31</span> For we and our fathers do languish of such
diseases: but because of us sinners thou shalt be called merciful.

<span id="032">32</span> For if thou hast a desire to have mercy upon
us, thou shalt be called merciful, to us namely, that have no works of
righteousness.

<span id="033">33</span> For the just, which have many good works laid
up with thee, shall out of their own deeds receive reward.

<span id="034">34</span> For what is man, that thou shouldest take
displeasure at him? or what is a corruptible generation, that thou
shouldest be so bitter toward it?

<span id="035">35</span> For in truth them is no man among them that be
born, but he hath dealt wickedly; and among the faithful there is none
which hath not done amiss.

<span id="036">36</span> For in this, O Lord, thy righteousness and thy
goodness shall be declared, if thou be merciful unto them which have not
the confidence of good works.

<span id="037">37</span> Then answered he me, and said, Some things hast
thou spoken aright, and according unto thy words it shall be.

<span id="038">38</span> For indeed I will not think on the disposition
of them which have sinned before death, before judgment, before
destruction:

<span id="039">39</span> But I will rejoice over the disposition of the
righteous, and I will remember also their pilgrimage, and the salvation,
and the reward, that they shall have.

<span id="040">40</span> Like as I have spoken now, so shall it come to
pass.

<span id="041">41</span> For as the husbandman soweth much seed upon the
ground, and planteth many trees, and yet the thing that is sown good in
his season cometh not up, neither doth all that is planted take root:
even so is it of them that are sown in the world; they shall not all be
saved.

<span id="042">42</span> I answered then and said, If I have found
grace, let me speak.

<span id="043">43</span> Like as the husbandman's seed perisheth, if it
come not up, and receive not thy rain in due season; or if there come
too much rain, and corrupt it:

<span id="044">44</span> Even so perisheth man also, which is formed
with thy hands, and is called thine own image, because thou art like
unto him, for whose sake thou hast made all things, and likened him unto
the husbandman's seed.

<span id="045">45</span> Be not wroth with us but spare thy people, and
have mercy upon thine own inheritance: for thou art merciful unto thy
creature.

<span id="046">46</span> Then answered he me, and said, Things present
are for the present, and things to cometh for such as be to come.

<span id="047">47</span> For thou comest far short that thou shouldest
be able to love my creature more than I: but I have ofttimes drawn nigh
unto thee, and unto it, but never to the unrighteous.

<span id="048">48</span> In this also thou art marvellous before the
most High:

<span id="049">49</span> In that thou hast humbled thyself, as it
becometh thee, and hast not judged thyself worthy to be much glorified
among the righteous.

<span id="050">50</span> For many great miseries shall be done to them
that in the latter time shall dwell in the world, because they have
walked in great pride.

<span id="051">51</span> But understand thou for thyself, and seek out
the glory for such as be like thee.

<span id="052">52</span> For unto you is paradise opened, the tree of
life is planted, the time to come is prepared, plenteousness is made
ready, a city is builded, and rest is allowed, yea, perfect goodness and
wisdom.

<span id="053">53</span> The root of evil is sealed up from you,
weakness and the moth is hid from you, and corruption is fled into hell
to be forgotten:

<span id="054">54</span> Sorrows are passed, and in the end is shewed
the treasure of immortality.

<span id="055">55</span> And therefore ask thou no more questions
concerning the multitude of them that perish.

<span id="056">56</span> For when they had taken liberty, they despised
the most High, thought scorn of his law, and forsook his ways.

<span id="057">57</span> Moreover they have trodden down his righteous,

<span id="058">58</span> And said in their heart, that there is no God;
yea, and that knowing they must die.

<span id="059">59</span> For as the things aforesaid shalt receive you,
so thirst and pain are prepared for them: for it was not his will that
men should come to nought:

<span id="060">60</span> But they which be created have defiled the name
of him that made them, and were unthankful unto him which prepared life
for them.

<span id="061">61</span> And therefore is my judgment now at hand.

<span id="062">62</span> These things have I not shewed unto all men,
but unto thee, and a few like thee. Then answered I and said,

<span id="063">63</span> Behold, O Lord, now hast thou shewed me the
multitude of the wonders, which thou wilt begin to do in the last times:
but at what time, thou hast not shewed me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 9](es2009)
