[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2015)  [Sep](../sep/es2015)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2014)  [Next](es2016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 15

<span id="001">1</span> Behold, speak thou in the ears of my people the
words of prophecy, which I will put in thy mouth, saith the Lord:

<span id="002">2</span> And cause them to be written in paper: for they
are faithful and true.

<span id="003">3</span> Fear not the imaginations against thee, let not
the incredulity of them trouble thee, that speak against thee.

<span id="004">4</span> For all the unfaithful shall die in their
unfaithfulness.

<span id="005">5</span> Behold, saith the Lord, I will bring plagues
upon the world; the sword, famine, death, and destruction.

<span id="006">6</span> For wickedness hath exceedingly polluted the
whole earth, and their hurtful works are fulfilled.

<span id="007">7</span> Therefore saith the Lord,

<span id="008">8</span> I will hold my tongue no more as touching their
wickedness, which they profanely commit, neither will I suffer them in
those things, in which they wickedly exercise themselves: behold, the
innocent and righteous blood crieth unto me, and the souls of the just
complain continually.

<span id="009">9</span> And therefore, saith the Lord, I will surely
avenge them, and receive unto me all the innocent blood from among them.

<span id="010">10</span> Behold, my people is led as a flock to the
slaughter: I will not suffer them now to dwell in the land of Egypt:

<span id="011">11</span> But I will bring them with a mighty hand and a
stretched out arm, and smite Egypt with plagues, as before, and will
destroy all the land thereof.

<span id="012">12</span> Egypt shall mourn, and the foundation of it
shall be smitten with the plague and punishment that God shall bring
upon it.

<span id="013">13</span> They that till the ground shall mourn: for
their seeds shall fail through the blasting and hail, and with a fearful
constellation.

<span id="014">14</span> Woe to the world and them that dwell therein!

<span id="015">15</span> For the sword and their destruction draweth
nigh, and one people shall stand up and fight against another, and
swords in their hands.

<span id="016">16</span> For there shall be sedition among men, and
invading one another; they shall not regard their kings nor princes, and
the course of their actions shall stand in their power.

<span id="017">17</span> A man shall desire to go into a city, and shall
not be able.

<span id="018">18</span> For because of their pride the cities shall be
troubled, the houses shall be destroyed, and men shall be afraid.

<span id="019">19</span> A man shall have no pity upon his neighbour,
but shall destroy their houses with the sword, and spoil their goods,
because of the lack of bread, and for great tribulation.

<span id="020">20</span> Behold, saith God, I will call together all the
kings of the earth to reverence me, which are from the rising of the
sun, from the south, from the east, and Libanus; to turn themselves one
against another, and repay the things that they have done to them.

<span id="021">21</span> Like as they do yet this day unto my chosen, so
will I do also, and recompense in their bosom. Thus saith the Lord God;

<span id="022">22</span> My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and
my sword shall not cease over them that shed innocent blood upon the
earth.

<span id="023">23</span> The fire is gone forth from his wrath, and hath
consumed the foundations of the earth, and the sinners, like the straw
that is kindled.

<span id="024">24</span> Woe to them that sin, and keep not my
commandments! saith the Lord.

<span id="025">25</span> I will not spare them: go your way, ye
children, from the power, defile not my sanctuary.

<span id="026">26</span> For the Lord knoweth all them that sin against
him, and therefore delivereth he them unto death and destruction.

<span id="027">27</span> For now are the plagues come upon the whole
earth and ye shall remain in them: for God shall not deliver you,
because ye have sinned against him.

<span id="028">28</span> Behold an horrible vision, and the appearance
thereof from the east:

<span id="029">29</span> Where the nations of the dragons of Arabia
shall come out with many chariots, and the multitude of them shall be
carried as the wind upon earth, that all they which hear them may fear
and tremble.

<span id="030">30</span> Also the Carmanians raging in wrath shall go
forth as the wild boars of the wood, and with great power shall they
come, and join battle with them, and shall waste a portion of the land
of the Assyrians.

<span id="031">31</span> And then shall the dragons have the upper hand,
remembering their nature; and if they shall turn themselves, conspiring
together in great power to persecute them,

<span id="032">32</span> Then these shall be troubled bled, and keep
silence through their power, and shall flee.

<span id="033">33</span> And from the land of the Assyrians shall the
enemy besiege them, and consume some of them, and in their host shall be
fear and dread, and strife among their kings.

<span id="034">34</span> Behold clouds from the east and from the north
unto the south, and they are very horrible to look upon, full of wrath
and storm.

<span id="035">35</span> They shall smite one upon another, and they
shall smite down a great multitude of stars upon the earth, even their
own star; and blood shall be from the sword unto the belly,

<span id="036">36</span> And dung of men unto the camel's hough.

<span id="037">37</span> And there shall be great fearfulness and
trembling upon earth: and they that see the wrath shall be afraid, and
trembling shall come upon them.

<span id="038">38</span> And then shall there come great storms from the
south, and from the north, and another part from the west.

<span id="039">39</span> And strong winds shall arise from the east, and
shall open it; and the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and the star
stirred to cause fear toward the east and west wind, shall be destroyed.

<span id="040">40</span> The great and mighty clouds shall be puffed up
full of wrath, and the star, that they may make all the earth afraid,
and them that dwell therein; and they shall pour out over every high and
eminent place an horrible star,

<span id="041">41</span> Fire, and hail, and flying swords, and many
waters, that all fields may be full, and all rivers, with the abundance
of great waters.

<span id="042">42</span> And they shall break down the cities and walls,
mountains and hills, trees of the wood, and grass of the meadows, and
their corn.

<span id="043">43</span> And they shall go stedfastly unto Babylon, and
make her afraid.

<span id="044">44</span> They shall come to her, and besiege her, the
star and all wrath shall they pour out upon her: then shall the dust and
smoke go up unto the heaven, and all they that be about her shall bewail
her.

<span id="045">45</span> And they that remain under her shall do service
unto them that have put her in fear.

<span id="046">46</span> And thou, Asia, that art partaker of the hope
of Babylon, and art the glory of her person:

<span id="047">47</span> Woe be unto thee, thou wretch, because thou
hast made thyself like unto her; and hast decked thy daughters in
whoredom, that they might please and glory in thy lovers, which have
always desired to commit whoredom with thee.

<span id="048">48</span> Thou hast followed her that is hated in all her
works and inventions: therefore saith God,

<span id="049">49</span> I will send plagues upon thee; widowhood,
poverty, famine, sword, and pestilence, to waste thy houses with
destruction and death.

<span id="050">50</span> And the glory of thy Power shall be dried up as
a flower, the heat shall arise that is sent over thee.

<span id="051">51</span> Thou shalt be weakened as a poor woman with
stripes, and as one chastised with wounds, so that the mighty and lovers
shall not be able to receive thee.

<span id="052">52</span> Would I with jealousy have so proceeded against
thee, saith the Lord,

<span id="053">53</span> If thou hadst not always slain my chosen,
exalting the stroke of thine hands, and saying over their dead, when
thou wast drunken,

<span id="054">54</span> Set forth the beauty of thy countenance?

<span id="055">55</span> The reward of thy whoredom shall be in thy
bosom, therefore shalt thou receive recompence.

<span id="056">56</span> Like as thou hast done unto my chosen, saith
the Lord, even so shall God do unto thee, and shall deliver thee into
mischief

<span id="057">57</span> Thy children shall die of hunger, and thou
shalt fall through the sword: thy cities shall be broken down, and all
thine shall perish with the sword in the field.

<span id="058">58</span> They that be in the mountains shall die of
hunger, and eat their own flesh, and drink their own blood, for very
hunger of bread, and thirst of water.

<span id="059">59</span> Thou as unhappy shalt come through the sea, and
receive plagues again.

<span id="060">60</span> And in the passage they shall rush on the idle
city, and shall destroy some portion of thy land, and consume part of
thy glory, and shall return to Babylon that was destroyed.

<span id="061">61</span> And thou shalt be cast down by them as stubble,
and they shall be unto thee as fire;

<span id="062">62</span> And shall consume thee, and thy cities, thy
land, and thy mountains; all thy woods and thy fruitful trees shall they
burn up with fire.

<span id="063">63</span> Thy children shall they carry away captive,
and, look, what thou hast, they shall spoil it, and mar the beauty of
thy face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 16](es2016)
