[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2005)  [Sep](../sep/es2005)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2004)  [Next](es2006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 5

<span id="001">1</span> Nevertheless as coming the tokens, behold, the
days shall come, that they which dwell upon earth shall be taken in a
great number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and the land shall
be barren of faith.

<span id="002">2</span> But iniquity shall be increased above that which
now thou seest, or that thou hast heard long ago.

<span id="003">3</span> And the land, that thou seest now to have root,
shalt thou see wasted suddenly.

<span id="004">4</span> But if the most High grant thee to live, thou
shalt see after the third trumpet that the sun shall suddenly shine
again in the night, and the moon thrice in the day:

<span id="005">5</span> And blood shall drop out of wood, and the stone
shall give his voice, and the people shall be troubled:

<span id="006">6</span> And even he shall rule, whom they look not for
that dwell upon the earth, and the fowls shall take their flight away
together:

<span id="007">7</span> And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and
make a noise in the night, which many have not known: but they shall all
hear the voice thereof.

<span id="008">8</span> There shall be a confusion also in many places,
and the fire shall be oft sent out again, and the wild beasts shall
change their places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters:

<span id="009">9</span> And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and
all friends shall destroy one another; then shall wit hide itself, and
understanding withdraw itself into his secret chamber,

<span id="010">10</span> And shall be sought of many, and yet not be
found: then shall unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplied upon
earth.

<span id="011">11</span> One land also shall ask another, and say, Is
righteousness that maketh a man righteous gone through thee? And it
shall say, No.

<span id="012">12</span> At the same time shall men hope, but nothing
obtain: they shall labour, but their ways shall not prosper.

<span id="013">13</span> To shew thee such tokens I have leave; and if
thou wilt pray again, and weep as now, and fast even days, thou shalt
hear yet greater things.

<span id="014">14</span> Then I awaked, and an extreme fearfulness went
through all my body, and my mind was troubled, so that it fainted.

<span id="015">15</span> So the angel that was come to talk with me held
me, comforted me, and set me up upon my feet.

<span id="016">16</span> And in the second night it came to pass, that
Salathiel the captain of the people came unto me, saying, Where hast
thou been? and why is thy countenance so heavy?

<span id="017">17</span> Knowest thou not that Israel is committed unto
thee in the land of their captivity?

<span id="018">18</span> Up then, and eat bread, and forsake us not, as
the shepherd that leaveth his flock in the hands of cruel wolves.

<span id="019">19</span> Then said I unto him, Go thy ways from me, and
come not nigh me. And he heard what I said, and went from me.

<span id="020">20</span> And so I fasted seven days, mourning and
weeping, like as Uriel the angel commanded me.

<span id="021">21</span> And after seven days so it was, that the
thoughts of my heart were very grievous unto me again,

<span id="022">22</span> And my soul recovered the spirit of
understanding, and I began to talk with the most High again,

<span id="023">23</span> And said, O Lord that bearest rule, of every
wood of the earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou hast chosen thee
one only vine:

<span id="024">24</span> And of all lands of the whole world thou hast
chosen thee one pit: and of all the flowers thereof one lily:

<span id="025">25</span> And of all the depths of the sea thou hast
filled thee one river: and of all builded cities thou hast hallowed Sion
unto thyself:

<span id="026">26</span> And of all the fowls that are created thou hast
named thee one dove: and of all the cattle that are made thou hast
provided thee one sheep:

<span id="027">27</span> And among all the multitudes of people thou
hast gotten thee one people: and unto this people, whom thou lovedst,
thou gavest a law that is approved of all.

<span id="028">28</span> And now, O Lord, why hast thou given this one
people over unto many? and upon the one root hast thou prepared others,
and why hast thou scattered thy only one people among many?

<span id="029">29</span> And they which did gainsay thy promises, and
believed not thy covenants, have trodden them down.

<span id="030">30</span> If thou didst so much hate thy people, yet
shouldest thou punish them with thine own hands.

<span id="031">31</span> Now when I had spoken these words, the angel
that came to me the night afore was sent unto me,

<span id="032">32</span> And said unto me, Hear me, and I will instruct
thee; hearken to the thing that I say, and I shall tell thee more.

<span id="033">33</span> And I said, Speak on, my Lord. Then said he
unto me, Thou art sore troubled in mind for Israel's sake: lovest thou
that people better than he that made them?

<span id="034">34</span> And I said, No, Lord: but of very grief have I
spoken: for my reins pain me every hour, while I labour to comprehend
the way of the most High, and to seek out part of his judgment.

<span id="035">35</span> And he said unto me, Thou canst not. And I
said, Wherefore, Lord? whereunto was I born then? or why was not my
mother's womb then my grave, that I might not have seen the travail of
Jacob, and the wearisome toil of the stock of Israel?

<span id="036">36</span> And he said unto me, Number me the things that
are not yet come, gather me together the dross that are scattered
abroad, make me the flowers green again that are withered,

<span id="037">37</span> Open me the places that are closed, and bring
me forth the winds that in them are shut up, shew me the image of a
voice: and then I will declare to thee the thing that thou labourest to
know.

<span id="038">38</span> And I said, O Lord that bearest rule, who may
know these things, but he that hath not his dwelling with men?

<span id="039">39</span> As for me, I am unwise: how may I then speak of
these things whereof thou askest me?

<span id="040">40</span> Then said he unto me, Like as thou canst do
none of these things that I have spoken of, even so canst thou not find
out my judgment, or in the end the love that I have promised unto my
people.

<span id="041">41</span> And I said, Behold, O Lord, yet art thou nigh
unto them that be reserved till the end: and what shall they do that
have been before me, or we that be now, or they that shall come after
us?

<span id="042">42</span> And he said unto me, I will liken my judgment
unto a ring: like as there is no slackness of the last, even so there is
no swiftness of the first.

<span id="043">43</span> So I answered and said, Couldest thou not make
those that have been made, and be now, and that are for to come, at
once; that thou mightest shew thy judgment the sooner?

<span id="044">44</span> Then answered he me, and said, The creature may
not haste above the maker; neither may the world hold them at once that
shall be created therein.

<span id="045">45</span> And I said, As thou hast said unto thy servant,
that thou, which givest life to all, hast given life at once to the
creature that thou hast created, and the creature bare it: even so it
might now also bear them that now be present at once.

<span id="046">46</span> And he said unto me, Ask the womb of a woman,
and say unto her, If thou bringest forth children, why dost thou it not
together, but one after another? pray her therefore to bring forth ten
children at once.

<span id="047">47</span> And I said, She cannot: but must do it by
distance of time.

<span id="048">48</span> Then said he unto me, Even so have I given the
womb of the earth to those that be sown in it in their times.

<span id="049">49</span> For like as a young child may not bring forth
the things that belong to the aged, even so have I disposed the world
which I created.

<span id="050">50</span> And I asked, and said, Seeing thou hast now
given me the way, I will proceed to speak before thee: for our mother,
of whom thou hast told me that she is young, draweth now nigh unto age.

<span id="051">51</span> He answered me, and said, Ask a woman that
beareth children, and she shall tell thee.

<span id="052">52</span> Say unto her, Wherefore are unto they whom thou
hast now brought forth like those that were before, but less of stature?

<span id="053">53</span> And she shall answer thee, They that be born in
the the strength of youth are of one fashion, and they that are born in
the time of age, when the womb faileth, are otherwise.

<span id="054">54</span> Consider thou therefore also, how that ye are
less of stature than those that were before you.

<span id="055">55</span> And so are they that come after you less than
ye, as the creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the
strength of youth.

<span id="056">56</span> Then said I, Lord, I beseech thee, if I have
found favour in thy sight, shew thy servant by whom thou visitest thy
creature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 6](es2006)
