[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2001)  [Sep](../sep/es2001.md)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es1009)  [Next](es2002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> The second book of the prophet Esdras, the son
of Saraias, the son of Azarias, the son of Helchias, the son of
Sadamias, the sou of Sadoc, the son of Achitob,

<span id="002">2</span> The son of Achias, the son of Phinees, the son
of Heli, the son of Amarias, the son of Aziei, the son of Marimoth, the
son of And he spake unto the of Borith, the son of Abisei, the son of
Phinees, the son of Eleazar,

<span id="003">3</span> The son of Aaron, of the tribe of Levi; which
was captive in the land of the Medes, in the reign of Artexerxes king of
the Persians.

<span id="004">4</span> And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

<span id="005">5</span> Go thy way, and shew my people their sinful
deeds, and their children their wickedness which they have done against
me; that they may tell their children's children:

<span id="006">6</span> Because the sins of their fathers are increased
in them: for they have forgotten me, and have offered unto strange gods.

<span id="007">7</span> Am not I even he that brought them out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage? but they have provoked me unto
wrath, and despised my counsels.

<span id="008">8</span> Pull thou off then the hair of thy head, and
cast all evil upon them, for they have not been obedient unto my law,
but it is a rebellious people.

<span id="009">9</span> How long shall I forbear them, into whom I have
done so much good?

<span id="010">10</span> Many kings have I destroyed for their sakes;
Pharaoh with his servants and all his power have I smitten down.

<span id="011">11</span> All the nations have I destroyed before them,
and in the east I have scattered the people of two provinces, even of
Tyrus and Sidon, and have slain all their enemies.

<span id="012">12</span> Speak thou therefore unto them, saying, Thus
saith the Lord,

<span id="013">13</span> I led you through the sea and in the beginning
gave you a large and safe passage; I gave you Moses for a leader, and
Aaron for a priest.

<span id="014">14</span> I gave you light in a pillar of fire, and great
wonders have I done among you; yet have ye forgotten me, saith the Lord.

<span id="015">15</span> Thus saith the Almighty Lord, The quails were
as a token to you; I gave you tents for your safeguard: nevertheless ye
murmured there,

<span id="016">16</span> And triumphed not in my name for the
destruction of your enemies, but ever to this day do ye yet murmur.

<span id="017">17</span> Where are the benefits that I have done for
you? when ye were hungry and thirsty in the wilderness, did ye not cry
unto me,

<span id="018">18</span> Saying, Why hast thou brought us into this
wilderness to kill us? it had been better for us to have served the
Egyptians, than to die in this wilderness.

<span id="019">19</span> Then had I pity upon your mournings, and gave
you manna to eat; so ye did eat angels' bread.

<span id="020">20</span> When ye were thirsty, did I not cleave the
rock, and waters flowed out to your fill? for the heat I covered you
with the leaves of the trees.

<span id="021">21</span> I divided among you a fruitful land, I cast out
the Canaanites, the Pherezites, and the Philistines, before you: what
shall I yet do more for you? saith the Lord.

<span id="022">22</span> Thus saith the Almighty Lord, When ye were in
the wilderness, in the river of the Amorites, being athirst, and
blaspheming my name,

<span id="023">23</span> I gave you not fire for your blasphemies, but
cast a tree in the water, and made the river sweet.

<span id="024">24</span> What shall I do unto thee, O Jacob? thou, Juda,
wouldest not obey me: I will turn me to other nations, and unto those
will I give my name, that they may keep my statutes.

<span id="025">25</span> Seeing ye have forsaken me, I will forsake you
also; when ye desire me to be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy
upon you.

<span id="026">26</span> Whensoever ye shall call upon me, I will not
hear you: for ye have defiled your hands with blood, and your feet are
swift to commit manslaughter.

<span id="027">27</span> Ye have not as it were forsaken me, but your
own selves, saith the Lord.

<span id="028">28</span> Thus saith the Almighty Lord, Have I not prayed
you as a father his sons, as a mother her daughters, and a nurse her
young babes,

<span id="029">29</span> That ye would be my people, and I should be
your God; that ye would be my children, and I should be your father?

<span id="030">30</span> I gathered you together, as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings: but now, what shall I do unto you? I will cast
you out from my face.

<span id="031">31</span> When ye offer unto me, I will turn my face from
you: for your solemn feastdays, your new moons, and your circumcisions,
have I forsaken.

<span id="032">32</span> I sent unto you my servants the prophets, whom
ye have taken and slain, and torn their bodies in pieces, whose blood I
will require of your hands, saith the Lord.

<span id="033">33</span> Thus saith the Almighty Lord, Your house is
desolate, I will cast you out as the wind doth stubble.

<span id="034">34</span> And your children shall not be fruitful; for
they have despised my commandment, and done the thing that is an evil
before me.

<span id="035">35</span> Your houses will I give to a people that shall
come; which not having heard of me yet shall believe me; to whom I have
shewed no signs, yet they shall do that I have commanded them.

<span id="036">36</span> They have seen no prophets, yet they shall call
their sins to remembrance, and acknowledge them.

<span id="037">37</span> I take to witness the grace of the people to
come, whose little ones rejoice in gladness: and though they have not
seen me with bodily eyes, yet in spirit they believe the thing that I
say.

<span id="038">38</span> And now, brother, behold what glory; and see
the people that come from the east:

<span id="039">39</span> Unto whom I will give for leaders, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, Joel, Abdias, and Jonas,

<span id="040">40</span> Nahum, and Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zachary,
and Malachy, which is called also an angel of the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 2](es2002.md)
