[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2014)  [Sep](../sep/es2014)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2013)  [Next](es2015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> And it came to pass upon the third day, I sat
under an oak, and, behold, there came a voice out of a bush over against
me, and said, Esdras, Esdras.

<span id="002">2</span> And I said, Here am I, Lord And I stood up upon
my feet.

<span id="003">3</span> Then said he unto me, In the bush I did
manifestly reveal myself unto Moses, and talked with him, when my people
served in Egypt:

<span id="004">4</span> And I sent him and led my people out of Egypt,
and brought him up to the mount of where I held him by me a long season,

<span id="005">5</span> And told him many wondrous things, and shewed
him the secrets of the times, and the end; and commanded him, saying,

<span id="006">6</span> These words shalt thou declare, and these shalt
thou hide.

<span id="007">7</span> And now I say unto thee,

<span id="008">8</span> That thou lay up in thy heart the signs that I
have shewed, and the dreams that thou hast seen, and the interpretations
which thou hast heard:

<span id="009">9</span> For thou shalt be taken away from all, and from
henceforth thou shalt remain with my Son, and with such as be like thee,
until the times be ended.

<span id="010">10</span> For the world hath lost his youth, and the
times begin to wax old.

<span id="011">11</span> For the world is divided into twelve parts, and
the ten parts of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part:

<span id="012">12</span> And there remaineth that which is after the
half of the tenth part.

<span id="013">13</span> Now therefore set thine house in order, and
reprove thy people, comfort such of them as be in trouble, and now
renounce corruption,

<span id="014">14</span> Let go from thee mortal thoughts, cast away the
burdens of man, put off now the weak nature,

<span id="015">15</span> And set aside the thoughts that are most heavy
unto thee, and haste thee to flee from these times.

<span id="016">16</span> For yet greater evils than those which thou
hast seen happen shall be done hereafter.

<span id="017">17</span> For look how much the world shall be weaker
through age, so much the more shall evils increase upon them that dwell
therein.

<span id="018">18</span> For the time is fled far away, and leasing is
hard at hand: for now hasteth the vision to come, which thou hast seen.

<span id="019">19</span> Then answered I before thee, and said,

<span id="020">20</span> Behold, Lord, I will go, as thou hast commanded
me, and reprove the people which are present: but they that shall be
born afterward, who shall admonish them? thus the world is set in
darkness, and they that dwell therein are without light.

<span id="021">21</span> For thy law is burnt, therefore no man knoweth
the things that are done of thee, or the work that shall begin.

<span id="022">22</span> But if I have found grace before thee, send the
Holy Ghost into me, and I shall write all that hath been done in the
world since the beginning, which were written in thy law, that men may
find thy path, and that they which will live in the latter days may
live.

<span id="023">23</span> And he answered me, saying, Go thy way, gather
the people together, and say unto them, that they seek thee not for
forty days.

<span id="024">24</span> But look thou prepare thee many box trees, and
take with thee Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Ecanus, and Asiel, these five
which are ready to write swiftly;

<span id="025">25</span> And come hither, and I shall light a candle of
understanding in thine heart, which shall not be put out, till the
things be performed which thou shalt begin to write.

<span id="026">26</span> And when thou hast done, some things shalt thou
publish, and some things shalt thou shew secretly to the wise: to morrow
this hour shalt thou begin to write.

<span id="027">27</span> Then went I forth, as he commanded, and
gathered all the people together, and said,

<span id="028">28</span> Hear these words, O Israel.

<span id="029">29</span> Our fathers at the beginning were strangers in
Egypt, from whence they were delivered:

<span id="030">30</span> And received the law of life, which they kept
not, which ye also have transgressed after them.

<span id="031">31</span> Then was the land, even the land of Sion,
parted among you by lot: but your fathers, and ye yourselves, have done
unrighteousness, and have not kept the ways which the Highest commanded
you.

<span id="032">32</span> And forasmuch as he is a righteous judge, he
took from you in time the thing that he had given you.

<span id="033">33</span> And now are ye here, and your brethren among
you.

<span id="034">34</span> Therefore if so be that ye will subdue your own
understanding, and reform your hearts, ye shall be kept alive and after
death ye shall obtain mercy.

<span id="035">35</span> For after death shall the judgment come, when
we shall live again: and then shall the names of the righteous be
manifest, and the works of the ungodly shall be declared.

<span id="036">36</span> Let no man therefore come unto me now, nor seek
after me these forty days.

<span id="037">37</span> So I took the five men, as he commanded me, and
we went into the field, and remained there.

<span id="038">38</span> And the next day, behold, a voice called me,
saying, Esdras, open thy mouth, and drink that I give thee to drink.

<span id="039">39</span> Then opened I my mouth, and, behold, he reached
me a full cup, which was full as it were with water, but the colour of
it was like fire.

<span id="040">40</span> And I took it, and drank: and when I had drunk
of it, my heart uttered understanding, and wisdom grew in my breast, for
my spirit strengthened my memory:

<span id="041">41</span> And my mouth was opened, and shut no more.

<span id="042">42</span> The Highest gave understanding unto the five
men, and they wrote the wonderful visions of the night that were told,
which they knew not: and they sat forty days, and they wrote in the day,
and at night they ate bread.

<span id="043">43</span> As for me. I spake in the day, and I held not
my tongue by night.

<span id="044">44</span> In forty days they wrote two hundred and four
books.

<span id="045">45</span> And it came to pass, when the forty days were
filled, that the Highest spake, saying, The first that thou hast written
publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it:

<span id="046">46</span> But keep the seventy last, that thou mayest
deliver them only to such as be wise among the people:

<span id="047">47</span> For in them is the spring of understanding, the
fountain of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge.

<span id="048">48</span> And I did so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 15](es2015)
