[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2003)  [Sep](../sep/es2003)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2002)  [Next](es2004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> In the thirtieth year after the ruin of the city
I was in Babylon, and lay troubled upon my bed, and my thoughts came up
over my heart:

<span id="002">2</span> For I saw the desolation of Sion, and the wealth
of them that dwelt at Babylon.

<span id="003">3</span> And my spirit was sore moved, so that I began to
speak words full of fear to the most High, and said,

<span id="004">4</span> O Lord, who bearest rule, thou spakest at the
beginning, when thou didst plant the earth, and that thyself alone, and
commandedst the people,

<span id="005">5</span> And gavest a body unto Adam without soul, which
was the workmanship of thine hands, and didst breathe into him the
breath of life, and he was made living before thee.

<span id="006">6</span> And thou leadest him into paradise, which thy
right hand had planted, before ever the earth came forward.

<span id="007">7</span> And unto him thou gavest commandment to love thy
way: which he transgressed, and immediately thou appointedst death in
him and in his generations, of whom came nations, tribes, people, and
kindreds, out of number.

<span id="008">8</span> And every people walked after their own will,
and did wonderful things before thee, and despised thy commandments.

<span id="009">9</span> And again in process of time thou broughtest the
flood upon those that dwelt in the world, and destroyedst them.

<span id="010">10</span> And it came to pass in every of them, that as
death was to Adam, so was the flood to these.

<span id="011">11</span> Nevertheless one of them thou leftest, namely,
Noah with his household, of whom came all righteous men.

<span id="012">12</span> And it happened, that when they that dwelt upon
the earth began to multiply, and had gotten them many children, and were
a great people, they began again to be more ungodly than the first.

<span id="013">13</span> Now when they lived so wickedly before thee,
thou didst choose thee a man from among them, whose name was Abraham.

<span id="014">14</span> Him thou lovedst, and unto him only thou
shewedst thy will:

<span id="015">15</span> And madest an everlasting covenant with him,
promising him that thou wouldest never forsake his seed.

<span id="016">16</span> And unto him thou gavest Isaac, and unto Isaac
also thou gavest Jacob and Esau. As for Jacob, thou didst choose him to
thee, and put by Esau: and so Jacob became a great multitude.

<span id="017">17</span> And it came to pass, that when thou leadest his
seed out of Egypt, thou broughtest them up to the mount Sinai.

<span id="018">18</span> And bowing the heavens, thou didst set fast the
earth, movedst the whole world, and madest the depths to tremble, and
troubledst the men of that age.

<span id="019">19</span> And thy glory went through four gates, of fire,
and of earthquake, and of wind, and of cold; that thou mightest give the
law unto the seed of Jacob, and diligence unto the generation of Israel.

<span id="020">20</span> And yet tookest thou not away from them a
wicked heart, that thy law might bring forth fruit in them.

<span id="021">21</span> For the first Adam bearing a wicked heart
transgressed, and was overcome; and so be all they that are born of him.

<span id="022">22</span> Thus infirmity was made permanent; and the law
(also) in the heart of the people with the malignity of the root; so
that the good departed away, and the evil abode still.

<span id="023">23</span> So the times passed away, and the years were
brought to an end: then didst thou raise thee up a servant, called
David:

<span id="024">24</span> Whom thou commandedst to build a city unto thy
name, and to offer incense and oblations unto thee therein.

<span id="025">25</span> When this was done many years, then they that
inhabited the city forsook thee,

<span id="026">26</span> And in all things did even as Adam and all his
generations had done: for they also had a wicked heart:

<span id="027">27</span> And so thou gavest thy city over into the hands
of thine enemies.

<span id="028">28</span> Are their deeds then any better that inhabit
Babylon, that they should therefore have the dominion over Sion?

<span id="029">29</span> For when I came thither, and had seen impieties
without number, then my soul saw many evildoers in this thirtieth year,
so that my heart failed me.

<span id="030">30</span> For I have seen how thou sufferest them
sinning, and hast spared wicked doers: and hast destroyed thy people,
and hast preserved thine enemies, and hast not signified it.

<span id="031">31</span> I do not remember how this way may be left: Are
they then of Babylon better than they of Sion?

<span id="032">32</span> Or is there any other people that knoweth thee
beside Israel? or what generation hath so believed thy covenants as
Jacob?

<span id="033">33</span> And yet their reward appeareth not, and their
labour hath no fruit: for I have gone here and there through the
heathen, and I see that they flow in wealth, and think not upon thy
commandments.

<span id="034">34</span> Weigh thou therefore our wickedness now in the
balance, and their's also that dwell the world; and so shall thy name no
where be found but in Israel.

<span id="035">35</span> Or when was it that they which dwell upon the
earth have not sinned in thy sight? or what people have so kept thy
commandments?

<span id="036">36</span> Thou shalt find that Israel by name hath kept
thy precepts; but not the heathen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 4](es2004)
