[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt009)  [Sep](../sep/jdt009.md) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt009.md)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](jdt008)  [Next](jdt010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 9

<span id="001">1</span> Judith fell upon her face, and put ashes upon
her head, and uncovered the sackcloth wherewith she was clothed; and
about the time that the incense of that evening was offered in Jerusalem
in the house of the Lord Judith cried with a loud voice, and said,

<span id="002">2</span> O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom thou
gavest a sword to take vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the
girdle of a maid to defile her, and discovered the thigh to her shame,
and polluted her virginity to her reproach; for thou saidst, It shall
not be so; and yet they did so:

<span id="003">3</span> Wherefore thou gavest their rulers to be slain,
so that they dyed their bed in blood, being deceived, and smotest the
servants with their lords, and the lords upon their thrones;

<span id="004">4</span> And hast given their wives for a prey, and their
daughters to be captives, and all their spoils to be divided among thy
dear children; which were moved with thy zeal, and abhorred the
pollution of their blood, and called upon thee for aid: O God, O my God,
hear me also a widow.

<span id="005">5</span> For thou hast wrought not only those things, but
also the things which fell out before, and which ensued after; thou hast
thought upon the things which are now, and which are to come.

<span id="006">6</span> Yea, what things thou didst determine were ready
at hand, and said, Lo, we are here: for all thy ways are prepared, and
thy judgments are in thy foreknowledge.

<span id="007">7</span> For, behold, the Assyrians are multiplied in
their power; they are exalted with horse and man; they glory in the
strength of their footmen; they trust in shield, and spear, and bow, and
sling; and know not that thou art the Lord that breakest the battles:
the Lord is thy name.

<span id="008">8</span> Throw down their strength in thy power, and
bring down their force in thy wrath: for they have purposed to defile
thy sanctuary, and to pollute the tabernacle where thy glorious name
resteth and to cast down with sword the horn of thy altar.

<span id="009">9</span> Behold their pride, and send thy wrath upon
their heads: give into mine hand, which am a widow, the power that I
have conceived.

<span id="010">10</span> Smite by the deceit of my lips the servant with
the prince, and the prince with the servant: break down their
stateliness by the hand of a woman.

<span id="011">11</span> For thy power standeth not in multitude nor thy
might in strong men: for thou art a God of the afflicted, an helper of
the oppressed, an upholder of the weak, a protector of the forlorn, a
saviour of them that are without hope.

<span id="012">12</span> I pray thee, I pray thee, O God of my father,
and God of the inheritance of Israel, Lord of the heavens and earth,
Creator of the waters, king of every creature, hear thou my prayer:

<span id="013">13</span> And make my speech and deceit to be their wound
and stripe, who have purposed cruel things against thy covenant, and thy
hallowed house, and against the top of Sion, and against the house of
the possession of thy children.

<span id="014">14</span> And make every nation and tribe to acknowledge
that thou art the God of all power and might, and that there is none
other that protecteth the people of Israel but thou.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 10](jdt010.md)
