[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt015)  [Sep](../sep/jdt015) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt015)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt014)  [Next](jdt016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 15

<span id="001">1</span> And when they that were in the tents heard, they
were astonished at the thing that was done.

<span id="002">2</span> And fear and trembling fell upon them, so that
there was no man that durst abide in the sight of his neighbour, but
rushing out all together, they fled into every way of the plain, and of
the hill country.

<span id="003">3</span> They also that had camped in the mountains round
about Bethulia fled away. Then the children of Israel, every one that
was a warrior among them, rushed out upon them.

<span id="004">4</span> Then sent Ozias to Betomasthem, and to Bebai,
and Chobai, and Cola and to all the coasts of Israel, such as should
tell the things that were done, and that all should rush forth upon
their enemies to destroy them.

<span id="005">5</span> Now when the children of Israel heard it, they
all fell upon them with one consent, and slew them unto Chobai: likewise
also they that came from Jerusalem, and from all the hill country, (for
men had told them what things were done in the camp of their enemies)
and they that were in Galaad, and in Galilee, chased them with a great
slaughter, until they were past Damascus and the borders thereof.

<span id="006">6</span> And the residue that dwelt at Bethulia, fell
upon the camp of Assur, and spoiled them, and were greatly enriched.

<span id="007">7</span> And the children of Israel that returned from
the slaughter had that which remained; and the villages and the cities,
that were in the mountains and in the plain, gat many spoils: for the
multitude was very great.

<span id="008">8</span> Then Joacim the high priest, and the ancients of
the children of Israel that dwelt in Jerusalem, came to behold the good
things that God had shewed to Israel, and to see Judith, and to salute
her.

<span id="009">9</span> And when they came unto her, they blessed her
with one accord, and said unto her, Thou art the exaltation of
Jerusalem, thou art the great glory of Israel, thou art the great
rejoicing of our nation:

<span id="010">10</span> Thou hast done all these things by thine hand:
thou hast done much good to Israel, and God is pleased therewith:
blessed be thou of the Almighty Lord for evermore. And all the people
said, So be it.

<span id="011">11</span> And the people spoiled the camp the space of
thirty days: and they gave unto Judith Holofernes his tent, and all his
plate, and beds, and vessels, and all his stuff: and she took it and
laid it on her mule; and made ready her carts, and laid them thereon.

<span id="012">12</span> Then all the women of Israel ran together to
see her, and blessed her, and made a dance among them for her: and she
took branches in her hand, and gave also to the women that were with
her.

<span id="013">13</span> And they put a garland of olive upon her and
her maid that was with her, and she went before all the people in the
dance, leading all the women: and all the men of Israel followed in
their armour with garlands, and with songs in their mouths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 16](jdt016)
