[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt001)  [Sep](../sep/jdt001.md) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt001.md)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](tob014)  [Next](jdt002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> In the twelfth year of the reign of
Nabuchodonosor, who reigned in Nineve, the great city; in the days of
Arphaxad, which reigned over the Medes in Ecbatane,

<span id="002">2</span> And built in Ecbatane walls round about of
stones hewn three cubits broad and six cubits long, and made the height
of the wall seventy cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits:

<span id="003">3</span> And set the towers thereof upon the gates of it
an hundred cubits high, and the breadth thereof in the foundation
threescore cubits:

<span id="004">4</span> And he made the gates thereof, even gates that
were raised to the height of seventy cubits, and the breadth of them was
forty cubits, for the going forth of his mighty armies, and for the
setting in array of his footmen:

<span id="005">5</span> Even in those days king Nabuchodonosor made war
with king Arphaxad in the great plain, which is the plain in the borders
of Ragau.

<span id="006">6</span> And there came unto him all they that dwelt in
the hill country, and all that dwelt by Euphrates, and Tigris and
Hydaspes, and the plain of Arioch the king of the Elymeans, and very
many nations of the sons of Chelod, assembled themselves to the battle.

<span id="007">7</span> Then Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians sent
unto all that dwelt in Persia, and to all that dwelt westward, and to
those that dwelt in Cilicia, and Damascus, and Libanus, and Antilibanus,
and to all that dwelt upon the sea coast,

<span id="008">8</span> And to those among the nations that were of
Carmel, and Galaad, and the higher Galilee, and the great plain of
Esdrelom,

<span id="009">9</span> And to all that were in Samaria and the cities
thereof, and beyond Jordan unto Jerusalem, and Betane, and Chelus, and
Kades, and the river of Egypt, and Taphnes, and Ramesse, and all the
land of Gesem,

<span id="010">10</span> Until ye come beyond Tanis and Memphis, and to
all the inhabitants of Egypt, until ye come to the borders of Ethiopia.

<span id="011">11</span> But all the inhabitants of the land made light
of the commandment of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, neither went
they with him to the battle; for they were not afraid of him: yea, he
was before them as one man, and they sent away his ambassadors from them
without effect, and with disgrace.

<span id="012">12</span> Therefore Nabuchodonosor was very angry with
all this country, and sware by his throne and kingdom, that he would
surely be avenged upon all those coasts of Cilicia, and Damascus, and
Syria, and that he would slay with the sword all the inhabitants of the
land of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and all Judea, and all that
were in Egypt, till ye come to the borders of the two seas.

<span id="013">13</span> Then he marched in battle array with his power
against king Arphaxad in the seventeenth year, and he prevailed in his
battle: for he overthrew all the power of Arphaxad, and all his
horsemen, and all his chariots,

<span id="014">14</span> And became lord of his cities, and came unto
Ecbatane, and took the towers, and spoiled the streets thereof, and
turned the beauty thereof into shame.

<span id="015">15</span> He took also Arphaxad in the mountains of
Ragau, and smote him through with his darts, and destroyed him utterly
that day.

<span id="016">16</span> So he returned afterward to Nineve, both he and
all his company of sundry nations being a very great multitude of men of
war, and there he took his ease, and banqueted, both he and his army, an
hundred and twenty days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 2](jdt002.md)
