[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt013)  [Sep](../sep/jdt013.md) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt013.md)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](jdt012)  [Next](jdt014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> Now when the evening was come, his servants made
haste to depart, and Bagoas shut his tent without, and dismissed the
waiters from the presence of his lord; and they went to their beds: for
they were all weary, because the feast had been long.

<span id="002">2</span> And Judith was left along in the tent, and
Holofernes lying along upon his bed: for he was filled with wine.

<span id="003">3</span> Now Judith had commanded her maid to stand
without her bedchamber, and to wait for her. coming forth, as she did
daily: for she said she would go forth to her prayers, and she spake to
Bagoas according to the same purpose.

<span id="004">4</span> So all went forth and none was left in the
bedchamber, neither little nor great. Then Judith, standing by his bed,
said in her heart, O Lord God of all power, look at this present upon
the works of mine hands for the exaltation of Jerusalem.

<span id="005">5</span> For now is the time to help thine inheritance,
and to execute thine enterprizes to the destruction of the enemies which
are risen against us.

<span id="006">6</span> Then she came to the pillar of the bed, which
was at Holofernes' head, and took down his fauchion from thence,

<span id="007">7</span> And approached to his bed, and took hold of the
hair of his head, and said, Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, this
day.

<span id="008">8</span> And she smote twice upon his neck with all her
might, and she took away his head from him.

<span id="009">9</span> And tumbled his body down from the bed, and
pulled down the canopy from the pillars; and anon after she went forth,
and gave Holofernes his head to her maid;

<span id="010">10</span> And she put it in her bag of meat: so they
twain went together according to their custom unto prayer: and when they
passed the camp, they compassed the valley, and went up the mountain of
Bethulia, and came to the gates thereof.

<span id="011">11</span> Then said Judith afar off, to the watchmen at
the gate, Open, open now the gate: God, even our God, is with us, to
shew his power yet in Jerusalem, and his forces against the enemy, as he
hath even done this day.

<span id="012">12</span> Now when the men of her city heard her voice,
they made haste to go down to the gate of their city, and they called
the elders of the city.

<span id="013">13</span> And then they ran all together, both small and
great, for it was strange unto them that she was come: so they opened
the gate, and received them, and made a fire for a light, and stood
round about them.

<span id="014">14</span> Then she said to them with a loud voice,
Praise, praise God, praise God, I say, for he hath not taken away his
mercy from the house of Israel, but hath destroyed our enemies by mine
hands this night.

<span id="015">15</span> So she took the head out of the bag, and shewed
it, and said unto them, behold the head of Holofernes, the chief captain
of the army of Assur, and behold the canopy, wherein he did lie in his
drunkenness; and the Lord hath smitten him by the hand of a woman.

<span id="016">16</span> As the Lord liveth, who hath kept me in my way
that I went, my countenance hath deceived him to his destruction, and
yet hath he not committed sin with me, to defile and shame me.

<span id="017">17</span> Then all the people were wonderfully
astonished, and bowed themselves and worshipped God, and said with one
accord, Blessed be thou, O our God, which hast this day brought to
nought the enemies of thy people.

<span id="018">18</span> Then said Ozias unto her, O daughter, blessed
art thou of the most high God above all the women upon the earth; and
blessed be the Lord God, which hath created the heavens and the earth,
which hath directed thee to the cutting off of the head of the chief of
our enemies.

<span id="019">19</span> For this thy confidence shall not depart from
the heart of men, which remember the power of God for ever.

<span id="020">20</span> And God turn these things to thee for a
perpetual praise, to visit thee in good things because thou hast not
spared thy life for the affliction of our nation, but hast revenged our
ruin, walking a straight way before our God. And all the people said; So
be it, so be it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 14](jdt014.md)
