[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt008)  [Sep](../sep/jdt008) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt008)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt007)  [Next](jdt009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 8

<span id="001">1</span> Now at that time Judith heard thereof, which was
the daughter of Merari, the son of Ox, the son of Joseph, the son of
Ozel, the son of Elcia, the son of Ananias, the son of Gedeon, the son
of Raphaim, the son of Acitho, the son of Eliu, the son of Eliab, the
son of Nathanael, the son of Samael, the son of Salasadal, the son of
Israel.

<span id="002">2</span> And Manasses was her husband, of her tribe and
kindred, who died in the barley harvest.

<span id="003">3</span> For as he stood overseeing them that bound
sheaves in the field, the heat came upon his head, and he fell on his
bed, and died in the city of Bethulia: and they buried him with his
fathers in the field between Dothaim and Balamo.

<span id="004">4</span> So Judith was a widow in her house three years
and four months.

<span id="005">5</span> And she made her a tent upon the top of her
house, and put on sackcloth upon her loins and ware her widow's apparel.

<span id="006">6</span> And she fasted all the days of her widowhood,
save the eves of the sabbaths, and the sabbaths, and the eves of the new
moons, and the new moons and the feasts and solemn days of the house of
Israel.

<span id="007">7</span> She was also of a goodly countenance, and very
beautiful to behold: and her husband Manasses had left her gold, and
silver, and menservants and maidservants, and cattle, and lands; and she
remained upon them.

<span id="008">8</span> And there was none that gave her an ill word; ar
she feared God greatly.

<span id="009">9</span> Now when she heard the evil words of the people
against the governor, that they fainted for lack of water; for Judith
had heard all the words that Ozias had spoken unto them, and that he had
sworn to deliver the city unto the Assyrians after five days;

<span id="010">10</span> Then she sent her waitingwoman, that had the
government of all things that she had, to call Ozias and Chabris and
Charmis, the ancients of the city.

<span id="011">11</span> And they came unto her, and she said unto them,
Hear me now, O ye governors of the inhabitants of Bethulia: for your
words that ye have spoken before the people this day are not right,
touching this oath which ye made and pronounced between God and you, and
have promised to deliver the city to our enemies, unless within these
days the Lord turn to help you.

<span id="012">12</span> And now who are ye that have tempted God this
day, and stand instead of God among the children of men?

<span id="013">13</span> And now try the Lord Almighty, but ye shall
never know any thing.

<span id="014">14</span> For ye cannot find the depth of the heart of
man, neither can ye perceive the things that he thinketh: then how can
ye search out God, that hath made all these things, and know his mind,
or comprehend his purpose? Nay, my brethren, provoke not the Lord our
God to anger.

<span id="015">15</span> For if he will not help us within these five
days, he hath power to defend us when he will, even every day, or to
destroy us before our enemies.

<span id="016">16</span> Do not bind the counsels of the Lord our God:
for God is not as man, that he may be threatened; neither is he as the
son of man, that he should be wavering.

<span id="017">17</span> Therefore let us wait for salvation of him, and
call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice, if it please him.

<span id="018">18</span> For there arose none in our age, neither is
there any now in these days neither tribe, nor family, nor people, nor
city among us, which worship gods made with hands, as hath been
aforetime.

<span id="019">19</span> For the which cause our fathers were given to
the sword, and for a spoil, and had a great fall before our enemies.

<span id="020">20</span> But we know none other god, therefore we trust
that he will not dispise us, nor any of our nation.

<span id="021">21</span> For if we be taken so, all Judea shall lie
waste, and our sanctuary shall be spoiled; and he will require the
profanation thereof at our mouth.

<span id="022">22</span> And the slaughter of our brethren, and the
captivity of the country, and the desolation of our inheritance, will he
turn upon our heads among the Gentiles, wheresoever we shall be in
bondage; and we shall be an offence and a reproach to all them that
possess us.

<span id="023">23</span> For our servitude shall not be directed to
favour: but the Lord our God shall turn it to dishonour.

<span id="024">24</span> Now therefore, O brethren, let us shew an
example to our brethren, because their hearts depend upon us, and the
sanctuary, and the house, and the altar, rest upon us.

<span id="025">25</span> Moreover let us give thanks to the Lord our
God, which trieth us, even as he did our fathers.

<span id="026">26</span> Remember what things he did to Abraham, and how
he tried Isaac, and what happened to Jacob in Mesopotamia of Syria, when
he kept the sheep of Laban his mother's brother.

<span id="027">27</span> For he hath not tried us in the fire, as he did
them, for the examination of their hearts, neither hath he taken
vengeance on us: but the Lord doth scourge them that come near unto him,
to admonish them.

<span id="028">28</span> Then said Ozias to her, All that thou hast
spoken hast thou spoken with a good heart, and there is none that may
gainsay thy words.

<span id="029">29</span> For this is not the first day wherein thy
wisdom is manifested; but from the beginning of thy days all the people
have known thy understanding, because the disposition of thine heart is
good.

<span id="030">30</span> But the people were very thirsty, and compelled
us to do unto them as we have spoken, and to bring an oath upon
ourselves, which we will not break.

<span id="031">31</span> Therefore now pray thou for us, because thou
art a godly woman, and the Lord will send us rain to fill our cisterns,
and we shall faint no more.

<span id="032">32</span> Then said Judith unto them, Hear me, and I will
do a thing, which shall go throughout all generations to the children of
our nation.

<span id="033">33</span> Ye shall stand this night in the gate, and I
will go forth with my waitingwoman: and within the days that ye have
promised to deliver the city to our enemies the Lord will visit Israel
by mine hand.

<span id="034">34</span> But enquire not ye of mine act: for I will not
declare it unto you, till the things be finished that I do.

<span id="035">35</span> Then said Ozias and the princes unto her, Go in
peace, and the Lord God be before thee, to take vengeance on our
enemies.

<span id="036">36</span> So they returned from the tent, and went to
their wards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 9](jdt009)
