[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt002)  [Sep](../sep/jdt002.md) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt002.md)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](jdt001)  [Next](jdt003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> And in the eighteenth year, the two and
twentieth day of the first month, there was talk in the house of
Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians that he should, as he said, avenge
himself on all the earth.

<span id="002">2</span> So he called unto him all his officers, and all
his nobles, and communicated with them his secret counsel, and concluded
the afflicting of the whole earth out of his own mouth.

<span id="003">3</span> Then they decreed to destroy all flesh, that did
not obey the commandment of his mouth.

<span id="004">4</span> And when he had ended his counsel,
Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians called Holofernes the chief captain
of his army, which was next unto him, and said unto him.

<span id="005">5</span> Thus saith the great king, the lord of the whole
earth, Behold, thou shalt go forth from my presence, and take with thee
men that trust in their own strength, of footmen an hundred and twenty
thousand; and the number of horses with their riders twelve thousand.

<span id="006">6</span> And thou shalt go against all the west country,
because they disobeyed my commandment.

<span id="007">7</span> And thou shalt declare unto that they prepare
for me earth and water: for I will go forth in my wrath against them and
will cover the whole face of the earth with the feet of mine army, and I
will give them for a spoil unto them:

<span id="008">8</span> So that their slain shall fill their valleys and
brooks and the river shall be filled with their dead, till it overflow:

<span id="009">9</span> And I will lead them captives to the utmost
parts of all the earth.

<span id="010">10</span> Thou therefore shalt go forth. and take
beforehand for me all their coasts: and if they will yield themselves
unto thee, thou shalt reserve them for me till the day of their
punishment.

<span id="011">11</span> But concerning them that rebel, let not thine
eye spare them; but put them to the slaughter, and spoil them
wheresoever thou goest.

<span id="012">12</span> For as I live, and by the power of my kingdom,
whatsoever I have spoken, that will I do by mine hand.

<span id="013">13</span> And take thou heed that thou transgress none of
the commandments of thy lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have
commanded thee, and defer not to do them.

<span id="014">14</span> Then Holofernes went forth from the presence of
his lord, and called ail the governors and captains, and the officers of
the army of Assur;

<span id="015">15</span> And he mustered the chosen men for the battle,
as his lord had commanded him, unto an hundred and twenty thousand, and
twelve thousand archers on horseback;

<span id="016">16</span> And he ranged them, as a great army is ordered
for the war.

<span id="017">17</span> And he took camels and asses for their
carriages, a very great number; and sheep and oxen and goats without
number for their provision:

<span id="018">18</span> And plenty of victual for every man of the
army, and very much gold and silver out of the king's house.

<span id="019">19</span> Then he went forth and all his power to go
before king Nabuchodonosor in the voyage, and to cover all the face of
the earth westward with their chariots, and horsemen, and their chosen
footmen.

<span id="020">20</span> A great number also sundry countries came with
them like locusts, and like the sand of the earth: for the multitude was
without number.

<span id="021">21</span> And they went forth of Nineve three days'
journey toward the plain of Bectileth, and pitched from Bectileth near
the mountain which is at the left hand of the upper Cilicia.

<span id="022">22</span> Then he took all his army, his footmen, and
horsemen and chariots, and went from thence into the hill country;

<span id="023">23</span> And destroyed Phud and Lud, and spoiled all the
children of Rasses, and the children of Israel, which were toward the
wilderness at the south of the land of the Chellians.

<span id="024">24</span> Then he went over Euphrates, and went through
Mesopotamia, and destroyed all the high cities that were upon the river
Arbonai, till ye come to the sea.

<span id="025">25</span> And he took the borders of Cilicia, and killed
all that resisted him, and came to the borders of Japheth, which were
toward the south, over against Arabia.

<span id="026">26</span> He compassed also all the children of Madian,
and burned up their tabernacles, and spoiled their sheepcotes.

<span id="027">27</span> Then he went down into the plain of Damascus in
the time of wheat harvest, and burnt up all their fields, and destroyed
their flocks and herds, also he spoiled their cities, and utterly wasted
their countries, and smote all their young men with the edge of the
sword.

<span id="028">28</span> Therefore the fear and dread of him fell upon
all the inhabitants of the sea coasts, which were in Sidon and Tyrus,
and them that dwelt in Sur and Ocina, and all that dwelt in Jemnaan; and
they that dwelt in Azotus and Ascalon feared him greatly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 3](jdt003.md)
