[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt012)  [Sep](../sep/jdt012.md) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt012.md)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](jdt011)  [Next](jdt013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> Then he commanded to bring her in where his
plate was set; and bade that they should prepare for her of his own
meats, and that she should drink of his own wine.

<span id="002">2</span> And Judith said, I will not eat thereof, lest
there be an offence: but provision shall be made for me of the things
that I have brought.

<span id="003">3</span> Then Holofernes said unto her, If thy provision
should fail, how should we give thee the like? for there be none with us
of thy nation.

<span id="004">4</span> Then said Judith unto him As thy soul liveth, my
lord, thine handmaid shall not spend those things that I have, before
the Lord work by mine hand the things that he hath determined.

<span id="005">5</span> Then the servants of Holofernes brought her into
the tent, and she slept till midnight, and she arose when it was toward
the morning watch,

<span id="006">6</span> And sent to Holofernes, saving, Let my lord now
command that thine handmaid may go forth unto prayer.

<span id="007">7</span> Then Holofernes commanded his guard that they
should not stay her: thus she abode in the camp three days, and went out
in the night into the valley of Bethulia, and washed herself in a
fountain of water by the camp.

<span id="008">8</span> And when she came out, she besought the Lord God
of Israel to direct her way to the raising up of the children of her
people.

<span id="009">9</span> So she came in clean, and remained in the tent,
until she did eat her meat at evening.

<span id="010">10</span> And in the fourth day Holofernes made a feast
to his own servants only, and called none of the officers to the
banquet.

<span id="011">11</span> Then said he to Bagoas the eunuch, who had
charge over all that he had, Go now, and persuade this Hebrew woman
which is with thee, that she come unto us, and eat and drink with us.

<span id="012">12</span> For, lo, it will be a shame for our person, if
we shall let such a woman go, not having had her company; for if we draw
her not unto us, she will laugh us to scorn.

<span id="013">13</span> Then went Bagoas from the presence of
Holofernes, and came to her, and he said, Let not this fair damsel fear
to come to my lord, and to be honoured in his presence, and drink wine,
and be merry with us and be made this day as one of the daughters of the
Assyrians, which serve in the house of Nabuchodonosor.

<span id="014">14</span> Then said Judith unto him, Who am I now, that I
should gainsay my lord? surely whatsoever pleaseth him I will do
speedily, and it shall be my joy unto the day of my death.

<span id="015">15</span> So she arose, and decked herself with her
apparel and all her woman's attire, and her maid went and laid soft
skins on the ground for her over against Holofernes, which she had
received of Bagoas far her daily use, that she might sit and eat upon
them.

<span id="016">16</span> Now when Judith came in and sat down,
Holofernes his heart was ravished with her, and his mind was moved, and
he desired greatly her company; for he waited a time to deceive her,
from the day that he had seen her.

<span id="017">17</span> Then said Holofernes unto her, Drink now, and
be merry with us.

<span id="018">18</span> So Judith said, I will drink now, my lord,
because my life is magnified in me this day more than all the days since
I was born.

<span id="019">19</span> Then she took and ate and drank before him what
her maid had prepared.

<span id="020">20</span> And Holofernes took great delight in her, and
drank more wine than he had drunk at any time in one day since he was
born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 13](jdt013.md)
