[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt010)  [Sep](../sep/jdt010) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt010)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt009)  [Next](jdt011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 10

<span id="001">1</span> Now after that she had ceased to cry unto the
God of Israel, and bad made an end of all these words.

<span id="002">2</span> She rose where she had fallen down, and called
her maid, and went down into the house in the which she abode in the
sabbath days, and in her feast days,

<span id="003">3</span> And pulled off the sackcloth which she had on,
and put off the garments of her widowhood, and washed her body all over
with water, and anointed herself with precious ointment, and braided the
hair of her head, and put on a tire upon it, and put on her garments of
gladness, wherewith she was clad during the life of Manasses her
husband.

<span id="004">4</span> And she took sandals upon her feet, and put
about her her bracelets, and her chains, and her rings, and her
earrings, and all her ornaments, and decked herself bravely, to allure
the eyes of all men that should see her.

<span id="005">5</span> Then she gave her maid a bottle of wine, and a
cruse of oil, and filled a bag with parched corn, and lumps of figs, and
with fine bread; so she folded all these things together, and laid them
upon her.

<span id="006">6</span> Thus they went forth to the gate of the city of
Bethulia, and found standing there Ozias and the ancients of the city,
Chabris and Charmis.

<span id="007">7</span> And when they saw her, that her countenance was
altered, and her apparel was changed, they wondered at her beauty very
greatly, and said unto her.

<span id="008">8</span> The God, the God of our fathers give thee
favour, and accomplish thine enterprizes to the glory of the children of
Israel, and to the exaltation of Jerusalem. Then they worshipped God.

<span id="009">9</span> And she said unto them, Command the gates of the
city to be opened unto me, that I may go forth to accomplish the things
whereof ye have spoken with me. So they commanded the young men to open
unto her, as she had spoken.

<span id="010">10</span> And when they had done so, Judith went out,
she, and her maid with her; and the men of the city looked after her,
until she was gone down the mountain, and till she had passed the
valley, and could see her no more.

<span id="011">11</span> Thus they went straight forth in the valley:
and the first watch of the Assyrians met her,

<span id="012">12</span> And took her, and asked her, Of what people art
thou? and whence comest thou? and whither goest thou? And she said, I am
a woman of the Hebrews, and am fled from them: for they shall be given
you to be consumed:

<span id="013">13</span> And I am coming before Holofernes the chief
captain of your army, to declare words of truth; and I will shew him a
way, whereby he shall go, and win all the hill country, without losing
the body or life of any one of his men.

<span id="014">14</span> Now when the men heard her words, and beheld
her countenance, they wondered greatly at her beauty, and said unto her,

<span id="015">15</span> Thou hast saved thy life, in that thou hast
hasted to come down to the presence of our lord: now therefore come to
his tent, and some of us shall conduct thee, until they have delivered
thee to his hands.

<span id="016">16</span> And when thou standest before him, be not
afraid in thine heart, but shew unto him according to thy word; and he
will entreat thee well.

<span id="017">17</span> Then they chose out of them an hundred men to
accompany her and her maid; and they brought her to the tent of
Holofernes.

<span id="018">18</span> Then was there a concourse throughout all the
camp: for her coming was noised among the tents, and they came about
her, as she stood without the tent of Holofernes, till they told him of
her.

<span id="019">19</span> And they wondered at her beauty, and admired
the children of Israel because of her, and every one said to his
neighbour, Who would despise this people, that have among them such
women? surely it is not good that one man of them be left who being let
go might deceive the whole earth.

<span id="020">20</span> And they that lay near Holofernes went out, and
all his servants and they brought her into the tent.

<span id="021">21</span> Now Holofernes rested upon his bed under a
canopy, which was woven with purple, and gold, and emeralds, and
precious stones.

<span id="022">22</span> So they shewed him of her; and he came out
before his tent with silver lamps going before him.

<span id="023">23</span> And when Judith was come before him and his
servants they all marvelled at the beauty of her countenance; and she
fell down upon her face, and did reverence unto him: and his servants
took her up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 11](jdt011)
