[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1016)  [Sep](../sep/ma1016) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1016)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1015)  [Next](ma2001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> Then came up John from Gazera, and told Simon
his father what Cendebeus had done.

<span id="002">2</span> Wherefore Simon called his two eldest sons,
Judas and John, and said unto them, I, and my brethren, and my father's
house, have ever from my youth unto this day fought against the enemies
of Israel; and things have prospered so well in our hands, that we have
delivered Israel oftentimes.

<span id="003">3</span> But now I am old, and ye, by God's mercy, are of
a sufficient age: be ye instead of me and my brother, and go and fight
for our nation, and the help from heaven be with you.

<span id="004">4</span> So he chose out of the country twenty thousand
men of war with horsemen, who went out against Cendebeus, and rested
that night at Modin.

<span id="005">5</span> And when as they rose in the morning, and went
into the plain, behold, a mighty great host both of footmen and horsemen
came against them: howbeit there was a water brook betwixt them.

<span id="006">6</span> So he and his people pitched over against them:
and when he saw that the people were afraid to go over the water brook,
he went first over himself, and then the men seeing him passed through
after him.

<span id="007">7</span> That done, he divided his men, and set the
horsemen in the midst of the footmen: for the enemies' horsemen were
very many.

<span id="008">8</span> Then sounded they with the holy trumpets:
whereupon Cendebeus and his host were put to flight, so that many of
them were slain, and the remnant gat them to the strong hold.

<span id="009">9</span> At that time was Judas John's brother wounded;
but John still followed after them, until he came to Cedron, which
Cendebeus had built.

<span id="010">10</span> So they fled even unto the towers in the fields
of Azotus; wherefore he burned it with fire: so that there were slain of
them about two thousand men. Afterward he returned into the land of
Judea in peace.

<span id="011">11</span> Moreover in the plain of Jericho was Ptolemeus
the son of Abubus made captain, and he had abundance of silver and gold:

<span id="012">12</span> For he was the high priest's son in law.

<span id="013">13</span> Wherefore his heart being lifted up, he thought
to get the country to himself, and thereupon consulted deceitfully
against Simon and his sons to destroy them.

<span id="014">14</span> Now Simon was visiting the cities that were in
the country, and taking care for the good ordering of them; at which
time he came down himself to Jericho with his sons, Mattathias and
Judas, in the hundred threescore and seventeenth year, in the eleventh
month, called Sabat:

<span id="015">15</span> Where the son of Abubus receiving them
deceitfully into a little hold, called Docus, which he had built, made
them a great banquet: howbeit he had hid men there.

<span id="016">16</span> So when Simon and his sons had drunk largely,
Ptolemee and his men rose up, and took their weapons, and came upon
Simon into the banqueting place, and slew him, and his two sons, and
certain of his servants.

<span id="017">17</span> In which doing he committed a great treachery,
and recompensed evil for good.

<span id="018">18</span> Then Ptolemee wrote these things, and sent to
the king, that he should send him an host to aid him, and he would
deliver him the country and cities.

<span id="019">19</span> He sent others also to Gazera to kill John: and
unto the tribunes he sent letters to come unto him, that he might give
them silver, and gold, and rewards.

<span id="020">20</span> And others he sent to take Jerusalem, and the
mountain of the temple.

<span id="021">21</span> Now one had run afore to Gazera and told John
that his father and brethren were slain, and, quoth he, Ptolemee hath
sent to slay thee also.

<span id="022">22</span> Hereof when he heard, he was sore astonished:
so he laid hands on them that were come to destroy him, and slew them;
for he knew that they sought to make him away.

<span id="023">23</span> As concerning the rest of the acts of John, and
his wars, and worthy deeds which he did, and the building of the walls
which he made, and his doings,

<span id="024">24</span> Behold, these are written in the chronicles of
his priesthood, from the time he was made high priest after his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 1](ma2001)
