[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1001)  [Sep](../sep/ma1001.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1001.md)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](aes016)  [Next](ma1002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> And it happened, after that Alexander son of
Philip, the Macedonian, who came out of the land of Chettiim, had
smitten Darius king of the Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his
stead, the first over Greece,

<span id="002">2</span> And made many wars, and won many strong holds,
and slew the kings of the earth,

<span id="003">3</span> And went through to the ends of the earth, and
took spoils of many nations, insomuch that the earth was quiet before
him; whereupon he was exalted and his heart was lifted up.

<span id="004">4</span> And he gathered a mighty strong host and ruled
over countries, and nations, and kings, who became tributaries unto him.

<span id="005">5</span> And after these things he fell sick, and
perceived that he should die.

<span id="006">6</span> Wherefore he called his servants, such as were
honourable, and had been brought up with him from his youth, and parted
his kingdom among them, while he was yet alive.

<span id="007">7</span> So Alexander reigned twelves years, and then
died.

<span id="008">8</span> And his servants bare rule every one in his
place.

<span id="009">9</span> And after his death they all put crowns upon
themselves; so did their sons after them many years: and evils were
multiplied in the earth.

<span id="010">10</span> And there came out of them a wicked root
Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the king, who had been an
hostage at Rome, and he reigned in the hundred and thirty and seventh
year of the kingdom of the Greeks.

<span id="011">11</span> In those days went there out of Israel wicked
men, who persuaded many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant with the
heathen that are round about us: for since we departed from them we have
had much sorrow.

<span id="012">12</span> So this device pleased them well.

<span id="013">13</span> Then certain of the people were so forward
herein, that they went to the king, who gave them licence to do after
the ordinances of the heathen:

<span id="014">14</span> Whereupon they built a place of exercise at
Jerusalem according to the customs of the heathen:

<span id="015">15</span> And made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook
the holy covenant, and joined themselves to the heathen, and were sold
to do mischief.

<span id="016">16</span> Now when the kingdom was established before
Antiochus, he thought to reign over Egypt that he might have the
dominion of two realms.

<span id="017">17</span> Wherefore he entered into Egypt with a great
multitude, with chariots, and elephants, and horsemen, and a great navy,

<span id="018">18</span> And made war against Ptolemee king of Egypt:
but Ptolemee was afraid of him, and fled; and many were wounded to
death.

<span id="019">19</span> Thus they got the strong cities in the land of
Egypt and he took the spoils thereof.

<span id="020">20</span> And after that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he
returned again in the hundred forty and third year, and went up against
Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude,

<span id="021">21</span> And entered proudly into the sanctuary, and
took away the golden altar, and the candlestick of light, and all the
vessels thereof,

<span id="022">22</span> And the table of the shewbread, and the pouring
vessels, and the vials. and the censers of gold, and the veil, and the
crown, and the golden ornaments that were before the temple, all which
he pulled off.

<span id="023">23</span> He took also the silver and the gold, and the
precious vessels: also he took the hidden treasures which he found.

<span id="024">24</span> And when he had taken all away, he went into
his own land, having made a great massacre, and spoken very proudly.

<span id="025">25</span> Therefore there was a great mourning in Israel,
in every place where they were;

<span id="026">26</span> So that the princes and elders mourned, the
virgins and young men were made feeble, and the beauty of women was
changed.

<span id="027">27</span> Every bridegroom took up lamentation, and she
that sat in the marriage chamber was in heaviness,

<span id="028">28</span> The land also was moved for the inhabitants
thereof, and all the house of Jacob was covered with confusion.

<span id="029">29</span> And after two years fully expired the king sent
his chief collector of tribute unto the cities of Juda, who came unto
Jerusalem with a great multitude,

<span id="030">30</span> And spake peaceable words unto them, but all
was deceit: for when they had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon
the city, and smote it very sore, and destroyed much people of Israel.

<span id="031">31</span> And when he had taken the spoils of the city,
he set it on fire, and pulled down the houses and walls thereof on every
side.

<span id="032">32</span> But the women and children took they captive,
and possessed the cattle.

<span id="033">33</span> Then builded they the city of David with a
great and strong wall, and with mighty towers, and made it a strong hold
for them.

<span id="034">34</span> And they put therein a sinful nation, wicked
men, and fortified themselves therein.

<span id="035">35</span> They stored it also with armour and victuals,
and when they had gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem, they laid
them up there, and so they became a sore snare:

<span id="036">36</span> For it was a place to lie in wait against the
sanctuary, and an evil adversary to Israel.

<span id="037">37</span> Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of
the sanctuary, and defiled it:

<span id="038">38</span> Insomuch that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled
because of them: whereupon the city was made an habitation of strangers,
and became strange to those that were born in her; and her own children
left her.

<span id="039">39</span> Her sanctuary was laid waste like a wilderness,
her feasts were turned into mourning, her sabbaths into reproach her
honour into contempt.

<span id="040">40</span> As had been her glory, so was her dishonour
increased, and her excellency was turned into mourning.

<span id="041">41</span> Moreover king Antiochus wrote to his whole
kingdom, that all should be one people,

<span id="042">42</span> And every one should leave his laws: so all the
heathen agreed according to the commandment of the king.

<span id="043">43</span> Yea, many also of the Israelites consented to
his religion, and sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the sabbath.

<span id="044">44</span> For the king had sent letters by messengers
unto Jerusalem and the cities of Juda that they should follow the
strange laws of the land,

<span id="045">45</span> And forbid burnt offerings, and sacrifice, and
drink offerings, in the temple; and that they should profane the
sabbaths and festival days:

<span id="046">46</span> And pollute the sanctuary and holy people:

<span id="047">47</span> Set up altars, and groves, and chapels of
idols, and sacrifice swine's flesh, and unclean beasts:

<span id="048">48</span> That they should also leave their children
uncircumcised, and make their souls abominable with all manner of
uncleanness and profanation:

<span id="049">49</span> To the end they might forget the law, and
change all the ordinances.

<span id="050">50</span> And whosoever would not do according to the
commandment of the king, he said, he should die.

<span id="051">51</span> In the selfsame manner wrote he to his whole
kingdom, and appointed overseers over all the people, commanding the
cities of Juda to sacrifice, city by city.

<span id="052">52</span> Then many of the people were gathered unto
them, to wit every one that forsook the law; and so they committed evils
in the land;

<span id="053">53</span> And drove the Israelites into secret places,
even wheresoever they could flee for succour.

<span id="054">54</span> Now the fifteenth day of the month Casleu, in
the hundred forty and fifth year, they set up the abomination of
desolation upon the altar, and builded idol altars throughout the cities
of Juda on every side;

<span id="055">55</span> And burnt incense at the doors of their houses,
and in the streets.

<span id="056">56</span> And when they had rent in pieces the books of
the law which they found, they burnt them with fire.

<span id="057">57</span> And whosoever was found with any the book of
the testament, or if any committed to the law, the king's commandment
was, that they should put him to death.

<span id="058">58</span> Thus did they by their authority unto the
Israelites every month, to as many as were found in the cities.

<span id="059">59</span> Now the five and twentieth day of the month
they did sacrifice upon the idol altar, which was upon the altar of God.

<span id="060">60</span> At which time according to the commandment they
put to death certain women, that had caused their children to be
circumcised.

<span id="061">61</span> And they hanged the infants about their necks,
and rifled their houses, and slew them that had circumcised them.

<span id="062">62</span> Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and
confirmed in themselves not to eat any unclean thing.

<span id="063">63</span> Wherefore the rather to die, that they might
not be defiled with meats, and that they might not profane the holy
covenant: so then they died.

<span id="064">64</span> And there was very great wrath upon Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 2](ma1002.md)
