[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1015)  [Sep](../sep/ma1015.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1015.md)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1014)  [Next](ma1016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 15

<span id="001">1</span> Moreover Antiochus son of Demetrius the king
sent letters from the isles of the sea unto Simon the priest and prince
of the Jews, and to all the people;

<span id="002">2</span> The contents whereof were these: King Antiochus
to Simon the high priest and prince of his nation, and to the people of
the Jews, greeting:

<span id="003">3</span> Forasmuch as certain pestilent men have usurped
the kingdom of our fathers, and my purpose is to challenge it again,
that I may restore it to the old estate, and to that end have gathered a
multitude of foreign soldiers together, and prepared ships of war;

<span id="004">4</span> My meaning also being to go through the country,
that I may be avenged of them that have destroyed it, and made many
cities in the kingdom desolate:

<span id="005">5</span> Now therefore I confirm unto thee all the
oblations which the kings before me granted thee, and whatsoever gifts
besides they granted.

<span id="006">6</span> I give thee leave also to coin money for thy
country with thine own stamp.

<span id="007">7</span> And as concerning Jerusalem and the sanctuary,
let them be free; and all the armour that thou hast made, and fortresses
that thou hast built, and keepest in thine hands, let them remain unto
thee.

<span id="008">8</span> And if anything be, or shall be, owing to the
king, let it be forgiven thee from this time forth for evermore.

<span id="009">9</span> Furthermore, when we have obtained our kingdom,
we will honour thee, and thy nation, and thy temple, with great honour,
so that your honour shall be known throughout the world.

<span id="010">10</span> In the hundred threescore and fourteenth year
went Antiochus into the land of his fathers: at which time all the
forces came together unto him, so that few were left with Tryphon.

<span id="011">11</span> Wherefore being pursued by king Antiochus, he
fled unto Dora, which lieth by the sea side:

<span id="012">12</span> For he saw that troubles came upon him all at
once, and that his forces had forsaken him.

<span id="013">13</span> Then camped Antiochus against Dora, having with
him an hundred and twenty thousand men of war, and eight thousand
horsemen.

<span id="014">14</span> And when he had compassed the city round about,
and joined ships close to the town on the sea side, he vexed the city by
land and by sea, neither suffered he any to go out or in.

<span id="015">15</span> In the mean season came Numenius and his
company from Rome, having letters to the kings and countries; wherein
were written these things:

<span id="016">16</span> Lucius, consul of the Romans unto king
Ptolemee, greeting:

<span id="017">17</span> The Jews' ambassadors, our friends and
confederates, came unto us to renew the old friendship and league, being
sent from Simon the high priest, and from the people of the Jews:

<span id="018">18</span> And they brought a shield of gold of a thousand
pound.

<span id="019">19</span> We thought it good therefore to write unto the
kings and countries, that they should do them no harm, nor fight against
them, their cities, or countries, nor yet aid their enemies against
them.

<span id="020">20</span> It seemed also good to us to receive the shield
of them.

<span id="021">21</span> If therefore there be any pestilent fellows,
that have fled from their country unto you, deliver them unto Simon the
high priest, that he may punish them according to their own law.

<span id="022">22</span> The same things wrote he likewise unto
Demetrius the king, and Attalus, to Ariarathes, and Arsaces,

<span id="023">23</span> And to all the countries and to Sampsames, and
the Lacedemonians, and to Delus, and Myndus, and Sicyon, and Caria, and
Samos, and Pamphylia, and Lycia, and Halicarnassus, and Rhodus, and
Aradus, and Cos, and Side, and Aradus, and Gortyna, and Cnidus, and
Cyprus, and Cyrene.

<span id="024">24</span> And the copy hereof they wrote to Simon the
high priest.

<span id="025">25</span> So Antiochus the king camped against Dora the
second day, assaulting it continually, and making engines, by which
means he shut up Tryphon, that he could neither go out nor in.

<span id="026">26</span> At that time Simon sent him two thousand chosen
men to aid him; silver also, and gold, and much armour.

<span id="027">27</span> Nevertheless he would not receive them, but
brake all the covenants which he had made with him afore, and became
strange unto him.

<span id="028">28</span> Furthermore he sent unto him Athenobius, one of
his friends, to commune with him, and say, Ye withhold Joppa and Gazera;
with the tower that is in Jerusalem, which are cities of my realm.

<span id="029">29</span> The borders thereof ye have wasted, and done
great hurt in the land, and got the dominion of many places within my
kingdom.

<span id="030">30</span> Now therefore deliver the cities which ye have
taken, and the tributes of the places, whereof ye have gotten dominion
without the borders of Judea:

<span id="031">31</span> Or else give me for them five hundred talents
of silver; and for the harm that ye have done, and the tributes of the
cities, other five hundred talents: if not, we will come and fight
against you

<span id="032">32</span> So Athenobius the king's friend came to
Jerusalem: and when he saw the glory of Simon, and the cupboard of gold
and silver plate, and his great attendance, he was astonished, and told
him the king's message.

<span id="033">33</span> Then answered Simon, and said unto him, We have
neither taken other men's land, nor holden that which appertaineth to
others, but the inheritance of our fathers, which our enemies had
wrongfully in possession a certain time.

<span id="034">34</span> Wherefore we, having opportunity, hold the
inheritance of our fathers.

<span id="035">35</span> And whereas thou demandest Joppa and Gazera,
albeit they did great harm unto the people in our country, yet will we
give thee an hundred talents for them. Hereunto Athenobius answered him
not a word;

<span id="036">36</span> But returned in a rage to the king, and made
report unto him of these speeches, and of the glory of Simon, and of all
that he had seen: whereupon the king was exceeding wroth.

<span id="037">37</span> In the mean time fled Tryphon by ship unto
Orthosias.

<span id="038">38</span> Then the king made Cendebeus captain of the sea
coast, and gave him an host of footmen and horsemen,

<span id="039">39</span> And commanded him to remove his host toward
Judea; also he commanded him to build up Cedron, and to fortify the
gates, and to war against the people; but as for the king himself, he
pursued Tryphon.

<span id="040">40</span> So Cendebeus came to Jamnia and began to
provoke the people and to invade Judea, and to take the people
prisoners, and slay them.

<span id="041">41</span> And when he had built up Cedrou, he set
horsemen there, and an host of footmen, to the end that issuing out they
might make outroads upon the ways of Judea, as the king had commanded
him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 16](ma1016.md)
