[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1010)  [Sep](../sep/ma1010.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1010.md)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1009)  [Next](ma1011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 10

<span id="001">1</span> In the hundred and sixtieth year Alexander, the
son of Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, went up and took Ptolemais: for the
people had received him, by means whereof he reigned there,

<span id="002">2</span> Now when king Demetrius heard thereof, he
gathered together an exceeding great host, and went forth against him to
fight.

<span id="003">3</span> Moreover Demetrius sent letters unto Jonathan
with loving words, so as he magnified him.

<span id="004">4</span> For said he, Let us first make peace with him,
before he join with Alexander against us:

<span id="005">5</span> Else he will remember all the evils that we have
done against him, and against his brethren and his people.

<span id="006">6</span> Wherefore he gave him authority to gather
together an host, and to provide weapons, that he might aid him in
battle: he commanded also that the hostages that were in the tower
should be delivered him.

<span id="007">7</span> Then came Jonathan to Jerusalem, and read the
letters in the audience of all the people, and of them that were in the
tower:

<span id="008">8</span> Who were sore afraid, when they heard that the
king had given him authority to gather together an host.

<span id="009">9</span> Whereupon they of the tower delivered their
hostages unto Jonathan, and he delivered them unto their parents.

<span id="010">10</span> This done, Jonathan settled himself in
Jerusalem, and began to build and repair the city.

<span id="011">11</span> And he commanded the workmen to build the walls
and the mount Sion and about with square stones for fortification; and
they did so.

<span id="012">12</span> Then the strangers, that were in the fortresses
which Bacchides had built, fled away;

<span id="013">13</span> Insomuch as every man left his place, and went
into his own country.

<span id="014">14</span> Only at Bethsura certain of those that had
forsaken the law and the commandments remained still: for it was their
place of refuge.

<span id="015">15</span> Now when king Alexander had heard what promises
Demetrius had sent unto Jonathan: when also it was told him of the
battles and noble acts which he and his brethren had done, and of the
pains that they had endured,

<span id="016">16</span> He said, Shall we find such another man? now
therefore we will make him our friend and confederate.

<span id="017">17</span> Upon this he wrote a letter, and sent it unto
him, according to these words, saying,

<span id="018">18</span> King Alexander to his brother Jonathan sendeth
greeting:

<span id="019">19</span> We have heard of thee, that thou art a man of
great power, and meet to be our friend.

<span id="020">20</span> Wherefore now this day we ordain thee to be the
high priest of thy nation, and to be called the king's friend; (and
therewithal he sent him a purple robe and a crown of gold:) and require
thee to take our part, and keep friendship with us.

<span id="021">21</span> So in the seventh month of the hundred and
sixtieth year, at the feast of the tabernacles, Jonathan put on the holy
robe, and gathered together forces, and provided much armour.

<span id="022">22</span> Whereof when Demetrius heard, he was very
sorry, and said,

<span id="023">23</span> What have we done, that Alexander hath
prevented us in making amity with the Jews to strengthen himself?

<span id="024">24</span> I also will write unto them words of
encouragement, and promise them dignities and gifts, that I may have
their aid.

<span id="025">25</span> He sent unto them therefore to this effect:
King Demetrius unto the people of the Jews sendeth greeting:

<span id="026">26</span> Whereas ye have kept covenants with us, and
continued in our friendship, not joining yourselves with our enemies, we
have heard hereof, and are glad.

<span id="027">27</span> Wherefore now continue ye still to be faithful
unto us, and we will well recompense you for the things ye do in our
behalf,

<span id="028">28</span> And will grant you many immunities, and give
you rewards.

<span id="029">29</span> And now do I free you, and for your sake I
release all the Jews, from tributes, and from the customs of salt, and
from crown taxes,

<span id="030">30</span> And from that which appertaineth unto me to
receive for the third part or the seed, and the half of the fruit of the
trees, I release it from this day forth, so that they shall not be taken
of the land of Judea, nor of the three governments which are added
thereunto out of the country of Samaria and Galilee, from this day forth
for evermore.

<span id="031">31</span> Let Jerusalem also be holy and free, with the
borders thereof, both from tenths and tributes.

<span id="032">32</span> And as for the tower which is at Jerusalem, I
yield up authority over it, and give the high priest, that he may set in
it such men as he shall choose to keep it.

<span id="033">33</span> Moreover I freely set at liberty every one of
the Jews, that were carried captives out of the land of Judea into any
part of my kingdom, and I will that all my officers remit the tributes
even of their cattle.

<span id="034">34</span> Furthermore I will that all the feasts, and
sabbaths, and new moons, and solemn days, and the three days before the
feast, and the three days after the feast shall be all of immunity and
freedom for all the Jews in my realm.

<span id="035">35</span> Also no man shall have authority to meddle with
or to molest any of them in any matter.

<span id="036">36</span> I will further, that there be enrolled among
the king's forces about thirty thousand men of the Jews, unto whom pay
shall be given, as belongeth to all king's forces.

<span id="037">37</span> And of them some shall be placed in the king's
strong holds, of whom also some shall be set over the affairs of the
kingdom, which are of trust: and I will that their overseers and
governors be of themselves, and that they live after their own laws,
even as the king hath commanded in the land of Judea.

<span id="038">38</span> And concerning the three governments that are
added to Judea from the country of Samaria, let them be joined with
Judea, that they may be reckoned to be under one, nor bound to obey
other authority than the high priest's.

<span id="039">39</span> As for Ptolemais, and the land pertaining
thereto, I give it as a free gift to the sanctuary at Jerusalem for the
necessary expences of the sanctuary.

<span id="040">40</span> Moreover I give every year fifteen thousand
shekels of silver out of the king's accounts from the places
appertaining.

<span id="041">41</span> And all the overplus, which the officers payed
not in as in former time, from henceforth shall be given toward the
works of the temple.

<span id="042">42</span> And beside this, the five thousand shekels of
silver, which they took from the uses of the temple out of the accounts
year by year, even those things shall be released, because they
appertain to the priests that minister.

<span id="043">43</span> And whosoever they be that flee unto the temple
at Jerusalem, or be within the liberties hereof, being indebted unto the
king, or for any other matter, let them be at liberty, and all that they
have in my realm.

<span id="044">44</span> For the building also and repairing of the
works of the sanctuary expences shall be given of the king's accounts.

<span id="045">45</span> Yea, and for the building of the walls of
Jerusalem, and the fortifying thereof round about, expences shall be
given out of the king's accounts, as also for the building of the walls
in Judea.

<span id="046">46</span> Now when Jonathan and the people heard these
words, they gave no credit unto them, nor received them, because they
remembered the great evil that he had done in Israel; for he had
afflicted them very sore.

<span id="047">47</span> But with Alexander they were well pleased,
because he was the first that entreated of true peace with them, and
they were confederate with him always.

<span id="048">48</span> Then gathered king Alexander great forces, and
camped over against Demetrius.

<span id="049">49</span> And after the two kings had joined battle,
Demetrius' host fled: but Alexander followed after him, and prevailed
against them.

<span id="050">50</span> And he continued the battle very sore until the
sun went down: and that day was Demetrius slain.

<span id="051">51</span> Afterward Alexander sent ambassadors to
Ptolemee king of Egypt with a message to this effect:

<span id="052">52</span> Forasmuch as I am come again to my realm, and
am set in the throne of my progenitors, and have gotten the dominion,
and overthrown Demetrius, and recovered our country;

<span id="053">53</span> For after I had joined battle with him, both he
and his host was discomfited by us, so that we sit in the throne of his
kingdom:

<span id="054">54</span> Now therefore let us make a league of amity
together, and give me now thy daughter to wife: and I will be thy son in
law, and will give both thee and her as according to thy dignity.

<span id="055">55</span> Then Ptolemee the king gave answer, saying,
Happy be the day wherein thou didst return into the land of thy fathers,
and satest in the throne of their kingdom.

<span id="056">56</span> And now will I do to thee, as thou hast
written: meet me therefore at Ptolemais, that we may see one another;
for I will marry my daughter to thee according to thy desire.

<span id="057">57</span> So Ptolemee went out of Egypt with his daughter
Cleopatra, and they came unto Ptolemais in the hundred threescore and
second year:

<span id="058">58</span> Where king Alexander meeting him, he gave unto
him his daughter Cleopatra, and celebrated her marriage at Ptolemais
with great glory, as the manner of kings is.

<span id="059">59</span> Now king Alexander had written unto Jonathan,
that he should come and meet him.

<span id="060">60</span> Who thereupon went honourably to Ptolemais,
where he met the two kings, and gave them and their friends silver and
gold, and many presents, and found favour in their sight.

<span id="061">61</span> At that time certain pestilent fellows of
Israel, men of a wicked life, assembled themselves against him, to
accuse him: but the king would not hear them.

<span id="062">62</span> Yea more than that, the king commanded to take
off his garments, and clothe him in purple: and they did so.

<span id="063">63</span> And he made him sit by himself, and said into
his princes, Go with him into the midst of the city, and make
proclamation, that no man complain against him of any matter, and that
no man trouble him for any manner of cause.

<span id="064">64</span> Now when his accusers saw that he was honored
according to the proclamation, and clothed in purple, they fled all
away.

<span id="065">65</span> So the king honoured him, and wrote him among
his chief friends, and made him a duke, and partaker of his dominion.

<span id="066">66</span> Afterward Jonathan returned to Jerusalem with
peace and gladness.

<span id="067">67</span> Furthermore in the; hundred threescore and
fifth year came Demetrius son of Demetrius out of Crete into the land of
his fathers:

<span id="068">68</span> Whereof when king Alexander heard tell, he was
right sorry, and returned into Antioch.

<span id="069">69</span> Then Demetrius made Apollonius the governor of
Celosyria his general, who gathered together a great host, and camped in
Jamnia, and sent unto Jonathan the high priest, saying,

<span id="070">70</span> Thou alone liftest up thyself against us, and I
am laughed to scorn for thy sake, and reproached: and why dost thou
vaunt thy power against us in the mountains?

<span id="071">71</span> Now therefore, if thou trustest in thine own
strength, come down to us into the plain field, and there let us try the
matter together: for with me is the power of the cities.

<span id="072">72</span> Ask and learn who I am, and the rest that take
our part, and they shall tell thee that thy foot is not able to to
flight in their own land.

<span id="073">73</span> Wherefore now thou shalt not be able to abide
the horsemen and so great a power in the plain, where is neither stone
nor flint, nor place to flee unto.

<span id="074">74</span> So when Jonathan heard these words of
Apollonius, he was moved in his mind, and choosing ten thousand men he
went out of Jerusalem, where Simon his brother met him for to help him.

<span id="075">75</span> And he pitched his tents against Joppa: but;
they of Joppa shut him out of the city, because Apollonius had a
garrison there.

<span id="076">76</span> Then Jonathan laid siege unto it: whereupon
they of the city let him in for fear: and so Jonathan won Joppa.

<span id="077">77</span> Whereof when Apollonius heard, he took three
thousand horsemen, with a great host of footmen, and went to Azotus as
one that journeyed, and therewithal drew him forth into the plain.
because he had a great number of horsemen, in whom he put his trust.

<span id="078">78</span> Then Jonathan followed after him to Azotus,
where the armies joined battle.

<span id="079">79</span> Now Apollonius had left a thousand horsemen in
ambush.

<span id="080">80</span> And Jonathan knew that there was an ambushment
behind him; for they had compassed in his host, and cast darts at the
people, from morning till evening.

<span id="081">81</span> But the people stood still, as Jonathan had
commanded them: and so the enemies' horses were tired.

<span id="082">82</span> Then brought Simon forth his host, and set them
against the footmen, (for the horsemen were spent) who were discomfited
by him, and fled.

<span id="083">83</span> The horsemen also, being scattered in the
field, fled to Azotus, and went into Bethdagon, their idol's temple, for
safety.

<span id="084">84</span> But Jonathan set fire on Azotus, and the cities
round about it, and took their spoils; and the temple of Dagon, with
them that were fled into it, he burned with fire.

<span id="085">85</span> Thus there were burned and slain with the sword
well nigh eight thousand men.

<span id="086">86</span> And from thence Jonathan removed his host, and
camped against Ascalon, where the men of the city came forth, and met
him with great pomp.

<span id="087">87</span> After this returned Jonathan and his host unto
Jerusalem, having any spoils.

<span id="088">88</span> Now when king ALexander heard these things, he
honoured Jonathan yet more.

<span id="089">89</span> And sent him a buckle of gold, as the use is to
be given to such as are of the king's blood: he gave him also Accaron
with the borders thereof in possession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 11](ma1011.md)
