[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1012)  [Sep](../sep/ma1012) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1012)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1011)  [Next](ma1013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> Now when Jonathan saw that time served him, he
chose certain men, and sent them to Rome, for to confirm and renew the
friendship that they had with them.

<span id="002">2</span> He sent letters also to the Lacedemonians, and
to other places, for the same purpose.

<span id="003">3</span> So they went unto Rome, and entered into the
senate, and said, Jonathan the high priest, and the people of the Jews,
sent us unto you, to the end ye should renew the friendship, which ye
had with them, and league, as in former time.

<span id="004">4</span> Upon this the Romans gave them letters unto the
governors of every place that they should bring them into the land of
Judea peaceably.

<span id="005">5</span> And this is the copy of the letters which
Jonathan wrote to the Lacedemonians:

<span id="006">6</span> Jonathan the high priest, and the elders of the
nation, and the priests, and the other of the Jews, unto the
Lacedemonians their brethren send greeting:

<span id="007">7</span> There were letters sent in times past unto Onias
the high priest from Darius, who reigned then among you, to signify that
ye are our brethren, as the copy here underwritten doth specify.

<span id="008">8</span> At which time Onias entreated the ambassador
that was sent honourably, and received the letters, wherein declaration
was made of the league and friendship.

<span id="009">9</span> Therefore we also, albeit we need none of these
things, that we have the holy books of scripture in our hands to comfort
us,

<span id="010">10</span> Have nevertheless attempted to send unto you
for the renewing of brotherhood and friendship, lest we should become
strangers unto you altogether: for there is a long time passed since ye
sent unto us.

<span id="011">11</span> We therefore at all times without ceasing, both
in our feasts, and other convenient days, do remember you in the
sacrifices which we offer, and in our prayers, as reason is, and as it
becometh us to think upon our brethren:

<span id="012">12</span> And we are right glad of your honour.

<span id="013">13</span> As for ourselves, we have had great troubles
and wars on every side, forsomuch as the kings that are round about us
have fought against us.

<span id="014">14</span> Howbeit we would not be troublesome unto you,
nor to others of our confederates and friends, in these wars:

<span id="015">15</span> For we have help from heaven that succoureth
us, so as we are delivered from our enemies, and our enemies are brought
under foot.

<span id="016">16</span> For this cause we chose Numenius the son of
Antiochus, and Antipater he son of Jason, and sent them unto the Romans,
to renew the amity that we had with them, and the former league.

<span id="017">17</span> We commanded them also to go unto you, and to
salute and to deliver you our letters concerning the renewing of our
brotherhood.

<span id="018">18</span> Wherefore now ye shall do well to give us an
answer thereto.

<span id="019">19</span> And this is the copy of the letters which
Oniares sent.

<span id="020">20</span> Areus king of the Lacedemonians to Onias the
high priest, greeting:

<span id="021">21</span> It is found in writing, that the Lacedemonians
and Jews are brethren, and that they are of the stock of Abraham:

<span id="022">22</span> Now therefore, since this is come to our
knowledge, ye shall do well to write unto us of your prosperity.

<span id="023">23</span> We do write back again to you, that your cattle
and goods are our's, and our's are your's We do command therefore our
ambassadors to make report unto you on this wise.

<span id="024">24</span> Now when Jonathan heard that Demebius' princes
were come to fight against him with a greater host than afore,

<span id="025">25</span> He removed from Jerusalem, and met them in the
land of Amathis: for he gave them no respite to enter his country.

<span id="026">26</span> He sent spies also unto their tents, who came
again, and told him that they were appointed to come upon them in the
night season.

<span id="027">27</span> Wherefore so soon as the sun was down, Jonathan
commanded his men to watch, and to be in arms, that all the night long
they might be ready to fight: also he sent forth centinels round about
the host.

<span id="028">28</span> But when the adversaries heard that Jonathan
and his men were ready for battle, they feared, and trembled in their
hearts, and they kindled fires in their camp.

<span id="029">29</span> Howbeit Jonathan and his company knew it not
till the morning: for they saw the lights burning.

<span id="030">30</span> Then Jonathan pursued after them, but overtook
them not: for they were gone over the river Eleutherus.

<span id="031">31</span> Wherefore Jonathan turned to the Arabians, who
were called Zabadeans, and smote them, and took their spoils.

<span id="032">32</span> And removing thence, he came to Damascus, and
so passed through all the country,

<span id="033">33</span> Simon also went forth, and passed through the
country unto Ascalon, and the holds there adjoining, from whence he
turned aside to Joppa, and won it.

<span id="034">34</span> For he had heard that they would deliver the
hold unto them that took Demetrius' part; wherefore he set a garrison
there to keep it.

<span id="035">35</span> After this came Jonathan home again, and
calling the elders of the people together, he consulted with them about
building strong holds in Judea,

<span id="036">36</span> And making the walls of Jerusalem higher, and
raising a great mount between the tower and the city, for to separate it
from the city, that so it might be alone, that men might neither sell
nor buy in it.

<span id="037">37</span> Upon this they came together to build up the
city, forasmuch as part of the wall toward the brook on the east side
was fallen down, and they repaired that which was called Caphenatha.

<span id="038">38</span> Simon also set up Adida in Sephela, and made it
strong with gates and bars.

<span id="039">39</span> Now Tryphon went about to get the kingdom of
Asia, and to kill Antiochus the king, that he might set the crown upon
his own head.

<span id="040">40</span> Howbeit he was afraid that Jonathan would not
suffer him, and that he would fight against him; wherefore he sought a
way how to take Jonathan, that he might kill him. So he removed, and
came to Bethsan.

<span id="041">41</span> Then Jonathan went out to meet him with forty
thousand men chosen for the battle, and came to Bethsan.

<span id="042">42</span> Now when Tryphon saw Jonathan came with so
great a force, he durst not stretch his hand against him;

<span id="043">43</span> But received him honourably, and commended him
unto all his friends, and gave him gifts, and commanded his men of war
to be as obedient unto him, as to himself.

<span id="044">44</span> Unto Jonathan also he said, Why hast thou
brought all this people to so great trouble, seeing there is no war
betwixt us?

<span id="045">45</span> Therefore send them now home again, and choose
a few men to wait on thee, and come thou with me to Ptolemais, for I
will give it thee, and the rest of the strong holds and forces, and all
that have any charge: as for me, I will return and depart: for this is
the cause of my coming.

<span id="046">46</span> So Jonathan believing him did as he bade him,
and sent away his host, who went into the land of Judea.

<span id="047">47</span> And with himself he retained but three thousand
men, of whom he sent two thousand into Galilee, and one thousand went
with him.

<span id="048">48</span> Now as soon as Jonathan entered into Ptolemais,
they of Ptolemais shut the gates and took him, and all them that came
with him they slew with the sword.

<span id="049">49</span> Then sent Tryphon an host of footmen and
horsemen into Galilee, and into the great plain, to destroy all
Jonathan's company.

<span id="050">50</span> But when they knew that Jonathan and they that
were with him were taken and slain, they encouraged one another; and
went close together, prepared to fight.

<span id="051">51</span> They therefore that followed upon them,
perceiving that they were ready to fight for their lives, turned back
again.

<span id="052">52</span> Whereupon they all came into the land of Judea
peaceably, and there they bewailed Jonathan, and them that were with
him, and they were sore afraid; wherefore all Israel made great
lamentation.

<span id="053">53</span> Then all the heathen that were round about then
sought to destroy them: for said they, They have no captain, nor any to
help them: now therefore let us make war upon them, and take away their
memorial from among men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 13](ma1013)
