[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1011)  [Sep](../sep/ma1011.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1011.md)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1010)  [Next](ma1012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 11

<span id="001">1</span> And the king of Egypt gathered together a great
host, like the sand that lieth upon the sea shore, and many ships, and
went about through deceit to get Alexander's kingdom, and join it to his
own.

<span id="002">2</span> Whereupon he took his journey into Spain in
peaceable manner, so as they of the cities opened unto him, and met him:
for king Alexander had commanded them so to do, because he was his
brother in law.

<span id="003">3</span> Now as Ptolemee entered into the cities, he set
in every one of them a garrison of soldiers to keep it.

<span id="004">4</span> And when he came near to Azotus, they shewed him
the temple of Dagon that was burnt, and Azotus and the suburbs thereof
that were destroyed, and the bodies that were cast abroad and them that
he had burnt in the battle; for they had made heaps of them by the way
where he should pass.

<span id="005">5</span> Also they told the king whatsoever Jonathan had
done, to the intent he might blame him: but the king held his peace.

<span id="006">6</span> Then Jonathan met the king with great pomp at
Joppa, where they saluted one another, and lodged.

<span id="007">7</span> Afterward Jonathan, when he had gone with the
king to the river called Eleutherus, returned again to Jerusalem.

<span id="008">8</span> King Ptolemee therefore, having gotten the
dominion of the cities by the sea unto Seleucia upon the sea coast,
imagined wicked counsels against Alexander.

<span id="009">9</span> Whereupon he sent ambasadors unto king
Demetrius, saying, Come, let us make a league betwixt us, and I will
give thee my daughter whom Alexander hath, and thou shalt reign in thy
father's kingdom:

<span id="010">10</span> For I repent that I gave my daughter unto him,
for he sought to slay me.

<span id="011">11</span> Thus did he slander him, because he was
desirous of his kingdom.

<span id="012">12</span> Wherefore he took his daughter from him, and
gave her to Demetrius, and forsook Alexander, so that their hatred was
openly known.

<span id="013">13</span> Then Ptolemee entered into Antioch, where he
set two crowns upon his head, the crown of Asia, and of Egypt.

<span id="014">14</span> In the mean season was king Alexander in
Cilicia, because those that dwelt in those parts had revolted from him.

<span id="015">15</span> But when Alexander heard of this, he came to
war against him: whereupon king Ptolemee brought forth his host, and met
him with a mighty power, and put him to flight.

<span id="016">16</span> So Alexander fled into Arabia there to be
defended; but king Ptolemee was exalted:

<span id="017">17</span> For Zabdiel the Arabian took off Alexander's
head, and sent it unto Ptolemee.

<span id="018">18</span> King Ptolemee also died the third day after,
and they that were in the strong holds were slain one of another.

<span id="019">19</span> By this means Demetrius reigned in the hundred
threescore and seventh year.

<span id="020">20</span> At the same time Jonathan gathered together
them that were in Judea to take the tower that was in Jerusalem: and he
made many engines of war against it.

<span id="021">21</span> Then came ungodly persons, who hated their own
people, went unto the king, and told him that Jonathan besieged the
tower,

<span id="022">22</span> Whereof when he heard, he was angry, and
immediately removing, he came to Ptolemais, and wrote unto Jonathan,
that he should not lay siege to the tower, but come and speak with him
at Ptolemais in great haste.

<span id="023">23</span> Nevertheless Jonathan, when he heard this,
commanded to besiege it still: and he chose certain of the elders of
Israel and the priests, and put himself in peril;

<span id="024">24</span> And took silver and gold, and raiment, and
divers presents besides, and went to Ptolemais unto the king, where he
found favour in his sight.

<span id="025">25</span> And though certain ungodly men of the people
had made complaints against him,

<span id="026">26</span> Yet the king entreated him as his predecessors
had done before, and promoted him in the sight of all his friends,

<span id="027">27</span> And confirmed him in the high priesthood, and
in all the honours that he had before, and gave him preeminence among
his chief friends.

<span id="028">28</span> Then Jonathan desired the king, that he would
make Judea free from tribute, as also the three governments, with the
country of Samaria; and he promised him three hundred talents.

<span id="029">29</span> So the king consented, and wrote letters unto
Jonathan of all these things after this manner:

<span id="030">30</span> King Demetrius unto his brother Jonathan, and
unto the nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting:

<span id="031">31</span> We send you here a copy of the letter which we
did write unto our cousin Lasthenes concerning you, that ye might see
it.

<span id="032">32</span> King Demetrius unto his father Lasthenes
sendeth greeting:

<span id="033">33</span> We are determined to do good to the people of
the Jews, who are our friends, and keep covenants with us, because of
their good will toward us.

<span id="034">34</span> Wherefore we have ratified unto them the
borders of Judea, with the three governments of Apherema and Lydda and
Ramathem, that are added unto Judea from the country of Samaria, and all
things appertaining unto them, for all such as do sacrifice in
Jerusalem, instead of the payments which the king received of them
yearly aforetime out of the fruits of the earth and of trees.

<span id="035">35</span> And as for other things that belong unto us, of
the tithes and customs pertaining unto us, as also the saltpits, and the
crown taxes, which are due unto us, we discharge them of them all for
their relief.

<span id="036">36</span> And nothing hereof shall be revoked from this
time forth for ever.

<span id="037">37</span> Now therefore see that thou make a copy of
these things, and let it be delivered unto Jonathan, and set upon the
holy mount in a conspicuous place.

<span id="038">38</span> After this, when king Demetrius saw that the
land was quiet before him, and that no resistance was made against him,
he sent away all his forces, every one to his own place, except certain
bands of strangers, whom he had gathered from the isles of the heathen:
wherefore all the forces of his fathers hated him.

<span id="039">39</span> Moreover there was one Tryphon, that had been
of Alexander's part afore, who, seeing that all the host murmured
against Demetrius, went to Simalcue the Arabian that brought up
Antiochus the young son of Alexander,

<span id="040">40</span> And lay sore upon him to deliver him this young
Antiochus, that he might reign in his father's stead: he told him
therefore all that Demetrius had done, and how his men of war were at
enmity with him, and there he remained a long season.

<span id="041">41</span> In the mean time Jonathan sent unto king
Demetrius, that he would cast those of the tower out of Jerusalem, and
those also in the fortresses: for they fought against Israel.

<span id="042">42</span> So Demetrius sent unto Jonathan, saying, I will
not only do this for thee and thy people, but I will greatly honour thee
and thy nation, if opportunity serve.

<span id="043">43</span> Now therefore thou shalt do well, if thou send
me men to help me; for all my forces are gone from me.

<span id="044">44</span> Upon this Jonathan sent him three thousand
strong men unto Antioch: and when they came to the king, the king was
very glad of their coming.

<span id="045">45</span> Howbeit they that were of the city gathered
themselves together into the midst of the city, to the number of an
hundred and twenty thousand men, and would have slain the king.

<span id="046">46</span> Wherefore the king fled into the court, but
they of the city kept the passages of the city, and began to fight.

<span id="047">47</span> Then the king called to the Jews for help, who
came unto him all at once, and dispersing themselves through the city
slew that day in the city to the number of an hundred thousand.

<span id="048">48</span> Also they set fire on the city, and gat many
spoils that day, and delivered the king.

<span id="049">49</span> So when they of the city saw that the Jews had
got the city as they would, their courage was abated: wherefore they
made supplication to the king, and cried, saying,

<span id="050">50</span> Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease from
assaulting us and the city.

<span id="051">51</span> With that they cast away their weapons, and
made peace; and the Jews were honoured in the sight of the king, and in
the sight of all that were in his realm; and they returned to Jerusalem,
having great spoils.

<span id="052">52</span> So king Demetrius sat on the throne of his
kingdom, and the land was quiet before him.

<span id="053">53</span> Nevertheless he dissembled in all that ever he
spake, and estranged himself from Jonathan, neither rewarded he him
according to the benefits which he had received of him, but troubled him
very sore.

<span id="054">54</span> After this returned Tryphon, and with him the
young child Antiochus, who reigned, and was crowned.

<span id="055">55</span> Then there gathered unto him all the men of
war, whom Demetrius had put away, and they fought against Demetrius, who
turned his back and fled.

<span id="056">56</span> Moreover Tryphon took the elephants, and won
Antioch.

<span id="057">57</span> At that time young Antiochus wrote unto
Jonathan, saying, I confirm thee in the high priesthood, and appoint
thee ruler over the four governments, and to be one of the king's
friends.

<span id="058">58</span> Upon this he sent him golden vessels to be
served in, and gave him leave to drink in gold, and to be clothed in
purple, and to wear a golden buckle.

<span id="059">59</span> His brother Simon also he made captain from the
place called The ladder of Tyrus unto the borders of Egypt.

<span id="060">60</span> Then Jonathan went forth, and passed through
the cities beyond the water, and all the forces of Syria gathered
themselves unto him for to help him: and when he came to Ascalon, they
of the city met him honourably.

<span id="061">61</span> From whence he went to Gaza, but they of Gaza
shut him out; wherefore he laid siege unto it, and burned the suburbs
thereof with fire, and spoiled them.

<span id="062">62</span> Afterward, when they of Gaza made supplication
unto Jonathan, he made peace with them, and took the sons of their chief
men for hostages, and sent them to Jerusalem, and passed through the
country unto Damascus.

<span id="063">63</span> Now when Jonathan heard that Demetrius' princes
were come to Cades, which is in Galilee, with a great power, purposing
to remove him out of the country,

<span id="064">64</span> He went to meet them, and left Simon his
brother in the country.

<span id="065">65</span> Then Simon encamped against Bethsura and fought
against it a long season, and shut it up:

<span id="066">66</span> But they desired to have peace with him, which
he granted them, and then put them out from thence, and took the city,
and set a garrison in it.

<span id="067">67</span> As for Jonathan and his host, they pitched at
the water of Gennesar, from whence betimes in the morning they gat them
to the plain of Nasor.

<span id="068">68</span> And, behold, the host of strangers met them in
the plain, who, having laid men in ambush for him in the mountains, came
themselves over against him.

<span id="069">69</span> So when they that lay in ambush rose out of
their places and joined battle, all that were of Jonathan's side fled;

<span id="070">70</span> Insomuch as there was not one of them left,
except Mattathias the son of Absalom, and Judas the son of Calphi, the
captains of the host.

<span id="071">71</span> Then Jonathan rent his clothes, and cast earth
upon his head, and prayed.

<span id="072">72</span> Afterwards turning again to battle, he put them
to flight, and so they ran away.

<span id="073">73</span> Now when his own men that were fled saw this,
they turned again unto him, and with him pursued them to Cades, even
unto their own tents, and there they camped.

<span id="074">74</span> So there were slain of the heathen that day
about three thousand men: but Jonathan returned to Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 12](ma1012.md)
