[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1009)  [Sep](../sep/ma1009.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1009.md)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1008)  [Next](ma1010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 9

<span id="001">1</span> Furthermore, when Demetrius heard the Nicanor
and his host were slain in battle, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus into
the land of Judea the second time, and with them the chief strength of
his host:

<span id="002">2</span> Who went forth by the way that leadeth to
Galgala, and pitched their tents before Masaloth, which is in Arbela,
and after they had won it, they slew much people.

<span id="003">3</span> Also the first month of the hundred fifty and
second year they encamped before Jerusalem:

<span id="004">4</span> From whence they removed, and went to Berea,
with twenty thousand footmen and two thousand horsemen.

<span id="005">5</span> Now Judas had pitched his tents at Eleasa, and
three thousand chosen men with him:

<span id="006">6</span> Who seeing the multitude of the other army to he
so great were sore afraid; whereupon many conveyed themselves out of the
host, insomuch as abode of them no more but eight hundred men.

<span id="007">7</span> When Judas therefore saw that his host slipt
away, and that the battle pressed upon him, he was sore troubled in
mind, and much distressed, for that he had no time to gather them
together.

<span id="008">8</span> Nevertheless unto them that remained he said,
Let us arise and go up against our enemies, if peradventure we may be
able to fight with them.

<span id="009">9</span> But they dehorted him, saying, We shall never be
able: let us now rather save our lives, and hereafter we will return
with our brethren, and fight against them: for we are but few.

<span id="010">10</span> Then Judas said, God forbid that I should do
this thing, and flee away from them: if our time be come, let us die
manfully for our brethren, and let us not stain our honour.

<span id="011">11</span> With that the host of Bacchides removed out of
their tents, and stood over against them, their horsemen being divided
into two troops, and their slingers and archers going before the host
and they that marched in the foreward were all mighty men.

<span id="012">12</span> As for Bacchides, he was in the right wing: so
the host drew near on the two parts, and sounded their trumpets.

<span id="013">13</span> They also of Judas' side, even they sounded
their trumpets also, so that the earth shook at the noise of the armies,
and the battle continued from morning till night.

<span id="014">14</span> Now when Judas perceived that Bacchides and the
strength of his army were on the right side, he took with him all the
hardy men,

<span id="015">15</span> Who discomfited the right wing, and pursued
them unto the mount Azotus.

<span id="016">16</span> But when they of the left wing saw that they of
the right wing were discomfited, they followed upon Judas and those that
were with him hard at the heels from behind:

<span id="017">17</span> Whereupon there was a sore battle, insomuch as
many were slain on both parts.

<span id="018">18</span> Judas also was killed, and the remnant fled.

<span id="019">19</span> THen Jonathan and Simon took Judas their
brother, and buried him in the sepulchre of his fathers in Modin.

<span id="020">20</span> Moreover they bewailed him, and all Israel made
great lamentation for him, and mourned many days, saying,

<span id="021">21</span> How is the valiant man fallen, that delivered
Israel!

<span id="022">22</span> As for the other things concerning Judas and
his wars, and the noble acts which he did, and his greatness, they are
not written: for they were very many.

<span id="023">23</span> Now after the death of Judas the wicked began
to put forth their heads in all the coasts of Israel, and there arose up
all such as wrought iniquity.

<span id="024">24</span> In those days also was there a very great
famine, by reason whereof the country revolted, and went with them.

<span id="025">25</span> Then Bacchides chose the wicked men, and made
them lords of the country.

<span id="026">26</span> And they made enquiry and search for Judas'
friends, and brought them unto Bacchides, who took vengeance of them,
and used them despitefully.

<span id="027">27</span> So was there a great affliction in Israel, the
like whereof was not since the time that a prophet was not seen among
them.

<span id="028">28</span> For this cause all Judas' friends came
together, and said unto Jonathan,

<span id="029">29</span> Since thy brother Judas died, we have no man
like him to go forth against our enemies, and Bacchides, and against
them of our nation that are adversaries to us.

<span id="030">30</span> Now therefore we have chosen thee this day to
be our prince and captain in his stead, that thou mayest fight our
battles.

<span id="031">31</span> Upon this Jonathan took the governance upon him
at that time, and rose up instead of his brother Judas.

<span id="032">32</span> But when Bacchides gat knowledge thereof, he
sought for to slay him

<span id="033">33</span> Then Jonathan, and Simon his brother, and all
that were with him, perceiving that, fled into the wilderness of Thecoe,
and pitched their tents by the water of the pool Asphar.

<span id="034">34</span> Which when Bacchides understood, he came near
to Jordan with all his host upon the sabbath day.

<span id="035">35</span> Now Jonathan had sent his brother John, a
captain of the people, to pray his friends the Nabathites, that they
might leave with them their carriage, which was much.

<span id="036">36</span> But the children of Jambri came out of Medaba,
and took John, and all that he had, and went their way with it.

<span id="037">37</span> After this came word to Jonathan and Simon his
brother, that the children of Jambri made a great marriage, and were
bringing the bride from Nadabatha with a great train, as being the
daughter of one of the great princes of Chanaan.

<span id="038">38</span> Therefore they remembered John their brother,
and went up, and hid themselves under the covert of the mountain:

<span id="039">39</span> Where they lifted up their eyes, and looked,
and, behold, there was much ado and great carriage: and the bridegroom
came forth, and his friends and brethren, to meet them with drums, and
instruments of musick, and many weapons.

<span id="040">40</span> Then Jonathan and they that were with him rose
up against them from the place where they lay in ambush, and made a
slaughter of them in such sort, as many fell down dead, and the remnant
fled into the mountain, and they took all their spoils.

<span id="041">41</span> Thus was the marriage turned into mourning, and
the noise of their melody into lamentation.

<span id="042">42</span> So when they had avenged fully the blood of
their brother, they turned again to the marsh of Jordan.

<span id="043">43</span> Now when Bacchides heard hereof, he came on the
sabbath day unto the banks of Jordan with a great power.

<span id="044">44</span> Then Jonathan said to his company, Let us go up
now and fight for our lives, for it standeth not with us to day, as in
time past:

<span id="045">45</span> For, behold, the battle is before us and behind
us, and the water of Jordan on this side and that side, the marsh
likewise and wood, neither is there place for us to turn aside.

<span id="046">46</span> Wherefore cry ye now unto heaven, that ye may
be delivered from the hand of your enemies.

<span id="047">47</span> With that they joined battle, and Jonathan
stretched forth his hand to smite Bacchides, but he turned back from
him.

<span id="048">48</span> Then Jonathan and they that were with him leapt
into Jordan, and swam over unto the other bank: howbeit the other passed
not over Jordan unto them.

<span id="049">49</span> So there were slain of Bacchides' side that day
about a thousand men.

<span id="050">50</span> Afterward returned Bacchides to Jerusalem and
repaired the strong cites in Judea; the fort in Jericho, and Emmaus, and
Bethhoron, and Bethel, and Thamnatha, Pharathoni, and Taphon, these did
he strengthen with high walls, with gates and with bars.

<span id="051">51</span> And in them he set a garrison, that they might
work malice upon Israel.

<span id="052">52</span> He fortified also the city Bethsura, and
Gazera, and the tower, and put forces in them, and provision of
victuals.

<span id="053">53</span> Besides, he took the chief men's sons in the
country for hostages, and put them into the tower at Jerusalem to be
kept.

<span id="054">54</span> Moreover in the hundred fifty and third year,
in the second month, Alcimus commanded that the wall of the inner court
of the sanctuary should be pulled down; he pulled down also the works of
the prophets

<span id="055">55</span> And as he began to pull down, even at that time
was Alcimus plagued, and his enterprizes hindered: for his mouth was
stopped, and he was taken with a palsy, so that he could no more speak
any thing, nor give order concerning his house.

<span id="056">56</span> So Alcimus died at that time with great
torment.

<span id="057">57</span> Now when Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead,
he returned to the king: whereupon the land of Judea was in rest two
years.

<span id="058">58</span> Then all the ungodly men held a council,
saying, Behold, Jonathan and his company are at ease, and dwell without
care: now therefore we will bring Bacchides hither, who shall take them
all in one night.

<span id="059">59</span> So they went and consulted with him.

<span id="060">60</span> Then removed he, and came with a great host,
and sent letters privily to his adherents in Judea, that they should
take Jonathan and those that were with him: howbeit they could not,
because their counsel was known unto them.

<span id="061">61</span> Wherefore they took of the men of the country,
that were authors of that mischief, about fifty persons, and slew them.

<span id="062">62</span> Afterward Jonathan, and Simon, and they that
were with him, got them away to Bethbasi, which is in the wilderness,
and they repaired the decays thereof, and made it strong.

<span id="063">63</span> Which thing when Bacchides knew, he gathered
together all his host, and sent word to them that were of Judea.

<span id="064">64</span> Then went he and laid siege against Bethbasi;
and they fought against it a long season and made engines of war.

<span id="065">65</span> But Jonathan left his brother Simon in the
city, and went forth himself into the country, and with a certain number
went he forth.

<span id="066">66</span> And he smote Odonarkes and his brethren, and
the children of Phasiron in their tent.

<span id="067">67</span> And when he began to smite them, and came up
with his forces, Simon and his company went out of the city, and burned
up the engines of war,

<span id="068">68</span> And fought against Bacchides, who was
discomfited by them, and they afflicted him sore: for his counsel and
travail was in vain.

<span id="069">69</span> Wherefore he was very wroth at the wicked men
that gave him counsel to come into the country, inasmuch as he slew many
of them, and purposed to return into his own country.

<span id="070">70</span> Whereof when Jonathan had knowledge, he sent
ambassadors unto him, to the end he should make peace with him, and
deliver them the prisoners.

<span id="071">71</span> Which thing he accepted, and did according to
his demands, and sware unto him that he would never do him harm all the
days of his life.

<span id="072">72</span> When therefore he had restored unto him the
prisoners that he had taken aforetime out of the land of Judea, he
returned and went his way into his own land, neither came he any more
into their borders.

<span id="073">73</span> Thus the sword ceased from Israel: but Jonathan
dwelt at Machmas, and began to govern the people; and he destroyed the
ungodly men out of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 10](ma1010.md)
