[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2008)  [Sep](../sep/ma2008) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2008)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2007)  [Next](ma2009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 8

<span id="001">1</span> Then Judas Maccabeus, and they that were with
him, went privily into the towns, and called their kinsfolks together,
and took unto them all such as continued in the Jews' religion, and
assembled about six thousand men.

<span id="002">2</span> And they called upon the Lord, that he would
look upon the people that was trodden down of all; and also pity the
temple profaned of ungodly men;

<span id="003">3</span> And that he would have compassion upon the city,
sore defaced, and ready to be made even with the ground; and hear the
blood that cried unto him,

<span id="004">4</span> And remember the wicked slaughter of harmless
infants, and the blasphemies committed against his name; and that he
would shew his hatred against the wicked.

<span id="005">5</span> Now when Maccabeus had his company about him, he
could not be withstood by the heathen: for the wrath of the Lord was
turned into mercy.

<span id="006">6</span> Therefore he came at unawares, and burnt up
towns and cities, and got into his hands the most commodious places, and
overcame and put to flight no small number of his enemies.

<span id="007">7</span> But specially took he advantage of the night for
such privy attempts, insomuch that the fruit of his holiness was spread
every where.

<span id="008">8</span> So when Philip saw that this man increased by
little and little, and that things prospered with him still more and
more, he wrote unto Ptolemeus, the governor of Celosyria and Phenice, to
yield more aid to the king's affairs.

<span id="009">9</span> Then forthwith choosing Nicanor the son of
Patroclus, one of his special friends, he sent him with no fewer than
twenty thousand of all nations under him, to root out the whole
generation of the Jews; and with him he joined also Gorgias a captain,
who in matters of war had great experience.

<span id="010">10</span> So Nicanor undertook to make so much money of
the captive Jews, as should defray the tribute of two thousand talents,
which the king was to pay to the Romans.

<span id="011">11</span> Wherefore immediately he sent to the cities
upon the sea coast, proclaiming a sale of the captive Jews, and
promising that they should have fourscore and ten bodies for one talent,
not expecting the vengeance that was to follow upon him from the
Almighty God.

<span id="012">12</span> Now when word was brought unto Judas of
Nicanor's coming, and he had imparted unto those that were with him that
the army was at hand,

<span id="013">13</span> They that were fearful, and distrusted the
justice of God, fled, and conveyed themselves away.

<span id="014">14</span> Others sold all that they had left, and withal
besought the Lord to deliver them, sold by the wicked Nicanor before
they met together:

<span id="015">15</span> And if not for their own sakes, yet for the
covenants he had made with their fathers, and for his holy and glorious
name's sake, by which they were called.

<span id="016">16</span> So Maccabeus called his men together unto the
number of six thousand, and exhorted them not to be stricken with terror
of the enemy, nor to fear the great multitude of the heathen, who came
wrongly against them; but to fight manfully,

<span id="017">17</span> And to set before their eyes the injury that
they had unjustly done to the holy place, and the cruel handling of the
city, whereof they made a mockery, and also the taking away of the
government of their forefathers:

<span id="018">18</span> For they, said he, trust in their weapons and
boldness; but our confidence is in the Almighty who at a beck can cast
down both them that come against us, and also all the world.

<span id="019">19</span> Moreover, he recounted unto them what helps
their forefathers had found, and how they were delivered, when under
Sennacherib an hundred fourscore and five thousand perished.

<span id="020">20</span> And he told them of the battle that they had in
Babylon with the Galatians, how they came but eight thousand in all to
the business, with four thousand Macedonians, and that the Macedonians
being perplexed, the eight thousand destroyed an hundred and twenty
thousand because of the help that they had from heaven, and so received
a great booty.

<span id="021">21</span> Thus when he had made them bold with these
words, and ready to die for the law and the country, he divided his army
into four parts;

<span id="022">22</span> And joined with himself his own brethren,
leaders of each band, to wit Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving
each one fifteen hundred men.

<span id="023">23</span> Also he appointed Eleazar to read the holy
book: and when he had given them this watchword, The help of God;
himself leading the first band,

<span id="024">24</span> And by the help of the Almighty they slew above
nine thousand of their enemies, and wounded and maimed the most part of
Nicanor's host, and so put all to flight;

<span id="025">25</span> And took their money that came to buy them, and
pursued them far: but lacking time they returned:

<span id="026">26</span> For it was the day before the sabbath, and
therefore they would no longer pursue them.

<span id="027">27</span> So when they had gathered their armour
together, and spoiled their enemies, they occupied themselves about the
sabbath, yielding exceeding praise and thanks to the Lord, who had
preserved them unto that day, which was the beginning of mercy
distilling upon them.

<span id="028">28</span> And after the sabbath, when they had given part
of the spoils to the maimed, and the widows, and orphans, the residue
they divided among themselves and their servants.

<span id="029">29</span> When this was done, and they had made a common
supplication, they besought the merciful Lord to be reconciled with his
servants for ever.

<span id="030">30</span> Moreover of those that were with Timotheus and
Bacchides, who fought against them, they slew above twenty thousand, and
very easily got high and strong holds, and divided among themselves many
spoils more, and made the maimed, orphans, widows, yea, and the aged
also, equal in spoils with themselves.

<span id="031">31</span> And when they had gathered their armour
together, they laid them up all carefully in convenient places, and the
remnant of the spoils they brought to Jerusalem.

<span id="032">32</span> They slew also Philarches, that wicked person,
who was with Timotheus, and had annoyed the Jews many ways.

<span id="033">33</span> Furthermore at such time as they kept the feast
for the victory in their country they burnt Callisthenes, that had set
fire upon the holy gates, who had fled into a little house; and so he
received a reward meet for his wickedness.

<span id="034">34</span> As for that most ungracious Nicanor, who had
brought a thousand merchants to buy the Jews,

<span id="035">35</span> He was through the help of the Lord brought
down by them, of whom he made least account; and putting off his
glorious apparel, and discharging his company, he came like a fugitive
servant through the midland unto Antioch having very great dishonour,
for that his host was destroyed.

<span id="036">36</span> Thus he, that took upon him to make good to the
Romans their tribute by means of captives in Jerusalem, told abroad,
that the Jews had God to fight for them, and therefore they could not be
hurt, because they followed the laws that he gave them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 9](ma2009)
