[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2014)  [Sep](../sep/ma2014.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2014.md)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2.md)  
  [Previous](ma2013)  [Next](ma2015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> After three years was Judas informed, that
Demetrius the son of Seleucus, having entered by the haven of Tripolis
with a great power and navy,

<span id="002">2</span> Had taken the country, and killed Antiochus, and
Lysias his protector.

<span id="003">3</span> Now one Alcimus, who had been high priest, and
had defiled himself wilfully in the times of their mingling with the
Gentiles, seeing that by no means he could save himself, nor have any
more access to the holy altar,

<span id="004">4</span> Came to king Demetrius in the hundred and one
and fiftieth year, presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and
also of the boughs which were used solemnly in the temple: and so that
day he held his peace.

<span id="005">5</span> Howbeit having gotten opportunity to further his
foolish enterprize, and being called into counsel by Demetrius, and
asked how the Jews stood affected, and what they intended, he answered
thereunto:

<span id="006">6</span> Those of the Jews that he called Assideans,
whose captain is Judas Maccabeus, nourish war and are seditious, and
will not let the rest be in peace.

<span id="007">7</span> Therefore I, being deprived of mine ancestors'
honour, I mean the high priesthood, am now come hither:

<span id="008">8</span> First, verily for the unfeigned care I have of
things pertaining to the king; and secondly, even for that I intend the
good of mine own countrymen: for all our nation is in no small misery
through the unadvised dealing of them aforersaid.

<span id="009">9</span> Wherefore, O king, seeing knowest all these
things, be careful for the country, and our nation, which is pressed on
every side, according to the clemency that thou readily shewest unto
all.

<span id="010">10</span> For as long as Judas liveth, it is not possible
that the state should be quiet.

<span id="011">11</span> This was no sooner spoken of him, but others of
the king's friends, being maliciously set against Judas, did more
incense Demetrius.

<span id="012">12</span> And forthwith calling Nicanor, who had been
master of the elephants, and making him governor over Judea, he sent him
forth,

<span id="013">13</span> Commanding him to slay Judas, and to scatter
them that were with him, and to make Alcimus high priest of the great
temple.

<span id="014">14</span> Then the heathen, that had fled out of Judea
from Judas, came to Nicanor by flocks, thinking the harm and calamities
ot the Jews to be their welfare.

<span id="015">15</span> Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming,
and that the heathen were up against them, they cast earth upon their
heads, and made supplication to him that had established his people for
ever, and who always helpeth his portion with manifestation of his
presence.

<span id="016">16</span> So at the commandment of the captain they
removed straightways from thence, and came near unto them at the town of
Dessau.

<span id="017">17</span> Now Simon, Judas' brother, had joined battle
with Nicanor, but was somewhat discomfited through the sudden silence of
his enemies.

<span id="018">18</span> Nevertheless Nicanor, hearing of the manliness
of them that were with Judas, and the courageousness that they had to
fight for their country, durst not try the matter by the sword.

<span id="019">19</span> Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotus,
and Mattathias, to make peace.

<span id="020">20</span> So when they had taken long advisement
thereupon, and the captain had made the multitude acquainted therewith,
and it appeared that they were all of one mind, they consented to the
covenants,

<span id="021">21</span> And appointed a day to meet in together by
themselves: and when the day came, and stools were set for either of
them,

<span id="022">22</span> Ludas placed armed men ready in convenient
places, lest some treachery should be suddenly practised by the enemies:
so they made a peaceable conference.

<span id="023">23</span> Now Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no
hurt, but sent away the people that came flocking unto him.

<span id="024">24</span> And he would not willingly have Judas out of
his sight: for he love the man from his heart

<span id="025">25</span> He prayed him also to take a wife, and to beget
children: so he married, was quiet, and took part of this life.

<span id="026">26</span> But Alcimus, perceiving the love that was
betwixt them, and considering the covenants that were made, came to
Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor was not well affected toward the
state; for that he had ordained Judas, a traitor to his realm, to be the
king's successor.

<span id="027">27</span> Then the king being in a rage, and provoked
with the accusations of the most wicked man, wrote to Nicanor,
signifying that he was much displeased with the covenants, and
commanding him that he should send Maccabeus prisoner in all haste unto
Antioch.

<span id="028">28</span> When this came to Nicanor's hearing, he was
much confounded in himself, and took it grievously that he should make
void the articles which were agreed upon, the man being in no fault.

<span id="029">29</span> But because there was no dealing against the
king, he watched his time to accomplish this thing by policy.

<span id="030">30</span> Notwithstanding, when Maccabeus saw that
Nicanor began to be churlish unto him, and that he entreated him more
roughly than he was wont, perceiving that such sour behaviour came not
of good, he gathered together not a few of his men, and withdrew himself
from Nicanor.

<span id="031">31</span> But the other, knowing that he was notably
prevented by Judas' policy, came into the great and holy temple, and
commanded the priests, that were offering their usual sacrifices, to
deliver him the man.

<span id="032">32</span> And when they sware that they could not tell
where the man was whom he sought,

<span id="033">33</span> He stretched out his right hand toward the
temple, and made an oath in this manner: If ye will not deliver me Judas
as a prisoner, I will lay this temple of God even with the ground, and I
will break down the altar, and erect a notable temple unto Bacchus.

<span id="034">34</span> After these words he departed. Then the priests
lifted up their hands toward heaven, and besought him that was ever a
defender of their nation, saying in this manner;

<span id="035">35</span> Thou, O Lord of all things, who hast need of
nothing, wast pleased that the temple of thine habitation should be
among us:

<span id="036">36</span> Therefore now, O holy Lord of all holiness,
keep this house ever undefiled, which lately was cleansed, and stop
every unrighteous mouth.

<span id="037">37</span> Now was there accused unto Nicanor one Razis,
one of the elders of Jerusalem, a lover of his countrymen, and a man of
very good report, who for his kindness was called a father of the Jews.

<span id="038">38</span> For in the former times, when they mingled not
themselves with the Gentiles, he had been accused of Judaism, and did
boldly jeopard his body and life with all vehemency for the religion of
the Jews.

<span id="039">39</span> So Nicanor, willing to declare the hate that he
bare unto the Jews, sent above five hundred men of war to take him:

<span id="040">40</span> For he thought by taking him to do the Jews
much hurt.

<span id="041">41</span> Now when the multitude would have taken the
tower, and violently broken into the outer door, and bade that fire
should be brought to burn it, he being ready to be taken on every side
fell upon his sword;

<span id="042">42</span> Choosing rather to die manfully, than to come
into the hands of the wicked, to be abused otherwise than beseemed his
noble birth:

<span id="043">43</span> But missing his stroke through haste, the
multitude also rushing within the doors, he ran boldly up to the wall,
and cast himself down manfully among the thickest of them.

<span id="044">44</span> But they quickly giving back, and a space being
made, he fell down into the midst of the void place.

<span id="045">45</span> Nevertheless, while there was yet breath within
him, being inflamed with anger, he rose up; and though his blood gushed
out like spouts of water, and his wounds were grievous, yet he ran
through the midst of the throng; and standing upon a steep rock,

<span id="046">46</span> When as his blood was now quite gone, he
plucked out his bowels, and taking them in both his hands, he cast them
upon the throng, and calling upon the Lord of life and spirit to restore
him those again, he thus died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 15](ma2015.md)
