[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2007)  [Sep](../sep/ma2007) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2007)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2006)  [Next](ma2008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> It came to pass also, that seven brethren with
their mother were taken, and compelled by the king against the law to
taste swine's flesh, and were tormented with scourges and whips.

<span id="002">2</span> But one of them that spake first said thus, What
wouldest thou ask or learn of us? we are ready to die, rather than to
transgress the laws of our fathers.

<span id="003">3</span> Then the king, being in a rage, commanded pans
and caldrons to be made hot:

<span id="004">4</span> Which forthwith being heated, he commanded to
cut out the tongue of him that spake first, and to cut off the utmost
parts of his body, the rest of his brethren and his mother looking on.

<span id="005">5</span> Now when he was thus maimed in all his members,
he commanded him being yet alive to be brought to the fire, and to be
fried in the pan: and as the vapour of the pan was for a good space
dispersed, they exhorted one another with the mother to die manfully,
saying thus,

<span id="006">6</span> The Lord God looketh upon us, and in truth hath
comfort in us, as Moses in his song, which witnessed to their faces,
declared, saying, And he shall be comforted in his servants.

<span id="007">7</span> So when the first was dead after this number,
they brought the second to make him a mocking stock: and when they had
pulled off the skin of his head with the hair, they asked him, Wilt thou
eat, before thou be punished throughout every member of thy body?

<span id="008">8</span> But he answered in his own language, and said,
No. Wherefore he also received the next torment in order, as the former
did.

<span id="009">9</span> And when he was at the last gasp, he said, Thou
like a fury takest us out of this present life, but the King of the
world shall raise us up, who have died for his laws, unto everlasting
life.

<span id="010">10</span> After him was the third made a mocking stock:
and when he was required, he put out his tongue, and that right soon,
holding forth his hands manfully.

<span id="011">11</span> And said courageously, These I had from heaven;
and for his laws I despise them; and from him I hope to receive them
again.

<span id="012">12</span> Insomuch that the king, and they that were with
him, marvelled at the young man's courage, for that he nothing regarded
the pains.

<span id="013">13</span> Now when this man was dead also, they tormented
and mangled the fourth in like manner.

<span id="014">14</span> So when he was ready to die he said thus, It is
good, being put to death by men, to look for hope from God to be raised
up again by him: as for thee, thou shalt have no resurrection to life.

<span id="015">15</span> Afterward they brought the fifth also, and
mangled him.

<span id="016">16</span> Then looked he unto the king, and said, Thou
hast power over men, thou art corruptible, thou doest what thou wilt;
yet think not that our nation is forsaken of God;

<span id="017">17</span> But abide a while, and behold his great power,
how he will torment thee and thy seed.

<span id="018">18</span> After him also they brought the sixth, who
being ready to die said, Be not deceived without cause: for we suffer
these things for ourselves, having sinned against our God: therefore
marvellous things are done unto us.

<span id="019">19</span> But think not thou, that takest in hand to
strive against God, that thou shalt escape unpunished.

<span id="020">20</span> But the mother was marvellous above all, and
worthy of honourable memory: for when she saw her seven sons slain
within the space of one day, she bare it with a good courage, because of
the hope that she had in the Lord.

<span id="021">21</span> Yea, she exhorted every one of them in her own
language, filled with courageous spirits; and stirring up her womanish
thoughts with a manly stomach, she said unto them,

<span id="022">22</span> I cannot tell how ye came into my womb: for I
neither gave you breath nor life, neither was it I that formed the
members of every one of you;

<span id="023">23</span> But doubtless the Creator of the world, who
formed the generation of man, and found out the beginning of all things,
will also of his own mercy give you breath and life again, as ye now
regard not your own selves for his laws' sake.

<span id="024">24</span> Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and
suspecting it to be a reproachful speech, whilst the youngest was yet
alive, did not only exhort him by words, but also assured him with
oaths, that he would make him both a rich and a happy man, if he would
turn from the laws of his fathers; and that also he would take him for
his friend, and trust him with affairs.

<span id="025">25</span> But when the young man would in no case hearken
unto him, the king called his mother, and exhorted her that she would
counsel the young man to save his life.

<span id="026">26</span> And when he had exhorted her with many words,
she promised him that she would counsel her son.

<span id="027">27</span> But she bowing herself toward him, laughing the
cruel tyrant to scorn, spake in her country language on this manner; O
my son, have pity upon me that bare thee nine months in my womb, and
gave thee such three years, and nourished thee, and brought thee up unto
this age, and endured the troubles of education.

<span id="028">28</span> I beseech thee, my son, look upon the heaven
and the earth, and all that is therein, and consider that God made them
of things that were not; and so was mankind made likewise.

<span id="029">29</span> Fear not this tormentor, but, being worthy of
thy brethren, take thy death that I may receive thee again in mercy with
thy brethren.

<span id="030">30</span> Whiles she was yet speaking these words, the
young man said, Whom wait ye for? I will not obey the king's
commandment: but I will obey the commandment of the law that was given
unto our fathers by Moses.

<span id="031">31</span> And thou, that hast been the author of all
mischief against the Hebrews, shalt not escape the hands of God.

<span id="032">32</span> For we suffer because of our sins.

<span id="033">33</span> And though the living Lord be angry with us a
little while for our chastening and correction, yet shall he be at one
again with his servants.

<span id="034">34</span> But thou, O godless man, and of all other most
wicked, be not lifted up without a cause, nor puffed up with uncertain
hopes, lifting up thy hand against the servants of God:

<span id="035">35</span> For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of
Almighty God, who seeth all things.

<span id="036">36</span> For our brethren, who now have suffered a short
pain, are dead under God's covenant of everlasting life: but thou,
through the judgment of God, shalt receive just punishment for thy
pride.

<span id="037">37</span> But I, as my brethren, offer up my body and
life for the laws of our fathers, beseeching God that he would speedily
be merciful unto our nation; and that thou by torments and plagues
mayest confess, that he alone is God;

<span id="038">38</span> And that in me and my brethren the wrath of the
Almighty, which is justly brought upon our nation, may cease.

<span id="039">39</span> Than the king' being in a rage, handed him
worse than all the rest, and took it grievously that he was mocked.

<span id="040">40</span> So this man died undefiled, and put his whole
trust in the Lord.

<span id="041">41</span> Last of all after the sons the mother died.

<span id="042">42</span> Let this be enough now to have spoken
concerning the idolatrous feasts, and the extreme tortures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 8](ma2008)
