[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2003)  [Sep](../sep/ma2003.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2003.md)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2.md)  
  [Previous](ma2002)  [Next](ma2004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> Now when the holy city was inhabited with all
peace, and the laws were kept very well, because of the godliness of
Onias the high priest, and his hatred of wickedness,

<span id="002">2</span> It came to pass that even the kings themselves
did honour the place, and magnify the temple with their best gifts;

<span id="003">3</span> Insomuch that Seleucus of Asia of his own
revenues bare all the costs belonging to the service of the sacrifices.

<span id="004">4</span> But one Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, who was
made governor of the temple, fell out with the high priest about
disorder in the city.

<span id="005">5</span> And when he could not overcome Onias, he gat him
to Apollonius the son of Thraseas, who then was governor of Celosyria
and Phenice,

<span id="006">6</span> And told him that the treasury in Jerusalem was
full of infinite sums of money, so that the multitude of their riches,
which did not pertain to the account of the sacrifices, was innumerable,
and that it was possible to bring all into the king's hand.

<span id="007">7</span> Now when Apollonius came to the king, and had
shewed him of the money whereof he was told, the king chose out
Heliodorus his treasurer, and sent him with a commandment to bring him
the foresaid money.

<span id="008">8</span> So forthwith Heliodorus took his journey; under
a colour of visiting the cities of Celosyria and Phenice, but indeed to
fulfil the king's purpose.

<span id="009">9</span> And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had been
courteously received of the high priest of the city, he told him what
intelligence was given of the money, and declared wherefore he came, and
asked if these things were so indeed.

<span id="010">10</span> Then the high priest told him that there was
such money laid up for the relief of widows and fatherless children:

<span id="011">11</span> And that some of it belonged to Hircanus son of
Tobias, a man of great dignity, and not as that wicked Simon had
misinformed: the sum whereof in all was four hundred talents of silver,
and two hundred of gold:

<span id="012">12</span> And that it was altogether impossible that such
wrongs should be done unto them, that had committed it to the holiness
of the place, and to the majesty and inviolable sanctity of the temple,
honoured over all the world.

<span id="013">13</span> But Heliodorus, because of the king's
commandment given him, said, That in any wise it must be brought into
the king's treasury.

<span id="014">14</span> So at the day which he appointed he entered in
to order this matter: wherefore there was no small agony throughout the
whole city.

<span id="015">15</span> But the priests, prostrating themselves before
the altar in their priests' vestments, called unto heaven upon him that
made a law concerning things given to he kept, that they should safely
be preserved for such as had committed them to be kept.

<span id="016">16</span> Then whoso had looked the high priest in the
face, it would have wounded his heart: for his countenance and the
changing of his colour declared the inward agony of his mind.

<span id="017">17</span> For the man was so compassed with fear and
horror of the body, that it was manifest to them that looked upon him,
what sorrow he had now in his heart.

<span id="018">18</span> Others ran flocking out of their houses to the
general supplication, because the place was like to come into contempt.

<span id="019">19</span> And the women, girt with sackcloth under their
breasts, abounded in the streets, and the virgins that were kept in ran,
some to the gates, and some to the walls, and others looked out of the
windows.

<span id="020">20</span> And all, holding their hands toward heaven,
made supplication.

<span id="021">21</span> Then it would have pitied a man to see the
falling down of the multitude of all sorts, and the fear of the high
priest being in such an agony.

<span id="022">22</span> They then called upon the Almighty Lord to keep
the things committed of trust safe and sure for those that had committed
them.

<span id="023">23</span> Nevertheless Heliodorus executed that which was
decreed.

<span id="024">24</span> Now as he was there present himself with his
guard about the treasury, the Lord of spirits, and the Prince of all
power, caused a great apparition, so that all that presumed to come in
with him were astonished at the power of God, and fainted, and were sore
afraid.

<span id="025">25</span> For there appeared unto them an horse with a
terrible rider upon him, and adorned with a very fair covering, and he
ran fiercely, and smote at Heliodorus with his forefeet, and it seemed
that he that sat upon the horse had complete harness of gold.

<span id="026">26</span> Moreover two other young men appeared before
him, notable in strength, excellent in beauty, and comely in apparel,
who stood by him on either side; and scourged him continually, and gave
him many sore stripes.

<span id="027">27</span> And Heliodorus fell suddenly unto the ground,
and was compassed with great darkness: but they that were with him took
him up, and put him into a litter.

<span id="028">28</span> Thus him, that lately came with a great train
and with all his guard into the said treasury, they carried out, being
unable to help himself with his weapons: and manifestly they
acknowledged the power of God.

<span id="029">29</span> For he by the hand of God was cast down, and
lay speechless without all hope of life.

<span id="030">30</span> But they praised the Lord, that had
miraculously honoured his own place: for the temple; which a little
afore was full of fear and trouble, when the Almighty Lord appeared, was
filled with joy and gladness.

<span id="031">31</span> Then straightways certain of Heliodorus'
friends prayed Onias, that he would call upon the most High to grant him
his life, who lay ready to give up the ghost.

<span id="032">32</span> So the high priest, suspecting lest the king
should misconceive that some treachery had been done to Heliodorus by
the Jews, offered a sacrifice for the health of the man.

<span id="033">33</span> Now as the high priest was making an atonement,
the same young men in the same clothing appeared and stood beside
Heliodorus, saying, Give Onias the high priest great thanks, insomuch as
for his sake the Lord hath granted thee life:

<span id="034">34</span> And seeing that thou hast been scourged from
heaven, declare unto all men the mighty power of God. And when they had
spoken these words, they appeared no more.

<span id="035">35</span> So Heliodorus, after he had offered sacrifice
unto the Lord, and made great vows unto him that had saved his life, and
saluted Onias, returned with his host to the king.

<span id="036">36</span> Then testified he to all men the works of the
great God, which he had seen with his eyes.

<span id="037">37</span> And when the king Heliodorus, who might be a
fit man to be sent yet once again to Jerusalem, he said,

<span id="038">38</span> If thou hast any enemy or traitor, send him
thither, and thou shalt receive him well scourged, if he escape with his
life: for in that place, no doubt; there is an especial power of God.

<span id="039">39</span> For he that dwelleth in heaven hath his eye on
that place, and defendeth it; and he beateth and destroyeth them that
come to hurt it.

<span id="040">40</span> And the things concerning Heliodorus, and the
keeping of the treasury, fell out on this sort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 4](ma2004.md)
