[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2001)  [Sep](../sep/ma2001.md) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2001.md)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2.md)  
  [Previous](ma1016)  [Next](ma2002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> The brethren, the Jews that be at Jerusalem and
in the land of Judea, wish unto the brethren, the Jews that are
throughout Egypt health and peace:

<span id="002">2</span> God be gracious unto you, and remember his
covenant that he made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, his faithful
servants;

<span id="003">3</span> And give you all an heart to serve him, and to
do his will, with a good courage and a willing mind;

<span id="004">4</span> And open your hearts in his law and
commandments, and send you peace,

<span id="005">5</span> And hear your prayers, and be at one with you,
and never forsake you in time of trouble.

<span id="006">6</span> And now we be here praying for you.

<span id="007">7</span> What time as Demetrius reigned, in the hundred
threescore and ninth year, we the Jews wrote unto you in the extremity
of trouble that came upon us in those years, from the time that Jason
and his company revolted from the holy land and kingdom,

<span id="008">8</span> And burned the porch, and shed innocent blood:
then we prayed unto the Lord, and were heard; we offered also sacrifices
and fine flour, and lighted the lamps, and set forth the loaves.

<span id="009">9</span> And now see that ye keep the feast of
tabernacles in the month Casleu.

<span id="010">10</span> In the hundred fourscore and eighth year, the
people that were at Jerusalem and in Judea, and the council, and Judas,
sent greeting and health unto Aristobulus, king Ptolemeus' master, who
was of the stock of the anointed priests, and to the Jews that were in
Egypt:

<span id="011">11</span> Insomuch as God hath delivered us from great
perils, we thank him highly, as having been in battle against a king.

<span id="012">12</span> For he cast them out that fought within the
holy city.

<span id="013">13</span> For when the leader was come into Persia, and
the army with him that seemed invincible, they were slain in the temple
of Nanea by the deceit of Nanea's priests.

<span id="014">14</span> For Antiochus, as though he would marry her,
came into the place, and his friends that were with him, to receive
money in name of a dowry.

<span id="015">15</span> Which when the priests of Nanea had set forth,
and he was entered with a small company into the compass of the temple,
they shut the temple as soon as Antiochus was come in:

<span id="016">16</span> And opening a privy door of the roof, they
threw stones like thunderbolts, and struck down the captain, hewed them
in pieces, smote off their heads and cast them to those that were
without.

<span id="017">17</span> Blessed be our God in all things, who hath
delivered up the ungodly.

<span id="018">18</span> Therefore whereas we are now purposed to keep
the purification of the temple upon the five and twentieth day of the
month Casleu, we thought it necessary to certify you thereof, that ye
also might keep it, as the feast of the tabernacles, and of the fire,
which was given us when Neemias offered sacrifice, after that he had
builded the temple and the altar.

<span id="019">19</span> For when our fathers were led into Persia, the
priests that were then devout took the fire of the altar privily, and
hid it in an hollow place of a pit without water, where they kept it
sure, so that the place was unknown to all men.

<span id="020">20</span> Now after many years, when it pleased God,
Neemias, being sent from the king of Persia, did send of the posterity
of those priests that had hid it to the fire: but when they told us they
found no fire, but thick water;

<span id="021">21</span> Then commanded he them to draw it up, and to
bring it; and when the sacrifices were laid on, Neemias commanded the
priests to sprinkle the wood and the things laid thereupon with the
water.

<span id="022">22</span> When this was done, and the time came that the
sun shone, which afore was hid in the cloud, there was a great fire
kindled, so that every man marvelled.

<span id="023">23</span> And the priests made a prayer whilst the
sacrifice was consuming, I say, both the priests, and all the rest,
Jonathan beginning, and the rest answering thereunto, as Neemias did.

<span id="024">24</span> And the prayer was after this manner; O Lord,
Lord God, Creator of all things, who art fearful and strong, and
righteous, and merciful, and the only and gracious King,

<span id="025">25</span> The only giver of all things, the only just,
almighty, and everlasting, thou that deliverest Israel from all trouble,
and didst choose the fathers, and sanctify them:

<span id="026">26</span> Receive the sacrifice for thy whole people
Israel, and preserve thine own portion, and sanctify it.

<span id="027">27</span> Gather those together that are scattered from
us, deliver them that serve among the heathen, look upon them that are
despised and abhorred, and let the heathen know that thou art our God.

<span id="028">28</span> Punish them that oppress us, and with pride do
us wrong.

<span id="029">29</span> Plant thy people again in thy holy place, as
Moses hath spoken.

<span id="030">30</span> And the priests sung psalms of thanksgiving.

<span id="031">31</span> Now when the sacrifice was consumed, Neemias
commanded the water that was left to be poured on the great stones.

<span id="032">32</span> When this was done, there was kindled a flame:
but it was consumed by the light that shined from the altar.

<span id="033">33</span> So when this matter was known, it was told the
king of Persia, that in the place, where the priests that were led away
had hid the fire, there appeared water, and that Neemias had purified
the sacrifices therewith.

<span id="034">34</span> Then the king, inclosing the place, made it
holy, after he had tried the matter.

<span id="035">35</span> And the king took many gifts, and bestowed
thereof on those whom he would gratify.

<span id="036">36</span> And Neemias called this thing Naphthar, which
is as much as to say, a cleansing: but many men call it Nephi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 2](ma2002.md)
