[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2010)  [Sep](../sep/ma2010) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2010)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2009)  [Next](ma2011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 10

<span id="001">1</span> Now Maccabeus and his company, the Lord guiding
them, recovered the temple and the city:

<span id="002">2</span> But the altars which the heathen had built in
the open street, and also the chapels, they pulled down.

<span id="003">3</span> And having cleansed the temple they made another
altar, and striking stones they took fire out of them, and offered a
sacrifice after two years, and set forth incense, and lights, and
shewbread.

<span id="004">4</span> When that was done, they fell flat down, and
besought the Lord that they might come no more into such troubles; but
if they sinned any more against him, that he himself would chasten them
with mercy, and that they might not be delivered unto the blasphemous
and barbarous nations.

<span id="005">5</span> Now upon the same day that the strangers
profaned the temple, on the very same day it was cleansed again, even
the five and twentieth day of the same month, which is Casleu.

<span id="006">6</span> And they kept the eight days with gladness, as
in the feast of the tabernacles, remembering that not long afore they
had held the feast of the tabernacles, when as they wandered in the
mountains and dens like beasts.

<span id="007">7</span> Therefore they bare branches, and fair boughs,
and palms also, and sang psalms unto him that had given them good
success in cleansing his place.

<span id="008">8</span> They ordained also by a common statute and
decree, That every year those days should be kept of the whole nation of
the Jews.

<span id="009">9</span> And this was the end of Antiochus, called
Epiphanes.

<span id="010">10</span> Now will we declare the acts of Antiochus
Eupator, who was the son of this wicked man, gathering briefly the
calamities of the wars.

<span id="011">11</span> So when he was come to the crown, he set one
Lysias over the affairs of his realm, and appointed him his chief
governor of Celosyria and Phenice.

<span id="012">12</span> For Ptolemeus, that was called Macron, choosing
rather to do justice unto the Jews for the wrong that had been done unto
them, endeavoured to continue peace with them.

<span id="013">13</span> Whereupon being accused of the king's friends
before Eupator, and called traitor at every word because he had left
Cyprus, that Philometor had committed unto him, and departed to
Antiochus Epiphanes, and seeing that he was in no honourable place, he
was so discouraged, that he poisoned himself and died.

<span id="014">14</span> But when Gorgias was governor of the holds, he
hired soldiers, and nourished war continually with the Jews:

<span id="015">15</span> And therewithall the Idumeans, having gotten
into their hands the most commodious holds, kept the Jews occupied, and
receiving those that were banished from Jerusalem, they went about to
nourish war.

<span id="016">16</span> Then they that were with Maccabeus made
supplication, and besought God that he would be their helper; and so
they ran with violence upon the strong holds of the Idumeans,

<span id="017">17</span> And assaulting them strongly, they won the
holds, and kept off all that fought upon the wall, and slew all that
fell into their hands, and killed no fewer than twenty thousand.

<span id="018">18</span> And because certain, who were no less than nine
thousand, were fled together into two very strong castles, having all
manner of things convenient to sustain the siege,

<span id="019">19</span> Maccabeus left Simon and Joseph, and Zaccheus
also, and them that were with him, who were enough to besiege them, and
departed himself unto those places which more needed his help.

<span id="020">20</span> Now they that were with Simon, being led with
covetousness, were persuaded for money through certain of those that
were in the castle, and took seventy thousand drachms, and let some of
them escape.

<span id="021">21</span> But when it was told Maccabeus what was done,
he called the governors of the people together, and accused those men,
that they had sold their brethren for money, and set their enemies free
to fight against them.

<span id="022">22</span> So he slew those that were found traitors, and
immediately took the two castles.

<span id="023">23</span> And having good success with his weapons in all
things he took in hand, he slew in the two holds more than twenty
thousand.

<span id="024">24</span> Now Timotheus, whom the Jews had overcome
before, when he had gathered a great multitude of foreign forces, and
horses out of Asia not a few, came as though he would take Jewry by
force of arms.

<span id="025">25</span> But when he drew near, they that were with
Maccabeus turned themselves to pray unto God, and sprinkled earth upon
their heads, and girded their loins with sackcloth,

<span id="026">26</span> And fell down at the foot of the altar, and
besought him to be merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their
enemies, and an adversary to their adversaries, as the law declareth.

<span id="027">27</span> So after the prayer they took their weapons,
and went on further from the city: and when they drew near to their
enemies, they kept by themselves.

<span id="028">28</span> Now the sun being newly risen, they joined both
together; the one part having together with their virtue their refuge
also unto the Lord for a pledge of their success and victory: the other
side making their rage leader of their battle

<span id="029">29</span> But when the battle waxed strong, there
appeared unto the enemies from heaven five comely men upon horses, with
bridles of gold, and two of them led the Jews,

<span id="030">30</span> And took Maccabeus betwixt them, and covered
him on every side weapons, and kept him safe, but shot arrows and
lightnings against the enemies: so that being confounded with blindness,
and full of trouble, they were killed.

<span id="031">31</span> And there were slain of footmen twenty thousand
and five hundred, and six hundred horsemen.

<span id="032">32</span> As for Timotheus himself, he fled into a very
strong hold, called Gawra, where Chereas was governor.

<span id="033">33</span> But they that were with Maccabeus laid siege
against the fortress courageously four days.

<span id="034">34</span> And they that were within, trusting to the
strength of the place, blasphemed exceedingly, and uttered wicked words.

<span id="035">35</span> Nevertheless upon the fifth day early twenty
young men of Maccabeus' company, inflamed with anger because of the
blasphemies, assaulted the wall manly, and with a fierce courage killed
all that they met withal.

<span id="036">36</span> Others likewise ascending after them, whiles
they were busied with them that were within, burnt the towers, and
kindling fires burnt the blasphemers alive; and others broke open the
gates, and, having received in the rest of the army, took the city,

<span id="037">37</span> And killed Timotheus, that was hid in a certain
pit, and Chereas his brother, with Apollophanes.

<span id="038">38</span> When this was done, they praised the Lord with
psalms and thanksgiving, who had done so great things for Israel, and
given them the victory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 11](ma2011)
