[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir013)  [Sep](../sep/sir013) 
[Vul](../vul/sir013)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir012)  [Next](sir014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled
therewith; and he that hath fellowship with a proud man shall be like
unto him.

<span id="002">2</span> Burden not thyself above thy power while thou
livest; and have no fellowship with one that is mightier and richer than
thyself: for how agree the kettle and the earthen pot together? for if
the one be smitten against the other, it shall be broken.

<span id="003">3</span> The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he
threateneth withal: the poor is wronged, and he must intreat also.

<span id="004">4</span> If thou be for his profit, he will use thee: but
if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee.

<span id="005">5</span> If thou have any thing, he will live with thee:
yea, he will make thee bare, and will not be sorry for it.

<span id="006">6</span> If he have need of thee, he will deceive thee,
and smile upon thee, and put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and
say, What wantest thou?

<span id="007">7</span> And he will shame thee by his meats, until he
have drawn thee dry twice or thrice, and at the last he will laugh thee
to scorn afterward, when he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake
his head at thee.

<span id="008">8</span> Beware that thou be not deceived and brought
down in thy jollity.

<span id="009">9</span> If thou be invited of a mighty man, withdraw
thyself, and so much the more will he invite thee.

<span id="010">10</span> Press thou not upon him, lest thou be put back;
stand not far off, lest thou be forgotten.

<span id="011">11</span> Affect not to be made equal unto him in talk,
and believe not his many words: for with much communication will he
tempt thee, and smiling upon thee will get out thy secrets:

<span id="012">12</span> But cruelly he will lay up thy words, and will
not spare to do thee hurt, and to put thee in prison.

<span id="013">13</span> Observe, and take good heed, for thou walkest
in peril of thy overthrowing: when thou hearest these things, awake in
thy sleep.

<span id="014">14</span> Love the Lord all thy life, and call upon him
for thy salvation.

<span id="015">15</span> Every beast loveth his like, and every man
loveth his neighbor.

<span id="016">16</span> All flesh consorteth according to kind, and a
man will cleave to his like.

<span id="017">17</span> What fellowship hath the wolf with the lamb? so
the sinner with the godly.

<span id="018">18</span> What agreement is there between the hyena and a
dog? and what peace between the rich and the poor?

<span id="019">19</span> As the wild ass is the lion's prey in the
wilderness: so the rich eat up the poor.

<span id="020">20</span> As the proud hate humility: so doth the rich
abhor the poor.

<span id="021">21</span> A rich man beginning to fall is held up of his
friends: but a poor man being down is thrust away by his friends.

<span id="022">22</span> When a rich man is fallen, he hath many
helpers: he speaketh things not to be spoken, and yet men justify him:
the poor man slipped, and yet they rebuked him too; he spake wisely, and
could have no place.

<span id="023">23</span> When a rich man speaketh, every man holdeth his
tongue, and, look, what he saith, they extol it to the clouds: but if
the poor man speak, they say, What fellow is this? and if he stumble,
they will help to overthrow him.

<span id="024">24</span> Riches are good unto him that hath no sin, and
poverty is evil in the mouth of the ungodly.

<span id="025">25</span> The heart of a man changeth his countenance,
whether it be for good or evil: and a merry heart maketh a cheerful
countenance.

<span id="026">26</span> A cheerful countenance is a token of a heart
that is in prosperity; and the finding out of parables is a wearisome
labour of the mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 14](sir014)
