[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir038)  [Sep](../sep/sir038.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir038.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir037)  [Next](sir039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 38

<span id="001">1</span> Honour a physician with the honour due unto him
for the uses which ye may have of him: for the Lord hath created him.

<span id="002">2</span> For of the most High cometh healing, and he
shall receive honour of the king.

<span id="003">3</span> The skill of the physician shall lift up his
head: and in the sight of great men he shall be in admiration.

<span id="004">4</span> The Lord hath created medicines out of the
earth; and he that is wise will not abhor them.

<span id="005">5</span> Was not the water made sweet with wood, that the
virtue thereof might be known?

<span id="006">6</span> And he hath given men skill, that he might be
honoured in his marvellous works.

<span id="007">7</span> With such doth he heal \[men,\] and taketh away
their pains.

<span id="008">8</span> Of such doth the apothecary make a confection;
and of his works there is no end; and from him is peace over all the
earth,

<span id="009">9</span> My son, in thy sickness be not negligent: but
pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole.

<span id="010">10</span> Leave off from sin, and order thine hands
aright, and cleanse thy heart from all wickedness.

<span id="011">11</span> Give a sweet savour, and a memorial of fine
flour; and make a fat offering, as not being.

<span id="012">12</span> Then give place to the physician, for the Lord
hath created him: let him not go from thee, for thou hast need of him.

<span id="013">13</span> There is a time when in their hands there is
good success.

<span id="014">14</span> For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he
would prosper that, which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life.

<span id="015">15</span> He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall
into the hand of the physician.

<span id="016">16</span> My son, let tears fall down over the dead, and
begin to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself; and then
cover his body according to the custom, and neglect not his burial.

<span id="017">17</span> Weep bitterly, and make great moan, and use
lamentation, as he is worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil
spoken of: and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness.

<span id="018">18</span> For of heaviness cometh death, and the
heaviness of the heart breaketh strength.

<span id="019">19</span> In affliction also sorrow remaineth: and the
life of the poor is the curse of the heart.

<span id="020">20</span> Take no heaviness to heart: drive it away, and
member the last end.

<span id="021">21</span> Forget it not, for there is no turning again:
thou shalt not do him good, but hurt thyself.

<span id="022">22</span> Remember my judgment: for thine also shall be
so; yesterday for me, and to day for thee.

<span id="023">23</span> When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance
rest; and be comforted for him, when his Spirit is departed from him.

<span id="024">24</span> The wisdom of a learned man cometh by
opportunity of leisure: and he that hath little business shall become
wise.

<span id="025">25</span> How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough,
and that glorieth in the goad, that driveth oxen, and is occupied in
their labours, and whose talk is of bullocks?

<span id="026">26</span> He giveth his mind to make furrows; and is
diligent to give the kine fodder.

<span id="027">27</span> So every carpenter and workmaster, that
laboureth night and day: and they that cut and grave seals, and are
diligent to make great variety, and give themselves to counterfeit
imagery, and watch to finish a work:

<span id="028">28</span> The smith also sitting by the anvil, and
considering the iron work, the vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh, and
he fighteth with the heat of the furnace: the noise of the hammer and
the anvil is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the pattern
of the thing that he maketh; he setteth his mind to finish his work, and
watcheth to polish it perfectly:

<span id="029">29</span> So doth the potter sitting at his work, and
turning the wheel about with his feet, who is alway carefully set at his
work, and maketh all his work by number;

<span id="030">30</span> He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth
down his strength before his feet; he applieth himself to lead it over;
and he is diligent to make clean the furnace:

<span id="031">31</span> All these trust to their hands: and every one
is wise in his work.

<span id="032">32</span> Without these cannot a city be inhabited: and
they shall not dwell where they will, nor go up and down:

<span id="033">33</span> They shall not be sought for in publick
counsel, nor sit high in the congregation: they shall not sit on the
judges' seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment: they cannot
declare justice and judgment; and they shall not be found where parables
are spoken.

<span id="034">34</span> But they will maintain the state of the world,
and \[all\] their desire is in the work of their craft.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 39](sir039.md)
