[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir029)  [Sep](../sep/sir029) 
[Vul](../vul/sir029)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir028)  [Next](sir030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 29

<span id="001">1</span> He that is merciful will lend unto his
neighbour; and he that strengtheneth his hand keepeth the commandments.

<span id="002">2</span> Lend to thy neighbour in time of his need, and
pay thou thy neighbour again in due season.

<span id="003">3</span> Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him, and
thou shalt always find the thing that is necessary for thee.

<span id="004">4</span> Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to
be found, and put them to trouble that helped them.

<span id="005">5</span> Till he hath received, he will kiss a man's
hand; and for his neighbour's money he will speak submissly: but when he
should repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and
complain of the time.

<span id="006">6</span> If he prevail, he shall hardly receive the half,
and he will count as if he had found it: if not, he hath deprived him of
his money, and he hath gotten him an enemy without cause: he payeth him
with cursings and railings; and for honour he will pay him disgrace.

<span id="007">7</span> Many therefore have refused to lend for other
men's ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded.

<span id="008">8</span> Yet have thou patience with a man in poor
estate, and delay not to shew him mercy.

<span id="009">9</span> Help the poor for the commandment's sake, and
turn him not away because of his poverty.

<span id="010">10</span> Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend,
and let it not rust under a stone to be lost.

<span id="011">11</span> Lay up thy treasure according to the
commandments of the most High, and it shall bring thee more profit than
gold.

<span id="012">12</span> Shut up alms in thy storehouses: and it shall
deliver thee from all affliction.

<span id="013">13</span> It shall fight for thee against thine enemies
better than a mighty shield and strong spear.

<span id="014">14</span> An honest man is surety for his neighbour: but
he that is impudent will forsake him.

<span id="015">15</span> Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he
hath given his life for thee.

<span id="016">16</span> A sinner will overthrow the good estate of his
surety:

<span id="017">17</span> And he that is of an unthankful mind will leave
him \[in danger\] that delivered him.

<span id="018">18</span> Suretiship hath undone many of good estate, and
shaken them as a wave of the sea: mighty men hath it driven from their
houses, so that they wandered among strange nations.

<span id="019">19</span> A wicked man transgressing the commandments of
the Lord shall fall into suretiship: and he that undertaketh and
followeth other men's business for gain shall fall into suits.

<span id="020">20</span> Help thy neighbour according to thy power, and
beware that thou thyself fall not into the same.

<span id="021">21</span> The chief thing for life is water, and bread,
and clothing, and an house to cover shame.

<span id="022">22</span> Better is the life of a poor man in a mean
cottage, than delicate fare in another man's house.

<span id="023">23</span> Be it little or much, hold thee contented, that
thou hear not the reproach of thy house.

<span id="024">24</span> For it is a miserable life to go from house to
house: for where thou art a stranger, thou darest not open thy mouth.

<span id="025">25</span> Thou shalt entertain, and feast, and have no
thanks: moreover thou shalt hear bitter words:

<span id="026">26</span> Come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and
feed me of that thou hast ready.

<span id="027">27</span> Give place, thou stranger, to an honourable
man; my brother cometh to be lodged, and I have need of mine house.

<span id="028">28</span> These things are grievous to a man of
understanding; the upbraiding of houseroom, and reproaching of the
lender.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 30](sir030)
