[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir025)  [Sep](../sep/sir025.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir025.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir024)  [Next](sir026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 25

<span id="001">1</span> In three things I was beautified, and stood up
beautiful both before God and men: the unity of brethren, the love of
neighbours, a man and a wife that agree together.

<span id="002">2</span> Three sorts of men my soul hateth, and I am
greatly offended at their life: a poor man that is proud, a rich man
that is a liar, and an old adulterer that doateth.

<span id="003">3</span> If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how
canst thou find any thing in thine age?

<span id="004">4</span> O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs,
and for ancient men to know counsel!

<span id="005">5</span> O how comely is the wisdom of old men, and
understanding and counsel to men of honour.

<span id="006">6</span> Much experience is the crown of old men, and the
fear of God is their glory.

<span id="007">7</span> There be nine things which I have judged in mine
heart to be happy, and the tenth I will utter with my tongue: A man that
hath joy of his children; and he that liveth to see the fall of his
enemy:

<span id="008">8</span> Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of
understanding, and that hath not slipped with his tongue, and that hath
not served a man more unworthy than himself:

<span id="009">9</span> Well is him that hath found prudence, and he
that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear:

<span id="010">10</span> O how great is he that findeth wisdom! yet is
there none above him that feareth the Lord.

<span id="011">11</span> But the love of the Lord passeth all things for
illumination: he that holdeth it, whereto shall he be likened?

<span id="012">12</span> The fear of the Lord is the beginning of his
love: and faith is the beginning of cleaving unto him.

<span id="013">13</span> \[Give me\] any plague, but the plague of the
heart: and any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman:

<span id="014">14</span> And any affliction, but the affliction from
them that hate me: and any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

<span id="015">15</span> There is no head above the head of a serpent;
and there is no wrath above the wrath of an enemy.

<span id="016">16</span> I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon,
than to keep house with a wicked woman.

<span id="017">17</span> The wickedness of a woman changeth her face,
and darkeneth her countenance like sackcloth.

<span id="018">18</span> Her husband shall sit among his neighbours; and
when he heareth it shall sigh bitterly.

<span id="019">19</span> All wickedness is but little to the wickedness
of a woman: let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.

<span id="020">20</span> As the climbing up a sandy way is to the feet
of the aged, so is a wife full of words to a quiet man.

<span id="021">21</span> Stumble not at the beauty of a woman, and
desire her not for pleasure.

<span id="022">22</span> A woman, if she maintain her husband, is full
of anger, impudence, and much reproach.

<span id="023">23</span> A wicked woman abateth the courage, maketh an
heavy countenance and a wounded heart: a woman that will not comfort her
husband in distress maketh weak hands and feeble knees.

<span id="024">24</span> Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and
through her we all die.

<span id="025">25</span> Give the water no passage; neither a wicked
woman liberty to gad abroad.

<span id="026">26</span> If she go not as thou wouldest have her, cut
her off from thy flesh, and give her a bill of divorce, and let her go.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 26](sir026.md)
