[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir026)  [Sep](../sep/sir026) 
[Vul](../vul/sir026)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir025)  [Next](sir027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 26

<span id="001">1</span> Blessed is the man that hath a virtuous wife,
for the number of his days shall be double.

<span id="002">2</span> A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and he
shall fulfil the years of his life in peace.

<span id="003">3</span> A good wife is a good portion, which shall be
given in the portion of them that fear the Lord.

<span id="004">4</span> Whether a man be rich or poor, if he have a good
heart toward the Lord, he shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful
countenance.

<span id="005">5</span> There be three things that mine heart feareth;
and for the fourth I was sore afraid: the slander of a city, the
gathering together of an unruly multitude, and a false accusation: all
these are worse than death.

<span id="006">6</span> But a grief of heart and sorrow is a woman that
is jealous over another woman, and a scourge of the tongue which
communicateth with all.

<span id="007">7</span> An evil wife is a yoke shaken to and fro: he
that hath hold of her is as though he held a scorpion.

<span id="008">8</span> A drunken woman and a gadder abroad causeth
great anger, and she will not cover her own shame.

<span id="009">9</span> The whoredom of a woman may be known in her
haughty looks and eyelids.

<span id="010">10</span> If thy daughter be shameless, keep her in
straitly, lest she abuse herself through overmuch liberty.

<span id="011">11</span> Watch over an impudent eye: and marvel not if
she trespass against thee.

<span id="012">12</span> She will open her mouth, as a thirsty traveller
when he hath found a fountain, and drink of every water near her: by
every hedge will she sit down, and open her quiver against every arrow.

<span id="013">13</span> The grace of a wife delighteth her husband, and
her discretion will fatten his bones.

<span id="014">14</span> A silent and loving woman is a gift of the
Lord; and there is nothing so much worth as a mind well instructed.

<span id="015">15</span> A shamefaced and faithful woman is a double
grace, and her continent mind cannot be valued.

<span id="016">16</span> As the sun when it ariseth in the high heaven;
so is the beauty of a good wife in the ordering of her house.

<span id="017">17</span> As the clear light is upon the holy
candlestick; so is the beauty of the face in ripe age.

<span id="018">18</span> As the golden pillars are upon the sockets of
silver; so are the fair feet with a constant heart.

<span id="019">19</span> My son, keep the flower of thine age sound; and
give not thy strength to strangers.

<span id="020">20</span> When thou hast gotten a fruitful possession
through all the field, sow it with thine own seed, trusting in the
goodness of thy stock.

<span id="021">21</span> So thy race which thou leavest shall be
magnified, having the confidence of their good descent.

<span id="022">22</span> An harlot shall be accounted as spittle; but a
married woman is a tower against death to her husband.

<span id="023">23</span> A wicked woman is given as a portion to a
wicked man: but a godly woman is given to him that feareth the Lord.

<span id="024">24</span> A dishonest woman contemneth shame: but an
honest woman will reverence her husband.

<span id="025">25</span> A shameless woman shall be counted as a dog;
but she that is shamefaced will fear the Lord.

<span id="026">26</span> A woman that honoureth her husband shall be
judged wise of all; but she that dishonoureth him in her pride shall be
counted ungodly of all.

<span id="027">27</span> A loud crying woman and a scold shall be sought
out to drive away the enemies.

<span id="028">28</span> There be two things that grieve my heart; and
the third maketh me angry: a man of war that suffereth poverty; and men
of understanding that are not set by; and one that returneth from
righteousness to sin; the Lord prepareth such an one for the sword.

<span id="029">29</span> A merchant shall hardly keep himself from doing
wrong; and an huckster shall not be freed from sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 27](sir027)
