[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir019)  [Sep](../sep/sir019) 
[Vul](../vul/sir019)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir018)  [Next](sir020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 19

<span id="001">1</span> A labouring man that A is given to drunkenness
shall not be rich: and he that contemneth small things shall fall by
little and little.

<span id="002">2</span> Wine and women will make men of understanding to
fall away: and he that cleaveth to harlots will become impudent.

<span id="003">3</span> Moths and worms shall have him to heritage, and
a bold man shall be taken away.

<span id="004">4</span> He that is hasty to give credit is lightminded;
and he that sinneth shall offend against his own soul.

<span id="005">5</span> Whoso taketh pleasure in wickedness shall be
condemned: but he that resisteth pleasures crowneth his life.

<span id="006">6</span> He that can rule his tongue shall live without
strife; and he that hateth babbling shall have less evil.

<span id="007">7</span> Rehearse not unto another that which is told
unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse.

<span id="008">8</span> Whether it be to friend or foe, talk not of
other men's lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them not.

<span id="009">9</span> For he heard and observed thee, and when time
cometh he will hate thee.

<span id="010">10</span> If thou hast heard a word, let it die with
thee; and be bold, it will not burst thee.

<span id="011">11</span> A fool travaileth with a word, as a woman in
labour of a child.

<span id="012">12</span> As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh, so
is a word within a fool's belly.

<span id="013">13</span> Admonish a friend, it may be he hath not done
it: and if he have done it, that he do it no more.

<span id="014">14</span> Admonish thy friend, it may be he hath not said
it: and if he have, that he speak it not again.

<span id="015">15</span> Admonish a friend: for many times it is a
slander, and believe not every tale.

<span id="016">16</span> There is one that slippeth in his speech, but
not from his heart; and who is he that hath not offended with his
tongue?

<span id="017">17</span> Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten
him; and not being angry, give place to the law of the most High.

<span id="018">18</span> The fear of the Lord is the first step to be
accepted \[of him,\] and wisdom obtaineth his love.

<span id="019">19</span> The knowledge of the commandments of the Lord
is the doctrine of life: and they that do things that please him shall
receive the fruit of the tree of immortality.

<span id="020">20</span> The fear of the Lord is all wisdom; and in all
wisdom is the performance of the law, and the knowledge of his
omnipotency.

<span id="021">21</span> If a servant say to his master, I will not do
as it pleaseth thee; though afterward he do it, he angereth him that
nourisheth him.

<span id="022">22</span> The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom,
neither at any time the counsel of sinners prudence.

<span id="023">23</span> There is a wickedness, and the same an
abomination; and there is a fool wanting in wisdom.

<span id="024">24</span> He that hath small understanding, and feareth
God, is better than one that hath much wisdom, and transgresseth the law
of the most High.

<span id="025">25</span> There is an exquisite subtilty, and the same is
unjust; and there is one that turneth aside to make judgment appear; and
there is a wise man that justifieth in judgment.

<span id="026">26</span> There is a wicked man that hangeth down his
head sadly; but inwardly he is full of deceit,

<span id="027">27</span> Casting down his countenance, and making as if
he heard not: where he is not known, he will do thee a mischief before
thou be aware.

<span id="028">28</span> And if for want of power he be hindered from
sinning, yet when he findeth opportunity he will do evil.

<span id="029">29</span> A man may be known by his look, and one that
hath understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him.

<span id="030">30</span> A man's attire, and excessive laughter, and
gait, shew what he is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 20](sir020)
