[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir049)  [Sep](../sep/sir049) 
[Vul](../vul/sir049)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir048)  [Next](sir050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 49

<span id="001">1</span> The remembrance of Josias is like the
composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the apothecary: it
is sweet as honey in all mouths, and as musick at a banquet of wine.

<span id="002">2</span> He behaved himself uprightly in the conversion
of the people, and took away the abominations of iniquity.

<span id="003">3</span> He directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the
time of the ungodly he established the worship of God.

<span id="004">4</span> All, except David and Ezekias and Josias, were
defective: for they forsook the law of the most High, even the kings of
Juda failed.

<span id="005">5</span> Therefore he gave their power unto others, and
their glory to a strange nation.

<span id="006">6</span> They burnt the chosen city of the sanctuary, and
made the streets desolate, according to the prophecy of Jeremias.

<span id="007">7</span> For they entreated him evil, who nevertheless
was a prophet, sanctified in his mother's womb, that he might root out,
and afflict, and destroy; and that he might build up also, and plant.

<span id="008">8</span> It was Ezekiel who saw the glorious vision,
which was shewed him upon the chariot of the cherubims.

<span id="009">9</span> For he made mention of the enemies under the
figure of the rain, and directed them that went right.

<span id="010">10</span> And of the twelve prophets let the memorial be
blessed, and let their bones flourish again out of their place: for they
comforted Jacob, and delivered them by assured hope.

<span id="011">11</span> How shall we magnify Zorobabel? even he was as
a signet on the right hand:

<span id="012">12</span> So was Jesus the son of Josedec: who in their
time builded the house, and set up an holy temple to the Lord, which was
prepared for everlasting glory.

<span id="013">13</span> And among the elect was Neemias, whose renown
is great, who raised up for us the walls that were fallen, and set up
the gates and the bars, and raised up our ruins again.

<span id="014">14</span> But upon the earth was no man created like
Enoch; for he was taken from the earth.

<span id="015">15</span> Neither was there a young man born like Joseph,
a governor of his brethren, a stay of the people, whose bones were
regarded of the Lord.

<span id="016">16</span> Sem and Seth were in great honour among men,
and so was Adam above every living thing in creation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 50](sir050)
