[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir021)  [Sep](../sep/sir021) 
[Vul](../vul/sir021)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir020)  [Next](sir022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 21

<span id="001">1</span> My son, hast thou sinned? do so no more, but ask
pardon for thy former sins.

<span id="002">2</span> Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent: for
if thou comest too near it, it will bite thee: the teeth thereof are as
the teeth of a lion, slaying the souls of men.

<span id="003">3</span> All iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds
whereof cannot be healed.

<span id="004">4</span> To terrify and do wrong will waste riches: thus
the house of proud men shall be made desolate.

<span id="005">5</span> A prayer out of a poor man's mouth reacheth to
the ears of God, and his judgment cometh speedily.

<span id="006">6</span> He that hateth to be reproved is in the way of
sinners: but he that feareth the Lord will repent from his heart.

<span id="007">7</span> An eloquent man is known far and near; but a man
of understanding knoweth when he slippeth.

<span id="008">8</span> He that buildeth his house with other men's
money is like one that gathereth himself stones for the tomb of his
burial.

<span id="009">9</span> The congregation of the wicked is like tow
wrapped together: and the end of them is a flame of fire to destroy
them.

<span id="010">10</span> The way of sinners is made plain with stones,
but at the end thereof is the pit of hell.

<span id="011">11</span> He that keepeth the law of the Lord getteth the
understanding thereof: and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is
wisdom.

<span id="012">12</span> He that is not wise will not be taught: but
there is a wisdom which multiplieth bitterness.

<span id="013">13</span> The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a
flood: and his counsel is like a pure fountain of life.

<span id="014">14</span> The inner parts of a fool are like a broken
vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth.

<span id="015">15</span> If a skilful man hear a wise word, he will
commend it, and add unto it: but as soon as one of no understanding
heareth it, it displeaseth him, and he casteth it behind his back.

<span id="016">16</span> The talking of a fool is like a burden in the
way: but grace shall be found in the lips of the wise.

<span id="017">17</span> They enquire at the mouth of the wise man in
the congregation, and they shall ponder his words in their heart.

<span id="018">18</span> As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom
to a fool: and the knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense.

<span id="019">19</span> Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet,
and like manacles on the right hand.

<span id="020">20</span> A fool lifteth up his voice with laughter; but
a wise man doth scarce smile a little.

<span id="021">21</span> Learning is unto a wise man as an ornament of
gold, and like a bracelet upon his right arm.

<span id="022">22</span> A foolish man's foot is soon in his
\[neighbour's\] house: but a man of experience is ashamed of him.

<span id="023">23</span> A fool will peep in at the door into the house:
but he that is well nurtured will stand without.

<span id="024">24</span> It is the rudeness of a man to hearken at the
door: but a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace.

<span id="025">25</span> The lips of talkers will be telling such things
as pertain not unto them: but the words of such as have understanding
are weighed in the balance.

<span id="026">26</span> The heart of fools is in their mouth: but the
mouth of the wise is in their heart.

<span id="027">27</span> When the ungodly curseth Satan, he curseth his
own soul.

<span id="028">28</span> A whisperer defileth his own soul, and is hated
wheresoever he dwelleth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 22](sir022)
