[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir022)  [Sep](../sep/sir022.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir022.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir021)  [Next](sir023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 22

<span id="001">1</span> A slothful man is compared to a filthy stone,
and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace.

<span id="002">2</span> A slothful man is compared to the filth of a
dunghill: every man that takes it up will shake his hand.

<span id="003">3</span> An evilnurtured man is the dishonour of his
father that begat him: and a \[foolish\] daughter is born to his loss.

<span id="004">4</span> A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to
her husband: but she that liveth dishonestly is her father's heaviness.

<span id="005">5</span> She that is bold dishonoureth both her father
and her husband, but they both shall despise her.

<span id="006">6</span> A tale out of season \[is as\] musick in
mourning: but stripes and correction of wisdom are never out of time.

<span id="007">7</span> Whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a
potsherd together, and as he that waketh one from a sound sleep.

<span id="008">8</span> He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one
in a slumber: when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the
matter?

<span id="009">9</span> If children live honestly, and have wherewithal,
they shall cover the baseness of their parents.

<span id="010">10</span> But children, being haughty, through disdain
and want of nurture do stain the nobility of their kindred.

<span id="011">11</span> Weep for the dead, for he hath lost the light:
and weep for the fool, for he wanteth understanding: make little weeping
for the dead, for he is at rest: but the life of the fool is worse than
death.

<span id="012">12</span> Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead;
but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life.

<span id="013">13</span> Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him
that hath no understanding: beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and
thou shalt never be defiled with his fooleries: depart from him, and
thou shalt find rest, and never be disquieted with madness.

<span id="014">14</span> What is heavier than lead? and what is the name
thereof, but a fool?

<span id="015">15</span> Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier
to bear, than a man without understanding.

<span id="016">16</span> As timber girt and bound together in a building
cannot be loosed with shaking: so the heart that is stablished by
advised counsel shall fear at no time.

<span id="017">17</span> A heart settled upon a thought of understanding
is as a fair plaistering on the wall of a gallery.

<span id="018">18</span> Pales set on an high place will never stand
against the wind: so a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool cannot
stand against any fear.

<span id="019">19</span> He that pricketh the eye will make tears to
fall: and he that pricketh the heart maketh it to shew her knowledge.

<span id="020">20</span> Whoso casteth a stone at the birds frayeth them
away: and he that upbraideth his friend breaketh friendship.

<span id="021">21</span> Though thou drewest a sword at thy friend, yet
despair not: for there may be a returning \[to favour.\]

<span id="022">22</span> If thou hast opened thy mouth against thy
friend, fear not; for there may be a reconciliation: except for
upbraiding, or pride, or disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound:
for for these things every friend will depart.

<span id="023">23</span> Be faithful to thy neighbour in his poverty,
that thou mayest rejoice in his prosperity: abide stedfast unto him in
the time of his trouble, that thou mayest be heir with him in his
heritage: for a mean estate is not always to be contemned: nor the rich
that is foolish to be had in admiration.

<span id="024">24</span> As the vapour and smoke of a furnace goeth
before the fire; so reviling before blood.

<span id="025">25</span> I will not be ashamed to defend a friend;
neither will I hide myself from him.

<span id="026">26</span> And if any evil happen unto me by him, every
one that heareth it will beware of him.

<span id="027">27</span> Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a
seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that
my tongue destroy me not?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 23](sir023.md)
