[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir016)  [Sep](../sep/sir016.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir016.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir015)  [Next](sir017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> Desire not a multitude of unprofitable children,
neither delight in ungodly sons.

<span id="002">2</span> Though they multiply, rejoice not in them,
except the fear of the Lord be with them.

<span id="003">3</span> Trust not thou in their life, neither respect
their multitude: for one that is just is better than a thousand; and
better it is to die without children, than to have them that are
ungodly.

<span id="004">4</span> For by one that hath understanding shall the
city be replenished: but the kindred of the wicked shall speedily become
desolate.

<span id="005">5</span> Many such things have I seen with mine eyes, and
mine ear hath heard greater things than these.

<span id="006">6</span> In the congregation of the ungodly shall a fire
be kindled; and in a rebellious nation wrath is set on fire.

<span id="007">7</span> He was not pacified toward the old giants, who
fell away in the strength of their foolishness.

<span id="008">8</span> Neither spared he the place where Lot sojourned,
but abhorred them for their pride.

<span id="009">9</span> He pitied not the people of perdition, who were
taken away in their sins:

<span id="010">10</span> Nor the six hundred thousand footmen, who were
gathered together in the hardness of their hearts.

<span id="011">11</span> And if there be one stiffnecked among the
people, it is marvel if he escape unpunished: for mercy and wrath are
with him; he is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure.

<span id="012">12</span> As his mercy is great, so is his correction
also: he judgeth a man according to his works

<span id="013">13</span> The sinner shall not escape with his spoils:
and the patience of the godly shall not be frustrate.

<span id="014">14</span> Make way for every work of mercy: for every man
shall find according to his works.

<span id="015">15</span> The Lord hardened Pharaoh, that he should not
know him, that his powerful works might be known to the world.

<span id="016">16</span> His mercy is manifest to every creature; and he
hath separated his light from the darkness with an adamant.

<span id="017">17</span> Say not thou, I will hide myself from the Lord:
shall any remember me from above? I shall not be remembered among so
many people: for what is my soul among such an infinite number of
creatures?

<span id="018">18</span> Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens,
the deep, and the earth, and all that therein is, shall be moved when he
shall visit.

<span id="019">19</span> The mountains also and foundations of the earth
be shaken with trembling, when the Lord looketh upon them.

<span id="020">20</span> No heart can think upon these things worthily:
and who is able to conceive his ways?

<span id="021">21</span> It is a tempest which no man can see: for the
most part of his works are hid.

<span id="022">22</span> Who can declare the works of his justice? or
who can endure them? for his covenant is afar off, and the trial of all
things is in the end.

<span id="023">23</span> He that wanteth understanding will think upon
vain things: and a foolish man erring imagineth follies.

<span id="024">24</span> by son, hearken unto me, and learn knowledge,
and mark my words with thy heart.

<span id="025">25</span> I will shew forth doctrine in weight, and
declare his knowledge exactly.

<span id="026">26</span> The works of the Lord are done in judgment from
the beginning: and from the time he made them he disposed the parts
thereof.

<span id="027">27</span> He garnished his works for ever, and in his
hand are the chief of them unto all generations: they neither labour,
nor are weary, nor cease from their works.

<span id="028">28</span> None of them hindereth another, and they shall
never disobey his word.

<span id="029">29</span> After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and
filled it with his blessings.

<span id="030">30</span> With all manner of living things hath he
covered the face thereof; and they shall return into it again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 17](sir017.md)
