[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir037)  [Sep](../sep/sir037) 
[Vul](../vul/sir037)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir036)  [Next](sir038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 37

<span id="001">1</span> Every friend saith, I am his friend also: but
there is a friend, which is only a friend in name.

<span id="002">2</span> Is it not a grief unto death, when a companion
and friend is turned to an enemy?

<span id="003">3</span> O wicked imagination, whence camest thou in to
cover the earth with deceit?

<span id="004">4</span> There is a companion, which rejoiceth in the
prosperity of a friend, but in the time of trouble will be against him.

<span id="005">5</span> There is a companion, which helpeth his friend
for the belly, and taketh up the buckler against the enemy.

<span id="006">6</span> Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not
unmindful of him in thy riches.

<span id="007">7</span> Every counsellor extolleth counsel; but there is
some that counselleth for himself.

<span id="008">8</span> Beware of a counsellor, and know before what
need he hath; for he will counsel for himself; lest he cast the lot upon
thee,

<span id="009">9</span> And say unto thee, Thy way is good: and
afterward he stand on the other side, to see what shall befall thee.

<span id="010">10</span> Consult not with one that suspecteth thee: and
hide thy counsel from such as envy thee.

<span id="011">11</span> Neither consult with a woman touching her of
whom she is jealous; neither with a coward in matters of war; nor with a
merchant concerning exchange; nor with a buyer of selling; nor with an
envious man of thankfulness; nor with an unmerciful man touching
kindness; nor with the slothful for any work; nor with an hireling for a
year of finishing work; nor with an idle servant of much business:
hearken not unto these in any matter of counsel.

<span id="012">12</span> But be continually with a godly man, whom thou
knowest to keep the commandments of the Lord, whose, mind is according
to thy mind, and will sorrow with thee, if thou shalt miscarry.

<span id="013">13</span> And let the counsel of thine own heart stand:
for there is no man more faithful unto thee than it.

<span id="014">14</span> For a man's mind is sometime wont to tell him
more than seven watchmen, that sit above in an high tower.

<span id="015">15</span> And above all this pray to the most High, that
he will direct thy way in truth.

<span id="016">16</span> Let reason go before every enterprize, and
counsel before every action.

<span id="017">17</span> The countenance is a sign of changing of the
heart.

<span id="018">18</span> Four manner of things appear: good and evil,
life and death: but the tongue ruleth over them continually.

<span id="019">19</span> There is one that is wise and teacheth many,
and yet is unprofitable to himself.

<span id="020">20</span> There is one that sheweth wisdom in words, and
is hated: he shall be destitute of all food.

<span id="021">21</span> For grace is not given, him from the Lord,
because he is deprived of all wisdom.

<span id="022">22</span> Another is wise to himself; and the fruits of
understanding are commendable in his mouth.

<span id="023">23</span> A wise man instructeth his people; and the
fruits of his understanding fail not.

<span id="024">24</span> A wise man shall be filled with blessing; and
all they that see him shall count him happy.

<span id="025">25</span> The days of the life of man may be numbered:
but the days of Israel are innumerable.

<span id="026">26</span> A wise man shall inherit glory among his
people, and his name shall be perpetual.

<span id="027">27</span> My son, prove thy soul in thy life, and see
what is evil for it, and give not that unto it.

<span id="028">28</span> For all things are not profitable for all men,
neither hath every soul pleasure in every thing.

<span id="029">29</span> Be not unsatiable in any dainty thing, nor too
greedy upon meats:

<span id="030">30</span> For excess of meats bringeth sickness, and
surfeiting will turn into choler.

<span id="031">31</span> By surfeiting have many perished; but he that
taketh heed prolongeth his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 38](sir038)
