[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir003)  [Sep](../sep/sir003) 
[Vul](../vul/sir003)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir002)  [Next](sir004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> Hear me your father, O children, and do
thereafter, that ye may be safe.

<span id="002">2</span> For the Lord hath given the father honour over
the children, and hath confirmed the authority of the mother over the
sons.

<span id="003">3</span> Whoso honoureth his father maketh an atonement
for his sins:

<span id="004">4</span> And he that honoureth his mother is as one that
layeth up treasure.

<span id="005">5</span> Whoso honoureth his father shall have joy of his
own children; and when he maketh his prayer, he shall be heard.

<span id="006">6</span> He that honoureth his father shall have a long
life; and he that is obedient unto the Lord shall be a comfort to his
mother.

<span id="007">7</span> He that feareth the Lord will honour his father,
and will do service unto his parents, as to his masters.

<span id="008">8</span> Honour thy father and mother both in word and
deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them.

<span id="009">9</span> For the blessing of the father establisheth the
houses of children; but the curse of the mother rooteth out foundations.

<span id="010">10</span> Glory not in the dishonour of thy father; for
thy father's dishonour is no glory unto thee.

<span id="011">11</span> For the glory of a man is from the honour of
his father; and a mother in dishonour is a reproach to the children.

<span id="012">12</span> My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve
him not as long as he liveth.

<span id="013">13</span> And if his understanding fail, have patience
with him; and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength.

<span id="014">14</span> For the relieving of thy father shall not be
forgotten: and instead of sins it shall be added to build thee up.

<span id="015">15</span> In the day of thine affliction it shall be
remembered; thy sins also shall melt away, as the ice in the fair warm
weather.

<span id="016">16</span> He that forsaketh his father is as a
blasphemer; and he that angereth his mother is cursed: of God.

<span id="017">17</span> My son, go on with thy business in meekness; so
shalt thou be beloved of him that is approved.

<span id="018">18</span> The greater thou art, the more humble thyself,
and thou shalt find favour before the Lord.

<span id="019">19</span> Many are in high place, and of renown: but
mysteries are revealed unto the meek.

<span id="020">20</span> For the power of the Lord is great, and he is
honoured of the lowly.

<span id="021">21</span> Seek not out things that are too hard for thee,
neither search the things that are above thy strength.

<span id="022">22</span> But what is commanded thee, think thereupon
with reverence, for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes
the things that are in secret.

<span id="023">23</span> Be not curious in unnecessary matters: for more
things are shewed unto thee than men understand.

<span id="024">24</span> For many are deceived by their own vain
opinion; and an evil suspicion hath overthrown their judgment.

<span id="025">25</span> Without eyes thou shalt want light: profess not
the knowledge therefore that thou hast not.

<span id="026">26</span> A stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last;
and he that loveth danger shall perish therein.

<span id="027">27</span> An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows;
and the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin.

<span id="028">28</span> In the punishment of the proud there is no
remedy; for the plant of wickedness hath taken root in him.

<span id="029">29</span> The heart of the prudent will understand a
parable; and an attentive ear is the desire of a wise man.

<span id="030">30</span> Water will quench a flaming fire; and alms
maketh an atonement for sins.

<span id="031">31</span> And he that requiteth good turns is mindful of
that which may come hereafter; and when he falleth, he shall find a
stay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 4](sir004)
