[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir035)  [Sep](../sep/sir035.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir035.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir034)  [Next](sir036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 35

<span id="001">1</span> He that keepeth the law bringeth offerings
enough: he that taketh heed to the commandment offereth a peace
offering.

<span id="002">2</span> He that requiteth a goodturn offereth fine
flour; and he that giveth alms sacrificeth praise.

<span id="003">3</span> To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to
the Lord; and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation.

<span id="004">4</span> Thou shalt not appear empty before the Lord.

<span id="005">5</span> For all these things \[are to be done\] because
of the commandment.

<span id="006">6</span> The offering of the righteous maketh the altar
fat, and the sweet savour thereof is before the most High.

<span id="007">7</span> The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable. and
the memorial thereof shall never be forgotten.

<span id="008">8</span> Give the Lord his honour with a good eye, and
diminish not the firstfruits of thine hands.

<span id="009">9</span> In all thy gifts shew a cheerful countenance,
and dedicate thy tithes with gladness.

<span id="010">10</span> Give unto the most High according as he hath
enriched thee; and as thou hast gotten, give with a cheerful eye.

<span id="011">11</span> For the Lord recompenseth, and will give thee
seven times as much.

<span id="012">12</span> Do not think to corrupt with gifts; for such he
will not receive: and trust not to unrighteous sacrifices; for the Lord
is judge, and with him is no respect of persons.

<span id="013">13</span> He will not accept any person against a poor
man, but will hear the prayer of the oppressed.

<span id="014">14</span> He will not despise the supplication of the
fatherless; nor the widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

<span id="015">15</span> Do not the tears run down the widow's cheeks?
and is not her cry against him that causeth them to fall?

<span id="016">16</span> He that serveth the Lord shall be accepted with
favour, and his prayer shall reach unto the clouds.

<span id="017">17</span> The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds:
and till it come nigh, he will not be comforted; and will not depart,
till the most High shall behold to judge righteously, and execute
judgment.

<span id="018">18</span> For the Lord will not be slack, neither will
the Mighty be patient toward them, till he have smitten in sunder the
loins of the unmerciful, and repayed vengeance to the heathen; till he
have taken away the multitude of the proud, and broken the sceptre of
the unrighteous;

<span id="019">19</span> Till he have rendered to every man according to
his deeds, and to the works of men according to their devices; till he
have judged the cause of his people, and made them to rejoice in his
mercy.

<span id="020">20</span> Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction,
as clouds of rain in the time of drought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 36](sir036.md)
