[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir007)  [Sep](../sep/sir007) 
[Vul](../vul/sir007)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir006)  [Next](sir008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee.

<span id="002">2</span> Depart from the unjust, and iniquity shall turn
away from thee.

<span id="003">3</span> My son, sow not upon the furrows of
unrighteousness, and thou shalt not reap them sevenfold.

<span id="004">4</span> Seek not of the Lord preeminence, neither of the
king the seat of honour.

<span id="005">5</span> justify not thyself before the Lord; and boast
not of thy wisdom before the king.

<span id="006">6</span> Seek not to be judge, being not able to take
away iniquity; lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, an
stumblingblock in the way of thy uprightness.

<span id="007">7</span> Offend not against the multitude of a city, and
then thou shalt not cast thyself down among the people.

<span id="008">8</span> Bind not one sin upon another; for in one thou
shalt not be unpunished.

<span id="009">9</span> Say not, God will look upon the multitude of my
oblations, and when I offer to the most high God, he will accept it.

<span id="010">10</span> Be not fainthearted when thou makest thy
prayer, and neglect not to give alms.

<span id="011">11</span> Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his
soul: for there is one which humbleth and exalteth.

<span id="012">12</span> Devise not a lie against thy brother; neither
do the like to thy friend.

<span id="013">13</span> Use not to make any manner of lie: for the
custom thereof is not good.

<span id="014">14</span> Use not many words in a multitude of elders,
and make not much babbling when thou prayest.

<span id="015">15</span> Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry,
which the most High hath ordained.

<span id="016">16</span> Number not thyself among the multitude of
sinners, but remember that wrath will not tarry long.

<span id="017">17</span> Humble thyself greatly: for the vengeance of
the ungodly is fire and worms.

<span id="018">18</span> Change not a friend for any good by no means;
neither a faithful brother for the gold of Ophir.

<span id="019">19</span> Forego not a wise and good woman: for her grace
is above gold.

<span id="020">20</span> Whereas thy servant worketh truly, entreat him
not evil. nor the hireling that bestoweth himself wholly for thee.

<span id="021">21</span> Let thy soul love a good servant, and defraud
him not of liberty.

<span id="022">22</span> Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them: and if
they be for thy profit, keep them with thee.

<span id="023">23</span> Hast thou children? instruct them, and bow down
their neck from their youth.

<span id="024">24</span> Hast thou daughters? have a care of their body,
and shew not thyself cheerful toward them.

<span id="025">25</span> Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have
performed a weighty matter: but give her to a man of understanding.

<span id="026">26</span> Hast thou a wife after thy mind? forsake her
not: but give not thyself over to a light woman.

<span id="027">27</span> Honour thy father with thy whole heart, and
forget not the sorrows of thy mother.

<span id="028">28</span> Remember that thou wast begotten of them; and
how canst thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee?

<span id="029">29</span> Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and reverence
his priests.

<span id="030">30</span> Love him that made thee with all thy strength,
and forsake not his ministers.

<span id="031">31</span> Fear the Lord, and honor the priest; and give
him his portion, as it is commanded thee; the firstfruits, and the
trespass offering, and the gift of the shoulders, and the sacrifice of
sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things.

<span id="032">32</span> And stretch thine hand unto the poor, that thy
blessing may be perfected.

<span id="033">33</span> A gift hath grace in the sight of every man
living; and for the dead detain it not.

<span id="034">34</span> Fail not to be with them that weep, and mourn
with them that mourn.

<span id="035">35</span> Be not slow to visit the sick: for that shall
make thee to be beloved.

<span id="036">36</span> Whatsoever thou takest in hand, remember the
end, and thou shalt never do amiss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 8](sir008)
