[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir036)  [Sep](../sep/sir036.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir036.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir035)  [Next](sir037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 36

<span id="001">1</span> Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and
behold us:

<span id="002">2</span> And send thy fear upon all the nations that seek
not after thee.

<span id="003">3</span> Lift up thy hand against the strange nations,
and let them see thy power.

<span id="004">4</span> As thou wast sanctified in us before them: so be
thou magnified among them before us.

<span id="005">5</span> And let them know thee, as we have known thee,
that there is no God but only thou, O God.

<span id="006">6</span> Shew new signs, and make other strange wonders:
glorify thy hand and thy right arm, that they may set forth thy wondrous
works.

<span id="007">7</span> Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath: take
away the adversary, and destroy the enemy.

<span id="008">8</span> Sake the time short, remember the covenant, and
let them declare thy wonderful works.

<span id="009">9</span> Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of
the fire; and let them perish that oppress the people.

<span id="010">10</span> Smite in sunder the heads of the rulers of the
heathen, that say, There is none other but we.

<span id="011">11</span> Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, and
inherit thou them, as from the beginning.

<span id="012">12</span> O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is
called by thy name, and upon Israel, whom thou hast named thy firstborn.

<span id="013">13</span> O be merciful unto Jerusalem, thy holy city,
the place of thy rest.

<span id="014">14</span> Fill Sion with thine unspeakable oracles, and
thy people with thy glory:

<span id="015">15</span> Give testimony unto those that thou hast
possessed from the beginning, and raise up prophets that have been in
thy name.

<span id="016">16</span> Reward them that wait for thee, and let thy
prophets be found faithful.

<span id="017">17</span> O Lord, hear the prayer of thy servants,
according to the blessing of Aaron over thy people, that all they which
dwell upon the earth may know that thou art the Lord, the eternal God.

<span id="018">18</span> The belly devoureth all meats, yet is one meat
better than another.

<span id="019">19</span> As the palate tasteth divers kinds of venison:
so doth an heart of understanding false speeches.

<span id="020">20</span> A froward heart causeth heaviness: but a man of
experience will recompense him.

<span id="021">21</span> A woman will receive every man, yet is one
daughter better than another.

<span id="022">22</span> The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance,
and a man loveth nothing better.

<span id="023">23</span> If there be kindness, meekness, and comfort, in
her tongue, then is not her husband like other men.

<span id="024">24</span> He that getteth a wife beginneth a possession,
a help like unto himself, and a pillar of rest.

<span id="025">25</span> Where no hedge is, there the possession is
spoiled: and he that hath no wife will wander up and down mourning.

<span id="026">26</span> Who will trust a thief well appointed, that
skippeth from city to city? so \[who will believe\] a man that hath no
house, and lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 37](sir037.md)
