[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir043)  [Sep](../sep/sir043) 
[Vul](../vul/sir043)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir042)  [Next](sir044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 43

<span id="001">1</span> The pride of the height, the clear firmament,
the beauty of heaven, with his glorious shew;

<span id="002">2</span> The sun when it appeareth, declaring at his
rising a marvellous instrument, the work of the most High:

<span id="003">3</span> At noon it parcheth the country, and who can
abide the burning heat thereof?

<span id="004">4</span> A man blowing a furnace is in works of heat, but
the sun burneth the mountains three times more; breathing out fiery
vapours, and sending forth bright beams, it dimmeth the eyes.

<span id="005">5</span> Great is the Lord that made it; and at his
commandment runneth hastily.

<span id="006">6</span> He made the moon also to serve in her season for
a declaration of times, and a sign of the world.

<span id="007">7</span> From the moon is the sign of feasts, a light
that decreaseth in her perfection.

<span id="008">8</span> The month is called after her name, increasing
wonderfully in her changing, being an instrument of the armies above,
shining in the firmament of heaven;

<span id="009">9</span> The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, an
ornament giving light in the highest places of the Lord.

<span id="010">10</span> At the commandment of the Holy One they will
stand in their order, and never faint in their watches.

<span id="011">11</span> Look upon the rainbow, and praise him that made
it; very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof.

<span id="012">12</span> It compasseth the heaven about with a glorious
circle, and the hands of the most High have bended it.

<span id="013">13</span> By his commandment he maketh the snow to fall
aplace, and sendeth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment.

<span id="014">14</span> Through this the treasures are opened: and
clouds fly forth as fowls.

<span id="015">15</span> By his great power he maketh the clouds firm,
and the hailstones are broken small.

<span id="016">16</span> At his sight the mountains are shaken, and at
his will the south wind bloweth.

<span id="017">17</span> The noise of the thunder maketh the earth to
tremble: so doth the northern storm and the whirlwind: as birds flying
he scattereth the snow, and the falling down thereof is as the lighting
of grasshoppers:

<span id="018">18</span> The eye marvelleth at the beauty of the
whiteness thereof, and the heart is astonished at the raining of it.

<span id="019">19</span> The hoarfrost also as salt he poureth on the
earth, and being congealed, it lieth on the top of sharp stakes.

<span id="020">20</span> When the cold north wind bloweth, and the water
is congealed into ice, it abideth upon every gathering together of
water, and clotheth the water as with a breastplate.

<span id="021">21</span> It devoureth the mountains, and burneth the
wilderness, and consumeth the grass as fire.

<span id="022">22</span> A present remedy of all is a mist coming
speedily, a dew coming after heat refresheth.

<span id="023">23</span> By his counsel he appeaseth the deep, and
planteth islands therein.

<span id="024">24</span> They that sail on the sea tell of the danger
thereof; and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat.

<span id="025">25</span> For therein be strange and wondrous works,
variety of all kinds of beasts and whales created.

<span id="026">26</span> By him the end of them hath prosperous success,
and by his word all things consist.

<span id="027">27</span> We may speak much, and yet come short:
wherefore in sum, he is all.

<span id="028">28</span> How shall we be able to magnify him? for he is
great above all his works.

<span id="029">29</span> The Lord is terrible and very great, and
marvellous is his power.

<span id="030">30</span> When ye glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as
ye can; for even yet will he far exceed: and when ye exalt him, put
forth all your strength, and be not weary; for ye can never go far
enough.

<span id="031">31</span> Who hath seen him, that he might tell us? and
who can magnify him as he is?

<span id="032">32</span> There are yet hid greater things than these be,
for we have seen but a few of his works.

<span id="033">33</span> For the Lord hath made all things; and to the
godly hath he given wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 44](sir044)
