[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir004)  [Sep](../sep/sir004.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir004.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir003)  [Next](sir005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> My son, defraud not the poor of his living, and
make not the needy eyes to wait long.

<span id="002">2</span> Make not an hungry soul sorrowful; neither
provoke a man in his distress.

<span id="003">3</span> Add not more trouble to an heart that is vexed;
and defer not to give to him that is in need.

<span id="004">4</span> Reject not the supplication of the afflicted;
neither turn away thy face from a poor man.

<span id="005">5</span> Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give
him none occasion to curse thee:

<span id="006">6</span> For if he curse thee in the bitterness of his
soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.

<span id="007">7</span> Get thyself the love of the congregation, and
bow thy head to a great man.

<span id="008">8</span> Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to
the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness.

<span id="009">9</span> Deliver him that suffereth wrong from the hand
of the oppressor; and be not fainthearted when thou sittest in judgment.

<span id="010">10</span> Be as a father unto the fatherless, and instead
of an husband unto their mother: so shalt thou be as the son of the most
High, and he shall love thee more than thy mother doth.

<span id="011">11</span> Wisdom exalteth her children, and layeth hold
of them that seek her.

<span id="012">12</span> He that loveth her loveth life; and they that
seek to her early shall be filled with joy.

<span id="013">13</span> He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory;
and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord will bless.

<span id="014">14</span> They that serve her shall minister to the Holy
One: and them that love her the Lord doth love.

<span id="015">15</span> Whoso giveth ear unto her shall judge the
nations: and he that attendeth unto her shall dwell securely.

<span id="016">16</span> If a man commit himself unto her, he shall
inherit her; and his generation shall hold her in possession.

<span id="017">17</span> For at the first she will walk with him by
crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with
her discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try him by her laws.

<span id="018">18</span> Then will she return the straight way unto him,
and comfort him, and shew him her secrets.

<span id="019">19</span> But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and
give him over to his own ruin.

<span id="020">20</span> Observe the opportunity, and beware of evil;
and be not ashamed when it concerneth thy soul.

<span id="021">21</span> For there is a shame that bringeth sin; and
there is a shame which is glory and grace.

<span id="022">22</span> Accept no person against thy soul, and let not
the reverence of any man cause thee to fall.

<span id="023">23</span> And refrain not to speak, when there is
occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty.

<span id="024">24</span> For by speech wisdom shall be known: and
learning by the word of the tongue.

<span id="025">25</span> In no wise speak against the truth; but be
abashed of the error of thine ignorance.

<span id="026">26</span> Be not ashamed to confess thy sins; and force
not the course of the river.

<span id="027">27</span> Make not thyself an underling to a foolish man;
neither accept the person of the mighty.

<span id="028">28</span> Strive for the truth unto death, and the Lord
shall fight for thee.

<span id="029">29</span> Be not hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds
slack and remiss.

<span id="030">30</span> Be not as a lion in thy house, nor frantick
among thy servants.

<span id="031">31</span> Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive,
and shut when thou shouldest repay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 5](sir005.md)
