[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir001)  [Sep](../sep/sir001.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir001.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](wis019)  [Next](sir002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> \[The Prologue of the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of
Sirach.\] Whereas many and great things have been delivered unto us by
the law and the prophets, and by others that have followed their steps,
for the which things Israel ought to be commended for learning and
wisdom; and whereof not only the readers must needs become skilful
themselves, but also they that desire to learn be able to profit them
which are without, both by speaking and writing: my grandfather Jesus,
when he had much given himself to the reading of the law, and the
prophets, and other books of our fathers, and had gotten therein good
judgment, was drawn on also himself to write something pertaining to
learning and wisdom; to the intent that those which are desirous to
learn, and are addicted to these things, might profit much more in
living according to the law. Wherefore let me intreat you to read it
with favour and attention, and to pardon us, wherein we may seem to come
short of some words, which we have laboured to interpret. For the same
things uttered in Hebrew, and translated into another tongue, have not
the same force in them: and not only these things, but the law itself,
and the prophets, and the rest of the books, have no small difference,
when they are spoken in their own language. For in the eight and
thirtieth year coming into Egypt, when Euergetes was king, and
continuing there some time, I found a book of no small learning:
therefore I thought it most necessary for me to bestow some diligence
and travail to interpret it; using great watchfulness and skill in that
space to bring the book to an end, and set it forth for them also, which
in a strange country are willing to learn, being prepared before in
manners to live after the law. All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and is
with him for ever.

<span id="002">2</span> Who can number the sand of the sea, and the
drops of rain, and the days of eternity?

<span id="003">3</span> Who can find out the height of heaven, and the
breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom?

<span id="004">4</span> Wisdom hath been created before all things, and
the understanding of prudence from everlasting.

<span id="005">5</span> The word of God most high is the fountain of
wisdom; and her ways are everlasting commandments.

<span id="006">6</span> To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed?
or who hath known her wise counsels?

<span id="007">7</span> \[Unto whom hath the knowledge of wisdom been
made manifest? and who hath understood her great experience?\]

<span id="008">8</span> There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the
Lord sitting upon his throne.

<span id="009">9</span> He created her, and saw her, and numbered her,
and poured her out upon all his works.

<span id="010">10</span> She is with all flesh according to his gift,
and he hath given her to them that love him.

<span id="011">11</span> The fear of the Lord is honour, and glory, and
gladness, and a crown of rejoicing.

<span id="012">12</span> The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and
giveth joy, and gladness, and a long life.

<span id="013">13</span> Whoso feareth the Lord, it shall go well with
him at the last, and he shall find favour in the day of his death.

<span id="014">14</span> To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom:
and it was created with the faithful in the womb.

<span id="015">15</span> She hath built an everlasting foundation with
men, and she shall continue with their seed.

<span id="016">16</span> To fear the Lord is fulness of wisdom, and
filleth men with her fruits.

<span id="017">17</span> She filleth all their house with things
desirable, and the garners with her increase.

<span id="018">18</span> The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom,
making peace and perfect health to flourish; both which are the gifts of
God: and it enlargeth their rejoicing that love him.

<span id="019">19</span> Wisdom raineth down skill and knowledge of
understanding standing, and exalteth them to honour that hold her fast.

<span id="020">20</span> The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the
branches thereof are long life.

<span id="021">21</span> The fear of the Lord driveth away sins: and
where it is present, it turneth away wrath.

<span id="022">22</span> A furious man cannot be justified; for the sway
of his fury shall be his destruction.

<span id="023">23</span> A patient man will tear for a time, and
afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

<span id="024">24</span> He will hide his words for a time, and the lips
of many shall declare his wisdom.

<span id="025">25</span> The parables of knowledge are in the treasures
of wisdom: but godliness is an abomination to a sinner.

<span id="026">26</span> If thou desire wisdom, keep the commandments,
and the Lord shall give her unto thee.

<span id="027">27</span> For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and
instruction: and faith and meekness are his delight.

<span id="028">28</span> Distrust not the fear of the Lord when thou art
poor: and come not unto him with a double heart.

<span id="029">29</span> Be not an hypocrite in the sight of men, and
take good heed what thou speakest.

<span id="030">30</span> Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall, and bring
dishonour upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee
down in the midst of the congregation, because thou camest not in truth
to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart is full of deceit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 2](sir002.md)
