[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir041)  [Sep](../sep/sir041) 
[Vul](../vul/sir041)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir040)  [Next](sir042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 41

<span id="001">1</span> O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee
to a man that liveth at rest in his possessions, unto the man that hath
nothing to vex him, and that hath prosperity in all things: yea, unto
him that is yet able to receive meat!

<span id="002">2</span> O death, acceptable is thy sentence unto the
needy, and unto him whose strength faileth, that is now in the last age,
and is vexed with all things, and to him that despaireth, and hath lost
patience!

<span id="003">3</span> Fear not the sentence of death, remember them
that have been before thee, and that come after; for this is the
sentence of the Lord over all flesh.

<span id="004">4</span> And why art thou against the pleasure of the
most High? there is no inquisition in the grave, whether thou have lived
ten, or an hundred, or a thousand years.

<span id="005">5</span> The children of sinners are abominable children,
and they that are conversant in the dwelling of the ungodly.

<span id="006">6</span> The inheritance of sinners' children shall
perish, and their posterity shall have a perpetual reproach.

<span id="007">7</span> The children will complain of an ungodly father,
because they shall be reproached for his sake.

<span id="008">8</span> Woe be unto you, ungodly men, which have
forsaken the law of the most high God! for if ye increase, it shall be
to your destruction:

<span id="009">9</span> And if ye be born, ye shall be born to a curse:
and if ye die, a curse shall be your portion.

<span id="010">10</span> All that are of the earth shall turn to earth
again: so the ungodly shall go from a curse to destruction.

<span id="011">11</span> The mourning of men is about their bodies: but
an ill name of sinners shall be blotted out.

<span id="012">12</span> Have regard to thy name; for that shall
continue with thee above a thousand great treasures of gold.

<span id="013">13</span> A good life hath but few days: but a good name
endureth for ever.

<span id="014">14</span> My children, keep discipline in peace: for
wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in
them both?

<span id="015">15</span> A man that hideth his foolishness is better
than a man that hideth his wisdom.

<span id="016">16</span> Therefore be shamefaced according to my word:
for it is not good to retain all shamefacedness; neither is it
altogether approved in every thing.

<span id="017">17</span> Be ashamed of whoredom before father and
mother: and of a lie before a prince and a mighty man;

<span id="018">18</span> Of an offence before a judge and ruler; of
iniquity before a congregation and people; of unjust dealing before thy
partner and friend;

<span id="019">19</span> And of theft in regard of the place where thou
sojournest, and in regard of the truth of God and his covenant; and to
lean with thine elbow upon the meat; and of scorning to give and take;

<span id="020">20</span> And of silence before them that salute thee;
and to look upon an harlot;

<span id="021">21</span> And to turn away thy face from thy kinsman; or
to take away a portion or a gift; or to gaze upon another man's wife.

<span id="022">22</span> Or to be overbusy with his maid, and come not
near her bed; or of upbraiding speeches before friends; and after thou
hast given, upbraid not;

<span id="023">23</span> Or of iterating and speaking again that which
thou hast heard; and of revealing of secrets.

<span id="024">24</span> So shalt thou be truly shamefaced and find
favour before all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 42](sir042)
