[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir034)  [Sep](../sep/sir034) 
[Vul](../vul/sir034)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir033)  [Next](sir035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 34

<span id="001">1</span> The hopes of a man void of understanding are
vain and false: and dreams lift up fools.

<span id="002">2</span> Whoso regardeth dreams is like him that catcheth
at a shadow, and followeth after the wind.

<span id="003">3</span> The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one
thing to another, even as the likeness of a face to a face.

<span id="004">4</span> Of an unclean thing what can be cleansed? and
from that thing which is false what truth can come?

<span id="005">5</span> Divinations, and soothsayings, and dreams, are
vain: and the heart fancieth, as a woman's heart in travail.

<span id="006">6</span> If they be not sent from the most High in thy
visitation, set not thy heart upon them.

<span id="007">7</span> For dreams have deceived many, and they have
failed that put their trust in them.

<span id="008">8</span> The law shall be found perfect without lies: and
wisdom is perfection to a faithful mouth.

<span id="009">9</span> A man that hath travelled knoweth many things;
and he that hath much experience will declare wisdom.

<span id="010">10</span> He that hath no experience knoweth little: but
he that hath travelled is full of prudence.

<span id="011">11</span> When I travelled, I saw many things; and I
understand more than I can express.

<span id="012">12</span> I was ofttimes in danger of death: yet I was
delivered because of these things.

<span id="013">13</span> The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall
live; for their hope is in him that saveth them.

<span id="014">14</span> Whoso feareth the Lord shall not fear nor be
afraid; for he is his hope.

<span id="015">15</span> Blessed is the soul of him that feareth the
Lord: to whom doth he look? and who is his strength?

<span id="016">16</span> For the eyes of the Lord are upon them that
love him, he is their mighty protection and strong stay, a defence from
heat, and a cover from the sun at noon, a preservation from stumbling,
and an help from falling.

<span id="017">17</span> He raiseth up the soul, and lighteneth the
eyes: he giveth health, life, and blessing.

<span id="018">18</span> He that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully
gotten, his offering is ridiculous; and the gifts of unjust men are not
accepted.

<span id="019">19</span> The most High is not pleased with the offerings
of the wicked; neither is he pacified for sin by the multitude of
sacrifices.

<span id="020">20</span> Whoso bringeth an offering of the goods of the
poor doeth as one that killeth the son before his father's eyes.

<span id="021">21</span> The bread of the needy is their life: he that
defraudeth him thereof is a man of blood.

<span id="022">22</span> He that taketh away his neighbour's living
slayeth him; and he that defraudeth the labourer of his hire is a
bloodshedder.

<span id="023">23</span> When one buildeth, and another pulleth down,
what profit have they then but labour?

<span id="024">24</span> When one prayeth, and another curseth, whose
voice will the Lord hear?

<span id="025">25</span> He that washeth himself after the touching of a
dead body, if he touch it again, what availeth his washing?

<span id="026">26</span> So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins,
and goeth again, and doeth the same: who will hear his prayer? or what
doth his humbling profit him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 35](sir035)
