[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir040)  [Sep](../sep/sir040) 
[Vul](../vul/sir040)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir039)  [Next](sir041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 40

<span id="001">1</span> Great travail is created for every man, and an
heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their mother's womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all
things.

<span id="002">2</span> Their imagination of things to come, and the day
of death, \[trouble\] their thoughts, and \[cause\] fear of heart;

<span id="003">3</span> From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, unto
him that is humbled in earth and ashes;

<span id="004">4</span> From him that weareth purple and a crown, unto
him that is clothed with a linen frock.

<span id="005">5</span> Wrath, and envy, trouble, and unquietness, fear
of death, and anger, and strife, and in the time of rest upon his bed
his night sleep, do change his knowledge.

<span id="006">6</span> A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward
he is in his sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, troubled in the vision
of his heart, as if he were escaped out of a battle.

<span id="007">7</span> When all is safe, he awaketh, and marvelleth
that the fear was nothing.

<span id="008">8</span> \[Such things happen\] unto all flesh, both man
and beast, and that is sevenfold more upon sinners.

<span id="009">9</span> Death, and bloodshed, strife, and sword,
calamities, famine, tribulation, and the scourge;

<span id="010">10</span> These things are created for the wicked, and
for their sakes came the flood.

<span id="011">11</span> All things that are of the earth shall turn to
the earth again: and that which is of the waters doth return into the
sea.

<span id="012">12</span> All bribery and injustice shall be blotted out:
but true dealing shall endure for ever.

<span id="013">13</span> The goods of the unjust shall be dried up like
a river, and shall vanish with noise, like a great thunder in rain.

<span id="014">14</span> While he openeth his hand he shall rejoice: so
shall transgressors come to nought.

<span id="015">15</span> The children of the ungodly shall not bring
forth many branches: but are as unclean roots upon a hard rock.

<span id="016">16</span> The weed growing upon every water and bank of a
river shall be pulled up before all grass.

<span id="017">17</span> Bountifulness is as a most fruitful garden, and
mercifulness endureth for ever.

<span id="018">18</span> To labour, and to be content with that a man
hath, is a sweet life: but he that findeth a treasure is above them
both.

<span id="019">19</span> Children and the building of a city continue a
man's name: but a blameless wife is counted above them both.

<span id="020">20</span> Wine and musick rejoice the heart: but the love
of wisdom is above them both.

<span id="021">21</span> The pipe and the psaltery make sweet melody:
but a pleasant tongue is above them both.

<span id="022">22</span> Thine eye desireth favour and beauty: but more
than both corn while it is green.

<span id="023">23</span> A friend and companion never meet amiss: but
above both is a wife with her husband.

<span id="024">24</span> Brethren and help are against time of trouble:
but alms shall deliver more than them both.

<span id="025">25</span> Gold and silver make the foot stand sure: but
counsel is esteemed above them both.

<span id="026">26</span> Riches and strength lift up the heart: but the
fear of the Lord is above them both: there is no want in the fear of the
Lord, and it needeth not to seek help.

<span id="027">27</span> The fear of the Lord is a fruitful garden, and
covereth him above all glory.

<span id="028">28</span> My son, lead not a beggar's life; for better it
is to die than to beg.

<span id="029">29</span> The life of him that dependeth on another man's
table is not to be counted for a life; for he polluteth himself with
other men's meat: but a wise man well nurtured will beware thereof.

<span id="030">30</span> Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless:
but in his belly there shall burn a fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 41](sir041)
