[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir017)  [Sep](../sep/sir017) 
[Vul](../vul/sir017)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir016)  [Next](sir018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 17

<span id="001">1</span> The Lord created man of the earth, and turned
him into it again.

<span id="002">2</span> He gave them few days, and a short time, and
power also over the things therein.

<span id="003">3</span> He endued them with strength by themselves, and
made them according to his image,

<span id="004">4</span> And put the fear of man upon all flesh, and gave
him dominion over beasts and fowls.

<span id="005">5</span> They received the use of the five operations of
the Lord, and in the sixth place he imparted them understanding, and in
the seventh speech, an interpreter of the cogitations thereof.\]

<span id="006">6</span> Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a
heart, gave he them to understand.

<span id="007">7</span> Withal he filled them with the knowledge of
understanding, and shewed them good and evil.

<span id="008">8</span> He set his eye upon their hearts, that he might
shew them the greatness of his works.

<span id="009">9</span> He gave them to glory in his marvellous acts for
ever, that they might declare his works with understanding.

<span id="010">10</span> And the elect shall praise his holy name.

<span id="011">11</span> Beside this he gave them knowledge, and the law
of life for an heritage.

<span id="012">12</span> He made an everlasting covenant with them, and
shewed them his judgments.

<span id="013">13</span> Their eyes saw the majesty of his glory, and
their ears heard his glorious voice.

<span id="014">14</span> And he said unto them, Beware of all
unrighteousness; and he gave every man commandment concerning his
neighbour.

<span id="015">15</span> Their ways are ever before him, and shall not
be hid from his eyes.

<span id="016">16</span> Every man from his youth is given to evil;
neither could they make to themselves fleshy hearts for stony.

<span id="017">17</span> For in the division of the nations of the whole
earth he set a ruler over every people; but Israel is the Lord's
portion:

<span id="018">18</span> Whom, being his firstborn, he nourisheth with
discipline, and giving him the light of his love doth not forsake him.

<span id="019">19</span> Therefore all their works are as the sun before
him, and his eyes are continually upon their ways.

<span id="020">20</span> None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from
him, but all their sins are before the Lord

<span id="021">21</span> But the Lord being gracious and knowing his
workmanship, neither left nor forsook them, but spared them.

<span id="022">22</span> The alms of a man is as a signet with him, and
he will keep the good deeds of man as the apple of the eye, and give
repentance to his sons and daughters.

<span id="023">23</span> Afterwards he will rise up and reward them, and
render their recompence upon their heads.

<span id="024">24</span> But unto them that repent, he granted them
return, and comforted those that failed in patience.

<span id="025">25</span> Return unto the Lord, and forsake thy sins,
make thy prayer before his face, and offend less.

<span id="026">26</span> Turn again to the most High, and turn away from
iniquity: for he will lead thee out of darkness into the light of
health, and hate thou abomination vehemently.

<span id="027">27</span> Who shall praise the most High in the grave,
instead of them which live and give thanks?

<span id="028">28</span> Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as from
one that is not: the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord.

<span id="029">29</span> How great is the lovingkindness of the Lord our
God, and his compassion unto such as turn unto him in holiness!

<span id="030">30</span> For all things cannot be in men, because the
son of man is not immortal.

<span id="031">31</span> What is brighter than the sun? yet the light
thereof faileth; and flesh and blood will imagine evil.

<span id="032">32</span> He vieweth the power of the height of heaven;
and all men are but earth and ashes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 18](sir018)
