[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir014)  [Sep](../sep/sir014.md) 
[Vul](../vul/sir014.md)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir.md)  
  [Previous](sir013)  [Next](sir015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> Blessed is the man that hath not slipped with
his mouth, and is not pricked with the multitude of sins.

<span id="002">2</span> Blessed is he whose conscience hath not
condemned him, and who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.

<span id="003">3</span> Riches are not comely for a niggard: and what
should an envious man do with money?

<span id="004">4</span> He that gathereth by defrauding his own soul
gathereth for others, that shall spend his goods riotously.

<span id="005">5</span> He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be
good? he shall not take pleasure in his goods.

<span id="006">6</span> There is none worse than he that envieth
himself; and this is a recompence of his wickedness.

<span id="007">7</span> And if he doeth good, he doeth it unwillingly;
and at the last he will declare his wickedness.

<span id="008">8</span> The envious man hath a wicked eye; he turneth
away his face, and despiseth men.

<span id="009">9</span> A covetous man's eye is not satisfied with his
portion; and the iniquity of the wicked drieth up his soul.

<span id="010">10</span> A wicked eye envieth \[his\] bread, and he is a
niggard at his table.

<span id="011">11</span> My son, according to thy ability do good to
thyself, and give the Lord his due offering.

<span id="012">12</span> Remember that death will not be long in coming,
and that the covenant of the grave is not shewed unto thee.

<span id="013">13</span> Do good unto thy friend before thou die, and
according to thy ability stretch out thy hand and give to him.

<span id="014">14</span> Defraud not thyself of the good day, and let
not the part of a good desire overpass thee.

<span id="015">15</span> Shalt thou not leave thy travails unto another?
and thy labours to be divided by lot?

<span id="016">16</span> Give, and take, and sanctify thy soul; for
there is no seeking of dainties in the grave.

<span id="017">17</span> All flesh waxeth old as a garment: for the
covenant from the beginning is, Thou shalt die the death.

<span id="018">18</span> As of the green leaves on a thick tree, some
fall, and some grow; so is the generation of flesh and blood, one cometh
to an end, and another is born.

<span id="019">19</span> Every work rotteth and consumeth away, and the
worker thereof shall go withal.

<span id="020">20</span> Blessed is the man that doth meditate good
things in wisdom, and that reasoneth of holy things by his
understanding. ing.

<span id="021">21</span> He that considereth her ways in his heart shall
also have understanding in her secrets.

<span id="022">22</span> Go after her as one that traceth, and lie in
wait in her ways.

<span id="023">23</span> He that prieth in at her windows shall also
hearken at her doors.

<span id="024">24</span> He that doth lodge near her house shall also
fasten a pin in her walls.

<span id="025">25</span> He shall pitch his tent nigh unto her, and
shall lodge in a lodging where good things are.

<span id="026">26</span> He shall set his children under her shelter,
and shall lodge under her branches.

<span id="027">27</span> By her he shall be covered from heat, and in
her glory shall he dwell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 15](sir015.md)
