[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sus001)  [Sep:Sus](../sep/sus001.md) 
[Sep:SuT](../sep/sut001.md)   
  
[Susanna Index](sus.md)  
  [Previous](epj006)  [Next](aza001.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Susanna Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> There dwelt a man in Babylon, called Joacim:

<span id="002">2</span> And he took a wife, whose name was Susanna, the
daughter of Chelcias, a very fair woman, and one that feared the Lord.

<span id="003">3</span> Her parents also were righteous, and taught
their daughter according to the law of Moses.

<span id="004">4</span> Now Joacim was a great rich man, and had a fair
garden joining unto his house: and to him resorted the Jews; because he
was more honourable than all others.

<span id="005">5</span> The same year were appointed two of the ancients
of the people to be judges, such as the Lord spake of, that wickedness
came from Babylon from ancient judges, who seemed to govern the people.

<span id="006">6</span> These kept much at Joacim's house: and all that
had any suits in law came unto them.

<span id="007">7</span> Now when the people departed away at noon,
Susanna went into her husband's garden to walk.

<span id="008">8</span> And the two elders saw her going in every day,
and walking; so that their lust was inflamed toward her.

<span id="009">9</span> And they perverted their own mind, and turned
away their eyes, that they might not look unto heaven, nor remember just
judgments.

<span id="010">10</span> And albeit they both were wounded with her
love, yet durst not one shew another his grief.

<span id="011">11</span> For they were ashamed to declare their lust,
that they desired to have to do with her.

<span id="012">12</span> Yet they watched diligently from day to day to
see her.

<span id="013">13</span> And the one said to the other, Let us now go
home: for it is dinner time.

<span id="014">14</span> So when they were gone out, they parted the one
from the other, and turning back again they came to the same place; and
after that they had asked one another the cause, they acknowledged their
lust: then appointed they a time both together, when they might find her
alone.

<span id="015">15</span> And it fell out, as they watched a fit time,
she went in as before with two maids only, and she was desirous to wash
herself in the garden: for it was hot.

<span id="016">16</span> And there was no body there save the two
elders, that had hid themselves, and watched her.

<span id="017">17</span> Then she said to her maids, Bring me oil and
washing balls, and shut the garden doors, that I may wash me.

<span id="018">18</span> And they did as she bade them, and shut the
garden doors, and went out themselves at privy doors to fetch the things
that she had commanded them: but they saw not the elders, because they
were hid.

<span id="019">19</span> Now when the maids were gone forth, the two
elders rose up, and ran unto her, saying,

<span id="020">20</span> Behold, the garden doors are shut, that no man
can see us, and we are in love with thee; therefore consent unto us, and
lie with us.

<span id="021">21</span> If thou wilt not, we will bear witness against
thee, that a young man was with thee: and therefore thou didst send away
thy maids from thee.

<span id="022">22</span> Then Susanna sighed, and said, I am straitened
on every side: for if I do this thing, it is death unto me: and if I do
it not I cannot escape your hands.

<span id="023">23</span> It is better for me to fall into your hands,
and not do it, than to sin in the sight of the Lord.

<span id="024">24</span> With that Susanna cried with a loud voice: and
the two elders cried out against her.

<span id="025">25</span> Then ran the one, and opened the garden door.

<span id="026">26</span> So when the servants of the house heard the cry
in the garden, they rushed in at the privy door, to see what was done
unto her.

<span id="027">27</span> But when the elders had declared their matter,
the servants were greatly ashamed: for there was never such a report
made of Susanna.

<span id="028">28</span> And it came to pass the next day, when the
people were assembled to her husband Joacim, the two elders came also
full of mischievous imagination against Susanna to put her to death;

<span id="029">29</span> And said before the people, Send for Susanna,
the daughter of Chelcias, Joacim's wife. And so they sent.

<span id="030">30</span> So she came with her father and mother, her
children, and all her kindred.

<span id="031">31</span> Now Susanna was a very delicate woman, and
beauteous to behold.

<span id="032">32</span> And these wicked men commanded to uncover her
face, (for she was covered) that they might be filled with her beauty.

<span id="033">33</span> Therefore her friends and all that saw her
wept.

<span id="034">34</span> Then the two elders stood up in the midst of
the people, and laid their hands upon her head.

<span id="035">35</span> And she weeping looked up toward heaven: for
her heart trusted in the Lord.

<span id="036">36</span> And the elders said, As we walked in the garden
alone, this woman came in with two maids, and shut the garden doors, and
sent the maids away.

<span id="037">37</span> Then a young man, who there was hid, came unto
her, and lay with her.

<span id="038">38</span> Then we that stood in a corner of the garden,
seeing this wickedness, ran unto them.

<span id="039">39</span> And when we saw them together, the man we could
not hold: for he was stronger than we, and opened the door, and leaped
out.

<span id="040">40</span> But having taken this woman, we asked who the
young man was, but she would not tell us: these things do we testify.

<span id="041">41</span> Then the assembly believed them as those that
were the elders and judges of the people: so they condemned her to
death.

<span id="042">42</span> Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and
said, O everlasting God, that knowest the secrets, and knowest all
things before they be:

<span id="043">43</span> Thou knowest that they have borne false witness
against me, and, behold, I must die; whereas I never did such things as
these men have maliciously invented against me.

<span id="044">44</span> And the Lord heard her voice.

<span id="045">45</span> Therefore when she was led to be put to death,
the Lord raised up the holy spirit of a young youth whose name was
Daniel:

<span id="046">46</span> Who cried with a loud voice, I am clear from
the blood of this woman.

<span id="047">47</span> Then all the people turned them toward him, and
said, What mean these words that thou hast spoken?

<span id="048">48</span> So he standing in the midst of them said, Are
ye such fools, ye sons of Israel, that without examination or knowledge
of the truth ye have condemned a daughter of Israel?

<span id="049">49</span> Return again to the place of judgment: for they
have borne false witness against her.

<span id="050">50</span> Wherefore all the people turned again in haste,
and the elders said unto him, Come, sit down among us, and shew it us,
seeing God hath given thee the honour of an elder.

<span id="051">51</span> Then said Daniel unto them, Put these two aside
one far from another, and I will examine them.

<span id="052">52</span> So when they were put asunder one from another,
he called one of them, and said unto him, O thou that art waxen old in
wickedness, now thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are come to
light.

<span id="053">53</span> For thou hast pronounced false judgment and
hast condemned the innocent and hast let the guilty go free; albeit the
Lord saith, The innocent and righteous shalt thou not slay.

<span id="054">54</span> Now then, if thou hast seen her, tell me, Under
what tree sawest thou them companying together? Who answered, Under a
mastick tree.

<span id="055">55</span> And Daniel said, Very well; thou hast lied
against thine own head; for even now the angel of God hath received the
sentence of God to cut thee in two.

<span id="056">56</span> So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the
other, and said unto him, O thou seed of Chanaan, and not of Juda,
beauty hath deceived thee, and lust hath perverted thine heart.

<span id="057">57</span> Thus have ye dealt with the daughters of
Israel, and they for fear companied with you: but the daughter of Juda
would not abide your wickedness.

<span id="058">58</span> Now therefore tell me, Under what tree didst
thou take them companying together? Who answered, Under an holm tree.

<span id="059">59</span> Then said Daniel unto him, Well; thou hast also
lied against thine own head: for the angel of God waiteth with the sword
to cut thee in two, that he may destroy you.

<span id="060">60</span> With that all the assembly cried out with a
loud voice, and praised God, who saveth them that trust in him.

<span id="061">61</span> And they arose against the two elders, for
Daniel had convicted them of false witness by their own mouth:

<span id="062">62</span> And according to the law of Moses they did unto
them in such sort as they maliciously intended to do to their neighbour:
and they put them to death. Thus the innocent blood was saved the same
day.

<span id="063">63</span> Therefore Chelcias and his wife praised God for
their daughter Susanna, with Joacim her husband, and all the kindred,
because there was no dishonesty found in her.

<span id="064">64</span> From that day forth was Daniel had in great
reputation in the sight of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer of Azariah Chapter 1](aza001.md)
