[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob001)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa001) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos001)  [Vul](../vul/tob001)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob)  
  [Previous](ma2015)  [Next](tob002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> The book of the words of Tobit, son of Tobiel,
the son of Ananiel, the son of Aduel, the son of Gabael, of the seed of
Asael, of the tribe of Nephthali;

<span id="002">2</span> Who in the time of Enemessar king of the
Assyrians was led captive out of Thisbe, which is at the right hand of
that city, which is called properly Nephthali in Galilee above Aser.

<span id="003">3</span> I Tobit have walked all the days of my life in
the ways of truth and justice, and I did many almsdeeds to my brethren,
and my nation, who came with me to Nineve, into the land of the
Assyrians.

<span id="004">4</span> And when I was in mine own country, in the land
of Israel being but young, all the tribe of Nephthali my father fell
from the house of Jerusalem, which was chosen out of all the tribes of
Israel, that all the tribes should sacrifice there, where the temple of
the habitation of the most High was consecrated and built for all ages.

<span id="005">5</span> Now all the tribes which together revolted, and
the house of my father Nephthali, sacrificed unto the heifer Baal.

<span id="006">6</span> But I alone went often to Jerusalem at the
feasts, as it was ordained unto all the people of Israel by an
everlasting decree, having the firstfruits and tenths of increase, with
that which was first shorn; and them gave I at the altar to the priests
the children of Aaron.

<span id="007">7</span> The first tenth part of all increase I gave to
the sons of Aaron, who ministered at Jerusalem: another tenth part I
sold away, and went, and spent it every year at Jerusalem:

<span id="008">8</span> And the third I gave unto them to whom it was
meet, as Debora my father's mother had commanded me, because I was left
an orphan by my father.

<span id="009">9</span> Furthermore, when I was come to the age of a
man, I married Anna of mine own kindred, and of her I begat Tobias.

<span id="010">10</span> And when we were carried away captives to
Nineve, all my brethren and those that were of my kindred did eat of the
bread of the Gentiles.

<span id="011">11</span> But I kept myself from eating;

<span id="012">12</span> Because I remembered God with all my heart.

<span id="013">13</span> And the most High gave me grace and favour
before Enemessar, so that I was his purveyor.

<span id="014">14</span> And I went into Media, and left in trust with
Gabael, the brother of Gabrias, at Rages a city of Media ten talents of
silver.

<span id="015">15</span> Now when Enemessar was dead, Sennacherib his
son reigned in his stead; whose estate was troubled, that I could not go
into Media.

<span id="016">16</span> And in the time of Enemessar I gave many alms
to my brethren, and gave my bread to the hungry,

<span id="017">17</span> And my clothes to the naked: and if I saw any
of my nation dead, or cast about the walls of Nineve, I buried him.

<span id="018">18</span> And if the king Sennacherib had slain any, when
he was come, and fled from Judea, I buried them privily; for in his
wrath he killed many; but the bodies were not found, when they were
sought for of the king.

<span id="019">19</span> And when one of the Ninevites went and
complained of me to the king, that I buried them, and hid myself;
understanding that I was sought for to be put to death, I withdrew
myself for fear.

<span id="020">20</span> Then all my goods were forcibly taken away,
neither was there any thing left me, beside my wife Anna and my son
Tobias.

<span id="021">21</span> And there passed not five and fifty days,
before two of his sons killed him, and they fled into the mountains of
Ararath; and Sarchedonus his son reigned in his stead; who appointed
over his father's accounts, and over all his affairs, Achiacharus my
brother Anael's son.

<span id="022">22</span> And Achiacharus intreating for me, I returned
to Nineve. Now Achiacharus was cupbearer, and keeper of the signet, and
steward, and overseer of the accounts: and Sarchedonus appointed him
next unto him: and he was my brother's son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 2](tob002)
