[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob007)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa007) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos007)  [Vul](../vul/tob007)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob)  
  [Previous](tob006)  [Next](tob008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> And when they were come to Ecbatane, they came
to the house of Raguel, and Sara met them: and after they had saluted
one another, she brought them into the house.

<span id="002">2</span> Then said Raguel to Edna his wife, How like is
this young man to Tobit my cousin!

<span id="003">3</span> And Raguel asked them, From whence are ye,
brethren? To whom they said, We are of the sons of Nephthalim, which are
captives in Nineve.

<span id="004">4</span> Then he said to them, Do ye know Tobit our
kinsman? And they said, We know him. Then said he, Is he in good health?

<span id="005">5</span> And they said, He is both alive, and in good
health: and Tobias said, He is my father.

<span id="006">6</span> Then Raguel leaped up, and kissed him, and wept,

<span id="007">7</span> And blessed him, and said unto him, Thou art the
son of an honest and good man. But when he had heard that Tobit was
blind, he was sorrowful, and wept.

<span id="008">8</span> And likewise Edna his wife and Sara his daughter
wept. Moreover they entertained them cheerfully; and after that they had
killed a ram of the flock, they set store of meat on the table. Then
said Tobias to Raphael, Brother Azarias, speak of those things of which
thou didst talk in the way, and let this business be dispatched.

<span id="009">9</span> So he communicated the matter with Raguel: and
Raguel said to Tobias, Eat and drink, and make merry:

<span id="010">10</span> For it is meet that thou shouldest marry my
daughter: nevertheless I will declare unto thee the truth.

<span id="011">11</span> I have given my daughter in marriage te seven
men, who died that night they came in unto her: nevertheless for the
present be merry. But Tobias said, I will eat nothing here, till we
agree and swear one to another.

<span id="012">12</span> Raguel said, Then take her from henceforth
according to the manner, for thou art her cousin, and she is thine, and
the merciful God give you good success in all things.

<span id="013">13</span> Then he called his daughter Sara, and she came
to her father, and he took her by the hand, and gave her to be wife to
Tobias, saying, Behold, take her after the law of Moses, and lead her
away to thy father. And he blessed them;

<span id="014">14</span> And called Edna his wife, and took paper, and
did write an instrument of covenants, and sealed it.

<span id="015">15</span> Then they began to eat.

<span id="016">16</span> After Raguel called his wife Edna, and said
unto her, Sister, prepare another chamber, and bring her in thither.

<span id="017">17</span> Which when she had done as he had bidden her,
she brought her thither: and she wept, and she received the tears of her
daughter, and said unto her,

<span id="018">18</span> Be of good comfort, my daughter; the Lord of
heaven and earth give thee joy for this thy sorrow: be of good comfort,
my daughter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 8](tob008)
