[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob008)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa008.md) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos008)  [Vul](../vul/tob008.md)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob.md)  
  [Previous](tob007)  [Next](tob009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 8

<span id="001">1</span> And when they had supped, they brought Tobias in
unto her.

<span id="002">2</span> And as he went, he remembered the words of
Raphael, and took the ashes of the perfumes, and put the heart and the
liver of the fish thereupon, and made a smoke therewith.

<span id="003">3</span> The which smell when the evil spirit had
smelled, he fled into the utmost parts of Egypt, and the angel bound
him.

<span id="004">4</span> And after that they were both shut in together,
Tobias rose out of the bed, and said, Sister, arise, and let us pray
that God would have pity on us.

<span id="005">5</span> Then began Tobias to say, Blessed art thou, O
God of our fathers, and blessed is thy holy and glorious name for ever;
let the heavens bless thee, and all thy creatures.

<span id="006">6</span> Thou madest Adam, and gavest him Eve his wife
for an helper and stay: of them came mankind: thou hast said, It is not
good that man should be alone; let us make unto him an aid like unto
himself.

<span id="007">7</span> And now, O Lord, I take not this my sister for
lush but uprightly: therefore mercifully ordain that we may become aged
together.

<span id="008">8</span> And she said with him, Amen.

<span id="009">9</span> So they slept both that night. And Raguel arose,
and went and made a grave,

<span id="010">10</span> Saying, I fear lest he also be dead.

<span id="011">11</span> But when Raguel was come into his house,

<span id="012">12</span> He said unto his wife Edna. Send one of the
maids, and let her see whether he be alive: if he be not, that we may
bury him, and no man know it.

<span id="013">13</span> So the maid opened the door, and went in, and
found them both asleep,

<span id="014">14</span> And came forth, and told them that he was
alive.

<span id="015">15</span> Then Raguel praised God, and said, O God, thou
art worthy to be praised with all pure and holy praise; therefore let
thy saints praise thee with all thy creatures; and let all thine angels
and thine elect praise thee for ever.

<span id="016">16</span> Thou art to be praised, for thou hast made me
joyful; and that is not come to me which I suspected; but thou hast
dealt with us according to thy great mercy.

<span id="017">17</span> Thou art to be praised because thou hast had
mercy of two that were the only begotten children of their fathers:
grant them mercy, O Lord, and finish their life in health with joy and
mercy.

<span id="018">18</span> Then Raguel bade his servants to fill the
grave.

<span id="019">19</span> And he kept the wedding feast fourteen days.

<span id="020">20</span> For before the days of the marriage were
finished, Raguel had said unto him by an oath, that he should not depart
till the fourteen days of the marriage were expired;

<span id="021">21</span> And then he should take the half of his goods,
and go in safety to his father; and should have the rest when I and my
wife be dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 9](tob009.md)
