[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob006)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa006.md) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos006)  [Vul](../vul/tob006.md)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob.md)  
  [Previous](tob005)  [Next](tob007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 6

<span id="001">1</span> And as they went on their journey, they came in
the evening to the river Tigris, and they lodged there.

<span id="002">2</span> And when the young man went down to wash
himself, a fish leaped out of the river, and would have devoured him.

<span id="003">3</span> Then the angel said unto him, Take the fish. And
the young man laid hold of the fish, and drew it to land.

<span id="004">4</span> To whom the angel said, Open the fish, and take
the heart and the liver and the gall, and put them up safely.

<span id="005">5</span> So the young man did as the angel commanded him;
and when they had roasted the fish, they did eat it: then they both went
on their way, till they drew near to Ecbatane.

<span id="006">6</span> Then the young man said to the angel, Brother
Azarias, to what use is the heart and the liver and the gal of the fish?

<span id="007">7</span> And he said unto him, Touching the heart and the
liver, if a devil or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a smoke
thereof before the man or the woman, and the party shall be no more
vexed.

<span id="008">8</span> As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that
hath whiteness in his eyes, and he shall be healed.

<span id="009">9</span> And when they were come near to Rages,

<span id="010">10</span> The angel said to the young man, Brother, to
day we shall lodge with Raguel, who is thy cousin; he also hath one only
daughter, named Sara; I will speak for her, that she may be given thee
for a wife.

<span id="011">11</span> For to thee doth the right of her appertain,
seeing thou only art of her kindred.

<span id="012">12</span> And the maid is fair and wise: now therefore
hear me, and I will speak to her father; and when we return from Rages
we will celebrate the marriage: for I know that Raguel cannot marry her
to another according to the law of Moses, but he shall be guilty of
death, because the right of inheritance doth rather appertain to thee
than to any other.

<span id="013">13</span> Then the young man answered the angel, I have
heard, brother Azarias that this maid hath been given to seven men, who
all died in the marriage chamber.

<span id="014">14</span> And now I am the only son of my father, and I
am afraid, lest if I go in unto her, I die, as the other before: for a
wicked spirit loveth her, which hurteth no body, but those which come
unto her; wherefore I also fear lest I die, and bring my father's and my
mother's life because of me to the grave with sorrow: for they have no
other son to bury them.

<span id="015">15</span> Then the angel said unto him, Dost thou not
remember the precepts which thy father gave thee, that thou shouldest
marry a wife of thine own kindred? wherefore hear me, O my brother; for
she shall be given thee to wife; and make thou no reckoning of the evil
spirit; for this same night shall she be given thee in marriage.

<span id="016">16</span> And when thou shalt come into the marriage
chamber, thou shalt take the ashes of perfume, and shalt lay upon them
some of the heart and liver of the fish, and shalt make a smoke with it:

<span id="017">17</span> And the devil shall smell it, and flee away,
and never come again any more: but when thou shalt come to her, rise up
both of you, and pray to God which is merciful, who will have pity on
you, and save you: fear not, for she is appointed unto thee from the
beginning; and thou shalt preserve her, and she shall go with thee.
Moreover I suppose that she shall bear thee children. Now when Tobias
had heard these things, he loved her, and his heart was effectually
joined to her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 7](tob007.md)
