[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob002)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa002.md) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos002)  [Vul](../vul/tob002.md)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob.md)  
  [Previous](tob001)  [Next](tob003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> Now when I was come home again, and my wife Anna
was restored unto me, with my son Tobias, in the feast of Pentecost,
which is the holy feast of the seven weeks, there was a good dinner
prepared me, in the which I sat down to eat.

<span id="002">2</span> And when I saw abundance of meat, I said to my
son, Go and bring what poor man soever thou shalt find out of our
brethren, who is mindful of the Lord; and, lo, I tarry for thee.

<span id="003">3</span> But he came again, and said, Father, one of our
nation is strangled, and is cast out in the marketplace.

<span id="004">4</span> Then before I had tasted of any meat, I started
up, and took him up into a room until the going down of the sun.

<span id="005">5</span> Then I returned, and washed myself, and ate my
meat in heaviness,

<span id="006">6</span> Remembering that prophecy of Amos, as he said,
Your feasts shall be turned into mourning, and all your mirth into
lamentation.

<span id="007">7</span> Therefore I wept: and after the going down of
the sun I went and made a grave, and buried him.

<span id="008">8</span> But my neighbours mocked me, and said, This man
is not yet afraid to be put to death for this matter: who fled away; and
yet, lo, he burieth the dead again.

<span id="009">9</span> The same night also I returned from the burial,
and slept by the wall of my courtyard, being polluted and my face was
uncovered:

<span id="010">10</span> And I knew not that there were sparrows in the
wall, and mine eyes being open, the sparrows muted warm dung into mine
eyes, and a whiteness came in mine eyes: and I went to the physicians,
but they helped me not: moreover Achiacharus did nourish me, until I
went into Elymais.

<span id="011">11</span> And my wife Anna did take women's works to do.

<span id="012">12</span> And when she had sent them home to the owners,
they paid her wages, and gave her also besides a kid.

<span id="013">13</span> And when it was in my house, and began to cry,
I said unto her, From whence is this kid? is it not stolen? render it to
the owners; for it is not lawful to eat any thing that is stolen.

<span id="014">14</span> But she replied upon me, It was given for a
gift more than the wages. Howbeit I did not believe her, but bade her
render it to the owners: and I was abashed at her. But she replied upon
me, Where are thine alms and thy righteous deeds? behold, thou and all
thy works are known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 3](tob003.md)
