[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob013)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa013) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos013)  [Vul](../vul/tob013)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob)  
  [Previous](tob012)  [Next](tob014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> Then Tobit wrote a prayer of rejoicing, and
said, Blessed be God that liveth for ever, and blessed be his kingdom.

<span id="002">2</span> For he doth scourge, and hath mercy: he leadeth
down to hell, and bringeth up again: neither is there any that can avoid
his hand.

<span id="003">3</span> Confess him before the Gentiles, ye children of
Israel: for he hath scattered us among them.

<span id="004">4</span> There declare his greatness, and extol him
before all the living: for he is our Lord, and he is the God our Father
for ever.

<span id="005">5</span> And he will scourge us for our iniquities, and
will have mercy again, and will gather us out of all nations, among whom
he hath scattered us.

<span id="006">6</span> If ye turn to him with your whole heart, and
with your whole mind, and deal uprightly before him, then will he turn
unto you, and will not hide his face from you. Therefore see what he
will do with you, and confess him with your whole mouth, and praise the
Lord of might, and extol the everlasting King. In the land of my
captivity do I praise him, and declare his might and majesty to a sinful
nation. O ye sinners, turn and do justice before him: who can tell if he
will accept you, and have mercy on you?

<span id="007">7</span> I will extol my God, and my soul shall praise
the King of heaven, and shall rejoice in his greatness.

<span id="008">8</span> Let all men speak, and let all praise him for
his righteousness.

<span id="009">9</span> O Jerusalem, the holy city, he will scourge thee
for thy children's works, and will have mercy again on the sons of the
righteous.

<span id="010">10</span> Give praise to the Lord, for he is good: and
praise the everlasting King, that his tabernacle may be builded in thee
again with joy, and let him make joyful there in thee those that are
captives, and love in thee for ever those that are miserable.

<span id="011">11</span> Many nations shall come from far to the name of
the Lord God with gifts in their hands, even gifts to the King of
heaven; all generations shall praise thee with great joy.

<span id="012">12</span> Cursed are all they which hate thee, and
blessed shall all be which love thee for ever.

<span id="013">13</span> Rejoice and be glad for the children of the
just: for they shall be gathered together, and shall bless the Lord of
the just.

<span id="014">14</span> O blessed are they which love thee, for they
shall rejoice in thy peace: blessed are they which have been sorrowful
for all thy scourges; for they shall rejoice for thee, when they have
seen all thy glory, and shall be glad for ever.

<span id="015">15</span> Let my soul bless God the great King.

<span id="016">16</span> For Jerusalem shall be built up with sapphires
and emeralds, and precious stone: thy walls and towers and battlements
with pure gold.

<span id="017">17</span> And the streets of Jerusalem shall be paved
with beryl and carbuncle and stones of Ophir.

<span id="018">18</span> And all her streets shall say, Alleluia; and
they shall praise him, saying, Blessed be God, which hath extolled it
for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 14](tob014)
