[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob004)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa004.md) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos004)  [Vul](../vul/tob004.md)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob.md)  
  [Previous](tob003)  [Next](tob005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> In that day Tobit remembered the money which he
had committed to Gabael in Rages of Media,

<span id="002">2</span> And said with himself, I have wished for death;
wherefore do I not call for my son Tobias that I may signify to him of
the money before I die?

<span id="003">3</span> And when he had called him, he said, My son,
when I am dead, bury me; and despise not thy mother, but honour her all
the days of thy life, and do that which shall please her, and grieve her
not.

<span id="004">4</span> Remember, my son, that she saw many dangers for
thee, when thou wast in her womb: and when she is dead, bury her by me
in one grave.

<span id="005">5</span> My son, be mindful of the Lord our God all thy
days, and let not thy will be set to sin, or to transgress his
commandments: do uprightly all thy life long, and follow not the ways of
unrighteousness.

<span id="006">6</span> For if thou deal truly, thy doings shall
prosperously succeed to thee, and to all them that live justly.

<span id="007">7</span> Give alms of thy substance; and when thou givest
alms, let not thine eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor,
and the face of God shall not be turned away from thee.

<span id="008">8</span> If thou hast abundance give alms accordingly: if
thou have but a little, be not afraid to give according to that little:

<span id="009">9</span> For thou layest up a good treasure for thyself
against the day of necessity.

<span id="010">10</span> Because that alms do deliver from death, and
suffereth not to come into darkness.

<span id="011">11</span> For alms is a good gift unto all that give it
in the sight of the most High.

<span id="012">12</span> Beware of all whoredom, my son, and chiefly
take a wife of the seed of thy fathers, and take not a strange woman to
wife, which is not of thy father's tribe: for we are the children of the
prophets, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: remember, my son, that our
fathers from the beginning, even that they all married wives of their
own kindred, and were blessed in their children, and their seed shall
inherit the land.

<span id="013">13</span> Now therefore, my son, love thy brethren, and
despise not in thy heart thy brethren, the sons and daughters of thy
people, in not taking a wife of them: for in pride is destruction and
much trouble, and in lewdness is decay and great want: for lewdness is
the mother of famine.

<span id="014">14</span> Let not the wages of any man, which hath
wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but give him it out of hand: for if
thou serve God, he will also repay thee: be circumspect my son, in all
things thou doest, and be wise in all thy conversation.

<span id="015">15</span> Do that to no man which thou hatest: drink not
wine to make thee drunken: neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy
journey.

<span id="016">16</span> Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy
garments to them that are naked; and according to thine abundance give
alms: and let not thine eye be envious, when thou givest alms.

<span id="017">17</span> Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just,
but give nothing to the wicked.

<span id="018">18</span> Ask counsel of all that are wise, and despise
not any counsel that is profitable.

<span id="019">19</span> Bless the Lord thy God alway, and desire of him
that thy ways may be directed, and that all thy paths and counsels may
prosper: for every nation hath not counsel; but the Lord himself giveth
all good things, and he humbleth whom he will, as he will; now
therefore, my son, remember my commandments, neither let them be put out
of thy mind.

<span id="020">20</span> And now I signify this to they that I committed
ten talents to Gabael the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.

<span id="021">21</span> And fear not, my son, that we are made poor:
for thou hast much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin,
and do that which is pleasing in his sight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 5](tob005.md)
