[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis017)  [Sep](../sep/wis017.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis017.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis016)  [Next](wis018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 17

<span id="001">1</span> For great are thy judgments, and cannot be
expressed: therefore unnurtured souls have erred.

<span id="002">2</span> For when unrighteous men thought to oppress the
holy nation; they being shut up in their houses, the prisoners of
darkness, and fettered with the bonds of a long night, lay \[there\]
exiled from the eternal providence.

<span id="003">3</span> For while they supposed to lie hid in their
secret sins, they were scattered under a dark veil of forgetfulness,
being horribly astonished, and troubled with \[strange\] apparitions.

<span id="004">4</span> For neither might the corner that held them keep
them from fear: but noises \[as of waters\] falling down sounded about
them, and sad visions appeared unto them with heavy countenances.

<span id="005">5</span> No power of the fire might give them light:
neither could the bright flames of the stars endure to lighten that
horrible night.

<span id="006">6</span> Only there appeared unto them a fire kindled of
itself, very dreadful: for being much terrified, they thought the things
which they saw to be worse than the sight they saw not.

<span id="007">7</span> As for the illusions of art magick, they were
put down, and their vaunting in wisdom was reproved with disgrace.

<span id="008">8</span> For they, that promised to drive away terrors
and troubles from a sick soul, were sick themselves of fear, worthy to
be laughed at.

<span id="009">9</span> For though no terrible thing did fear them; yet
being scared with beasts that passed by, and hissing of serpents,

<span id="010">10</span> They died for fear, denying that they saw the
air, which could of no side be avoided.

<span id="011">11</span> For wickedness, condemned by her own witness,
is very timorous, and being pressed with conscience, always forecasteth
grievous things.

<span id="012">12</span> For fear is nothing else but a betraying of the
succours which reason offereth.

<span id="013">13</span> And the expectation from within, being less,
counteth the ignorance more than the cause which bringeth the torment.

<span id="014">14</span> But they sleeping the same sleep that night,
which was indeed intolerable, and which came upon them out of the
bottoms of inevitable hell,

<span id="015">15</span> Were partly vexed with monstrous apparitions,
and partly fainted, their heart failing them: for a sudden fear, and not
looked for, came upon them.

<span id="016">16</span> So then whosoever there fell down was straitly
kept, shut up in a prison without iron bars,

<span id="017">17</span> For whether he were husbandman, or shepherd, or
a labourer in the field, he was overtaken, and endured that necessity,
which could not be avoided: for they were all bound with one chain of
darkness.

<span id="018">18</span> Whether it were a whistling wind, or a
melodious noise of birds among the spreading branches, or a pleasing
fall of water running violently,

<span id="019">19</span> Or a terrible sound of stones cast down, or a
running that could not be seen of skipping beasts, or a roaring voice of
most savage wild beasts, or a rebounding echo from the hollow mountains;
these things made them to swoon for fear.

<span id="020">20</span> For the whole world shined with clear light,
and none were hindered in their labour:

<span id="021">21</span> Over them only was spread an heavy night, an
image of that darkness which should afterward receive them: but yet were
they unto themselves more grievous than the darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 18](wis018.md)
