[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis015)  [Sep](../sep/wis015) 
[Vul](../vul/wis015)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis014)  [Next](wis016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 15

<span id="001">1</span> But thou, O God, art gracious and true,
longsuffering, and in mercy ordering all things,

<span id="002">2</span> For if we sin, we are thine, knowing thy power:
but we will not sin, knowing that we are counted thine.

<span id="003">3</span> For to know thee is perfect righteousness: yea,
to know thy power is the root of immortality.

<span id="004">4</span> For neither did the mischievous invention of men
deceive us, nor an image spotted with divers colours, the painter's
fruitless labour;

<span id="005">5</span> The sight whereof enticeth fools to lust after
it, and so they desire the form of a dead image, that hath no breath.

<span id="006">6</span> Both they that make them, they that desire them,
and they that worship them, are lovers of evil things, and are worthy to
have such things to trust upon.

<span id="007">7</span> For the potter, tempering soft earth, fashioneth
every vessel with much labour for our service: yea, of the same clay he
maketh both the vessels that serve for clean uses, and likewise also all
such as serve to the contrary: but what is the use of either sort, the
potter himself is the judge.

<span id="008">8</span> And employing his labours lewdly, he maketh a
vain god of the same clay, even he which a little before was made of
earth himself, and within a little while after returneth to the same,
out when his life which was lent him shall be demanded.

<span id="009">9</span> Notwithstanding his care is, not that he shall
have much labour, nor that his life is short: but striveth to excel
goldsmiths and silversmiths, and endeavoureth to do like the workers in
brass, and counteth it his glory to make counterfeit things.

<span id="010">10</span> His heart is ashes, his hope is more vile than
earth, and his life of less value than clay:

<span id="011">11</span> Forasmuch as he knew not his Maker, and him
that inspired into him an active soul, and breathed in a living spirit.

<span id="012">12</span> But they counted our life a pastime, and our
time here a market for gain: for, say they, we must be getting every
way, though it be by evil means.

<span id="013">13</span> For this man, that of earthly matter maketh
brittle vessels and graven images, knoweth himself to offend above all
others.

<span id="014">14</span> And all the enemies of thy people, that hold
them in subjection, are most foolish, and are more miserable than very
babes.

<span id="015">15</span> For they counted all the idols of the heathen
to be gods: which neither have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw
breath, nor ears to hear, nor fingers of hands to handle; and as for
their feet, they are slow to go.

<span id="016">16</span> For man made them, and he that borrowed his own
spirit fashioned them: but no man can make a god like unto himself.

<span id="017">17</span> For being mortal, he worketh a dead thing with
wicked hands: for he himself is better than the things which he
worshippeth: whereas he lived once, but they never.

<span id="018">18</span> Yea, they worshipped those beasts also that are
most hateful: for being compared together, some are worse than others.

<span id="019">19</span> Neither are they beautiful, so much as to be
desired in respect of beasts: but they went without the praise of God
and his blessing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 16](wis016)
