[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis016)  [Sep](../sep/wis016.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis016.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis015)  [Next](wis017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> Therefore by the like were they punished
worthily, and by the multitude of beasts tormented.

<span id="002">2</span> Instead of which punishment, dealing graciously
with thine own people, thou preparedst for them meat of a strange taste,
even quails to stir up their appetite:

<span id="003">3</span> To the end that they, desiring food, might for
the ugly sight of the beasts sent among them lothe even that, which they
must needs desire; but these, suffering penury for a short space, might
be made partakers of a strange taste.

<span id="004">4</span> For it was requisite, that upon them exercising
tyranny should come penury, which they could not avoid: but to these it
should only be shewed how their enemies were tormented.

<span id="005">5</span> For when the horrible fierceness of beasts came
upon these, and they perished with the stings of crooked serpents, thy
wrath endured not for ever:

<span id="006">6</span> But they were troubled for a small season, that
they might be admonished, having a sign of salvation, to put them in
remembrance of the commandment of thy law.

<span id="007">7</span> For he that turned himself toward it was not
saved by the thing that he saw, but by thee, that art the Saviour of
all.

<span id="008">8</span> And in this thou madest thine enemies confess,
that it is thou who deliverest from all evil:

<span id="009">9</span> For them the bitings of grasshoppers and flies
killed, neither was there found any remedy for their life: for they were
worthy to be punished by such.

<span id="010">10</span> But thy sons not the very teeth of venomous
dragons overcame: for thy mercy was ever by them, and healed them.

<span id="011">11</span> For they were pricked, that they should
remember thy words; and were quickly saved, that not falling into deep
forgetfulness, they might be continually mindful of thy goodness.

<span id="012">12</span> For it was neither herb, nor mollifying
plaister, that restored them to health: but thy word, O Lord, which
healeth all things.

<span id="013">13</span> For thou hast power of life and death: thou
leadest to the gates of hell, and bringest up again.

<span id="014">14</span> A man indeed killeth through his malice: and
the spirit, when it is gone forth, returneth not; neither the soul
received up cometh again.

<span id="015">15</span> But it is not possible to escape thine hand.

<span id="016">16</span> For the ungodly, that denied to know thee, were
scourged by the strength of thine arm: with strange rains, hails, and
showers, were they persecuted, that they could not avoid, and through
fire were they consumed.

<span id="017">17</span> For, which is most to be wondered at, the fire
had more force in the water, that quencheth all things: for the world
fighteth for the righteous.

<span id="018">18</span> For sometime the flame was mitigated, that it
might not burn up the beasts that were sent against the ungodly; but
themselves might see and perceive that they were persecuted with the
judgment of God.

<span id="019">19</span> And at another time it burneth even in the
midst of water above the power of fire, that it might destroy the fruits
of an unjust land.

<span id="020">20</span> Instead whereof thou feddest thine own people
with angels' food, and didst send them from heaven bread prepared
without their labour, able to content every man's delight, and agreeing
to every taste.

<span id="021">21</span> For thy sustenance declared thy sweetness unto
thy children, and serving to the appetite of the eater, tempered itself
to every man's liking.

<span id="022">22</span> But snow and ice endured the fire, and melted
not, that they might know that fire burning in the hail, and sparkling
in the rain, did destroy the fruits of the enemies.

<span id="023">23</span> But this again did even forget his own
strength, that the righteous might be nourished.

<span id="024">24</span> For the creature that serveth thee, who art the
Maker increaseth his strength against the unrighteous for their
punishment, and abateth his strength for the benefit of such as put
their trust in thee.

<span id="025">25</span> Therefore even then was it altered into all
fashions, and was obedient to thy grace, that nourisheth all things,
according to the desire of them that had need:

<span id="026">26</span> That thy children, O Lord, whom thou lovest,
might know, that it is not the growing of fruits that nourisheth man:
but that it is thy word, which preserveth them that put their trust in
thee.

<span id="027">27</span> For that which was not destroyed of the fire,
being warmed with a little sunbeam, soon melted away:

<span id="028">28</span> That it might be known, that we must prevent
the sun to give thee thanks, and at the dayspring pray unto thee.

<span id="029">29</span> For the hope of the unthankful shall melt away
as the winter's hoar frost, and shall run away as unprofitable water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 17](wis017.md)
