[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis013)  [Sep](../sep/wis013.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis013.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis012)  [Next](wis014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> Surely vain are all men by nature, who are
ignorant of God, and could not out of the good things that are seen know
him that is: neither by considering the works did they acknowledge the
workmaster;

<span id="002">2</span> But deemed either fire, or wind, or the swift
air, or the circle of the stars, or the violent water, or the lights of
heaven, to be the gods which govern the world.

<span id="003">3</span> With whose beauty if they being delighted took
them to be gods; let them know how much better the Lord of them is: for
the first author of beauty hath created them.

<span id="004">4</span> But if they were astonished at their power and
virtue, let them understand by them, how much mightier he is that made
them.

<span id="005">5</span> For by the greatness and beauty of the creatures
proportionably the maker of them is seen.

<span id="006">6</span> But yet for this they are the less to be blamed:
for they peradventure err, seeking God, and desirous to find him.

<span id="007">7</span> For being conversant in his works they search
him diligently, and believe their sight: because the things are
beautiful that are seen.

<span id="008">8</span> Howbeit neither are they to be pardoned.

<span id="009">9</span> For if they were able to know so much, that they
could aim at the world; how did they not sooner find out the Lord
thereof?

<span id="010">10</span> But miserable are they, and in dead things is
their hope, who call them gods, which are the works of men's hands, gold
and silver, to shew art in, and resemblances of beasts, or a stone good
for nothing, the work of an ancient hand.

<span id="011">11</span> Now a carpenter that felleth timber, after he
hath sawn down a tree meet for the purpose, and taken off all the bark
skilfully round about, and hath wrought it handsomely, and made a vessel
thereof fit for the service of man's life;

<span id="012">12</span> And after spending the refuse of his work to
dress his meat, hath filled himself;

<span id="013">13</span> And taking the very refuse among those which
served to no use, being a crooked piece of wood, and full of knots, hath
carved it diligently, when he had nothing else to do, and formed it by
the skill of his understanding, and fashioned it to the image of a man;

<span id="014">14</span> Or made it like some vile beast, laying it over
with vermilion, and with paint colouring it red, and covering every spot
therein;

<span id="015">15</span> And when he had made a convenient room for it,
set it in a wall, and made it fast with iron:

<span id="016">16</span> For he provided for it that it might not fall,
knowing that it was unable to help itself; for it is an image, and hath
need of help:

<span id="017">17</span> Then maketh he prayer for his goods, for his
wife and children, and is not ashamed to speak to that which hath no
life.

<span id="018">18</span> For health he calleth upon that which is weak:
for life prayeth to that which is dead; for aid humbly beseecheth that
which hath least means to help: and for a good journey he asketh of that
which cannot set a foot forward:

<span id="019">19</span> And for gaining and getting, and for good
success of his hands, asketh ability to do of him, that is most unable
to do any thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 14](wis014.md)
