[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis004)  [Sep](../sep/wis004.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis004.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis003)  [Next](wis005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> Better it is to have no children, and to have
virtue: for the memorial thereof is immortal: because it is known with
God, and with men.

<span id="002">2</span> When it is present, men take example at it; and
when it is gone, they desire it: it weareth a crown, and triumpheth for
ever, having gotten the victory, striving for undefiled rewards.

<span id="003">3</span> But the multiplying brood of the ungodly shall
not thrive, nor take deep rooting from bastard slips, nor lay any fast
foundation.

<span id="004">4</span> For though they flourish in branches for a time;
yet standing not last, they shall be shaken with the wind, and through
the force of winds they shall be rooted out.

<span id="005">5</span> The imperfect branches shall be broken off,
their fruit unprofitable, not ripe to eat, yea, meet for nothing.

<span id="006">6</span> For children begotten of unlawful beds are
witnesses of wickedness against their parents in their trial.

<span id="007">7</span> But though the righteous be prevented with
death, yet shall he be in rest.

<span id="008">8</span> For honourable age is not that which standeth in
length of time, nor that is measured by number of years.

<span id="009">9</span> But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an
unspotted life is old age.

<span id="010">10</span> He pleased God, and was beloved of him: so that
living among sinners he was translated.

<span id="011">11</span> Yea speedily was he taken away, lest that
wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul.

<span id="012">12</span> For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure
things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth
undermine the simple mind.

<span id="013">13</span> He, being made perfect in a short time,
fulfilled a long time:

<span id="014">14</span> For his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted
he to take him away from among the wicked.

<span id="015">15</span> This the people saw, and understood it not,
neither laid they up this in their minds, That his grace and mercy is
with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.

<span id="016">16</span> Thus the righteous that is dead shall condemn
the ungodly which are living; and youth that is soon perfected the many
years and old age of the unrighteous.

<span id="017">17</span> For they shall see the end of the wise, and
shall not understand what God in his counsel hath decreed of him, and to
what end the Lord hath set him in safety.

<span id="018">18</span> They shall see him, and despise him; but God
shall laugh them to scorn: and they shall hereafter be a vile carcase,
and a reproach among the dead for evermore.

<span id="019">19</span> For he shall rend them, and cast them down
headlong, that they shall be speechless; and he shall shake them from
the foundation; and they shall be utterly laid waste, and be in sorrow;
and their memorial shall perish.

<span id="020">20</span> And when they cast up the accounts of their
sins, they shall come with fear: and their own iniquities shall convince
them to their face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 5](wis005.md)
