[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis011)  [Sep](../sep/wis011) 
[Vul](../vul/wis011)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis010)  [Next](wis012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 11

<span id="001">1</span> She prospered their works in the hand of the
holy prophet.

<span id="002">2</span> They went through the wilderness that was not
inhabited, and pitched tents in places where there lay no way.

<span id="003">3</span> They stood against their enemies, and were
avenged of their adversaries.

<span id="004">4</span> When they were thirsty, they called upon thee,
and water was given them out of the flinty rock, and their thirst was
quenched out of the hard stone.

<span id="005">5</span> For by what things their enemies were punished,
by the same they in their need were benefited.

<span id="006">6</span> For instead of of a perpetual running river
troubled with foul blood,

<span id="007">7</span> For a manifest reproof of that commandment,
whereby the infants were slain, thou gavest unto them abundance of water
by a means which they hoped not for:

<span id="008">8</span> Declaring by that thirst then how thou hadst
punished their adversaries.

<span id="009">9</span> For when they were tried albeit but in mercy
chastised, they knew how the ungodly were judged in wrath and tormented,
thirsting in another manner than the just.

<span id="010">10</span> For these thou didst admonish and try, as a
father: but the other, as a severe king, thou didst condemn and punish.

<span id="011">11</span> Whether they were absent or present, they were
vexed alike.

<span id="012">12</span> For a double grief came upon them, and a
groaning for the remembrance of things past.

<span id="013">13</span> For when they heard by their own punishments
the other to be benefited, they had some feeling of the Lord.

<span id="014">14</span> For whom they respected with scorn, when he was
long before thrown out at the casting forth of the infants, him in the
end, when they saw what came to pass, they admired.

<span id="015">15</span> But for the foolish devices of their
wickedness, wherewith being deceived they worshipped serpents void of
reason, and vile beasts, thou didst send a multitude of unreasonable
beasts upon them for vengeance;

<span id="016">16</span> That they might know, that wherewithal a man
sinneth, by the same also shall he be punished.

<span id="017">17</span> For thy Almighty hand, that made the world of
matter without form, wanted not means to send among them a multitude of
bears or fierce lions,

<span id="018">18</span> Or unknown wild beasts, full of rage, newly
created, breathing out either a fiery vapour, or filthy scents of
scattered smoke, or shooting horrible sparkles out of their eyes:

<span id="019">19</span> Whereof not only the harm might dispatch them
at once, but also the terrible sight utterly destroy them.

<span id="020">20</span> Yea, and without these might they have fallen
down with one blast, being persecuted of vengeance, and scattered abroad
through the breath of thy power: but thou hast ordered all things in
measure and number and weight.

<span id="021">21</span> For thou canst shew thy great strength at all
times when thou wilt; and who may withstand the power of thine arm?

<span id="022">22</span> For the whole world before thee is as a little
grain of the balance, yea, as a drop of the morning dew that falleth
down upon the earth.

<span id="023">23</span> But thou hast mercy upon all; for thou canst do
all things, and winkest at the sins of men, because they should amend.

<span id="024">24</span> For thou lovest all the things that are, and
abhorrest nothing which thou hast made: for never wouldest thou have
made any thing, if thou hadst hated it.

<span id="025">25</span> And how could any thing have endured, if it had
not been thy will? or been preserved, if not called by thee?

<span id="026">26</span> But thou sparest all: for they are thine, O
Lord, thou lover of souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 12](wis012)
