[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis007)  [Sep](../sep/wis007.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis007.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis006)  [Next](wis008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> I myself also am a mortal man, like to all, and
the offspring of him that was first made of the earth,

<span id="002">2</span> And in my mother's womb was fashioned to be
flesh in the time of ten months, being compacted in blood, of the seed
of man, and the pleasure that came with sleep.

<span id="003">3</span> And when I was born, I drew in the common air,
and fell upon the earth, which is of like nature, and the first voice
which I uttered was crying, as all others do.

<span id="004">4</span> I was nursed in swaddling clothes, and that with
cares.

<span id="005">5</span> For there is no king that had any other
beginning of birth.

<span id="006">6</span> For all men have one entrance into life, and the
like going out.

<span id="007">7</span> Wherefore I prayed, and understanding was given
me: I called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me.

<span id="008">8</span> I preferred her before sceptres and thrones, and
esteemed riches nothing in comparison of her.

<span id="009">9</span> Neither compared I unto her any precious stone,
because all gold in respect of her is as a little sand, and silver shall
be counted as clay before her.

<span id="010">10</span> I loved her above health and beauty, and chose
to have her instead of light: for the light that cometh from her never
goeth out.

<span id="011">11</span> All good things together came to me with her,
and innumerable riches in her hands.

<span id="012">12</span> And I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom
goeth before them: and I knew not that she was the mother of them.

<span id="013">13</span> I learned diligently, and do communicate her
liberally: I do not hide her riches.

<span id="014">14</span> For she is a treasure unto men that never
faileth: which they that use become the friends of God, being commended
for the gifts that come from learning.

<span id="015">15</span> God hath granted me to speak as I would, and to
conceive as is meet for the things that are given me: because it is he
that leadeth unto wisdom, and directeth the wise.

<span id="016">16</span> For in his hand are both we and our words; all
wisdom also, and knowledge of workmanship.

<span id="017">17</span> For he hath given me certain knowledge of the
things that are, namely, to know how the world was made, and the
operation of the elements:

<span id="018">18</span> The beginning, ending, and midst of the times:
the alterations of the turning of the sun, and the change of seasons:

<span id="019">19</span> The circuits of years, and the positions of
stars:

<span id="020">20</span> The natures of living creatures, and the furies
of wild beasts: the violence of winds, and the reasonings of men: the
diversities of plants and the virtues of roots:

<span id="021">21</span> And all such things as are either secret or
manifest, them I know.

<span id="022">22</span> For wisdom, which is the worker of all things,
taught me: for in her is an understanding spirit holy, one only,
manifold, subtil, lively, clear, undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt,
loving the thing that is good quick, which cannot be letted, ready to do
good,

<span id="023">23</span> Kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from care,
having all power, overseeing all things, and going through all
understanding, pure, and most subtil, spirits.

<span id="024">24</span> For wisdom is more moving than any motion: she
passeth and goeth through all things by reason of her pureness.

<span id="025">25</span> For she is the breath of the power of God, and
a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty: therefore can
no defiled thing fall into her.

<span id="026">26</span> For she is the brightness of the everlasting
light, the unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of his
goodness.

<span id="027">27</span> And being but one, she can do all things: and
remaining in herself, she maketh all things new: and in all ages
entering into holy souls, she maketh them friends of God, and prophets.

<span id="028">28</span> For God loveth none but him that dwelleth with
wisdom.

<span id="029">29</span> For she is more beautiful than the sun, and
above all the order of stars: being compared with the light, she is
found before it.

<span id="030">30</span> For after this cometh night: but vice shall not
prevail against wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 8](wis008.md)
