[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis006)  [Sep](../sep/wis006.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis006.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis005)  [Next](wis007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 6

<span id="001">1</span> Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand;
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth.

<span id="002">2</span> Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in
the multitude of nations.

<span id="003">3</span> For power is given you of the Lord, and
sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out
your counsels.

<span id="004">4</span> Because, being ministers of his kingdom, ye have
not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the counsel of
God;

<span id="005">5</span> Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you:
for a sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high places.

<span id="006">6</span> For mercy will soon pardon the meanest: but
mighty men shall be mightily tormented.

<span id="007">7</span> For he which is Lord over all shall fear no
man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man's greatness: for
he hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike.

<span id="008">8</span> But a sore trial shall come upon the mighty.

<span id="009">9</span> Unto you therefore, O kings, do I speak, that ye
may learn wisdom, and not fall away.

<span id="010">10</span> For they that keep holiness holily shall be
judged holy: and they that have learned such things shall find what to
answer.

<span id="011">11</span> Wherefore set your affection upon my words;
desire them, and ye shall be instructed.

<span id="012">12</span> Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away: yea,
she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her.

<span id="013">13</span> She preventeth them that desire her, in making
herself first known unto them.

<span id="014">14</span> Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great
travail: for he shall find her sitting at his doors.

<span id="015">15</span> To think therefore upon her is perfection of
wisdom: and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care.

<span id="016">16</span> For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy
of her, sheweth herself favourably unto them in the ways, and meeteth
them in every thought.

<span id="017">17</span> For the very true beginning of her is the
desire of discipline; and the care of discipline is love;

<span id="018">18</span> And love is the keeping of her laws; and the
giving heed unto her laws is the assurance of incorruption;

<span id="019">19</span> And incorruption maketh us near unto God:

<span id="020">20</span> Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to a
kingdom.

<span id="021">21</span> If your delight be then in thrones and
sceptres, O ye kings of the people, honour wisdom, that ye may reign for
evermore.

<span id="022">22</span> As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came
up, I will tell you, and will not hide mysteries from you: but will seek
her out from the beginning of her nativity, and bring the knowledge of
her into light, and will not pass over the truth.

<span id="023">23</span> Neither will I go with consuming envy; for such
a man shall have no fellowship with wisdom.

<span id="024">24</span> But the multitude of the wise is the welfare of
the world: and a wise king is the upholding of the people.

<span id="025">25</span> Receive therefore instruction through my words,
and it shall do you good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 7](wis007.md)
