[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis018)  [Sep](../sep/wis018.md) 
[Vul](../vul/wis018.md)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis.md)  
  [Previous](wis017)  [Next](wis019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 18

<span id="001">1</span> Nevertheless thy saints had a very great light,
whose voice they hearing, and not seeing their shape, because they also
had not suffered the same things, they counted them happy.

<span id="002">2</span> But for that they did not hurt them now, of whom
they had been wronged before, they thanked them, and besought them
pardon for that they had been enemies.

<span id="003">3</span> Instead whereof thou gavest them a burning
pillar of fire, both to be a guide of the unknown journey, and an
harmless sun to entertain them honourably.

<span id="004">4</span> For they were worthy to be deprived of light and
imprisoned in darkness, who had kept thy sons shut up, by whom the
uncorrupt light of the law was to be given unto the world.

<span id="005">5</span> And when they had determined to slay the babes
of the saints, one child being cast forth, and saved, to reprove them,
thou tookest away the multitude of their children, and destroyedst them
altogether in a mighty water.

<span id="006">6</span> Of that night were our fathers certified afore,
that assuredly knowing unto what oaths they had given credence, they
might afterwards be of good cheer.

<span id="007">7</span> So of thy people was accepted both the salvation
of the righteous, and destruction of the enemies.

<span id="008">8</span> For wherewith thou didst punish our adversaries,
by the same thou didst glorify us, whom thou hadst called.

<span id="009">9</span> For the righteous children of good men did
sacrifice secretly, and with one consent made a holy law, that the
saints should be like partakers of the same good and evil, the fathers
now singing out the songs of praise.

<span id="010">10</span> But on the other side there sounded an ill
according cry of the enemies, and a lamentable noise was carried abroad
for children that were bewailed.

<span id="011">11</span> The master and the servant were punished after
one manner; and like as the king, so suffered the common person.

<span id="012">12</span> So they all together had innumerable dead with
one kind of death; neither were the living sufficient to bury them: for
in one moment the noblest offspring of them was destroyed.

<span id="013">13</span> For whereas they would not believe any thing by
reason of the enchantments; upon the destruction of the firstborn, they
acknowledged this people to be the sons of God.

<span id="014">14</span> For while all things were in quiet silence, and
that night was in the midst of her swift course,

<span id="015">15</span> Thine Almighty word leaped down from heaven out
of thy royal throne, as a fierce man of war into the midst of a land of
destruction,

<span id="016">16</span> And brought thine unfeigned commandment as a
sharp sword, and standing up filled all things with death; and it
touched the heaven, but it stood upon the earth.

<span id="017">17</span> Then suddenly visions of horrible dreams
troubled them sore, and terrors came upon them unlooked for.

<span id="018">18</span> And one thrown here, and another there, half
dead, shewed the cause of his death.

<span id="019">19</span> For the dreams that troubled them did foreshew
this, lest they should perish, and not know why they were afflicted.

<span id="020">20</span> Yea, the tasting of death touched the righteous
also, and there was a destruction of the multitude in the wilderness:
but the wrath endured not long.

<span id="021">21</span> For then the blameless man made haste, and
stood forth to defend them; and bringing the shield of his proper
ministry, even prayer, and the propitiation of incense, set himself
against the wrath, and so brought the calamity to an end, declaring that
he was thy servant.

<span id="022">22</span> So he overcame the destroyer, not with strength
of body, nor force of arms, but with a word subdued him that punished,
alleging the oaths and covenants made with the fathers.

<span id="023">23</span> For when the dead were now fallen down by heaps
one upon another, standing between, he stayed the wrath, and parted the
way to the living.

<span id="024">24</span> For in the long garment was the whole world,
and in the four rows of the stones was the glory of the fathers graven,
and thy Majesty upon the daidem of his head.

<span id="025">25</span> Unto these the destroyer gave place, and was
afraid of them: for it was enough that they only tasted of the wrath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 19](wis019.md)
