[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020386)  [Next](2020388) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Causes of the
Deposition of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem. Mutual Dissensions among the
Bishops. Melitius is ordained by the Arians, and supplants Eustathius in
the Bishopric of Sebaste*.

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxv-p2.1"></span>Besides</span> the prelates above mentioned,
Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, was deposed <span
id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346) because he had admitted Eustathius
and Elpidius into communion, after they had opposed the decrees enacted
by those convened at Melitina, among whom was Cyril himself; and because
he had also received Basil and George, bishop of Laodicea, into
communion after their deposition in Palestine. When Cyril was first
installed in the bishopric of Jerusalem, he had a dispute with Acacius,
bishop of Cæsarea, concerning his rights as a Metropolitan, which he
claimed on the ground of his bishopric being an apostolic see. This
dispute excited feelings of enmity between the two bishops, and they
mutually accused each other of unsoundness of doctrine concerning the
Godhead. In fact, they had both been suspected previously; the one, that
is, Acacius, of favoring the heresy of Arius; and the other, of siding
with those who maintain that the Son is in substance like unto the
Father. Acacius being thus inimically disposed towards Cyril, and
finding himself supported by the bishops of the province, who were of
the same sentiments as himself, contrived to depose Cyril under the
following pretext. Jerusalem and the neighboring country was at one time
visited with a famine, and the poor appealed in great multitudes to
Cyril, as their bishop, for necessary food. As he had no money to
purchase the requisite provisions, he sold for this purpose the veil and
sacred ornaments of the church. It is said that a man, having recognized
an offering which he had presented at the altar as forming part of the
costume of an actress, made it his business to inquire whence it was
procured; and ascertained that a merchant had sold it to the actress,
and that the bishop had sold it to the merchant. It was under this
pretext that Acacius deposed Cyril.

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p4"></span>And on inquiry I find these to be the
facts. It is said that the Acacians then expelled from Constantinople
all the bishops above mentioned who had been deposed. Ten bishops of
their own party who had refused to subscribe to these edicts of
deposition, were separated from the others, and were interdicted from
performing the functions of the ministry or ruling their churches until
they consented to give their signatures. It was enacted that unless they
complied within six months, <span id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347)
and yielded their assent to all the decrees of the council, they should
be deposed, and that the bishops of every province should be summoned to
elect other bishops in their stead. After these determinations and
deeds, letters were then sent to all the bishops and clergy, to observe
and fulfill its decrees.

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p6"></span>As a consequence, not long after, some
of the Eudoxian party were substituted here and there. Eudoxius himself
took possession of the bishopric of Macedonius; Athanasius was placed
over the church of Basil; and Eunomius, who was <span id="page_322">p.
322</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxv-Page_322"></span>subsequently the leader
of a heresy bearing his name, took the see of Eleusius; and Meletius was
appointed to the church of Sebaste, instead of Eustathius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[321:1347](2020387.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="iii.ix.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p3"></span>See references to previous chapter.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[321:1348](2020387.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="iii.ix.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxv-p5"></span>See the abrogation of the time-limit
through a Synod convened by Eudoxius. Philost. vii. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople. What Eudoxius said
in his Teaching. Eudoxius and Acacius strenuously sought the Abolition
of the Formularies of Faith set forth at Nicæa and at Ariminum; Troubles
which thence arose in the Churches.](2020388)
