[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020280)  [Next](2020282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Refutation of the Assertion
that Constantine became a Christian in consequence of the Murder of his
son Crispus*.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.v-p2.1"></span>I am</span> aware that it is reported by the
pagans that Constantine, after slaying some of his nearest relations,
and particularly after assenting to the murder of his own son Crispus,
repented of his evil deeds, and inquired of Sopater, <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076) the philosopher, who was then
master of the school of Plotinus, concerning the means of purification
from guilt. The philosopher—so the story goes—replied that such moral
defilement could admit of no purification. The emperor was grieved at
this repulse, but happening to meet with some bishops who told him that
he would be cleansed from sin, on repentance and on submitting to
baptism, he was delighted with their representations, and admired their
doctrines, and became a Christian, and led his subjects to the same
faith. It appears to me that this story was the invention of persons who
desired to vilify the Christian religion. Crispus, <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) on whose account, it is said,
Constantine re<span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="iii.vi.v-Page_243"></span>quired purification, did not die till the
twentieth year of his father’s reign; he held the second place in the
empire and bore the name of Cæsar and many laws, framed with his
sanction in favor of Christianity, are still extant. That this was the
case can be proved by referring to the dates affixed to these laws, and
to the lists of the legislators. It does not appear likely that Sopater
had any intercourse with Constantine whose government was then centered
in the regions near the ocean and the Rhine; for his dispute with
Maxentius, the governor of Italy, had created so much dissension in the
Roman dominions, that it was then no easy matter to dwell in Gaul, in
Britain, or in the neighboring countries, in which it is universally
admitted Constantine embraced the religion of the Christians, previous
to his war with Maxentius, and prior to his return to Rome and Italy:
and this is evidenced by the dates of the laws which he enacted in favor
of religion. But even granting that Sopater chanced to meet the emperor,
or that he had epistolary correspondence with him, it cannot be imagined
the philosopher was ignorant that Hercules, the son of Alcmena, obtained
purification at Athens by the celebration of the mysteries of Ceres
after the murder of his children, and of Iphitus, his guest and friend.
That the Greeks held that purification from guilt of this nature could
be obtained, is obvious from the instance I have just alleged, and he is
a false calumniator who represents that Sopater taught the contrary.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p5"></span>I cannot admit the possibility of the
philosopher’s having been ignorant of these facts; for he was at that
period esteemed the most learned man in Greece.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[242:1077](2020281.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="iii.vi.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p3"></span>Or Sosipater of Apamea. Cf. Eunap. *V. S.*
(Ædesius).

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[242:1078](2020281.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="iii.vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p4"></span>The earlier church historians, except
Philost. *H. E.* ii. 4, are silent as to the cause of his death, while
the pagan authorities speak freely, but variously; later Christian
writers take their statements from the pagans. Cf. Eutrop. *Brev. hist.
Rom.* x. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Father of Constantine allows the Name of Christ to be
Extended; Constantine the Great prepared it to Penetrate
Everywhere.](2020282)
