[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020345)  [Next](2020347) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Ejection of Paul and
Athanasius; Macedonius is invested with the Government of the Church of
Constantinople*.

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>After</span> having written in this strain
to Julius, the bishops of the East brought accusations against those
whom they had deposed before the emperor Constantius. <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) Accordingly, the emperor, who was
then at Antioch, wrote to Philip, the prefect of Constantinople,
commanding him to surrender the Church to Macedonius, and to expel Paul
from the city. The prefect feared the commotion among the people, and
before the order of the emperor could be divulged, he repaired to the
public bath which is called Zeuxippus, a conspicuous and large
structure, and summoned Paul, as if he wished to converse with him on
some affairs of general interest; as soon as he had arrived, he showed
him the edict of the emperor. Paul was, according to orders, secretly
conducted through the palace contiguous to the bath, to the seaside, and
placed on board a vessel and was sent to Thessalonica, whence, it is
said, his ancestors originally came. He was strictly prohibited from
approaching the Eastern regions, but was not forbidden to visit Illyria
and the remoter provinces.

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p4"></span>On quitting the court room, Philip,
accompanied by Macedonius, proceeded to the church. The people, who had
in the meantime been assembling together in untold numbers, quickly
filled the church, and the two parties into which they were divided,
namely, the supporters of the Arian heresy and the followers of Paul
respectively, strove to take possession of the building. When the
prefect and Macedonius arrived at the gates of the church, the soldiers
endeavored to force back the people, in order to make way for these
dignitaries, but as they were so crowded together, it was impossible for
them to recede, since they were closely packed to the farthest point, or
to make way; the soldiers, under the impression that the crowd was
unwilling to retire, slew many with their swords, and a great number
were killed by being trampled upon. The edict of the emperor was thus
accomplished, and Macedonius received the Churches, while Paul was
unexpectedly ejected from the Church in Constantinople.

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p5"></span>Athanasius in the meantime had fled,
and concealed himself, fearing the menace of the emperor Constantius,
for he had threatened to punish him with death; for the heterodox had
made the emperor believe that he was a seditious person, and that he
had, on his return to the bishopric, occasioned the death of several
persons. But the anger of the emperor had been chiefly excited by the
representation that Athanasius had sold the provisions which the emperor
Constantine had bestowed on the poor of Alexandria, and had appropriated
the price.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[288:1241](2020346.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 16, 17; Athan. *Hist. Arian.*
7; and *Apol. de fuga sua,* 3, 6–8. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bishop of Rome writes to the Bishops of the East in Favor of
Athanasius, and they send an Embassy to Rome who, with the Bishop of
Rome, are to investigate the Charges against the Eastern Bishops; this
Deputation is dismissed by Constans, the Cæsar.](2020347)
