[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020465)  [Next](2020467) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Decrees of the Second
General Council. Maximus, the Cynical Philosopher*.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.ix-p2.1"></span>After</span> these transactions, Nectarius
and the other priests assembled together, <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) and decreed that the faith
established by the council of Nicæa should remain dominant, and that all
heresies should be condemned; that the churches everywhere should be
governed according to the ancient canons; that each bishop should remain
in his own church, and not go elsewhere under any light pretext; or,
without invitation, perform ordinations in which he had no right to
interfere, as had frequently been the case in the Catholic Church during
the times of persecution. They likewise decreed that the affairs of each
church should be subjected to the investigation and control of a council
of the province; and that the bishop of Constantinople should rank next
in point of precedence to the bishop of Rome, as occupying the see of
New Rome; for Constantinople was not only already favored with this
appellation, but was also in the enjoyment of many privileges,—such as a
senate of its own, and the division of the citizens into ranks and
orders; it was also governed by its own magistrates, and possessed
contracts, laws, and immunities in equal degree with those of Rome in
Italy.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p4"></span>The council also decreed that Maximus
had not been nor was now a bishop; and that those individuals whom he
had ordained were not of the clergy; and that all that had been done by
him, or in his name, was null and void. Maximus was a native of
Alexandria, and, by profession, a cynical philosopher. He was zealously
attached to the Nicene doctrines, and had been secretly ordained bishop
of Constantinople by bishops who had assembled in that city from Egypt.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p5"></span>Such were the decrees of the council.
They were confirmed by the emperor, who enacted <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) that the faith established at Nicæa
should be dominant, and that the churches everywhere should be placed in
the hands of those who acknowledged one and the same Godhead in the
hypostasis of three Persons of equal honor and of equal power; namely,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. To designate them still more
precisely, the emperor declared that he referred to those who held
communion with Nectarius, at Constantinople, and with Timothy, bishop of
Alexandria, in Egypt; in the churches of the East with Diodorus, bishop
of Tarsus, <span id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span
id="iii.xii.ix-Page_382"></span>and in Syria with Pelagius, bishop of
Laodicea, and in Asia with Amphilochius, president of the churches in
Iconium; to those in the cities by the Pontus, from Bithynia to Armenia,
who held communion with Helladius, bishop of the church of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia; with Gregory, bishop of Nyssa; and with Otreinus, bishop of
Melitine; and to the cities of Thrace and Scythia, who held communion
with Terentius, bishop of Tomi, and with Martyrius, bishop of
Marcianopolis. The emperor was personally acquainted with all these
bishops, and had ascertained that they governed their respective
churches wisely and piously. After these transactions, the council was
dissolved, and each of the bishops returned homewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[381:1532](2020466.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iii.xii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p3"></span>Soc. v. 8; cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 8,
9. The latter chapter gives the text of the letter of this Synod to the
Synod of Rome. Soz. is here independent.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[381:1533](2020466.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iii.xii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p6"></span>*Cod. Theod.* xvi. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Martyrius of Cilicia. Translation of the Remains of
St. Paul the Confessor, and of Meletius, Bishop of Antioch.](2020467)
