[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020210)  [Next](2020212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Of Eudoxia’s Silver
Statue. On account of it John is exiled a Second Time.*

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xix-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time a silver statue of the
Empress Eudoxia covered with a long robe was erected <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) upon a column of porphyry supported by
a lofty base. And this stood neither near nor far from the church named
*Sophia,* but one-half the breadth of the street separated them. At this
statue public games were accustomed to be performed; these John regarded
as an insult offered to the church, and having regained his ordinary
freedom and keenness of tongue, he employed his tongue against those who
tolerated them. Now while it would have been proper to induce the
authorities by a supplicatory petition to discontinue the games, he did
not do this, but employing abusive language he ridiculed those who had
enjoined such practices. The empress once more applied his expressions
to herself as indicating marked contempt toward her own person: she
therefore endeavored to procure the convocation of another council of
bishops against him. When John became aware of this, he delivered in the
church that celebrated oration commencing with these words: <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) ‘Again Herodias raves; again she is
troubled; she dances again; and again desires to receive John’s head in
a charger.’ This, of course, exasperated the empress still more. Not
long after the following bishops arrived: Leontius bishop of Ancyra in
Asia, Ammonius of Laodicea in Pisidia, Briso of Philippi in Thrace,
Acacius of Berœa in Syria, and some others. John presented himself
fearlessly before them, and demanded an investigation of the charges
which were made against him. But the anniversary of the birth of our
Saviour having recurred, the emperor would not attend church as usual,
but sent Chrysostom a message to the effect that he should not partake
of the communion with him until he had cleared himself of the crimes
with which he stood impeached. Now as John maintained a bold and ardent
bearing, and his accusers seemed to grow faint-hearted, the bishops
present, setting aside all other matters, said they would confine
themselves to this sole consideration, that he had on his own
responsibility, after his deposition, again seated himself in the
episcopal chair, without being authorized by an ecclesiastical council.
As he alleged that sixty-five bishops who had held communion with him
had reinstated him, the partisans of Leontius objected, saying: ‘A
larger number voted against you, John, in the Synod.’ But although John
then contended that this was a canon of the Arians, and not of the
catholic church, and therefore it was inoperative against him—for it had
been framed in the council convened against Athanasius at Antioch, for
the subversion of the doctrine of consubstantiality <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) —<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>
<span id="ii.ix.xix-Page_151"></span>the bishops would not listen to his
defence, but immediately condemned him, without considering that by
using this canon they were sanctioning the deposition of Athanasius
himself. This sentence was pronounced a little before Easter; the
emperor therefore sent to tell John that he could not go to the church,
because two Synods had condemned him. Accordingly Chrysostom was
silenced, and went no more to the church; but those who were of his
party celebrated Easter in the public baths which are called
Constantianæ, and thenceforth left the church. Among them were many
bishops and presbyters, with others of the clerical order, who from that
time held their assemblies apart in various places, and were from him
denominated ‘Johannites.’ For the space of two months, John refrained
from appearing in public; after which a decree of the emperor sent him
into exile. Thus he was led into exile by force, and on the very day of
his departure, some of the Johannites set fire to the church, which by
means of a strong easterly wind, communicated with the senate-house.
This conflagration happened on the 20th of June, under the sixth
consulate of Honorius, which he bore in conjunction with
Aristænetus. <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) The severities
which Optatus, the prefect of Constantinople, a pagan in religion, and a
hater of the Christians, inflicted on John’s friends, and how he put
many of them to death on account of this act of incendiarism, I ought, I
believe, to pass by in silence. <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_880"></span>[150:881](2020211.htm#fr_880) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p3"></span>From Prosper Aquitamus and Marcellinus’
*Chronicon*, we learn that this was done in 403 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.xix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, or rather the consulship of
Theodosius the younger and Rumoridius.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[150:882](2020211.htm#fr_881) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p4"></span>This discourse entitled ‘*In
decollationem Præcursoris et baptistæ Joannis*’ is to be found in
Migné’s *Patrologia Græcia*, Vol. LIV. p. 485, and in Savile’s edition
of Chrysostom’s works, Vol. VII. 545. Savile, however, places it among
the spurious pieces, and considers it unworthy of the genius of
Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[150:883](2020211.htm#fr_882) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p5"></span>Cf. II. 8.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[151:884](2020211.htm#fr_883) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p6"></span>404 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.xix-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_884"></span>[151:885](2020211.htm#fr_884) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p7"></span>Some of these details presumably are
given by Sozomen in VIII. 23 and 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ordination of Arsacius as John's Successor. Indisposition of
Cyrinus Bishop of Chalcedon.](2020212)
