[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020491)  [Next](2020493) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*John swayed the People by
his Teachings. Concerning the Woman, a Follower of Macedonius, on
account of whom the Bread was turned into a Stone*.

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.v-p2.1"></span>John</span> governed the church of
Constantinople with exemplary prudence, and induced many of the pagans
and of the heretics to unite themselves with him. <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) Crowds of people daily resorted to
him; some for the purpose of being edified by listening to his
discourses, and others with the intention of tempting him. He, however,
pleased and attracted all classes, and led them to embrace the same
religious sentiments as himself. As the people pressed around him, and
could not get enough of his words, so that when they were pushed hither
and yon, and were pressing one another, they incurred danger; and each
one was forcing his way to go farther, so that by standing near, he
might hear more accurately what John was saying, he placed himself in
the midst of them upon the platform of the readers, and, having taken a
seat, taught the multitude. It seems to me that this is a suitable place
in my history for the insertion of the account of a miracle which was
performed during the life of John. A certain man of the Macedonian
heresy, lived with a wife of the same belief; he chanced to hear John
discoursing concerning the opinion one ought to hold about the Divine
nature; he was convinced by the argument he heard advanced, and strove
to persuade his wife to embrace the same sentiments. Her previous habits
of mind, and the conversation of other women of her acquaintance,
deterred her from complying with his wishes; and, when he found that all
his efforts to convince her were futile, he told her that, unless she
would be of one mind with him on Divine subjects, she should not
continue to live with him. The woman, therefore, promised to do as she
was required; but, at the same time, <span id="page_403">p. 403</span>
<span id="iii.xiii.v-Page_403"></span>she made known the matter to one
of her servant maids, in whose fidelity she confided, and used her as an
instrument in deceiving her husband. At the season of the celebration of
the mysteries (the initiated will understand what I mean), this woman
kept what was given to her and held down her head as if engaged in
prayer. Her servant, who was standing behind her, placed in her hand a
bit of bread which she had brought with her; but, as soon as she had
placed it between her teeth, it was converted into stone. Since such a
divine affair had happened to her, she was very fearful lest any further
calamity should befall her, and ran to the bishop, and confessed on
herself. She showed him the stone, which bore the marks of her teeth; it
was composed of some unknown substance, and was marked by a very strange
color. She implored forgiveness with tears, and continued ever after to
hold the same religious tenets as her husband. If any person should
consider this narrative incredible, he can inspect the stone in
question; for it is still preserved in the treasury of the church of
Constantinople.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[402:1591](2020492.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="iii.xiii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p3"></span>Independent chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proceedings of John in Asia and Phrygia. Heraclides, Bishop of
Ephesus, and Gerontius, Bishop of Nicomedia.](2020493)
