[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020352)  [Next](2020354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Concerning St.
Ephraim*.

<span id="iii.viii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Ephraim</span> the Syrian <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) was entitled to the highest honors,
and was the greatest ornament of the Catholic Church. He was a native of
Nisibis, or his family was of the neighboring territory. He devoted his
life to monastic philosophy; and although he received no instruction, he
became, contrary to all expectation, so proficient in the learning and
language of the Syrians, that he comprehended with ease the most
abstruse theorems of philosophy. His style of writing was so replete
with splendid oratory and with richness and temperateness of thought
that he surpassed the most approved writers of Greece. If the works of
these writers were to be translated into Syriac, or any other language,
and divested, as it were, of the beauties of the Greek language, they
would retain little of their original elegance and value. The
productions of Ephraim have not this disadvantage: they were translated
into Greek during his life, and translations are even now being made,
and yet they preserve much of their original force, so that his works
are not less admired when read in Greek than when read in Syriac. Basil,
who was subsequently bishop of the metropolis of Cappadocia, was a great
admirer of Ephraim, and was astonished at his erudition. The opinion of
Basil, who is universally confessed to have been the most eloquent man
of his age, is a stronger testimony, I think, to the merit of Ephraim,
than anything that could be indited to his praise. It is said that he
wrote three hundred thousand verses, and that he had many disciples who
were zealously attached to his doctrines. The most celebrated of his
disciples were Abbas, Zenobius, Abraham, Maras, and Simeon, in whom the
Syrians and whoever among them pursued accurate learning make a great
boast. Paulanas and Aranad are praised for their finished speech,
although reported to have deviated from sound doctrine.

<span id="iii.viii.xvi-p4"></span>I am not ignorant that there were some
very learned men who formerly flourished in Osroëne, as, for instance,
Bardasanes, who devised a heresy designated by his name, <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) and Harmonius, his <span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span id="iii.viii.xvi-Page_296"></span>son.
It is related that this latter was deeply versed in Grecian erudition,
and was the first to subdue his native tongue to meters and musical
laws; these verses he delivered to the choirs, and even now the Syrians
frequently sing, not the precise copies by Harmonius, but the same
melodies. For as Harmonius was not altogether free from the errors of
his father, and entertained various opinions concerning the soul, the
generation and destruction of the body, and the regeneration which are
taught by the Greek philosophers, he introduced some of these sentiments
into the lyrical songs which he composed. When Ephraim perceived that
the Syrians were charmed with the elegance of the diction and the rhythm
of the melody, he became apprehensive, lest they should imbibe the same
opinions; and therefore, although he was ignorant of Grecian learning,
he applied himself to the understanding of the metres of Harmonius, and
composed similar poems in accordance with the doctrines of the Church,
and wrought also in sacred hymns and in the praises of passionless men.
From that period the Syrians sang the odes of Ephraim according to the
law of the ode established by Harmonius. The execution of this work is
alone sufficient to attest the natural endowments of Ephraim. He was as
celebrated for the good actions he performed as for the rigid course of
discipline he pursued. He was particularly fond of tranquillity. He was
so serious and so careful to avoid giving occasion to calumny, that he
refrained from the very sight of women. It is related that a female of
careless life, who was either desirous of tempting him, or who had been
bribed for the purpose, contrived on one occasion to meet him face to
face, and fixed her eyes intently upon him; he rebuked her, and
commanded her to look down upon the ground, “Wherefore should I obey
your injunction,” replied the woman; “for I was born not of the earth,
but of you? It would be more just if you were to look down upon the
earth whence you sprang, while I look upon you, as I was born of you.”
Ephraim, astonished at the little woman, recorded the whole transaction
in a book, which most Syrians regard as one of the best of his
productions. It is also said of him, that, although he was naturally
prone to passion, he never exhibited angry feeling toward any one from
the period of his embracing a monastic life. It once happened that after
he had, according to custom, been fasting several days, his attendant,
in presenting some food to him, let fall the dish on which it was
placed. Ephraim, perceiving that he was overwhelmed with shame and
terror, said to him, “Take courage; we will go to the food as the food
does not come to us” and he immediately seated himself beside the
fragments of the dish, and ate his supper. What I am about to relate
will suffice to show that he was totally exempt from the love of
vainglory. He was appointed bishop of some town, and attempts were made
to convey him away for the purpose of ordaining him. As soon as he
became aware of what was intended, he ran to the market-place, and
showed himself as a madman by stepping in a disorderly way, dragging his
clothes along, and eating in public. Those who had come to carry him
away to be their bishop, on seeing him in this state, believed that he
was out of his mind, and departed; and he, meeting with an opportunity
for effecting his escape, remained in concealment until another had been
ordained in his place. What I have now said concerning Ephraim must
suffice, although his own countrymen relate many other anecdotes of him.
Yet his conduct on one occasion, shortly before his death, appears to me
so worthy of remembrance that I shall record it here. The city of Edessa
being severely visited by famine, he quitted the solitary ceil in which
he pursued philosophy, and rebuked the rich for permitting the poor to
die around them, instead of imparting to them of their superfluities;
and he represented to them by his philosophy, that the wealth which they
were treasuring up so carefully would turn to their own condemnation,
and to the ruin of the soul, which is of more value than all riches, and
the body itself and all other values, and he proved that they were
putting no estimate upon their souls, because of their actions. The rich
men, revering the man and his words, replied, “We are not intent upon
hoarding our wealth, but we know of no one to whom we can confide the
distribution of our goods, for all are prone to seek after lucre, and to
betray the trust placed in them.” “What think you of me?” asked Ephraim.
On their admitting that they considered him an efficient, excellent, and
good man, and worthy, and that he was exactly what his reputation
confirmed, he offered to undertake the distribution of their alms. As
soon as he received their money, he had about three hundred beds fitted
up in the public porches; and here he tended those who were ill and
suffering from the effects of the famine, whether they were foreigners
or natives of the surrounding country. On the cessation of the famine he
returned to the cell in which he had previously dwelt; and, after the
lapse of a few days, he expired. He attained no higher clerical degree
than that of deacon, although he became no less famous for his virtue
than those who are ordained to the priesthood and are admired for the
conversation of a good life and for learning. I have now given some
account of the virtue of Ephraim. It would require a more experienced
hand than <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xvi-Page_297"></span>mine, to furnish a full description of
his character and that of the other illustrious men who, about the same
period, had devoted themselves to a life and career of philosophy; and
for some things, it would require such a writer as he himself was. The
attempt is beyond my powers by reason of weakness of language, and
ignorance of the men themselves and their exploits. Some of them
concealed themselves in the deserts. Others, who lived in the
intercourse of cities, strove to preserve a mean appearance, and to seem
as if they differed in no respect from the multitude, working out their
virtue, concealing a true estimate of themselves, that they might avoid
the praises of others. For as they were intent upon the exchange of
future benefits, they made God alone the witness of their thoughts, and
had no concern for outward glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[295:1266](2020353.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="iii.viii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvi-p3"></span>See below, vi. 34. This chapter is
independent. Theod. iv. 29 has Soz. before him, and possibly also the
same original. Cf. Hieron. *de vir. illust*. cxv.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[295:1267](2020353.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="iii.viii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvi-p5"></span>Cf. Euseb. *H. E.* iv. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Transactions of that Period, and Progress of Christian Doctrine
through the Joint Efforts of Emperors and Arch-Priests.](2020354)
