[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020494)  [Next](2020496) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Antiphonal Hymns
against the Arians introduced by John. The Interests of the Orthodox are
much augmented by the Teachings of John, while the Wealthy are More and
More Enraged*.

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Arians, having been deprived
of their churches in Constantinople during the reign of Theodosius, held
their churches without the walls of the city. <span
id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593) They previously assembled by night
in the public porticoes, and were divided into bands, so that they sang
antiphonally, for they had composed certain refrains which reflected
their own dogma, and at the break of day marched in procession, singing
these hymns, to the places in which they held their churches. They
proceeded in this manner on all solemn festivals, and on the first and
last days of the week. The sentiments propounded in these odes were such
as were likely to engender disputes. As, for instance, the following:
“Where are those who say that the Three Persons constitute one Power?”
Other similar acrimonious observations were interspersed throughout
their compositions. John was fearful lest any of his own church people
should be led astray by witnessing these exhibitions, and therefore
commanded them to sing hymns in the same manner. The orthodox became
more distinguished, and in a short time surpassed the opposing heretics
in number and processions; for they had silver crosses and lighted wax
tapers borne before them. The eunuch of the empress was appointed to
regulate these processions, to pay the cost of whatever might be
required, and to prepare hymns. Hence the Arians, impelled either by
jealousy or revenge, attacked the members of the Catholic Church. Much
bloodshed ensued on both sides. Briso (for this was the name of the
imperial eunuch) was wounded on the forehead by a stone that was cast at
him. The resentment of the emperor was kindled, and he put a stop to the
Arian assemblies. Having commenced the custom of singing hymns in the
manner and from the cause above stated, the members of the Catholic
Church did not discontinue the practice, but have retained it to the
present day. The institution of these processions and his services in
the Church endeared John to the people; but he was hated by the clergy
and the powerful on account of his free boldness, for he never failed to
rebuke the clergy when he detected them in acts of injustice, nor to
exhort the powerful to return to the practice of virtue when they abused
their wealth, committed impiety, or yielded to voluptuousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[404:1594](2020495.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Serapion, the Archdeacon, and St. Olympias. Some of the
Celebrated Men insolently bear down upon John, traducing him as
Impracticable and Passionate.](2020496)
