[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020323)  [Next](2020325) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*The Vain
Machinations of the Arians and Melitians against St. Athanasius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p2.1"></span>The</span> various calamities which befell
Athanasius were primarily occasioned by Eusebius and Theognis. <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) As they possessed great freedom of
speech and influence with the emperor, they strove for the recall of
Arius, with whom they were on terms of concord and friendship, to
Alexandria, and at the same time the expulsion from the Church of him
who was opposed to them. They accused him before Constantine of being
the author of all the seditions and troubles that agitated the Church,
and of excluding those who were desirous of joining the Church; and
alleged that unanimity would be restored were he alone to be removed.
The accusations against him were substantiated by many bishops and
clergy who were with John, and who sedulously obtained access to the
emperor; they pretended to great orthodoxy, and imputed to Athanasius
and the bishops of his party all the bloodshed, bonds, unjust blows,
wounds, and conflagrations of churches. But when Athanasius demonstrated
to the emperor the illegality of the ordination of John’s adherents,
their innovations of the decrees of the Nicæan Council, and the
unsoundness of their faith, and the insults offered to those who held
right opinions about God, Constantine was at a loss to know whom to
believe. Since there were such mutual allegations, and many accusations
were frequently stirred up by each party, and since he was earnestly
anxious to restore the like-mindedness of the people, he wrote to
Athanasius that no one should be shut out. If this should be betrayed to
the last, he would send regardless of consequences, one who should expel
him from the city of Alexandria. If any one should desire to see this
letter of the emperor’s, he will here find the portion of it relating to
this affair: “As you are now acquainted with my will, which is, that to
all who desire to enter the Church you should offer an unhindered
entrance. For should I hear that any who are willing to join the Church,
have been debarred or hindered therefrom by you, I shall send at once an
officer who shall remove you, according to my command, and shall
transfer you to some other place.” Athanasius, however, wrote to the
emperor and convinced him that the Arians ought not to be received into
communion by the Catholic Church; and Eusebius perceiving that his
schemes could never be carried into execution while Athanasius strove in
opposition, determined to resort to any means in order to get rid of
him. But as he could not find a sufficient pretext for effecting this
design, he promised the Melitians to interest the emperor and those in
power in their favor, if they would bring an accusation against
Athanasius. Accordingly, came the first indictment that he had imposed
upon the Egyptians a tax on linen <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>
<span id="iii.vii.xxii-Page_273"></span>tunics, and that such a tribute
had been exacted from the accusers. Apis <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) and Macarius, presbyters of the
Church of Athanasius, who then happened to be at court, clearly proved
the persistent accusation to be false. On being summoned to answer for
the offense, Athanasius was further accused of having conspired against
the emperor, and of having sent, for this purpose, a casket of gold to
one Philumen. The emperor detected the calumny of his accusers, sent
Athanasius home, and wrote to the people of Alexandria to testify that
their bishop possessed great moderation and a correct faith; that he had
gladly met him, and recognized him to be a man of God; and that, as envy
had been the sole cause of his indictment, he had appeared to better
advantage than his accusers; and having heard that the Arian and
Melitian sectarians had excited dissensions in Egypt, the emperor, in
the same epistle, exhorted the multitude to look to God, to take heed
unto his judgments, to be well disposed toward one another, to prosecute
with all their might those who plotted against their like-mindedness;
thus the emperor wrote to the people, exhorting them all to
like-mindedness, and striving to prevent divisions in the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[272:1180](2020324.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p3"></span>Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 6; Soc. i.
27; Theod. *H. E.* i. 26, 27. Soz. works independently from the same
sources.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[273:1181](2020324.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p4"></span>Soc. i. 27, Alypius; Athan. *Apol.
cont. Arian.* 60, where a part of the Epistle of the emperor Constantine
is given, and in this Apis and Macarius are mentioned; here is an
instance how Soz. corrects Soc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calumny respecting St. Athanasius and the Hand of
Arsenius.](2020325)
