[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020493)  [Next](2020495) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Concerning Eutropius,
Chief of the Eunuchs, and the Law enacted by him. On being turned from
the Church, he was put to Death. Murmurs against John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p2.1"></span>Eutropius</span> was originally the chief
of the eunuchs, and was the first and only person of that rank of whom
we have known or heard who attained the consular and patrician dig<span
id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-Page_404"></span>nity. <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) When he was raised to present
power, he thought not of the future, nor of the instability of human
affairs, but caused those who sought an asylum in churches to be thrust
out. He treated Pentadia, the wife of Timasius, in this manner. Timasius
was a general in the army, capable and much feared; but Eutropius
procured an edict for his banishment to Pasis in Egypt, under the
pretext that he aspired to tyranny. I have been informed that Timasius
fell a victim to thirst, or dreading lest anything worse might be in
store, he was caught in the sands there, and was found dead. Eutropius
issued a law, enacting that no one should seek refuge in churches, and
that those who had already fled thither should be driven out. He was,
however, the first to transgress this law; for not long after its
enactment, he offended the empress, and immediately left the palace, and
fled to the Church as a suppliant. While he was lying beneath the table,
John pronounced a discourse, in which he reprehended the pride of power,
and directed the attention of the people to the instability of human
greatness. The enemies of John hence took occasion to cast reproach on
him, because he had rebuked instead of compassionating, one who was
suffering under the calamities of adverse fortunes. Eutropius soon after
paid the penalty of his impious plan, and was beheaded; and the law
which he had enacted was effaced from the public inscriptions. The wrath
of God having been thus promptly visited on the injustice that had been
perpetrated against the Church, prosperity was restored to it, and there
was an increase in the Divine worship. The people of Constantinople were
more sedulous then than before, in attendance at the singing of the
morning and evening hymns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[404:1593](2020494.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Soc. vi. 5;
Philost. xi. 4–6; Chrys. *Homilia in Eutropium eunuchum patricium;
homilia de capto Eutropio et de divitiarum vanitate; Claudianus in
Eutropium,* i. ii.; Eunap. *Fragm.* ii. 53–56; *Fragm.* iii. 16;
*Fragm.* iv. 20–23; *Fragm.* v. 3; Zos. v. 3, 8–18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antiphonal Hymns against the Arians introduced by John. The
Interests of the Orthodox are much augmented by the Teachings of John,
while the Wealthy are More and More Enraged.](2020495)
