[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020104)  [Next](2020106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="ii.vi.vii-Page_81"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*By the Co-operation of
Eusebius and Athanasius a Synod is held at Alexandria, wherein the
Trinity is declared to be Consubstantial.*

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>As</span> soon as Eusebius reached
Alexandria, he in concert with Athanasius immediately convoked a Synod.
The bishops assembled on this occasion out of various cities, took into
consideration many subjects of the utmost importance. They asserted the
divinity of the Holy Spirit <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) and
comprehended him in the consubstantial Trinity: they also declared that
the Word in being made man, assumed not only flesh, but also a soul, in
accordance with the views of the early ecclesiastics. For they did not
introduce any new doctrine of their own devising into the church, but
contented themselves with recording their sanction of those points which
ecclesiastical tradition has insisted on from the beginning, and wise
Christians have demonstratively taught. Such sentiments the ancient
fathers have uniformly maintained in all their controversial writings.
Irenæus, Clemens, Apollinaris of Hierapolis, and Serapion who presided
over the church at Antioch, assure us in their several works, that it
was the generally received opinion that Christ in his incarnation was
endowed with a soul. Moreover, the Synod convened on account of
Beryllus <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) bishop of Philadelphia
in Arabia, recognized the same doctrine in their letter to that prelate.
Origen also everywhere in his extant works accepts that the Incarnate
God took on himself a human soul. But he more particularly explains this
mystery in the ninth volume of his *Comments upon Genesis,* where he
shows that Adam and Eve were types of Christ and the church. That holy
man Pamphilus, and Eusebius who was surnamed after him, are trustworthy
witnesses on this subject: both these witnesses in their joint life of
Origen, and admirable defense of him in answer to such as were
prejudiced against him, prove that he was not the first who made this
declaration, but that in doing so he was the mere expositor of the
mystical tradition of the church. Those who assisted at the Alexandrian
Council examined also with great minuteness the question concerning
‘Essence’ or ‘Substance,’ and ‘Existence,’ ‘Subsistence,’ or
‘Personality.’ For Hosius, bishop of Cordova in Spain, who has been
before referred to as having been sent by the Emperor Constantine to
allay the excitement which Arius had caused, originated the controversy
about these terms in his earnestness to overthrow the dogma of Sabellius
the Libyan. In the council of Nicæa, however, which was held soon after,
this dispute was not agitated; but in consequence of the contention
about it which subsequently arose, the matter was freely discussed at
Alexandria. <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) It was there
determined that such expressions as *ousia* and *hypostasis* ought not
to be used in reference to God: for they argued that the word *ousia* is
nowhere employed in the sacred Scriptures; and that the apostle has
misapplied the term *hypostasis* <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478)
owing to an inevitable necessity arising from the nature of the
doctrine. They nevertheless decided that in refutation of the Sabellian
error these terms were admissible, in default of more appropriate
language, lest it should be supposed that one thing was indicated by a
threefold designation; whereas we ought rather to believe that each of
those named in the Trinity is God in his own proper person. Such were
the decisions of this Synod. If we may express our own judgment
concerning substance and personality, it appears to us that the Greek
philosophers have given us various definitions of *ousia,* but have not
taken the slightest notice of *hypostasis.* Irenæus <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) the grammarian indeed, in his
Alphabetical \[Lexicon entitled\] *Atticistes,* even declares it to be a
barbarous term; for it is not to be found in any of the ancients, except
occasionally in a sense quite different from that which is attached to
it in the present day. Thus Sophocles, in his tragedy entitled *Phœnix,*
uses it to signify ‘treachery’: in Menander it implies ‘sauces’; as if
one should call the ‘sediment’ at the bottom of a hogshead of wine
*hypostasis.* But although the ancient philosophical writers scarcely
noticed this word, the more modern ones have frequently used it instead
of *ousia.* This term, as we before observed, has been variously
defined: but can that which is capable of being circumscribed by a
definition be applicable to God who is incomprehensible? Evagrius in his
*Monachicus,* <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) cautions us
against rash and inconsiderate language in reference to God; forbidding
all attempt to define the divinity, inasmuch as it is wholly simple in
its nature: ‘for,’ says he, ‘definition belongs only to things which are
compound.’ The same author further adds, ‘Every proposition has either a
“genus” <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="ii.vi.vii-Page_82"></span>which is predicted, or a “species,” or a
“differentia,” or a “proprium,” or an “accidens,” or that which is
compounded of these: but none of these can be supposed to exist in the
sacred Trinity. Let then what is inexplicable be adored in silence.’
Such is the reasoning of Evagrius, of whom we shall again speak
hereafter. <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) We have indeed made a
digression here, but such as will tend to illustrate the subject under
consideration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_475"></span>[81:476](2020105.htm#fr_475) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p3"></span>The bishops composing the Council of
Nicæa simply declared their faith in the Holy Spirit, without adding any
definition; they were not met with any denial of the divinity of the
Holy Spirit. This denial was first made by Macedonius, in the fourth
century.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[81:477](2020105.htm#fr_476) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p4"></span>Euseb. *H. E.* VI. 33, says that this
Beryllus denied that Christ was God before the Incarnation. He, however,
gives the see of Beryllus as Bostra in Arabia, instead of Philadelphia.
So also Epiphanius Scholasticus; though Nicephorus, X. 2, calls him
Cyrillus, instead of Beryllus.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[81:478](2020105.htm#fr_477) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p5"></span>Valesius conjectures that Socrates is
wrong here in attributing such an action to the Synod of Alexandria, as
the term *ousia* does not occur in the Nicene Creed, and such action
would therefore be in manifest contradiction to the action at Nicæa.
This, however, is not probable, in view of the dominating influence of
Athanasius in both. But, as the acts of the Alexandrian synod are not
extant, it is impossible to verify this conjecture.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[81:479](2020105.htm#fr_478) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p6"></span>[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ii.vi.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[81:480](2020105.htm#fr_479) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p7"></span>See Suidas, *Lexicon.*

<span id="fn_480"></span>[81:481](2020105.htm#fr_480) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p8"></span>The only work of Evagrius preserved to
our days is his *Ecclesiastical History.*

<span id="fn_481"></span>[82:482](2020105.htm#fr_481) <span
id="ii.vi.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p9"></span>IV. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Quotations from Athanasius' 'Defense of his Flight.'](2020106)
