[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020427)  [Next](2020429) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Councils of Sicily and
of Tyana. The Synod which was expected to be held in Cilicia is
dissolved by Valens. The Persecution at that Time. Athanasius the Great
flees again, and is in Concealment; by the Letter of Valens he
reappears, and governs the Churches in Egypt*.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p2.1"></span>A council</span> was convened at
Sicily; <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448) and after the same
doctrines had been confirmed as those set forth in the confession of the
deputies, the assembly was dissolved.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p4"></span>At the same time, a council was held at
Tyana; and Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, Athanasius, bishop
of Ancyra, Pelagius, bishop of Laodicea, Zeno, bishop of Tyre, Paul,
bishop of Emesa, Otreus, bishop of Melitene, and Gregory, bishop of
Nazianzen, were present with many others, who, during the reign of
Jovian, had assembled at Antioch, and determined to maintain the
doctrine of the Son being consubstantial with the Father. The letters of
Liberius and the Western bishops were read at this council. These
letters afforded high satisfaction to the members of the council; and
they wrote to all the churches, desiring them to peruse the decrees of
the bishops in Asia, <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) and the
documents written by Liberius and the bishops of Italy, of Africa, of
Gaul, and of Sicily, which had been intrusted to the deputies of the
council of Lampsacus. They urged them to reflect on the great number of
persons by whom these documents had been drawn up, and who were far more
in number than the members of the council of Ariminum, and exhorted them
to be of one mind, and to enter into communion with them, to signify the
same by writing, and finally to assemble together at Tarsus in Cilicia
before the end of the spring. On a fixed date which they prescribed,
they urged one another to convene. On the approach of the appointed day,
when the Synod was on the point of assembling at Tarsus, about
thirty-four of the Asiatic bishops came together in Caria, in the
province of Asia, commended the design of establishing uniformity of
belief in the Church, but objected to the term “consubstantial,” and
insisted that the formularies of faith set forth by the councils of
Antioch and Seleucia, and maintained by Lucian, the martyr, and by many
of their predecessors, with dangers and tensions, ought to obtain the
ascendancy over all others.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p6"></span>The emperor, at the instigation of
Eudoxius, prevented by letter the council from being convened in
Cilicia, and even prohibited it under severe penalties. He also wrote to
the governors of the provinces, commanding them to eject all bishops
from their churches who had been banished by Constantine <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) and who had again taken up their
priesthood under the Emperor Julian. On account of this order, those who
were at the head of the government of Egypt were anxious to deprive
Athanasius of his bishopric and expel him from the city; for no light
punishment was inserted in the imperial letters; for unless the
injunctions were fulfilled, all the magistrates equally, and the
soldiers under them, and counselors were condemned to the payment of
much money and also threatened with bodily maltreatment. <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451)

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p9"></span>The majority of Christians of the city,
however, assembled and besought the governor not to banish Athanasius
without further consideration of the terms of the imperial letter, which
merely specified all bishops who had been <span id="page_354">p.
354</span> <span id="iii.xi.xii-Page_354"></span>banished by Constantius
and recalled by Julian; and it was manifest that Athanasius was not of
this number, inasmuch as he had been recalled by Constantius and had
resumed his bishopric; but Julian, at the very time that all the other
bishops had been recalled, persecuted him, and finally Jovian recalled
him. The governor was by no means convinced by these arguments;
nevertheless, he restrained himself and did not give way to the use of
force. The people ran together from every quarter; there was much
commotion and perturbation throughout the city; an insurrection was
expected; he therefore advised the emperor of the facts and allowed the
bishop to remain in the city. Some days afterwards, when the popular
excitement had seemingly abated, Athanasius secretly quitted the city at
dusk, and concealed himself somewhere. The very same night, the governor
of Egypt and the military chief took possession of the church in which
Athanasius generally dwelt, and sought him in every part of the edifice,
and even on the roof, but in vain; for they had calculated upon seizing
the moment when the popular commotion had partially subsided, and when
the whole city was wrapt in sleep, to execute the mandate of the
emperor, and to transport Athanasius quietly from the city.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p10"></span>Not to have found Athanasius naturally
excited universal astonishment. Some attributed his escape to a special
revelation from above; others to the advice of some of his followers;
both had the same result; but more than human prudence seems to have
been requisite to foresee and to avoid such a plot. Some say, that as
soon as the people gave indications of being disposed to sedition, he
concealed himself among the tombs of his ancestors, being apprehensive
lest he should be regarded as the cause of any disturbances that might
ensue; and that he afterwards retreated to some other place of
concealment.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p11"></span>The Emperor Valens, soon after, wrote
to grant permission for him to return and hold his church. It is very
doubtful, whether, in making this concession, Valens acted according to
his own inclination. I rather imagine that, on reflecting on the esteem
in which Athanasius was universally held, he feared to excite the
displeasure of the Emperor Valentinian, who was well-known to be
attached to the Nicene doctrines; or perhaps he was apprehensive of a
commotion on the part of the many admirers of the bishop, lest some
innovation might injure the public affairs.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p12"></span>I also believe that the Arian
presidents did not, on this occasion, plead very vehemently against
Athanasius; for they considered that, if he were ejected from the city,
he would probably traduce them to the emperors and then would have an
occasion for conference with respect to them, and might possibly succeed
in persuading Valens to adopt his own sentiments, and in arousing the
anger of the like-minded Valentinian against themselves.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p13"></span>They were greatly troubled by the
evidences of the virtue and courage of Athanasius, which had been
afforded by the events which had transpired during the reign of
Constantius. He had, in fact, so skilfully evaded the plots of his
enemies, that they had been constrained to consent to his reinstallation
in the government of the churches of Egypt; and yet he could scarcely be
induced to return from Italy, although letters had been dispatched by
Constantius to that effect.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p14"></span>I am convinced that it was solely from
these reasons that Athanasius was not expelled from his church like the
other bishops, who were subjected to as cruel a persecution as ever was
inflicted by pagans.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p15"></span>Those who would not change their
doctrinal tenets were banished; their houses of prayer were taken from
them, and placed in the possession of those who held opposite
sentiments. Egypt alone was, during the life of Athanasius, exempted
from this persecution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[353:1449](2020428.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p3"></span>Soc. iv. 12, 13, 20. Soz. has much more
acts and details. Sabinus is probably a chief source, though not the
only one. Soc. iv. 12, at end.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[353:1450](2020428.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p5"></span>Text reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.2"></span>νὰ τὴν ᾽Ασίαν</span>; it is wrong to
substitute <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.3"></span>δύσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[353:1451](2020428.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p7"></span>Obviously an error in the text, for
Constantius. See below, where the name is given correctly.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[353:1452](2020428.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p8"></span>Cf. *Chronicon,* prefacing the Festal
letters of Athan. from <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 365 on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demophilus, an Arian, became Bishop of Constantinople after
Eudoxius. The Pious elect Evagrius. Account of the Persecution which
ensued.](2020429)
