[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020061)  [Next](2020063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*The People of
Constantinople restore Paul to his See after the Death of Eusebius,
while the Arians elect Macedonius.*

<span id="ii.v.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> Eusebius did not live to learn the
decision of Julius concerning Athanasius, for he died a short time after
that Synod was held. Whereupon the people introduced Paul again into the
church of Constantinople: the Arians, however, ordained Macedonius at
the same time, in the church dedicated to Paul. This those who had
formerly co-operated with Eusebius (that disturber of the public peace)
brought about, assuming all his authority. These were Theognis, bishop
of Nicæa, Maris of Chalcedon, Theodore of Heraclea in Thrace, Ursacius
of Singidunum in Upper Mysia, and Valens of Mursa in Upper Pannonia.
Ursacius and Valens indeed afterward altered their opinions, and
presented a written recantation of them to bishop Julius, so that on
subscribing the doctrine of consubstantiability they were again admitted
to communion; but at that time they warmly supported the Arian error,
and were instigators of the most violent conflicts in the churches, one
of which was connected with Macedonius at Constantinople. By this
intestine war among the Christians, continuous seditions arose in that
city, and many lives were sacrificed in consequence of these
occurrences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paul is again ejected from the Church by Constantius, in
consequence of the Slaughter of Hermogenes, his General.](2020063)
