[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020304)  [Next](2020306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Temples built by
Constantine the Great; the City called by his Name; its Founding; the
Buildings within it; the Temple of Michael the Archsoldier, in the
Sosthenium, and the Miracles which have occurred there*.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor, <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) always intent on the advancement of
religion, erected the most beautiful temples to God in every place,
particularly in metropolises, such as Nicomedia in Bithynia, Antioch on
the river Orontes, and Byzantium. He greatly improved this latter city,
and constituted it the equal of Rome in power, and participation in the
government; for, when he had settled the affairs of the empire according
to his own mind, and had rectified foreign affairs by wars and treaties,
he resolved upon founding a city which should be called by his own name,
and should be equal in celebrity to Rome. With this intention, he
repaired to a plain at the foot of Troy, near the Hellespont, above the
tomb of Ajax, where, it is said, the Achaians had their naval stations
and tents while besieging Troy; and here he laid the plan of a large and
beautiful city, and built the gates on <span id="page_260">p. 260</span>
<span id="iii.vii.iii-Page_260"></span>an elevated spot of ground,
whence they are still visible from the sea to those sailing by. But when
he had advanced thus far, God appeared to him by night, and commanded
him to seek another spot. Led by the hand of God, he arrived at
Byzantium in Thrace, beyond Chalcedon in Bithynia, and here he was
desired to build his city and to render it worthy of the name of
Constantine. In obedience to the words of God, he therefore enlarged the
city formerly called Byzantium, and surrounded it with high walls. He
also erected magnificent dwelling houses southward through the regions.
Since he was aware that the former population was insufficient for so
great a city, he peopled it with men of rank and their households, whom
he summoned hither from the elder Rome and from other countries. He
imposed taxes to cover the expenses of building and adorning the city,
and of supplying its inhabitants with food, and providing the city with
all the other requisites. He adorned it sumptuously with a hippodrome,
fountains, porticos, and other structures. He named it New Rome and
Constantinople, and constituted it the imperial capital for all the
inhabitants of the North, the South, the East, and the shores of the
Mediterranean, from the cities on the Ister and from Epidamnus and the
Ionian gulf, to Cyrene and that part of Libya called Borium.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p4"></span>He constructed another council house
which they call senate; he ordered the same honors and festal days as
those customary to the other Romans, and he did not fail studiously to
make the city which bore his name equal in every respect to that of Rome
in Italy; nor were his wishes thwarted; for by the assistance of God, it
had to be confessed as great in population and wealth. I know of no
cause to account for this extraordinary aggrandizement, unless it be the
piety of the builder and of the inhabitants, and their compassion and
liberality towards the poor. The zeal they manifested for the Christian
faith was so great that many of the Jewish inhabitants and most of the
Greeks were converted. As this city became the capital of the empire
during the period of religious prosperity, it was not polluted by
altars, Grecian temples, nor sacrifices; and although Julian authorized
the introduction of idolatry for a short space of time, it soon
afterwards became extinct. Constantine further honored this newly
compacted city of Christ, named after himself, by adorning it with
numerous and magnificent houses of prayer. And the Deity also
co-operated with the spirit of the emperor, and by Divine manifestations
persuaded men that these prayer houses in the city were holy and
salvatory. According to the general opinion of foreigners and citizens,
the most remarkable church was that built in a place formerly called
Hestiæ. This place, which is now called Michaelium, lies to the right of
those who sail from Pontus to Constantinople, and is about thirty-five
stadia distant from the latter city by water, but if you make the
circuit of the bay, the journey between them is seventy stadia and
upwards. This place obtained the name which now prevails, because it is
believed that Michael, the Divine archangel, once appeared there. And I
also affirm that this is true, because I myself received the greatest
benefits, and the experience of really helpful deeds on the part of many
others proves this to be so. For some who had fallen into fearful
reverses or unavoidable dangers, others with disease and unknown
sufferings, there prayed to God, and met with a change in their
misfortunes. I should be prolix were I to give details of circumstance
and person. But I cannot omit mentioning the case of Aquilinus, who is
even at the present time residing with us, and who is an advocate in the
same court of justice as that to which we belong. <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) I shall relate what I heard from
him concerning this occurrence and what I saw. Being attacked with a
severe fever, arising from a yellowish bile, the physicians gave him
some foreign drug to drink. This he vomited, and, by the effort of
vomiting, diffused the bile, which tinged his countenance with a yellow
color. Hence he had to vomit all his food and drink. For a long time he
remained in this state; and since his nourishment would not be quiet in
him, the skill of the physicians was at a loss for the suffering.
Finding that he was already half dead, he commanded his servant to carry
him to the house of prayer; for he affirmed earnestly that there he
would either die or be freed from his disease. While he was lying there,
a Divine Power appeared to him by night, and commanded him to dip his
foot in a confection made of honey, wine, and pepper. The man did so,
and was freed from his complaint, although the prescription was contrary
to the professional rules of the physicians, a confection of so very hot
a nature being considered adverse to a bilious disorder. I have also
heard that Probianus, one of the physicians of the palace, who was
suffering greatly from a disease in the feet, likewise met with
deliverance from sickness at this place, and was accounted worthy of
being visited with a wonderful and Divine vision. He had formerly been
attached to the Pagan superstitions, but afterwards became a Christian;
yet, while he admitted in one way or another the probability of the rest
of our doctrines, he could not understand how, by the <span
id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="iii.vii.iii-Page_261"></span>Divine cross, the salvation of all is
effected. While his mind was in doubt on this subject, the symbol of the
cross, which lay on the altar of this church, was pointed out to him in
the Divine vision, and he heard a voice openly declaring that, as Christ
had been crucified on the cross, the necessities of the human race or of
individuals, whatsoever they might be, could not be met by the
ministration of Divine angels or of pious and good men; for that there
was no power to rectify apart from the venerated cross. I have only
recorded a few of the incidents which I know to have taken place in this
temple, because there is not time to recount them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[259:1145](2020305.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 50–58; iv. 58; Soc.
i. 18; Zos. ii. 30–32.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[260:1146](2020305.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p5.2"></span>γορεύοντι</span> . This shows that Sozomen
was an advocate in the law courts at the very time of his writing this
history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Constantine the Great effected about the Oak in Mamre; he
also built a Temple.](2020306)
