[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020289)  [Next](2020291) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Account of St. Ammon
and Eutychius of Olympus*.

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>It</span> was about this period that
Ammon, <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) the Egyptian, embraced
philosophy. It is said that he was compelled to marry by his family, but
that his wife never knew him carnally; for on the day of their marriage,
when they were alone, and when he as the bridegroom was leading her as
the bride to his bed, he said to her, “Oh, woman! our marriage has
indeed taken place, but it is not consummated”; and then he showed her
from the Holy Scriptures that it was her chief good to remain a virgin,
and entreated that they might live apart. She was convinced by his
arguments concerning virginity, but was much distressed by the thought
of being separated from him; and therefore, though occupying a separate
bed, he lived with her for eighteen years, during which time he did not
neglect the monastic exercises. At the end of this period, the woman
whose emulation had been strongly excited by the virtue of her husband,
became convinced that it was not just that such a man should, on her
account, live in the domestic sphere; and she considered that it was
necessary that each should, for the sake of philosophy, live apart from
the other; and she entreated this of her husband. He therefore took his
departure, after having thanked God for the counsel of his wife, and
said to her, “Do thou retain this house, and I will make another for
myself.” He retired to a desert place, south of the Mareotic lake
between Scitis and the mountain called Nitria; and here, during two and
twenty years, he devoted himself to philosophy and visited his wife
twice every year. This divine man was the founder of the monasteries
there, and gathered round him many disciples of note, as the registers
of succession show. Many extraordinary events happened to him, which
have been accurately fixed by the Egyptian monks, who did very much to
commemorate carefully the virtues of the more ancient ascetics,
preserved in a succession of unwritten tradition. I will relate such of
them as have come to our knowledge.

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p4"></span>Ammon and his disciple Theodore, had
once occasion to take a journey somewhere, and on the road found it
requisite to cross a canal called Lycus. Ammon ordered Theodore to pass
over backwards, lest they should witness each other’s nudity, and as he
was likewise ashamed to see himself naked, he was suddenly, and by a
Divine impulse, seized and carried over, and landed on the opposite
bank. When Theodore had crossed the water, he perceived that the clothes
and feet of the elder were not wet, and inquired the reason; not
receiving a reply, he expostulated strongly on the subject, and at
length Ammon, after stipulating that it should not be mentioned during
his lifetime, confessed the fact.

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p5"></span>Here follows another miracle of the same
nature. Some wicked fathers, having brought to him a son, who had been
bitten by a mad dog, and was nigh unto death, besought him in their
lamentations to heal him. He said to them, “Your son does not require my
healing, but if you are willing to restore to your masters the ox you
have stolen, he will be healed immediately.” And the result was even as
had been predicted; for the ox was restored and the malady of the child
removed. It is said that, when Ammon died, Antony saw his spirit
ascending into heaven, since the heavenly powers conducted him with the
singing of psalms, and on being questioned by his companions as to the
cause of his evident astonishment, he did not conceal the matter from
them; for he was seen to survey the sky intently, because of his
amazement at the sight of the marvelous spectacle. A short time after,
certain persons came from Scitis, and, announcing the hour of Ammon’s
death, the truth of Antony’s prediction was manifested. Thus, as is
testified by all good men, each of these holy persons was blessed in a
special manner; the one, by being released from this life; the other, by
being accounted worthy of witnessing so miraculous a spectacle as that
which God showed him; for Antony and Ammon lived at a distance of many
days’ journey from each other, and the above incident is corroborated by
those who were personally acquainted with them both.

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p6"></span><span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xiv-Page_251"></span>I am convinced that it was likewise
during this reign that Eutychianus <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) embraced philosophy. He fixed his
residence in Bithynia, near Olympus. He belonged to the sect of the
Novatians, <span id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106) and was a partaker
of Divine grace; he healed diseases and wrought miracles, and the fame
of his virtuous life induced Constantine to keep his intimacy and
friendship. It so happened, that about this period, one of the royal
body-guard, who was suspected of plotting against the sovereign, fled,
and after search, was apprehended near Olympus. Eutychianus was besought
by relatives of the man to intercede on his behalf with the emperor, and
in the meantime, to direct that the prisoner’s chains might be loosened,
lest he should perish beneath their weight. It is related that
Eutychianus accordingly sent to the officers who held the man in
custody, desiring them to loosen the chains; and that, on their refusal,
he went himself to the prison, when the doors, though fastened, opened
of their own accord, and the bonds of the prisoner fell off. Eutychianus
afterwards repaired to the emperor who was then residing at Byzantium,
and easily obtained a pardon, for Constantine was not wont to refuse his
requests, because he held the man in very great honor.

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p9"></span>I have now given in few words the
history of the most illustrious professors of the monastic philosophy.
If any one desires more exact information about these men he will find
it in the biographies which have been written of very many of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[250:1105](2020290.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="iii.vi.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. M.* 30; Pall. *H. L.* 12; Soc.
iv. 23.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[251:1106](2020290.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="iii.vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p7"></span>Soc. i. 13, who gives his authority as
Auxanon, a Novatian.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[251:1107](2020290.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="iii.vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiv-p8"></span>Eus. *H. E.* vii. 8; Soc. i. 10; iv. 28,
&c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arian Heresy, its Origin, its Progress, and the Contention
which it occasioned among the Bishops.](2020291)
