[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020287)  [Next](2020289) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*On the Organization of
the Monks: its Origin and Founders*.

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>Those</span> who at this period had embraced
monasticism <span id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) were not the
least in manifesting the church as most illustrious, and evidencing the
truth of their doctrines by their virtuous line of conduct. Indeed, the
most useful thing that has been received by man from God is their
philosophy. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) They neglect many
branches of mathematics and the technicalities of dialectics, because
<span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xii-Page_248"></span>they regard such studies as superfluous,
and as a useless expenditure of time, seeing that they contribute
nothing towards correct living. They apply themselves exclusively to the
cultivation of natural and useful science, in order that they may
mitigate, if not eradicate, evil. They invariably refrain from
accounting any action or principle as good, which occupies a middle
place between virtue and vice, for they delight only in what is good.
They regard every man as wicked, who, though he abstain from evil, does
not do good. For they do not demonstrate virtue by argument, but
practice it, and count as nothing the glory current among men. They
manfully subjugate the passions of the soul, yielding neither to the
necessities of nature, nor succumbing to the weakness of the body.
Having possessed the power of the Divine mind, they always look away to
the Creator of the whole, night and day worshiping him, and appeasing
him by prayers and supplications. By purity of soul and by a life of
good works they entered without guilt upon religious observances, and
despised purification, lustral vessels, and such ceremonials; for they
think that sins alone are blemishes. They are greater than the external
casualties to which we are liable, and hold, as it were, all things
under their control: and are not therefore diverted from the path they
have selected by the disasters or the necessity which sway the life.
They are not distressed when insulted, nor do they defend themselves
when suffering from malice; nor do they lose heart when pressed by
sickness or lack of necessaries but rather rejoice in such trials and
endure them with patience and meekness. They inure themselves through
the whole of life to be content with little, and approximate as nearly
to God as is possible to human nature. They regard the present life as a
journey only, and are not therefore solicitous about acquiring wealth,
nor do they provide for the present beyond urgent necessities. They
admire the beauty and simplicity of nature, but their hope is placed in
heaven and the blessedness of the future. Wholly absorbed in the worship
of God, they revolted from obscene language; and as they had banished
evil practices, so they would not allow such things to be even named.
They limited, as far as possible, the demands of nature, and compelled
the body to be satisfied with moderate supplies. They overcame
intemperance by temperance, injustice by justice, and falsehood by
truth, and attained the happy medium in all things. They dwelt in
harmony and fellowship with their neighbors. They provided for their
friends and strangers, imparted to those who were in want, according to
their need, and comforted the afflicted. As they were diligent in all
things, and zealous in seeking the supreme good, their instructions,
though clothed in modesty and prudence, and devoid of vain and
meritricious eloquence, possessed power, like sovereign medicines, in
healing the moral diseases of their audience; they spoke, too, with fear
and reverence, and eschewed all strife, raillery, and anger. Indeed, it
is but reasonable to suppress all irrational emotions, and to subdue
carnal and natural passions. Elias the prophet and John the Baptist were
the authors, as some say, of this sublime philosophy. Philo the
Pythagorean <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099) relates, that in
his time the most virtuous of the Hebrews assembled from all parts of
the world, and settled in a tract of country situated on a hill near
Lake Mareotis, for the purpose of living as philosophers. He describes
their dwellings, their regimen, and their customs, as similar to those
which we now meet with among the monks of Egypt. He says that from the
moment they began to apply themselves to the study of philosophy, they
gave up their property to their relatives, relinquished business and
society, and dwelt outside of walls, in fields and in gardens. They had
also, he informs us, sacred edifices which were called monasteries, in
which they dwelt apart and alone, occupied in celebrating the holy
mysteries, and in worshiping God sedulously with psalms and hymns. They
never tasted food before sunset, and some only took food every third
day, or even at longer intervals. Finally, he says, that on certain days
they lay on the ground and abstained from wine and the flesh of animals;
that their food was bread, salt, and hyssop, and their drink, water; and
that there were women among them who had lived as virgins to old age,
who, for the love of philosophy, and from their voluntary judgment,
practiced celibacy. In this narrative, Philo seems to describe <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) certain Jews who had embraced
Christianity, and yet retained the customs of their nation; for no
vestiges of this manner of life are to be found elsewhere: and hence I
conclude that this philosophy flourished in Egypt from this period.
Others, however, assert that this mode of life originated from the
persecutions for the sake of religion, which arose from time to time,
and by which many were compelled to flee to the mountains and deserts
and forests, and they became used to this kind of living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[247:1098](2020288.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="iii.vi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p3"></span>On the origin and growth of the monastic
system, see Soc. iv. 23, and cf. Gibbon, *Decl. & Fall,* ch. 37, and
Bingham’s *Christian Antiq.* Bk. vii.; articles in Herz. *R. E.* Bk.
iv.; *D. C. A*. Vol. ii.; Ad Harnack: Das Mönchthum, seine Ideale und
seine Geschichte.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[247:1099](2020288.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="iii.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p4"></span>The verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>φιλοσοφεῖν</span> is constantly used by the
early Christian historians to signify the practice of asceticism.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[248:1100](2020288.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="iii.vi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p5"></span>Valesius would prefer to read “The
Platonist.”

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[248:1101](2020288.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="iii.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xii-p6"></span>Cf. Eus. *H. E.* ii. 17, where he
attributes to the Christians what is said by Philo concerning the
Therapeutæ, as these ascetics were called.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: About Antony the Great and St. Paul the Simple.](2020289)
