[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020067)  [Next](2020069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*The Emperor of the
West requests his Brother to send him Three Persons who could give an
Account of the Deposition of Athanasius and Paul. Those who are sent
publish Another Form of the Creed.*

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>When</span> the Western emperor <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) was informed of their affairs, he
sympathized with their sufferings; and wrote to his brother
\[Constantius\], begging him to send three bishops who should explain to
him the reason for the deposition of Athanasius and Paul. In compliance
with this request, Narcissus the Cilician, Theodore the Thracian, Maris
of Chalcedon, and Mark the Syrian, were deputed to execute this
commission; who on their arrival refused to hold any communication with
Athanasius or his friends, but suppressing the creed which had been
promulgated at Antioch, presented to the Emperor Constans another
declaration of faith composed by themselves, in the following terms:

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p4"></span>Another Exposition of the Faith.

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p5"></span>We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom the whole family
in heaven and upon earth is named; <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) and in his only-begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, who was begotten of the Father before all ages; God of
God; Light of Light; through whom all things in the heavens and upon the
earth, both visible and invisible, were made: who is the Word, and
Wisdom, and Power, and Life, and true Light: who in the last days for
our sake was made man, and was born of the holy virgin; was crucified,
and died; was buried, arose again from the dead on the third day,
ascended into the heavens, is seated at the right hand of the Father,
and shall come at the consummation of the ages, to judge the living and
the dead, and to render to every one according to his works: whose
kingdom being perpetual, shall continue to infinite ages; for he shall
sit at the right hand of the Father, not only in this age, but also in
that which is to come. \[We believe\] in the Holy Spirit, that is, in
the Comforter, whom the Lord, according to his promise, sent to his
apostles after his ascension into the heavens, to teach them, and bring
all things to their remembrance: by whom also the souls of those who
have sincerely believed on him shall be sanctified; and those who assert
that the Son was made of things which are not, or of another substance,
and not of God, or that there was a time when he did not exist, the
Catholic Church accounts as aliens.

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p7"></span>Having delivered this creed to the
emperor, and exhibited it to many others also, they departed without
attending to anything besides. But while there was yet an inseparable
communion between the Western and Eastern churches, there sprang up
another heresy at Sirmium, a city of Illyricum; for Photinus, who
presided over the churches in that district, a native of the Lesser
Galatia, and a disciple of that Marcellus who had been deposed, adopting
his master’s sentiments, asserted that the Son of God was a mere man. We
shall, however, enter into this matter more fully in its proper
place. <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[44:292](2020068.htm#fr_291) <span
id="ii.v.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p3"></span>Constantine the Younger. See I. 38, end.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[44:293](2020068.htm#fr_292) <span
id="ii.v.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p6"></span>[Eph. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[44:294](2020068.htm#fr_293) <span
id="ii.v.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p8"></span>See below, ch. 59.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Creed sent by the Eastern Bishops to those in Italy,
called the Lengthy Creed.](2020069)
