[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020311)  [Next](2020313) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Christians slain by Sapor
in Persia*.

<span id="iii.vii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.x-p2.1"></span>In</span> this manner the honorable life of
Usthazanes was terminated, and when the intelligence was brought to
Symeon in the prison, he offered thanksgiving to God on his account. The
following day, which happened to be the sixth day of the week, and
likewise the day on which, as immediately preceding the festival of the
resurrection, the annual memorial of the passion of the Saviour is
celebrated, the king issued orders for the decapitation of Symeon; for
he had again been conducted to the palace from the prison, had reasoned
most nobly with Sapor on points of doctrine, and had expressed a
determination never to worship either the king or the sun. On the same
day a hundred other prisoners were ordered to be slain. Symeon beheld
their execution, and last of all he was put to death. Amongst <span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="iii.vii.x-Page_266"></span>these
victims were bishops, presbyters, and other clergy of different grades.
As they were being led out to execution, the chief of the Magi
approached them, and asked them whether they would preserve their lives
by conforming to the religion of the king and by worshiping the sun. As
none of them would comply with this condition, they were conducted to
the place of execution, and the executioners applied themselves to the
task of slaying these martyrs. Symeon, standing by those who were to be
slain, exhorted them to constancy, and reasoned concerning death, and
the resurrection, and piety, and showed them from the sacred Scriptures
that a death like theirs is true life; whereas to live, and through fear
to deny God, is as truly death. He told them, too, that even if no one
were to slay them, death would inevitably overtake them; for our death
is a natural consequence of our birth. The things after those of this
life are perpetual, and do not happen alike to all men; but as if
measured by some rule, they must give an accurate account of the course
of life here. Each one who did well, will receive immortal rewards and
will escape the punishments of those who did the opposite. He likewise
told them that the greatest and happiest of all good actions is to die
for the cause of God. While Symeon was pursuing such themes, and like a
household attendant, was exhorting them about the manner in which they
were to go into the conflicts, each one listened and spiritedly went to
the slaughter. After the executioner had despatched a hundred, Symeon
himself was slain; and Abedechalaas and Anannias, two aged presbyters of
his own church, who had been his fellow-prisoners, suffered with
him. <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[266:1160](2020312.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="iii.vii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.x-p3"></span>The attempt to fix the date as Pagi,
*Ap.* 21, 349, has no historical warrant; see Pagi, under 343 iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pusices, Superintendent of the Artisans of Sapor.](2020313)
