[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020116)  [Next](2020118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Wrath of the Emperor,
and Firmness of Theodore the Confessor.*

<span id="ii.vi.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>Then</span> indeed the emperor’s real temper
and disposition, which he had hitherto kept as much as possible from
observation, became fully manifested: for he who had boasted so much of
his philosophy, was no longer able to restrain himself; but being goaded
almost to madness by these reproachful hymns, he was ready to inflict
the same cruelties on the Christians, with which Diocletian’s agents had
formerly visited them. Since, however, his solicitude about the Persian
expedition afforded him no leisure for personally executing his wishes,
he commanded Sallust the Prætorian Prefect to seize those who had been
most conspicuous for their zeal in psalm-singing, in order to make
examples of them. The prefect, though a pagan, was far from being
pleased with his commission; but since he durst not contravene it, he
caused several of the Christians to be apprehended, and some of them to
be imprisoned. One young man named Theodore, whom the heathens brought
before him, he subjected to a variety of tortures, causing his person to
be so lacerated and only released him from further punishment when he
thought that he could not possibly outlive the torments: yet God
preserved this sufferer, so that he long survived that confession.
Rufinus, the author of the *Ecclesiastical History* written in Latin,
states that he himself conversed with the same Theodore a considerable
time afterwards: and enquired of him whether in the process of scourging
and racking he had not felt the most intense pains; his answer was, that
he felt the pain of the tortures to which he was subjected for a very
short time; and that a young man stood by him who both wiped off the
sweat which was produced by the acuteness of the ordeal through which he
was passing, and at the same time strengthened his mind, so that he
rendered this time of trial a season of rapture rather than of
suffering. Let this suffice concerning the most wonderful Theodore.
About this time Persian ambassadors came to the emperor, requesting him
to terminate the war on certain express conditions. But Julian abruptly
dismissed them, saying, ‘You shall very shortly see me in person, so
that there will be no need of an embassy.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Jews instigated by the Emperor attempt to rebuild their
Temple, and are frustrated in their Attempt by Miraculous
Interposition.](2020118)
