[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020464)  [Next](2020466) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Election of
Nectarius to the See of Constantinople; his Birthplace and Education*.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p2.1"></span>A certain</span> man of Tarsus in Cilicia,
of the illustrious order of senator, was at this period residing at
Constantinople. <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) Being about
to return to his own country, he called upon Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus,
to inquire whether he had any letters to send by him. Diodorus was fully
intent upon the ordination, which was the subject then engrossing
universal attention of the men. He had no sooner seen Nectarius than he
considered him worthy of the bishopric, <span id="page_381">p.
381</span> <span id="iii.xii.viii-Page_381"></span>and straightway
determined this in his own mind as he reflected on the venerable age of
the man, his form so befitting a priest, and the suavity of his manners.
He conducted him, as if upon some other business, to the bishop of
Antioch, and requested him to use his influence to procure this
election. The bishop of Antioch derided this request, for the names of
the most eminent men had already been proposed for consideration. He,
however, called Nectarius to him, and desired him to remain for a short
time with him. Some time after, the emperor commanded the priests to
draw up a list of the names of those whom they thought worthy of the
ordination, reserving to himself the right of choosing any one of those
whose names were thus submitted to him. All the bishops complied with
this mandate; and, among the others, the bishop of Antioch wrote down
the names of those whom he proposed as candidates for the bishopric,
and, at the end of his list, from consideration for Diodorus, he
inserted the name of Nectarius. The emperor read the list of those
inscribed and stopped at the name of Nectarius at the end of the
document, on which he placed his finger, and seemed for some time lost
in reflection; ran it up to the beginning, and again went through the
whole, and chose Nectarius. This nomination excited great astonishment
and all the people were anxious to ascertain who Nectarius was, his
manner of life, and birthplace. When they heard that he had not been
initiated their amazement was increased at the decision of the emperor.
I believe that Diodorus himself was not aware that Nectarius had not
been baptized; for, had he been acquainted with this fact, he would not
have ventured to give his vote for the priesthood to one uninitiated. It
appears reasonable to suppose, that on perceiving that Nectarius was of
advanced age, he took it for granted that he had been initiated long
previously. But these events did not take place without the
interposition of God. For when the emperor was informed that Nectarius
had not been initiated, he remained of the same opinion, although
opposed by many priests. When at last, consent had been given to the
imperial mandate, Nectarius was initiated, and while yet clad in his
initiatory robes, was proclaimed bishop of Constantinople by the
unanimous voice of the Synod. Many have conjectured that the emperor was
led to make this election by a Divine revelation. I shall not decide
whether this conjecture be true or false; but I feel convinced, when I
reflect on the extraordinary circumstances attending this ordination,
that the events were not brought about without the Divine strength; and
that God led this mild and virtuous and excellent man into the
priesthood. Such are the details which I have been able to ascertain
concerning the ordination of Nectarius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[380:1531](2020465.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p3"></span>Soc. v. 8; cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* v.
8; Marcell. s. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381. Soz. is entirely
independent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Decrees of the Second General Council. Maximus, the Cynical
Philosopher.](2020466)
