[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020440)  [Next](2020442) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Concerning Apolinarius:
Father and Son of that Name. Vitalianus, the Presbyter. On being
dislodged from One Kind of Heresy, they incline to Others*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period, Apolinarius openly
devised a heresy, to which his name has since been given. <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) He induced many persons to secede
from the Church, and formed separate <span id="page_362">p. 362</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxv-Page_362"></span>assemblies. Vitalius, a presbyter
of Antioch, and one of the priests of Meletius, concurred with him in
the confirmation of his peculiar opinion. In other respects, Vitalius
was conspicuous in life and conduct, and was zealous in watching over
those committed to his pastoral superintendence; hence he was greatly
revered by the people. He seceded from communion with Meletius, joined
Apolinarius and presided over those at Antioch who had embraced the same
opinions; by the sanctity of his life he attracted a great number of
followers, who are still called Vitalians by the citizens of Antioch. It
is said he was led to secede from the Church from resentment at the
contempt that was manifested towards him by Flavian, then one of his
fellow-presbyters, but who was afterwards raised to the bishopric of
Antioch. Flavian having prevented him from holding his customary
interview with the bishop, he fancied himself despised and entered into
communion with Apolinarius, and held him as his friend. From that period
the members of this sect have formed separate churches in various
cities, under their own bishops, and have established laws differing
from those of the Catholic Church. Besides the customary sacred order,
they sang some metrical songs composed by Apolinarius; for, in addition
to his other learning he was a poet, and skilled in a great variety of
meters, and by their sweetness he induced many to cleave to him. Men
sang his strains at convivial meetings and at their daily labor, and
women sang them while engaged at the loom. But, whether his tender poems
were adapted for holidays, festivals, or other occasions, they were all
alike to the praise and glory of God. Damasus, bishop of Rome, and
Peter, bishop of Alexandria, were the first to learn that the heresy was
creeping among the people, and at a council held at Rome <span
id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) they voted it to be foreign to the
Catholic Church. It is said that it was as much from narrowness of mind
as from any other cause that Apolinarius made an innovation in doctrine.
For when Athanasius, who administered the church of Alexandria, was on
his road back to Egypt from the place whither he had been banished by
Constantine, he had to pass through Laodicea, and that while in that
city he formed an intimacy with Apolinarius, which terminated in the
strictest friendship. As, however, the heterodox considered it
disgraceful to hold communion with Athanasius, George, the bishop of the
Arians in that city, ejected Apolinarius in a very insulting manner from
the church, under the plea that he had received Athanasius contrary to
the canons and holy laws. The bishop did not rest here, but reproached
him with crimes which he had committed and repented of at a remote
period. For when Theodotus, the predecessor of George, regulated the
church of Laodicea, Epiphanius, the sophist, recited a hymn which he had
composed in honor of Dionysus. Apolinarius, who was then a youth and a
pupil of Epiphanius, went to hear the recitation, accompanied by his
father, whose name also was Apolinarius, and who was a noted grammarian.
After the exordium, Epiphanius, according to the custom always observed
at the public recitation of hymns, directed the uninitiated and the
profane to go out of doors. But neither Apolinarius the younger nor the
elder, nor, indeed, any of the Christians who were present, left the
audience. When Theodotus, the bishop, heard that they had been present
during the recitation, he was exceedingly displeased; he, however,
pardoned the laymen who had committed this error, after they had
received a moderate reproof. With respect to Apolinarius, father and
son, he convicted them both publicly of their sin, and ejected them from
the church; for they both belonged to the clergy, the father being a
presbyter, and the son a reader of the Holy Scriptures. After some time
had elapsed, and when the father and son had evinced by tears and
fasting a degree of repentance adequate to their transgression,
Theodotus restored them to their offices in the church. When George
received the same bishopric, he excommunicated Apolinarius, and treated
him as alien to the Church on account of his having, as before stated,
received Athanasius into communion. It is said that Apolinarius besought
him repeatedly to restore him to communion, but that he was inexorable.
Apolinarius, overcome with grief, disturbed the Church, and by
innovations in doctrines introduced the aforesaid heresy; <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) and he thought by means of his
eloquence to revenge himself on his enemy by proving that George had
deposed one who was more deeply acquainted with the Sacred Scriptures
than himself. Thus do the private animosities of the clergy from time to
time greatly injure the Church, and divide religion into many heresies.
And this is a proof; for had George, like Theodotus, received
Apolinarius on his repentance into communion, I believe that we should
never have heard of the heresy that bears his name. Men are prone, when
loaded with opprobrium and contempt, to resort to rivalries and
innovations; whereas when treated with justice, they become moderate,
and remain in the same position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[361:1480](2020441.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxv-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 20; Soc. ii. 46, iii.
16. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 3, 4. Soz. has much independent material.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[362:1481](2020441.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxv-p4"></span>Held <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 377 (Rade), 374 (Hefele). The
letters of Damasus “Illud sane miramur,” “non nobis quidquam,” refer to
this subject.

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[362:1482](2020441.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="iii.xi.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxv-p5"></span>Athan. *Tomus ad Antioch.* 7, 8; *Ep. ad
Epictetum; De incarnatione Domini nostri Jesu Christi contra
Apollinarium.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eunomius and his Teacher Aëtius, their Affairs and Doctrines.
They were the first who broached One Immersion for the
Baptism.](2020442)
