[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020446)  [Next](2020448) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI</span>.—*Concerning the Monks
of Nitria, and the Monasteries called Cells; about the One in
Rhinocorura; about Melas, Dionysius, and Solon*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>They</span> call this place Nitria. It is
inhabited by a great number of persons devoted to a life of philosophy,
and derives its name from its vicinity to a village in which nitre is
gathered. It contains about fifty monasteries, built tolerably near to
each other, some of which are inhabited by monks who live together in
society, and others by monks who have adopted a solitary mode of
existence. More in the interior of the desert, about seventy stadia from
this locality, is another place called Cellia, <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495) throughout which numerous little
dwellings are dispersed hither and thither, and hence its name; but at
such a distance that those who dwell in them can neither see nor hear
each other. They assemble together on the first and last days of each
week; and if any monk happen to be absent, it is evident that he has
been left behind involuntarily, having been hindered by suffering some
disease; they do not all go immediately to see and nurse him, but each
one in turn at different times, and bearing whatever each has suitable
for disease. Except for such a cause, they seldom converse together,
unless, indeed, there be one among them capable of communicating further
knowledge concerning God and the salvation of the soul. Those who dwell
in the cells are those who have attained the summit of philosophy, and
who are therefore able to regulate their own conduct, to live alone, and
are separated from the others for the sake of quietude. This is what I
had briefly to state concerning Scetis and its philosophers. Some one
would probably censure my writing as prolix, were I to enter into
further details concerning their mode of life; for they have established
individual courses of life, labors, customs, exercises, abstinence, and
time, divided naturally according to the age of the individual.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p4"></span>Rhinocorura was also celebrated at this
period, on account of the holy men, not from abroad, but who were
natives of the place. I have heard <span
id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496) that the most eminent philosophers
among them were Melas, who then administered the church of the country;
Dionysius, who presided over a monastery situated to the north of the
city; and Solon, the brother and successor to the bishopric of Melas. It
is said that when the decree for the ejection of all priests opposed to
Arianism was issued, the officers appointed to apprehend Melas found him
engaged as the lowest servant, in trimming the lights of the church,
with a girdle soiled with oil on his cloak, and carrying the wicks. When
they asked him for the bishop, he replied that he was within, and that
he would conduct them to him. As they were fatigued with their journey,
he led them to the episcopal dwelling, made them sit down at table, and
gave them to eat of such things as he had. After the repast, he supplied
them with water to wash their hands; for he served the guests, and then
told them who he was. Amazed at his conduct, they confessed the mission
on which they had arrived; but from respect to him, gave him full
liberty to go whereever he would. He, however, replied that he would not
shrink from the sufferings to which the other bishops who maintained the
same sentiments as himself were exposed, and that he was willing to go
into exile. Having philosophized from his youth, he had exercised
himself in all the monastic virtues.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p6"></span>Solon quitted the pursuits of commerce
to embrace a monastic life, a measure which tended greatly to his
welfare; for under the instruction of his brother and other ascetics, he
progressed rapidly in piety towards God, and in goodness towards his
neighbor. The church of Rhinocorura having been thus, from the
beginning, under the guidance of such exemplary bishops, never
afterwards swerved from their precepts, and produced good men. The
clergy of this church dwell in one house, sit at the same table, and
have everything in common.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[369:1496](2020447.htm#fr_1495) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p3"></span>See above, note on c. 29. For Nitria
and Cellia, see Ruf. *H. M.* 21, 22; Pallad. *H. L.* 69.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[369:1497](2020447.htm#fr_1496) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p5"></span>This is independent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Monks of Palestine: Hesycas, Epiphanius, who was afterwards in
Cyprus, Ammonius, and Silvanus.](2020448)
