[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020484)  [Next](2020486) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*Acacius, Bishop
of Berœa, Zeno, and Ajax, Men Distinguished and Renowned for Virtue*.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> following details are also
the results of inquiry. <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570)
Acacius <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) was conspicuous among
the bishops; he had already previously administered the episcopate of
Berœa in Syria. There are of course many actions of his, which are
worthy of record. He was from his youth brought up to the profession of
ascetic monasticism, and was rigid in observing all the regulations of
this mode of life. When he was raised to the bishopric, he gave this
evidence of greatest virtue, in that he kept the episcopal residence
open at all hours of the day, so that the citizens and strangers were
always free to visit him, even when he was at meals or at repose. This
course of conduct is, in my opinion, very admirable; for either he was
living in such a way as to be always sure of himself, or he devised this
as a means of preparation against the evil in one’s nature, so that in
expecting to be caught by the sudden entrance of persons, it would be
necessary for him to be on continuous guard, not to err in his duties,
but rather to be engaged in covenanted acts.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p5"></span>Zeno and Ajax, <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) two celebrated brothers, flourished
about the same period. They devoted themselves to a life of philosophy,
but did not fix their abode as hermits in the desert, but at Gaza, a
maritime city, which was also called Majuma. They both defended the
truth of their religion with greatest fidelity, and confessed God with
courage, so that they were frequently subjected to very cruel and harsh
treatment by the pagans. It is said that Ajax married a very lovely
woman, and after he had known her thrice in all that time, had three
sons; and that subsequently he held no further intercourse with her, but
persevered in the exercises of monasticism. He brought up two of his
sons to the divine life and celibacy, and the third he permitted to
marry. He governed the church of Botolium with propriety and
distinction.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p7"></span>Zeno, who had from his youth
renounced the world and marriage, persevered in steadfast adherence to
the service of God. It is said, and I myself am witness of the truth of
the assertion, that when he was bishop of the church in Majuma, he was
never absent at morning or evening hymns, or any other worship of God,
unless attacked by some malady; and yet he was at this period an old
man, being nearly a hundred years of age. He continued his course of
life in the monastic philosophy, but, by pursuing his trade of weaving
linen, continued to earn the means of supplying his own wants and of
providing for others. He never deviated from this course of conduct till
the close of his life, although he exceeded all the other priests of
that province in age; and <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-Page_397"></span>although he presided over the people
and property of the largest church.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p8"></span>I have mentioned these as examples
of those who served as priests at this period. It would be a task to
enumerate all where the main part of them were good, and God bore
testimony to their lives by readily hearing their prayers and by working
many miracles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[396:1571](2020485.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p3"></span>Also independent.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[396:1572](2020485.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p4"></span>Acacius, Soc. vi. 18; and Theodoret,
*H. E.* v. 4, 8.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[396:1573](2020485.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p6"></span>Cf. v. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discovery of the Remains of the Prophets Habakkuk and Micah.
Death of the Emperor Theodosius the Great.](2020486)
