[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020100)  [Next](2020102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*The Emperor Indignant at
the Murder of George, rebukes the Alexandrians by Letter.*

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor being highly indignant at
the assassination of George, wrote to the citizens of Alexandria,
rebuking their violence in the strongest terms. A report was circulated
that those who detested him because of Athanasius, perpetrated this
outrage upon George: but as for me I think it is undoubtedly true that
such as cherish hostile feelings against particular individuals are
often found identified with popular commotions; yet the emperor’s letter
evidently attaches the blame to the populace, rather than to any among
the Christians. George, however, was at that time, and had for some time
previously been, exceedingly obnoxious to all classes, which is
sufficient to account for the burning indignation of the multitude
against him. That the emperor charges the people with the crime may be
seen from his letter which was expressed in the following terms.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p3"></span>*Emperor Cæsar Julian Maximus Augustus to
the Citizens of Alexandria.* <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468)

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p5"></span>Even if you have neither respect for
Alexander the founder of your city, nor, what is more, for that great
and most holy god Serapis; yet how is it you have made no account not
only of the universal claims of humanity and social order, but also of
what is due to us, to whom all the gods, and especially the mighty
Serapis, have assigned the empire of the world, for whose cognizance
therefore it became you to reserve all matters of public wrong? But
perhaps the impulse of rage and indignation, which taking possession of
the mind, too often stimulate it to the most atrocious acts, has led you
astray. It seems, however, that when your fury had in some degree
moderated, you aggravated your culpability by adding a most heinous
offense to that which had been committed under the excitement of the
moment: nor were you, although but the common people, ashamed to
perpetrate those very acts on account of which you justly detested them.
By Serapis I conjure you tell me, for what unjust deed were ye so
indignant at George? You will perhaps answer, it was because he
exasperated Constantius of blessed memory against you: because he
introduced an army into the sacred city: because in consequence the
governor <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) of Egypt despoiled the
god’s most holy temple of its images, votive offerings, and such other
consecrated apparatus as it contained; who, when ye could not endure the
sight of such a foul desecration, but attempted to defend the god from
sacrilegious hands, or rather to hinder the pillage of what had been
consecrated to his service, in contravention of all justice, law, and
piety, dared to send armed bands against you. This he probably did from
his dreading George more than Constantius: but he would have consulted
better for his own safety had he not been guilty of this tyrannical
conduct, but persevered in his former moderation toward you. Being on
all these accounts enraged against George as the adversary of the gods,
you have again polluted your sacred city; whereas you ought to have
impeached him before the judges. For had you thus acted, neither murder,
nor any other unlawful deed would have been committed; but justice being
equitably dispensed, would have preserved you innocent of these
disgraceful excesses, while it brought on him the punishment due to his
impious crimes. Thus too, in short, the insolence of those would have
been curbed who contemn the gods, and respect neither cities of such
magnitude, nor so flourishing a <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span
id="ii.vi.iii-Page_80"></span>population; but make the barbarities they
practice against them the prelude, as it were, of their exercise of
power. Compare therefore this my present letter, with that which I wrote
you some time since. With what high commendation did I then greet you!
But now, by the immortal gods, with an equal disposition to praise you I
am unable to do so on account of your heinous misdoings. The people have
had the audacity to tear a man in pieces, like dogs; nor have they been
subsequently ashamed of this inhuman procedure, nor desirous of
purifying their hands from such pollution, that they may stretch them
forth in the presence of the gods undefiled by blood. You will no doubt
be ready to say that George justly merited this chastisement; and we
might be disposed perhaps to admit that he deserved still more acute
tortures. Should you farther affirm that on your account he was worthy
of these sufferings, even this might also be granted. But should you add
that it became you to inflict the vengeance due to his offenses, that I
could by no means acquiesce in; for you have laws to which it is the
duty of every one of you to be subject, and to evince your respect for
both publicly, as well as in private. If any individual should
transgress those wise and salutary regulations which were originally
constituted for the well-being of the community, does that absolve the
rest from obedience to them? It is fortunate for you, ye Alexandrians,
that such an atrocity has been perpetrated in our reign, who, by reason
of our reverence for the gods, and on account of our grandfather and
uncle <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) whose name we bear, and
who governed Egypt and your city, still retain a fraternal affection for
you. Assuredly that power which will not suffer itself to be
disrespected, and such a government as is possessed of a vigorous and
healthy constitution, could not connive at such unbridled licentiousness
in its subjects, without unsparingly purging out the dangerous distemper
by the application of remedies sufficiently potent. We shall however in
your case, for the reasons already assigned, restrict ourselves to the
more mild and gentle medicine of remonstrance and exhortation; to the
which mode of treatment we are persuaded ye will the more readily
submit, inasmuch as we understand ye are Greeks by original descent, and
also still preserve in your memory and character the traces of the glory
of your ancestors. Let this be published to our citizens of Alexandria.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p8"></span>Such was the emperor’s letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_468"></span>[79:469](2020101.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p4"></span>Julian, *Ep.* 10.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[79:470](2020101.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p6"></span>Artemius, whom the Emperor Julian
afterwards beheaded for desecrating the pagan temple.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[80:471](2020101.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p7"></span>Philostorgius (VII. 10) calls this Julian
‘the governor of the East, who was the uncle on the maternal side of
Julian the Apostate.’ Sozomen also (V. 7 and 8) and Theodoret (*H. E.*
III. 12, 13) furnish information regarding him, as well as Ammianus
Marcellius XXIII. i. Cf. also Julian, *Epist.* XIII. (Spanheim, p. 382).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Death of George, Athanasius returns to Alexandria, and
takes Possession of his See.](2020102)
