[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020333)  [Next](2020335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII</span>.—*Constantine enacts
a Law against all Heresies, and prohibits the People from holding Church
in any place but the Catholic Church, and thus the Greater Number of
Heresies disappear. The Arians who sided with Eusebius of Nicomedia,
artfully attempted to obliterate the Term “Consubstantial*.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>Although</span> the doctrine of Arius was
zealously supported by many persons in disputations, <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) a party had not as yet been formed
to whom the name of Arians could be applied as a distinctive
appellation; for all assembled together as a church and held communion
with each other, with the exception of the Novatians, those called
Phrygians, the Valentinians, the Marcionites, the Paulianians, and some
few others who adhered to already invented heresies. The emperor,
however, enacted a law that their own <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>
<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-Page_281"></span>houses of prayer should be
abolished; and that they should meet in the churches, and not hold
church in private houses, or in public places. He deemed it better to
hold fellowship in the Catholic Church, and he advised them to assemble
in her walls. By means of this law, almost all the heresies, I believe,
disappeared. During the reign of preceding emperors, all who worshiped
Christ, however they might have differed from each other in opinion,
received the same treatment from the pagans, and were persecuted with
equal cruelty. These common calamities, to which they were all equally
liable, prevented them from prosecuting any close inquiries as to the
differences of opinion which existed among themselves; it was therefore
easy for the members of each party to hold church by themselves, and by
continually conferring with one another, however few they might have
been in number, they were not disrupted. But after this law was passed
they could not assemble in public, because it was forbidden; nor could
they hold their assemblies in secret, for they were watched by the
bishops and clergy of their city. Hence the greater number of these
sectarians were led, by fear of consequences, to join themselves to the
Catholic Church. Those who adhered to their original sentiments did not,
at their death, leave any disciples to propagate their heresy, for they
could neither come together into the same place, nor were they able to
teach in security those of the same opinions. On account either of the
absurdity of the heretical dogmas, or of the utter ignorance of those
who devised and taught them, the respective followers of each heresy
were, from the beginning, very few in number. The Novatians alone, <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203) who had obtained good leaders, and
who entertained the same opinions respecting the Divinity as the
Catholic Church, were numerous, from the beginning, and remained so, not
being much injured by this law; the emperor, I believe, willingly
relaxed in their favor the rigor of the enactment, for he only desired
to strike terror into the minds of his subjects, and had no intention of
persecuting them. Acesius, who was then the bishop of this heresy in
Constantinople, was much esteemed by the emperor on account of his
virtuous life; and it is probable that it was for his sake that the
church which he governed met with protection. The Phrygians suffered the
same treatment as the other heretics in all the Roman provinces except
Phrygia and the neighboring regions, for here they had, since the time
of Montanus, existed in great numbers and do so to the present day.

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-p5"></span>About this time the partisans of
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and of Theognis, bishop of Nicæa, began
to make innovations in writing upon the confession set forth by the
Nicæan Council. They did not venture to reject openly the assertion that
the Son is consubstantial with the Father, because this assertion was
maintained by the emperor; but they propounded another document, and
signified to the Eastern bishops that they received the terms of the
Nicæan doctrine with verbal interpretations. From this declaration and
reflection, the former dispute lapsed into fresh discussion, and what
seemed to have been put at rest was again set in motion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[280:1203](2020334.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="iii.vii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-p3"></span>This chapter, outside of the law of
Constantine against the heretics (Eus. *V. C.* iii. 64), consists of
Soz.’s reflections on the state of the heresies.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[281:1204](2020334.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="iii.vii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxii-p4"></span>Sozomen speaks with favor of the
Novatians, though not with the earnestness of Socrates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra; his Heresy and Deposition.](2020335)
