[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020142)  [Next](2020144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Events at Edessa:
Constancy of the Devout Citizens, and Courage of a Pious Woman.*

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p2.1"></span>But</span> we must here mention certain
circumstances that occurred at Edessa in Mesopotamia. There is in that
city a magnificent church <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)
dedicated to St. Thomas the Apostle, wherein, on account of the sanctity
of the place, religious assemblies are incessantly held. The Emperor
Valens wishing to inspect this edifice, and having learnt that all who
usually congregated there were opposed to the heresy which he favored,
he is said to have struck the prefect with his own hand, because he had
neglected to expel them thence also. As the prefect after submitting to
this ignominy, was most unwillingly constrained to subserve the
emperor’s indignation against them,—for he did not desire to effect the
slaughter of so great a number of persons,—he privately suggested that
no one should be found there. But no one gave heed either to his
admonitions or to his menaces; for on the following day they all crowded
to the church. <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) And when the
prefect was going towards it with a large military force in order to
satisfy the emperor’s rage, a poor woman leading her own little child by
the hand hurried hastily by, on her way to the church, breaking through
the ranks of the prefect’s company of soldiers. The prefect irritated at
this, ordered her to be brought to him, and thus addressed her:
‘Wretched woman! whither are you running in so disorderly a manner?’ She
replied, ‘To the same place that others are hastening.’ ‘Have you not
heard,’ said he, ‘that the prefect is about to put to death all that
shall be found there?’ ‘Yes,’ said the woman, ‘and therefore I hasten
that I may be found there.’ ‘And whither are you dragging that little
child?’ said the prefect: the woman answered, ‘That he also may be made
worthy of martyrdom.’ <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) The <span
id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xviii-Page_105"></span>prefect on hearing these things,
conjecturing that a similar resolution actuated the others who were
assembled there, immediately went back to the emperor, and informed him
that all were ready to die in behalf of their own faith. He added that
it would be preposterous to destroy so many persons at one time, and
thus persuaded the emperor to control his wrath. In this way were the
Edessenes preserved from being massacred by order of their sovereign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_610"></span>[104:611](2020143.htm#fr_610) <span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p3"></span>The kind of church here meant was a
memorial structure to a martyr, erected where his relics were deposited,
and was called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p3.1"></span>Μαρτύριον</span> . See Bingham, *Christ.
Antiq.* VIII. 1.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[104:612](2020143.htm#fr_611) <span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p4"></span>The same church which above was called
a <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p4.1"></span>μαρτύριον</span> from its origin, is here
called <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii.xviii-p4.2"></span>εὐκτήριος
τόπος</span>, from its use (‘a place of prayer’).

<span id="fn_612"></span>[104:613](2020143.htm#fr_612) <span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p5"></span>Gibbon, in his *Decline and Fall,*
chap. 16, quotes a number of extracts from Sulpicius Severus and
Ignatius, showing the honor in which martyrdom was held in the early
church, and the eagerness with which it was sought. To check the excess
of zeal which was thus manifested, the Council of Elvira, in 306 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.vii.xviii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>, passed a
canon (its sixtieth) to the following intent: ‘that if any one should
overthrow idols, and should therefore be put to death, inasmuch as this
is not written in the Gospel nor found done among the apostles at any
time, such a one should not be received among the martyrs.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Slaughter of Many Persons by Valens an Account of their Names, in
Consequence of a Heathen Prediction.](2020144)
