[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020382)  [Next](2020384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Proceedings of
Macedonius in Mantinium. His Removal from his See when he attempted to
remove the Coffin of Constantine the Great. Julian was pronounced
Cæsar*.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same time Eleusius wholly
demolished the church of the Novatians in Cyzicus. <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) The inhabitants of other parts of
Paphlagonia, and particularly of Mantinium, were subjected to similar
persecutions. Macedonius, having been apprised that the majority of
these people were followers of Novatus, and that the ecclesiastical
power was not of itself sufficiently strong to expel them, persuaded the
emperor to send four cohorts against them. For he imagined that men who
are unaccustomed to arms would, on the first appearance of soldiers, be
seized with terror, and conform to his sentiments. But it happened
otherwise, for the people of Mantinium armed themselves with sickles and
axes and whatever other weapons chanced to be at hand, and marched
against the military. A severe conflict ensued, and many of the
Paphlagonians fell, but nearly all the soldiers were slain. Many of the
friends of Macedonius blamed him for having occasioned so great a
disaster, and the emperor was displeased, and regarded him with less
favor than before. Inimical feelings were engendered still more strongly
by another occurrence. Macedonius contemplated the removal of the coffin
of the Emperor Constantine, as the structure in which it had been
concealed was falling into ruin. The people were divided in opinion on
this subject: some concurred in the design, and others opposed it,
deeming it impious and similar to digging up a grave. Those who
maintained the Nicene doctrines were of the latter sentiment, and
insisted that no indignity should be offered to the body of Constantine,
as that emperor had held the same doctrines as themselves. They were
besides, I can readily imagine, eager to oppose the projects of
Macedonius. However, without further delay, Macedonius caused the coffin
to be conveyed to the same church in which the tomb of Acacius the
martyr is placed. The people, divided into two factions, the one
approving, the other condemning the deed, rushed upon each other in the
same church, and so much carnage ensued that the house of prayer and the
adjoining place were filled with blood and slaughtered bodies. The
emperor, who was then in the West, was deeply incensed on hearing of
this occurrence; and he blamed Macedonius as the cause of the indignity
offered to his father, and of the slaughter of the people.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p4"></span>The emperor had determined to visit the
East, and held on his way; he conferred the title of Cæsar on his cousin
Julian, and sent him to Western Gaul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[316:1334](2020383.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 38; order and detail from
Socrates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council of Seleucia.](2020384)
