[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020379)  [Next](2020381) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—</span>*Letter from the
Council at Ariminum to the Emperor Constantius*.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Synod selected twenty
bishops, <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328) and sent them on an
embassy to the emperor, with the following letter, which has been
translated from Latin into Greek:— <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329)

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p5"></span>“We believe that it is by the command
of God, as well as by the arrangement of your piety, that we have been
led from all the cities of the West, to assemble at Ariminum, for the
purpose of declaring the faith of the Catholic Church, and of detecting
those who have set forth heresies in opposition to it. After a
protracted investigation, we have come to the conclusion that it is best
to preserve that faith which has been continuous from antiquity, and
which was preached by the prophets, the evangelists, the apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Guardian of your empire, and Protector of your
strength, by holding on thereto and guarding it to the end. It would
have been absurd, as well as illegal, to have introduced any change in
the doctrines which were so rightly and so justly propounded by the
bishops at Nicæa, with the concurrence of the most illustrious
Constantine, the emperor and your father, whose teaching and thought has
gone forth and been preached in the universal hearing and reflection of
men; and it is the antagonist and destroyer of the Arian heresy; through
whose agency not only that deflection from the faith, but all others
have been destroyed. There is great danger in adding to, or in taking
away from, these doctrines; nor can the slightest alteration be made in
any one of them, without giving an opportunity to the adversaries to do
what they list. Ursacius and Valens, after having been suspected of
participating in and advising about the Arian doctrine, were cut off
from communion with us. In the hope of being restored to communion, they
confessed their error, and obtained forgiveness, as their own writings
testify, through which they were spared and received a pardon from the
charges. The occasion on which the edict of forgiveness was conceded,
was at the council of Milan, when the presbyters of the Roman church
were also present.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p6"></span>“Since we know that the formulary of
the faith set forth at Nicæa was compiled with the greatest care and
accuracy, in the presence of Constantine, of worthy memory, who
maintained it throughout his life, and at his baptism, and when he
departed to enjoy the merited peace of heaven, we judge that it would be
absurd to attempt any alteration in it, and to overlook so many holy
confessors and martyrs, and the writers and authors of this dogma, who
have bestowed much thought upon it, and have perpetuated the ancient
decree of the Catholic Church. God has transmitted the knowledge of
their faith to the time in which you live, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom you reign and rule the world. Again have these wretched
men, who are lamentable, to our way of thinking, announced themselves as
heralds of an impious view with unlawful rashness, and have attempted to
overturn the entire system of truth. For according to your injunction,
the Synod was convened, and these men laid bare the view of their own
deceit; for they attempted an innovation which they introduced with
knavery and disturbance, and they found some companions whom they
captured for this nefarious transaction; viz. Germanius, Auxentius, and
Caius, who caused contention and discord. The teaching of these men,
although it was uniform, exceeded the entire range of blasphemies. As
they perceived that they were after all not of the same heresy, and that
they did not think alike in any of the points of their evil suggestions,
they went over to our symbol, so that it might appear as some other
document. The time was indeed brief, but it was sufficient to refute
their opinions. <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-Page_314"></span>In order that the affairs of the
Church might not be wrecked by them and that the disturbance and tumult
which tossed everything to and fro might be restrained, it appeared the
safe thing to preserve the ancient and immovable definitions, and to
eject the aforesaid persons from communion with us. We have, for this
reason, sent our reinstructed deputies to your Clemency, and have
furnished them with letters, declaratory of the sentiments of the
council. These deputies have been especially charged by us to maintain
the truths which were defined rightly by the founders, and to instruct
your Holiness as to the falsity of the assertion of Valens and Ursacius,
that a few changes in righteous truths would produce peace in the
Church. For how can peace be reproduced by those who destroy peace? They
would be more likely to introduce contention and disturbance into the
other cities and into the Church of Rome. We therefore entreat your
Clemency to consider our deputies with gentle audience and mild look,
and not to allow the dead to be dishonored by any novel changes. We pray
you to permit us to remain in the definitions and decrees which we
received from our ancestors, who, we would affirm, did their work with
ready minds, with prudence, and with the Holy Spirit. For these
innovations not only lead believers to infidelity, but also delude
unbelievers to immaturity. We likewise entreat you to command that the
bishops who are now absent from their churches, and of whom some are
laboring under the infirmities of old age, and others under the
privations of poverty, may be furnished with the means of returning to
their own homes, in order that the churches may not be longer deprived
of their ministry.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p7"></span>“Again, we beseech you that nothing be
taken away from the former decisions, or added to them; let all remain
unchanged, even as it has been preserved from the piety of your father
to the present time; so that we may not in future be fatigued, and be
compelled to become strangers to our own parishes, but that bishops and
people may dwell together in peace, and be able to devote themselves to
prayer and supplication for your own personal salvation and empire and
peace, which may the Deity graciously vouchsafe to you uninterruptedly.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p8"></span>“Our deputies will show you the
signatures and the names of the bishops, and some of them will offer
instruction to your Holiness out of the Sacred Scriptures.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[313:1329](2020380.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p3"></span>The emperor had requested ten; cf.
also ii. 23.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[313:1330](2020380.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p4"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* c. 10; Hil.
*Fragm.* viii., Latin form; Soc. ii. 37; Theod. ii. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Deputies of the Council and the Emperor's Letter;
Agreement of the Adherents of Ursacius and Valens afterwards with the
Letter put forth; Exile of the Archbishops. Concerning the Synod at
Nicæa, and the Reason why the Synod was held in Ariminum.](2020381)
