[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020407)  [Next](2020409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Athanasius is again
Banished; concerning Eleusius, Bishop of Cyzicus, and Titus, Bishop of
Bostra; Mention of the Ancestors of the Author*.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xv-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor, <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) on being informed that Athanasius
held meetings in the church of Alexandria, and taught the people boldly,
and converted many pagans to Christianity, commanded him, under the
severest penalties, to depart from Alexandria. <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) The pretext made use of for
enforcing this edict, was that Athanasius, after having been banished by
Constantius, had reassumed his episcopal see without the sanction of the
reigning emperor; for Julian declared that he had never contemplated
restoring the bishops who had been exiled by Constantius to their
ecclesiastical functions, but only to their native land. On the
announcement of the command enjoining his immediate departure,
Athanasius said to the Christian multitudes who stood weeping around
him, “Be of good courage; it is but a cloud which will speedily be
dispersed.” After these words he bade farewell; he then committed the
care of the church to the most zealous of his friends and quitted
Alexandria.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p5"></span>About the same period, the inhabitants of
Cyzicus sent an embassy to the emperor to lay before him some of their
private affairs, and particularly to entreat the restoration of the
pagan temples. He applauded their forethought, and promised to grant all
their requests. He expelled Eleusius, the bishop of their city, because
he had destroyed some temples, and desecrated the sacred areas with
contumely, provided houses for the support of widows, erected buildings
for holy virgins, and induced pagans to abandon their ancestral rites.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p6"></span>The emperor prohibited some foreign
Christians, who had accompanied him, from entering the city of Cyzicus,
from the apprehension, it appears, that they would, in conjunction with
the Christians within the city, excite a sedition on account of
religion. There were many persons gathered with them who also held like
religious views with the Christians of the city, and who were engaged in
woolen manufactures for the state, and were coiners of money. They were
numerous, and were divided into two populous classes; they had received
permission from preceding emperors to dwell, with their wives and
possessions, in Cyzicus, provided that they annually handed over to the
public treasury a supply of clothes for the soldiery and of newly coined
money.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p7"></span>Although Julian was anxious to advance
paganism by every means, yet he deemed it the height of imprudence to
employ force or vengeance against those who refused to sacrifice.
Besides, there were so many Christians in every city that it would have
been no easy task for the rulers even to number them. He did not even
forbid them to assemble together for worship, as he was aware that when
freedom of the will is called into question, constraint is utterly
useless. He expelled the clergy and presidents of the churches from all
the cities, in order to put an end to these assemblies, saying truly
that by their absence the gatherings of the people would be effectually
dissolved, if indeed <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="iii.x.xv-Page_337"></span>there were none to convene the churches,
and none to teach or to dispense the mysteries, religion itself would,
in the course of time, fall into oblivion. The pretext which he advanced
for these proceedings was, that the clergy were the leaders of sedition
among the people. Under this plea, he expelled Eleusius and his friends
from Cyzicus, although there was not even a symptom nor expectation of
sedition in that city. He also publicly called upon the citizens of
Bostra <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) to expel Titus, their
bishop. It appears that the emperor had threatened to impeach Titus and
the other clergy as the authors of any sedition that might arise among
the people, and that Titus had thereupon written stating to him that
although the Christians were near the pagans in number, yet that, in
accordance with his exhortations, they were disposed to remain quiet,
and were not likely to rise up in sedition. Julian, with the view of not
exciting the enmity of the inhabitants of Bostra against Titus,
represented, in a letter which he addressed to them, that their bishop
had advanced a calumny against them, by stating that it was in
accordance with his exhortations rather than with their own inclination
that they refrained from sedition; and Julian exhorted them to expel him
from their city as a public enemy.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p9"></span>It appears that the Christians were
subjected to similar injustice in other places; sometimes by the command
of the emperor, and sometimes by the wrath and impetuosity of the
populace. The blame of these transactions may be justly imputed to the
ruler; for he did not bring under the force of law the transgressors of
law, but out of his hatred to the Christian religion, he only visited
the perpetrators of such deeds with verbal rebukes, while, by his
actions, he urged them on in the same course. Hence although not
absolutely persecuted by the emperor, the Christians were obliged to
flee from city to city and village to village. My grandfather and many
of my ancestors were compelled to flee in this manner. My grandfather
was of pagan parentage; and, with his own family and that of Alaphion,
had been the first to embrace Christianity in Bethelia, a populous town
near Gaza, in which there are temples highly reverenced by the people of
the country, on account of their antiquity and structural excellence.
The most celebrated of these temples is the Pantheon, built on an
artificial eminence commanding a view of the whole town. The conjecture
is that the place received its name from the temple, that the original
name given to this temple was in the Syriac language, and that this name
was afterwards rendered into Greek and expressed by a word which
signifies that the temple is the residence of all the gods.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p10"></span>It is said that the above-mentioned
families were converted through the instrumentality of the monk
Hilarion. Alaphion, it appears, was possessed of a devil; and neither
the pagans nor the Jews could, by any incantations and enchantments,
deliver him from this affliction; but Hilarion, by simply calling on the
name of Christ, expelled the demon, and Alaphion, with his whole family,
immediately embraced Christianity.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p11"></span>My grandfather was endowed with great
natural ability, which he applied with success to the explanation of the
Sacred Scriptures; he had made some attainments in general knowledge,
and was not ignorant of arithmetic. He was much beloved by the
Christians of Ascalon, of Gaza, and of the surrounding country; and was
regarded as necessary to religion, on account of his gift in expounding
the doubtful points of Scripture. No one can speak in adequate terms of
the virtues of the other <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399)
family. The first churches and monasteries erected in that country were
founded by members of this family and supported by their power and
beneficence towards strangers and the needy. Some good men belonging to
this family have flourished even in our own days; and in my youth I saw
some of them, but they were then very aged. I shall have occasion to say
more concerning them in the course of my history. <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[336:1397](2020408.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 13, 14; Ruf. *H. E.* i. 32–34;
all remotely; much new material in this chapter. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.*
iii. 9; Athan. *Ep. Heort.*, under 363.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[336:1398](2020408.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p4"></span>The edict of Julian, in *Juliani Op. Ep.*
xxvi.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[337:1399](2020408.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p8"></span>*Juliani Op. Ep.* lii. Julianus Bostrenis.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[337:1400](2020408.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p12"></span>He probably means that of Alaphion.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[337:1401](2020408.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p13"></span>He means Salamines, Phuscon, Malachion,
and Crispion, whom he mentions below, vi. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Efforts of Julian to establish Paganism and to abolish our
Usages. The Epistle which he sent to the Pagan High-Priests.](2020409)
