[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020505)  [Next](2020507) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Obstinancy of
Theophilus. Enmity between the Egyptians and the Citizens of
Constantinople. Flight of Theophilus. Nilammon the Ascetic. The Synod
concerning John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xix-p2.1"></span>Although</span> Theophilus would fain have
brought an accusation against John, <span
id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) under the plea that he had
unlawfully reinstated himself in his bishopric, yet he was deterred from
doing so by the fear of offending the emperor, who had been compelled to
recall John, as the means of suppressing the popular insurrection.
Theophilus, however, received an accusation against Heraclides during
the absence of the accused, in the hope of thereby authorizing the
sentence of condemnation which had been issued against John. But the
friends of Heraclides interposed, and declared that it was unjust, and
contrary to ecclesiastical law, to condemn one who was absent.
Theophilus and his partisans maintained the opposite side of the
question: the people of Alexandria and of Egypt sided with them, and
were opposed by the citizens of Constantinople. The strife between the
two parties became so vehement that bloodshed ensued; many were wounded,
and others slain in the contest. Severian, and all the bishops at
Constantinople who did not support the cause of John, became
apprehensive for their personal safety, and quitted the city in haste.
Theophilus, also, fled the city at the commencement of the winter; and,
in company with Isaac the monk, sailed for Alexandria. A wind arose
which drove the vessel to Gera, a small city about fifty stadia from
Pelusium. The bishop of this city died, and the inhabitants, I have been
informed, elected Nilammon to preside over their church; he was a good
man, and had attained the summit of monastic philosophy. He dwelt
without the city, in a cell of which the door was built up with stones.
He refused to accept the dignity of the priesthood; and Theophilus,
therefore, visited him in person, to exhort him to receive ordination at
his hands. Nilammon repeatedly refused the honor; but, as Theophilus
would take no refusal, he said to him, “To-morrow, my father, you shall
act as you please; to-day it is requisite that I should arrange my
affairs.” Theophilus repaired, on the following day, to the cell of the
monk, and commanded the door to be opened; but Nilammon exclaimed, “Let
us first engage in prayer.” Theophilus complied and began to pray.
Nilammon likewise prayed within his cell, and in the act of prayer he
expired. Theophilus, and those who were standing with him without the
cell, knew nothing at the time of what had occurred; but, when the
greater part of the day had passed away, and the name of Nilammon had
been loudly reiterated without his returning any answer, the stones were
removed from the door, and the monk was found dead. They honored him
with a public burial after they had clothed him in the necessary
vestments, and the inhabitants built a house of prayer about his tomb;
and they celebrate the day of his death, in a very marked way, until
this day. Thus died Nilammon, if it can be called death to quit this
life for another,—rather than accept a bishopric of which, with
extraordinary modesty, he considered himself unworthy.

<span id="iii.xiii.xix-p4"></span><span id="page_412">p. 412</span>
<span id="iii.xiii.xix-Page_412"></span>After his return to
Constantinople, John appeared to be more than ever beloved by the
people. Sixty bishops assembled together in that city, and annulled all
the decrees of the council of “The Oak.” They confirmed John in the
possession of the bishopric, and enacted that he should officiate as a
priest, confer ordination, and perform all the duties of the church
usually devolving on the president. At this time Serapion was appointed
bishop of Heraclea in Thrace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[411:1609](2020506.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iii.xiii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xix-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 17; Pallad. *ibid*.; and
Chrys. *Ep. ad Inn.* Soz. has independent material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Statue of the Empress; what happened there; the Teaching of
John; Convocation of another Synod against John; his
Deposition.](2020507)
