[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020411)  [Next](2020413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Work written by Julian
entitled “Aversion to Beards.” Daphne in Antioch, a Full Description of
it. Translation of the Remains of Babylas, the Holy Martyr*.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p2.1"></span>Julian, <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414) having determined upon undertaking
a war against Persia, repaired to Antioch in Syria. The people loudly
complained, that, although provisions were very abundant the price
affixed to them was very high. Accordingly, the emperor, from
liberality, as I believe, towards the people, reduced the price of
provisions to so low a scale that the vendors fled the city. </span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p4"></span>A scarcity in consequence ensued, for
which the people blamed the emperor; and their resentment found vent in
ridiculing the length of his beard, and the bulls which he had had
stamped upon his coins; and they satirically <span id="page_341">p.
341</span> <span id="iii.x.xix-Page_341"></span>remarked, that he upset
the world in the same way that his priests, when offering sacrifice,
threw down the victims.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p5"></span>At first his displeasure was excited, and
he threatened to punish them and prepared to depart for Tarsus.
Afterwards, however, he suppressed his feelings of indignation, and
repaid their ridicule by words alone; he composed a very elegant work
under the title of “Aversion to Beards,” which he sent to them. He
treated the Christians of the city precisely in the same manner as at
other places, and endeavored, as far as possible, to promote the
extension of paganism.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p6"></span>I shall here recount some of the details
connected with the tomb of Babylas, the martyr, and certain occurrences
which took place about this period in the temple of Apollo at Daphne.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p7"></span>Daphne is a suburb of Antioch, and is
planted with cypresses and other trees, beneath which all kinds of
flowers flourish in their season. The branches of these trees are so
thick and interlaced that they may be said to form a roof rather than
merely to afford shade, and the rays of the sun can never pierce through
them to the soil beneath. It is made delicious and exceedingly lovely by
the richness and beauty of the waters, the temperateness of the air, and
the breath of friendly winds. The Greeks invent the myth that Daphne,
the daughter of the river Ladon, was here changed into a tree which
bears her name, while she was fleeing from Arcadia, to evade the love of
Apollo. The passion of Apollo was not diminished, they say, by this
transformation; he made a crown of the leaves of his beloved and
embraced the tree. He afterwards often fixed his residence on this spot,
as being dearer to him than any other place.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p8"></span>Men of grave temperament, however,
considered it disgraceful to approach this suburb; for the position and
nature of the place seemed to excite voluptuous feelings; and the
substance of the fable itself being erotic, afforded a measurable
impulse and redoubled the passions among corrupt youths. They, who
furnished this myth as an excuse, were greatly inflamed and gave way
without constraint to profligate deeds, incapable of being continent
themselves, or of enduring the presence of those who were continent. Any
one who dwelt at Daphne without a mistress was regarded as callous and
ungracious, and was shunned as an abominable and abhorrent thing. The
pagans likewise manifested great reverence for this place on account of
a very beautiful statue of the Daphnic Apollo which stood here, as also
a magnificent and costly temple, supposed to have been built by
Seleucus, the father of Antiochus, who gave his name to the city of
Antioch. Those who attach credit to fables of this kind believe that a
stream flows from the fountain Castalia which confers the power of
predicting the future, and which is similar in its name and powers to
the fountain of Delphi. It is related that Adrian here received
intimation of his future greatness, when he was but a private
individual; and that he dipped a leaf of the laurel into the water and
found written thereon an account of his destiny. When he became emperor,
it is said, he commanded the fountain to be closed, in order that no one
might be enabled to pry into the knowledge of the future. But I leave
this subject to those who are more accurately acquainted with mythology
than I am.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p9"></span>When Gallus, the brother of Julian, had
been declared Cæsar by Constantius, and had fixed his residence at
Antioch, his zeal for the Christian religion and his veneration for the
memory of the martyrs determined him to purge the place of the pagan
superstition and the outrages of profligates. He considered that the
readiest method of effecting this object would be to erect a house of
prayer in the temple and to transfer thither the tomb of Babylas, the
martyr, who had, with great reputation to himself, presided over the
church of Antioch, and suffered martyrdom. It is said that from the time
of this translation, the demon ceased to utter oracles. This silence was
at first attributed to the neglect into which his service was allowed to
fall and to the omission of the former cult; but results proved that it
was occasioned solely by the presence of the holy martyr. The silence
continued unbroken even when Julian was the sole ruler of the Roman
Empire, although libations, incense, and victims were offered in
abundance to the demon; for when eventually the oracle itself spoke and
indicated the cause of its previous silence, the emperor himself entered
the temple for the purpose of consulting the oracle, and offering up
gifts and sacrifices with entreaties to grant a reply. The demon did not
openly admit that the hindrance was occasioned by the tomb of Babylas,
the martyr, but he stated that the place was filled with dead bodies,
and that this prevented the oracle from speaking.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p10"></span>Although many interments had taken place
at Daphne, the emperor perceived that it was the presence of Babylas,
the martyr, alone which had silenced the oracle, and he commanded his
tomb to be removed. The Christians, therefore, assembled together and
conveyed the coffin to the city, about forty stadia distant, and
deposited it in the place where it is still preserved, and to which the
name of the martyr has been given. It is said that men and women, young
men and maidens, old men and children drew the casket, and encouraged
one another by singing psalms as they went along the road, apparently
<span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="iii.x.xix-Page_342"></span>for the purpose of lightening their
labor, but in truth because they were transported by zeal and spirit for
their kindred religious belief, which the emperor had opposed. The best
singers sang first, and the multitude replied in chorus, and the
following was the burden of their song: “Confounded are all they who
worship graven images, who boast themselves in idols.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[340:1415](2020412.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.4"></span>Soc. iii. 17, 18; Ruf. *H. E.* i. 35;
Philost. vii. 8; Theodoret, iii. 10; Am. Marcel. xxii. 14.
1–3.</span></span></span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Consequence of the Translation, Many of the Christians are
Ill-Treated. Theodore the Confessor. Temple of Apollo at Daphne
destroyed by Fire falling from Heaven.](2020413)
