[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020326)  [Next](2020328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Council of Tyre;
Illegal Deposition of St. Athanasius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p2.1"></span>The</span> plots of the enemies of
Athanasius involved him in fresh troubles, excited the hatred of the
emperor against him, and stirred up a multitude of accusers. Wearied by
their importunity, the emperor convened a council at Cæsarea in
Palestine. Athanasius was summoned thither; but fearing the artifices of
Eusebius, bishop of the city, of Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and of
their party, he refused to attend, and for thirty months, although
pressed to attend, persisted in his refusal. At the end of that period,
however, he was forced more urgently and repaired to Tyre, where a great
number of the bishops of the East were assembled, <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) who commanded him to undergo the
charges of those who accused him. Of John’s party, Callinicus, a bishop,
and a certain Ischurias, accused him of breaking a mystical chalice and
of throwing down an episcopal chair; and of often causing Ischurias,
although he was a presbyter, to be loaded with chains; and by falsely
informing Hyginus, governor of Egypt, that he had cast stones at the
statues of the emperor of occasioning his being thrown into prison; of
deposing Callinicus, bishop of the Catholic Church at Pelusium, and of
saying that he would debar him from fellowship unless he could remove
certain suspicions concerning his having broken a mystical chalice; of
committing the Church of Pelusium to Mark, a deposed presbyter; and of
placing Callinicus under a military guard, and of putting him under
judicial tortures. Euplus, Pachomius, Isaac, Achillas, <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) and Hermæon, bishops of John’s
party, accused him of inflicting blows. They all concurred in
maintaining that he obtained the episcopal dignity by means of the
perjury of certain individuals, it having been decreed that no one
should receive ordination, who could not clear himself of any crime laid
to his charge. They further alleged, that having been deceived by him,
they had separated themselves from communion with him, and that, so far
from satisfying their scruples, he had treated them with violence and
thrown them into prison.

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p5"></span>Further, the affair of Arsenius was
again agitated; and as generally happens in such a studiously concocted
plot, many even of those considered his friends loomed up unexpectedly
as accusers. A document was then read, containing popular complaints
that the people of Alexandria could not continue their attendance at
church on his account. Athanasius, having been urged to justify himself,
presented himself repeatedly before the tribunal; successfully repelled
some of the allegations, and requested delay for investigation as to the
others. He was exceedingly perplexed when he reflected on the favor in
which his accusers were held by his judges, on the number of witnesses
belonging to the sects of Arius and Melitius who appeared against him,
and on the indulgence that was manifested towards the informers, whose
allegations had been overcome. And especially in the indictment
concerning Arsenius, whose arm he was charged with having cut off for
purposes of magic, and in the indictment concerning a certain woman to
whom he was charged with having given gifts for uncleanness, and with
having corrupted her by night, although she was unwilling. Both these
indictments were proved to be ridiculous and full of false espionage.
When this female made the deposition before the bishops, Timothy, a
presbyter of Alexandria, who stood by Athanasius, approached her
according to a plan he had secretly concerted, and said to her, “Did I
then, O woman, violate your chastity?” <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188) She replied, “But didst thou not?”
and mentioned the place and the attendant circumstances, in which she
had been forced. He likewise led Arsenius into the midst of them, showed
both his hands to the judges, and requested them to make the accusers
account for the arm which they had exhibited. For it happened that
Arsenius, either driven by a Divine influence, or, as it is said, having
been concealed by the plans of Athanasius, when the danger to that
bishop on his account was announced, escaped by night, and arrived at
Tyre the day before the trial. But these allegations having been thus
summarily dismissed, so that no defense was necessary, no mention of the
first was made in the transactions; most probably, I think, because the
whole affair was considered too indecorous and absurd for insertion. As
to the second, the accusers strove to justify themselves by saying that
a bishop under the jurisdiction of Athanasius, named Plusian, <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) had, at the command of his chief,
burnt the house of Arsenius, fastened him to a column, and maltreated
him with thongs, and then chained him in a cell. They further stated
that Arsenius escaped from the <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-Page_276"></span>cell through a window, and while he was
sought for remained a while in concealment; that as he did not appear,
they naturally supposed him to be dead; that the reputation he had
acquired as a man and confessor, had endeared him to the bishops of
John’s party; and that they sought for him, and applied on his behalf to
the magistrates.

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p8"></span>Athanasius was filled with apprehension
when he reflected on these subjects, and began to suspect that his
enemies were secretly scheming to effect his ruin. After several
sessions, when the Synod was filled with tumult and confusion, and the
accusers and a multitude of persons around the tribunal were crying
aloud that Athanasius ought to be deposed as a sorcerer and a ruffian,
and as being utterly unworthy the priesthood, the officers, who had been
appointed by the emperor to be present at the Synod for the maintenance
of order, compelled the accused to quit the judgment hall secretly; for
they feared lest they might become his murderers, as is apt to be the
case in the rush of a tumult. On finding that he could not remain in
Tyre without peril of his life, and that there was no hope of obtaining
justice against his numerous accusers, from judges who were inimical to
him, he fled to Constantinople. The Synod condemned him during his
absence, deposed him from the bishopric, and prohibited his residing at
Alexandria, lest, said they, he should excite disturbances and
seditions. John and all his adherents were restored to communion, as if
they had been unjustly suffering wrongs, and each was reinstated in his
own clerical rank. The bishops then gave an account of their proceedings
to the emperor, and wrote to the bishops of all regions, enjoining them
not to receive Athanasius into fellowship, and not to write to him or
receive letters from him, as one who had been convicted of the crimes
which they had investigated, and on account of his flight, as also
guilty in those indictments which had not been tried. They likewise
declared, in this epistle, that they had been obliged to pass such
condemnation upon him, because, when commanded by the emperor the
preceding year to repair to the bishops of the East, who were assembled
at Cæsarea, he disobeyed the injunction, kept the bishops waiting for
him, and set at naught the commands of the ruler. They also deposed that
when the bishops had assembled at Tyre, he went to that city, attended
by a large retinue, for the purpose of exciting disturbances and tumults
in the Synod; that when there, he sometimes refused to reply to the
charges preferred against him; sometimes insulted the bishops
individually; when summoned by them, sometimes not obeying, at others
not deigning to be judged. They specified in the same letter, that he
was manifestly guilty of having broken a mystical chalice, and that this
fact was attested by Theognis, bishop of Nicæa; by Maris, bishop of
Chalcedonia; by Theodore, bishop of Heraclea; by Valentinus and
Ursacius; and by Macedonius, who had been sent to the village in Egypt,
where the chalice was said to have been broken, in order to ascertain
the truth. Thus did the bishops detail successively each of the
allegations against Athanasius, with the same art to which sophists
resort when they desire to heighten the effect of their calumnies. Many
of the priests, however, who were present at the trial, perceived the
injustice of the accusation. It is related that Paphnutius, the
confessor, <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) who was present at
the Synod, arose, and took the hand of Maximus, the bishop of Jerusalem,
to lead him away, as if those who were confessors, and had their eyes
dug out for the sake of piety, ought not to participate in an assembly
of wicked men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[275:1187](2020327.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iv. 41, 42; the letter in
42 has a late addition in Theodoret, *H. E.* i. 29 (27); Athan. *Apol.
cont. Arian.* 8–12, 71–83; Ruf. *H. E.* i. 16, 17; Soc. i. 27–32.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[275:1188](2020327.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p4"></span>In the brief by Melitius, Achilles and
Hermæon are given as bishops respectively of Cusæ and Cynus (Cynopolis).
Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 71.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[275:1189](2020327.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p6"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 17.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[275:1190](2020327.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p7"></span>Mention is made of a bishop of this
name in the Epistle of Arsenius to Athanasius, which is preserved in the
*Apol. cont. Arian.* 69.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[276:1191](2020327.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="iii.vii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxv-p9"></span>This is in Ruf. *H. E.* i. 17. He also
signs the first letter of the Egyptian bishops at Tyre to Dionysius;
Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 79; he presumably subscribed to the second.
*Ibid.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Erection of a Temple by Constantine the Great at Golgotha, in
Jerusalem; its Dedication.](2020328)
