[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020394)  [Next](2020396) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*The Life, Education, and
Training of Julian, and his Accession to the Empire*.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p2.1"></span>Immediately</span> after the death of
Constantius, <span id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span id="iii.x.ii-Page_326"></span>the
dread of a persecution arose in the Church, and Christians suffered more
anguish from the anticipation of this calamity than they would have
experienced from its actual occurrence. This state of feeling proceeded
from the fact that a long interval had made them unaccustomed to such
dangers, and from the remembrance of the tortures which had been
exercised by the tyrants upon their fathers, and from their knowledge of
the hatred with which the emperor regarded their doctrines. It is said
that he openly renounced the faith of Christ so entirely, that he by
sacrifices and expiations, which the pagans call renunciatory, and by
the blood of animals, purged himself of our baptism. From that period he
employed himself in auguries and in the celebration of the pagan rites,
both publicly and privately. It is related <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) that one day, as he was inspecting
the entrails of a victim, he beheld among them a cross encompassed with
a crown. This appearance terrified those who were assisting in the
ceremony, for they judged that it indicated the strength of religion,
and the eternal duration of the Christian doctrines; inasmuch as the
crown by which it was encircled is the symbol of victory, and because of
its continuity, for the circle beginning everywhere and ending in
itself, has no limits in any direction. The chief augur commanded Julian
to be of good cheer, because in his judgment the victims were
propitious, and since they surrounded the symbol of the Christian
doctrine, and was indeed pushing into it, so that it would not spread
and expand itself where it wished, since it was limited by the
circumference of the circle.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p5"></span>I have also heard that one day Julian
descended into a most noted and terrific adytum, <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) either for the purpose of
participating in some initiation, or of consulting an oracle; and that,
by means of machinery which is devised for this end, or of enchantments,
such frightful specters were projected suddenly before him, that through
perturbation and fear, he became forgetful of those who were present,
for he had turned to his new religion when already a man, and so
unconsciously fell into his earlier habit, and signed himself with the
symbol of Christ, just as the Christian encompassed with untried dangers
is wont to do. Immediately the specters disappeared and their designs
were frustrated. The initiator was at first surprised at this, but when
apprised of the cause of the flight of the demons, he declared that the
act was a profanation; and after exhorting the emperor to be courageous
and to have no recourse in deed or thought to anything connected with
the Christian religion, he again conducted him to the initiation. The
zeal of the king for such matters saddened the Christians not a little
and made them extremely anxious, more especially as he had been himself
formerly a Christian. He was born of pious parents, had been initiated
in infancy according to the custom of the Church, and had been brought
up in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, and was nurtured by bishops
and men of the Church. He and Gallus were the sons of Constantius, the
brother by the same father of Constantine the emperor, and of Dalmatius.
Dalmatius had a son of the same name, who was declared Cæsar, and was
slain by the soldiery after the death of Constantine. His fate would
have been shared by Gallus and Julian, who were then orphans, had not
Gallus been spared on account of a disease under which he was laboring,
and from which, it was supposed, that he would soon naturally die; and
Julian, on account of his extreme youth, for he was but eight years of
age. After this wonderful preservation, a residence was assigned to the
two brothers in a palace called Macellum, situated in Cappadocia; this
imperial post was near Mount Argeus, and not far from Cæsarea; it
contained a magnificent palace and was adorned with baths, gardens, and
perennial fountains. Here they were cultured and educated in a manner
corresponding to the dignity of their birth; they were taught the
sciences and bodily exercises befitting their age, by masters of
languages and interpreters of the Holy Scriptures, so that they were
enrolled among the clergy, and read the ecclesiastical books to the
people. Their habits and actions indicated no dereliction from piety.
They respected the clergy and other good people and persons zealous for
doctrine; they repaired regularly to church and rendered due homage to
the tombs of the martyrs.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p7"></span>It is said that they undertook to deposit
the tomb of St. Mammas <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) the
martyr in a large edifice, and to divide the labor between themselves,
and that while they were trying to excel one another in a rivalry of
honor, an event occurred which was so astonishing that it would indeed
be utterly incredible were it not for the testimony of many who are
still among us, who heard it from those who were eyewitnesses of the
transaction.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p9"></span>The part of the edifice upon which Gallus
labored advanced rapidly and according to wish, but of the section upon
which Julian labored, a part fell into ruin; another was projected
upward from the earth; a third immediately on its touching the
foundation could not be held <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="iii.x.ii-Page_327"></span>upright, but was hurled backward as if
some resistant and strong force from beneath were pushing against it.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p10"></span>This was universally regarded as a
prodigy. The people, however, drew no conclusion from it till subsequent
events manifested its import. There were a few who from that moment
doubted the reality of Julian’s religion, and suspected that he only
made an outward profession of piety for fear of displeasing the emperor,
who was then a Christian, and that he concealed his own sentiments
because it was not safe to divulge them. It is asserted that he was
first secretly led to renounce the religion of his fathers by his
intercourse with diviners; for when the resentment of Constantius
against the two brothers was abated, Gallus went to Asia, and took up
his residence in Ephesus, where the greater part of his property was
situated; and Julian repaired to Constantinople, and frequented the
schools, where his fine natural abilities and ready attainments in the
sciences did not remain concealed. He appeared in public in the garb of
a private individual, and had much company; but because he was related
to the emperor and was capable of conducting affairs and was expected to
become emperor, considerable talk about him to this effect was
prevalent, as is wont to be the case in a populous and imperial city, he
was commanded to retire to Nicomedia.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p11"></span>Here he became acquainted with Maximus,
an Ephesian philosopher, <span id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) who
instructed him in philosophy, and inspired him with hatred towards the
Christian religion, and moreover assured him that the much talked of
prophecy about him was true. Julian, as happens in many cases, while
suffering in anticipation of severe circumstances, was softened by these
favorable hopes and held Maximus as his friend. As these occurrences
reached the ears of Constantius, Julian became apprehensive, and
accordingly shaved himself, and adopted externally the monkish mode of
life, while he secretly held to the other religion.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p13"></span>When he arrived at the age of manhood, he
was more readily infatuated, and yet was anxious about these tendencies;
and admiring the art (if there be such an art) of predicting the future,
he thought the knowledge of it necessary; he advanced to such
experiments as are not lawful for Christians. From this period he had as
his friends those who followed this art. In this opinion, he came into
Asia from Nicomedia, and there consorting with men of such practices, he
became more ardent in the pursuit of divination.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p14"></span>When Gallus, his brother, who had been
established as Cæsar, was put to death on being accused of revolution,
Constantius also suspected Julian of cherishing the love of empire, and
therefore put him under the custody of guards.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p15"></span>Eusebia, the wife of Constantius,
obtained for him permission to retire to Athens; and he accordingly
settled there, under pretext of attending the pagan exercises and
schools; but as rumor says, he communed with diviners concerning his
future prospects. Constantius recalled him, and proclaimed him Cæsar,
promised him his sister Constantia <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) in marriage, and sent him to Gaul;
for the barbarians whose aid had been hired by Constantius previously
against Magnentius, finding that their services were not required, had
portioned out that country. As Julian was very young, generals, to whom
the prudential affairs were turned over, were sent with him; but as
these generals abandoned themselves to pleasure, he was present as
Cæsar, and provided for the war. He confirmed his soldiers in their
spirit for battle, and urged them in other ways to incur danger; he also
ordered that a fixed reward should be given to each one who should slay
a barbarian. After he had thus secured the affections of the soldiery,
he wrote to Constantius, acquainting him with the levity of the
generals; and when another general had been sent, he attacked the
barbarians, and obtained the victory. They sent embassies to beg for
peace, and showed the letter in which Constantius had requested them to
enter the Roman dominions. He purposely delayed to send the ambassador
back; he attacked a number of the enemy unexpectedly and conquered them.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p17"></span>Some have said that Constantius, with
designed enmity, committed this campaign to him; <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) but this does not appear probable
to me. For, as it rested with Constantius alone to nominate him Cæsar,
why did he confer that title upon him? Why did he give him his sister in
marriage, or hear his complaints against the inefficient generals, and
send a competent one in their stead in order to complete the war, if he
were not friendly to Julian?

<span id="iii.x.ii-p19"></span>But as I conjecture, he conferred on him
the title of Cæsar because he was well disposed to Julian; but that
after Julian had, without his sanction, been proclaimed emperor, he
plotted against him through the barbarians on the Rhine; and this, I
think, resulted either from the dread that Julian would seek revenge for
the ill-treatment he and his brother Gallus had experienced during their
youth, or as would be natural, from jealousy of his attaining similar
honor. But a great variety of opinions are entertained on this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[325:1361](2020395.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 1. Much the same order is
followed by Soz., but with the addition of many details. Greg. Naz.
*adv. Julianum,* i. and ii. *Invectiva;* Eunapius, *Excerpt,* i. 1, 2;
*Excerpt*, ii. 1–24; Zos. ii. 45; iii. 2–29, 34. Am. Marcel. xv.–xxiv.
Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 2, 3, follows Soz. succinctly.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[326:1362](2020395.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p4"></span>Greg. Naz. *Or. cont. Julianum*, i. 54.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[326:1363](2020395.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p6"></span>Greg. Naz. *cont. Julianum*, 1 *inv.* 55.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[326:1364](2020395.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p8"></span>Under Aurelian, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 274. The Greeks celebrate him
Sept. 2; Latins, Aug. 17. He is said by Greg. Naz. (*Orat.* 44, 12), and
by Basil (*Hom.* 23, on St. Mammas) to have been a shepherd and also a
martyr. The miraculous story here related is given also by Greg. Naz. in
his *First Oration against Julian*, 25, though he does not mention the
martyr’s name.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[327:1365](2020395.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p12"></span>See Eunap. *V. S. vita Maximi;* Julian
wrote four letters to him, *Op. Ep.* 15, 16, 38, 39; to be distinguished
from another teacher of Julian, Maximus of Epirus.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[327:1366](2020395.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p16"></span>Sozomen is mistaken here, as Constantia
was married to Gallus Cæsar, the brother of Julian. Soc. iii. 1, and Am.
Marcel. xv. 8, 18, give Helena as the name of Julian’s wife.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[327:1367](2020395.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p18"></span>As Eunapius, *Exc.* ii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Julian, on his Settlement in the Empire, began quietly to stir up
Opposition to Christianity, and to introduce Paganism
artfully.](2020396)
