[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020359)  [Next](2020361) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Valens and
Ursacius, who belonged to the Arian Faction, confess to the Bishop of
Rome that they had made False Charges against Athanasius*.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> was the letter written by
the Synod convened in Palestine. Some time after Athanasius had the
satisfaction of seeing the injustice of the sentence enacted against him
by the council of Tyre publicly recognized. <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) Valens and Ursacius, who had been
sent with Theognis and his followers to obtain information in Mareotis,
as we before mentioned, concerning the holy cup which Ischyrion had
accused Athanasius of having broken, wrote the following retraction to
Julius, bishop of Rome:—

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p4"></span>“Ursacius and Valens, to the most
blessed Lord Pope Julius.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p5"></span>“Since we previously, as is well
known, made many various charges against Athanasius, the bishop, by our
letters, and although we have been urged persistently by the epistles of
your excellency in this matter which we publicly alleged and have not
been able to give a reason for our accusation, therefore, we now confess
to your excellency in the presence of all the presbyters, our brethren,
that all that you have heard concerning the aforesaid Athanasius is
utterly false and fictitious, and in every way foreign to his nature.
For this reason, we joyfully enter into communion with him, particularly
as your piety in accordance with your implanted love of goodness has
granted forgiveness to us for our error. Moreover, we declare unto you
that if the bishops of the East, or even Athanasius himself, should at
any time malignantly summon us to judgment, we would not sever ourselves
from your judgment and disposition about the case. We now and ever shall
anathematize, as we formerly did in the memorial which we presented at
Milan, the heretic Arius and his followers, who say that there was a
time, in which the Son existed not, and that Christ is from that which
had no existence, and who deny that Christ was God and the Son of God
before all ages. We again protest, in our own handwriting, that we shall
ever condemn the aforesaid Arian heresy, and its originators.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p6"></span>“I, Ursacius, sign this confession
with my own signature. In like manner also Valens.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p7"></span>This was the confession which they
sent to Julius. It is also necessary to append to it their letter to
Athanasius: it is as follows:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[300:1279](2020360.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p3"></span>From Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 58;
Soc. ii. 24, only an allusion; Hil. *Fragm.* ii. 20; Sulp. Sev. *H. S.*
ii. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Conciliation from Valens and Ursacius to the Great
Athanasius. Restoration of the Other Eastern Bishops to their own Sees.
Ejection of Macedonius again; and Accession of Paul to the
See.](2020361)
