[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020499)  [Next](2020501) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*These Four repair
to John on account of his Interest; for this Reason, Theophilus was
enraged, and prepares himself to fight against John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Dioscorus</span>, Ammonius, and the other
monks, having discovered the machinations of Theophilus, retired to
Jerusalem, and thence proceeded to Scythopolis; for they thought that it
would be an advantageous residence there for them on account of the many
palms, whose leaves are used by the monks for their customary
work. <span id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601) Dioscorus and Ammonius
were accompanied hither by about eighty other monks. In the meantime,
Theophilus sent messengers to Constantinople, to prefer complaints
against them, and to oppose any petitions that they might lay before the
emperor. On being informed of this fact, Ammonius and the monks embarked
for Constantinople, and took Isidore with them; and they requested that
their cause might be tried in the presence of the emperor and of the
bishop; for they thought that, by reason of his boldness, John, who was
careful to do right, would be able to help them in their rights. John,
although he received them with kindness, and treated them with honor,
and did not forbid them to pray in the church, refused to admit them to
participation in the mysteries, for it was not lawful to do this before
the investigation. He wrote to Theophilus, desiring him to receive them
back into communion, as their sentiments concerning the Divine nature
were orthodox; requesting him, if he regarded their orthodoxy as
doubtful, to send some one to act as their accuser. Theophilus returned
no reply to this epistle. Some time subsequently, Ammonius and his
companions presented themselves before the wife of the emperor, as she
was riding out, and complained of the machinations of Theophilus against
them. She knew what had been plotted against them; and she stood up in
honor of them; and, leaning forward from her royal chariot, she nodded,
and said to them, “Pray for the emperor, for me, for our children, and
for the empire. For my part, I shall shortly cause a council to be
convened, to which Theophilus shall be summoned.” A false report having
prevailed in Alexandria, that John had received Dioscorus and his
companions into communion, and had afforded them every aid and
encouragement in his power, Theophilus began to reflect upon what
measures it would be possible to adopt in order to eject John from his
episcopate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[407:1602](2020500.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="iii.xiii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xiii-p3"></span>Pallad. *Dialog.* 7; Soc. vi. 7, 9.
Soz.’s has independent matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Perversity of Theophilus. St. Epiphanius: his Residence at
Constantinople and Preparation to excite the People against
John.](2020501)
