[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020476)  [Next](2020478) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*Extension of our
Doctrines, and Complete Demolition of Idolatrous Temples. Inundation of
the Nile*.

<span id="iii.xii.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xx-p2.1"></span>While</span> the heretics were disrupted
among themselves, the Catholic Church increased more and more by many
accessions from the heterodox, on account of the dissensions among them
and <span id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xx-Page_391"></span>especially from multitudes of
pagans. <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) The emperor having
observed that the practice of idolatry had been greatly promoted by the
facility of constant ingress and egress to and from the temple, directed
the entrances of all temples to be closed; and eventually he commanded
the demolition of many of these edifices. <span
id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560) When the pagans found themselves
deprived of their own houses of prayer, they began to frequent our
churches; for they did not dare to offer sacrifices after the pagan form
in secret, for it was dangerous, since the sacrifice was under the
penalty of death and of confiscation of property.

<span id="iii.xii.xx-p5"></span>It is said that the river of Egypt did
not overflow its banks this year at the proper season; and that the
Egyptians angrily ascribed this circumstance to the prohibition of
sacrifices to it, according to the ancestral law. The governor of the
province, apprehensive lest the general discontent should terminate in
sedition, sent a message to the emperor on the subject. But the emperor,
far from attaching more importance to the temporary fertility produced
by the Nile, than to the fidelity he owed to God and the interests of
religion, replied as follows: “Let that river cease to flow, if
enchantments are requisite to insure the regularity of its course; or if
it delights in sacrifices, or if blood must be mingled with the waters
that derive their source from the paradise of God.” Soon afterwards, the
Nile overflowed its banks with such violence, that the highest eminences
were submerged. When it reached the farthest limit and almost had
attained the fullest measure, the water did not the less press upward,
so that the Egyptians were thrown into the contrary fear. The dread was
lest the city of Alexandria and part of Libya should be submerged. The
pagans of Alexandria, irritated at this unexpected occurrence, exclaimed
in derision at the public theatres, that the river, like an old man or
fool, could not moderate its proceedings. Many of the Egyptians were
hence induced to abandon the superstitions of their forefathers, and
embrace Christianity. These incidents are given as I have learned them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[391:1560](2020477.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="iii.xii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xx-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Ruf. *H. E.*
ii. 19; Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 21; Zos. iv. 28, 29.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[391:1561](2020477.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="iii.xii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xx-p4"></span>*Cod. Theod.* xvi. 10, 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discovery of the Honored Head of the Forerunner of our Lord, and
the Events about it.](2020478)
