[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020031)  [Next](2020033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, and Theognis Bishop of Nicæa, having recovered Confidence,
endeavor to subvert the Nicene Creed, by plotting against Athanasius.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span>The</span> partisans of Eusebius and
Theognis having returned from their exile, these latter were reinstated
in their churches, having expelled, as we observed, those who had been
ordained in their stead. Moreover, they came into great consideration
with the emperor, who honored them exceedingly, as those who had
returned from error to the orthodox faith. They, however, abused the
license thus afforded them, by exciting greater commotions in the world
than they had done before; being instigated to this by two causes—on the
one hand the Arian heresy with which they had been previously infected,
and bitter animosity against Athanasius on the other, because he had so
vigorously withstood them in the Synod while the articles of faith were
under discussion. And in the first place they objected to the ordination
of Athanasius partly as a person unworthy of the prelacy, and partly
because he had been elected by disqualified persons. But when Athanasius
had shown himself superior to this calumny (for having assumed control
of the church of Alexandria, he ardently contended for the Nicene
creed), then Eusebius exerted himself to the utmost insidiously to cause
the removal of Athanasius and to bring Arius back to Alexandria; for he
thought that thus only he should be able to expunge the doctrine of
consubstantiality, and introduce Arianism. Eusebius therefore wrote to
Athanasius, desiring him to re-admit Arius and his adherents into the
church. Now the tone of his letter indeed was that of entreaty, but
openly he menaced him. And as Athanasius would by no means accede to
this, he endeavored to induce the emperor to give Arius an audience, and
then permit him to return to Alexandria: and by what means he attained
his object, I shall mention in its proper place. Meanwhile before this
another commotion was raised in the church. In fact, her own children
again disturbed her peace. Eusebius Pamphilus says, <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) that immediately after the Synod,
Egypt became agitated by intestine divisions: not assigning, however,
the reason for this, so that hence he has won the reputation of
disingenuousness, and of avoiding to specify the causes of <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxiii-Page_27"></span>these
dissensions, from a determination on his part not to give his sanction
to the proceedings at Nicæa. Yet as we ourselves have discovered from
various letters which the bishops wrote to one another after the Synod,
the term *homoousios* troubled some of them. So that while they occupied
themselves in a too minute investigation of its import, they roused the
strife against each other; it seemed not unlike a contest in the dark;
for neither party appeared to understand distinctly the grounds on which
they calumniated one another. Those who objected to the word
*homoousios,* conceived that those who approved it favored the opinion
of Sabellius <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) and Montanus; <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) they therefore called them
blasphemers, as subverting the existence of the Son of God. And again
the advocates of this term, charging their opponents with polytheism,
inveighed against them as introducers of heathen superstitions.
Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, accuses Eusebius Pamphilus of perverting
the Nicene Creed; Eusebius again denies that he violates that exposition
of the faith, and recriminates, saying that Eustathius was a defender of
the opinion of Sabellius. In consequence of these misunderstandings,
each of them wrote as if contending against adversaries: and although it
was admitted on both sides that the Son of God has a distinct person and
existence, and all acknowledged that there is one God in three Persons,
yet from what cause I am unable to divine, they could not agree among
themselves, and therefore could in no way endure to be at peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_231"></span>[26:232](2020032.htm#fr_231) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>Euseb. *Life of Const.* III. 23.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[27:233](2020032.htm#fr_232) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span>Cf. ch. 5, and note.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[27:234](2020032.htm#fr_233) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span>It is not clear why Socrates joins the
name of Montanus to that of Sabellius; the former was undoubtedly in
accord with the common doctrine of the church as to the Trinity. Cf.
Epiphan. *Hær.* XLVIII. and Tertullian *ad. Praxeam.* It was, however,
frequently alleged by various writers of the age that Montanus and the
Montanists held erroneous views concerning the Godhead. See Eus. *H. E.*
V. 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Synod held at Antioch, which deposed Eustathius, Bishop of
Antioch, on whose account a Sedition broke out and almost ruined the
City.](2020033)
