[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020039)  [Next](2020041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI</span>.—*When the Bishops will
not listen to Athanasius’ Defense on the Second Charge, he betakes
himself to the Emperor.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span>But</span> in refuting the false allegations
against Macarius, he made use of legal forms; taking exception in the
first place to Eusebius and his party, as his enemies, protesting
against the injustice of any man’s being tried by his adversaries. He
next insisted on its being proved that his accuser Ischyras had really
obtained the dignity of presbyter; for so he had been designated in the
indictment. But as the judges would not allow any of these objections,
the case of Macarius was entered into, and the informers being found
deficient of proofs, the hearing of the matter was postponed, until some
persons should have gone into Mareotis, in order that all doubtful
points might be examined on the spot. Athanasius seeing that those very
individuals were to be sent to whom he had taken exception (for the
persons sent were Theognis, Maris, Theodorus, Macedonius, Valens, and
Ursacius), exclaimed that ‘their procedure was both treacherous and
fraudulent; for that it was unjust that the presbyter Macarius should be
detained in bonds, while the accuser together with the judges who were
his adversaries, were permitted to go, in order that an *ex parte*
collection of the facts in evidence might be made.’ Having made this
protest before the whole Synod and Dionysius the governor of the
province, and finding that no one paid any attention to his appeal, he
privately withdrew. Those, therefore, who were sent to Mareotis, having
made an *ex parte* <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247)
investigation, held that what the accuser said was true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[31:248](2020040.htm#fr_247) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>ἐκ μονομεροῦς, Lat. *ex parte*; the
term, however, is not restricted to this technical sense, but may be
used of any form of partiality. Cf. Sophocles’ *Greek Lex. of Rom. and
Byz*. As already noted in the Intro. p. ix, Harnack denies that there is
any special juristic knowledge shown here; it must be conceded that the
language used is such as might have been at the command of any
intelligent and educated non-professional man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Departure of Athanasius, those who composed the Synod vote
his Deposition.](2020041)
