[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020355)  [Next](2020357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Further Particulars
concerning the Term “Consubstantial.” Council of Ariminum, the Manner,
Source, and Reason of its Convention*.

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xix-p2.1"></span>It</span> is not surprising that the
Emperor Constantius was induced to adopt the use of the term
“*homoiousios,*” for it was admitted by many priests who conformed to
the doctrines of the Nicæan council. <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) Many use the two words
indifferently, to convey the same meaning. Hence, it appears to me, that
the Arians departed greatly from the truth when they affirmed that,
after the council of Nicæa, many of the priests, among whom were
Eusebius and Theognis, refused to admit that the Son is consubstantial
with the Father, and that Constantine was in consequence so indignant,
that he condemned them to banishment. They say that it was afterwards
revealed to his sister by a dream or a vision from God, that these
bishops held orthodox doctrines and had suffered unjustly; and that the
emperor thereupon recalled them, and demanded of them wherefore they had
departed from the Nicene doctrines, since they had been participants in
the document concerning the faith which had been there framed; and that
they urged in reply that they had not assented to those doctrines from
conviction, but from the fear that, if the disputes then existing were
prolonged, the emperor, who was then just beginning to embrace
Christianity, and who was yet unbaptized, might be impelled to return to
Paganism, as seemed likely, and to persecute the Church. They assert
that Constantine was pleased with this defense, and determined upon
convening another council; but that, being prevented by death from
carrying his scheme into execution, the task devolved upon his eldest
son, Constantius, to whom he represented that it would avail him nothing
to be possessed of imperial power, unless he could establish uniformity
of worship throughout his empire; and Constantius they say, at the
instigation of his father, convened a council at Ariminum. <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) This story is easily seen to be a
gross fabrication, for the council was convened during the consulate of
Hypatius and Eusebius, and twenty-two years after Constantius had, on
the death of his father, succeeded to the empire. Now, during this
interval of twenty-two years, many councils were held, in which debates
were carried on concerning the terms “*homoousios*” and “*homoiousios.*”
No one, it appears, ventured to deny that the Son is of like
substance <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) with the Father,
until Aëtius, by starting a contrary opinion, so offended the emperor
that, in order to arrest the course of the heresy, he commanded the
priests to assemble themselves together at Ariminum and at Seleucia.
Thus the true cause of this council being convened was not the command
of Constantine, <span id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) but the
question agitated by Aëtius. And this will become still more apparent by
what we shall hereafter relate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[298:1271](2020356.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="iii.viii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p3"></span>An independent chapter on the true
cause of division and the origin of the council of Ariminum. Cf. Athan.
*Ep. de Synodis.*

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[298:1272](2020356.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="iii.viii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p4"></span>Cf. Soc. ii. 37.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[298:1273](2020356.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="iii.viii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xix-p5.1"></span>κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἀνόμοιον</span> is the right
correction of Valesius.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[298:1274](2020356.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="iii.viii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xix-p6"></span>A mistake for Constantius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius again reinstated by the Letter of Constantius, and
receives his See. The Arch-Priests of Antioch. Question put by
Constantius to Athanasius. The Praise of God in Hymns.](2020357)
