[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020271)  [Next](2020273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Part IV.—Conclusion.</span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>The original translation, with its many
excellences, seems to belong to an earlier school. It is free both in
enlargement and in compression; words at times, and occasionally
clauses, are inverted. The editor felt the difficulty of recasting such
a flowing style; yet, in spite of the resulting infelicity, he felt
constrained to make every possible correction, and these have been very
numerous and extended in caption and text.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p3"></span>Sozomen uniformly describes the ancient
heathen cult, of whatever form it might be, as Hellenism, and its
followers, Hellenists. It seemed advisable to retain the rendering
“paganism,” which the first translator used toward the middle and the
end of his work, although he had not been uniform in the beginning; any
other translation would cause a constant confusion between nationality
and religion.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p4"></span>In order to give a better impression of
the author and text, the spelling of the proper names indicated by the
text has been adhered to; the orthography “Novatus” is not a real
exception. Where the spelling of a proper name in the caption differs
from that of the text, the differences of origin between the two must be
borne in mind. To the Pseudo-Nicephorus are due the headings; these
variations have been preserved purposely.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p5"></span>The notes have been for the greater part
limited to the sources, previous or contemporary. It has not been deemed
necessary to load the text with references to the literature, ancient or
<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv-Page_232"></span>modern, sufficiently indicated in the
Bibliography. It is just for the editor to say, that while the
literature is not unfamiliar to him, he does not believe in the modern
German method of annotation and allusion to every book under the sun, to
the grave impediment of individual study. Similarly, the dictionaries
show the biography and archæology in a better form than can be
compressed into a note. Nor did the editor think it best to introduce
into the translation any technical discussion as to the errors of
Sozomen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefatory Remarks, by Valesius.](2020273)
