[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020380)  [Next](2020382) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Concerning the Deputies
of the Council and the Emperor’s Letter; Agreement of the Adherents of
Ursacius and Valens afterwards with the Letter put forth; Exile of the
Archbishops. Concerning the Synod at Nicæa, and the Reason why the Synod
was held in Ariminum*.

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xix-p2.1"></span>We</span> have now transcribed the letter of
the council of Ariminum. Ursacius and Valens, with their adherents,
anticipating the arrival of the deputies of the council, showed to the
emperor the document which they had read, and calumniated the
council. <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) The emperor was
displeased at the rejection of this formulary, as it had been composed
in his presence at Sirmium, and he therefore treated Ursacius and Valens
with honor; while, on the other hand, he manifested great contempt
towards the deputies, and even delayed granting them an audience. At
length, however, he wrote to the Synod, and informed them that an
expedition which he was compelled to undertake against the barbarians
prevented him from conferring with the deputies; and that he had,
therefore, commanded them to remain at Adrianople until his return, in
order that, when public business had been dismissed, his mind might be
at liberty to hear and test the representations of the deputies; “for it
is right,” he said, “to bring to the investigation of Divine subjects, a
mind unfettered by other cares.” Such was the strain of his
letter. <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331)

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p5"></span>The bishops replied that they could
never depart from the decision they had formed, as they had before
declared in writing, and had charged their deputies to declare; and they
besought him to regard them with favor, and to give audience to their
deputies, and to read their letter. They told him that it must appear
grievous to him that so many churches should be deprived of their
bishops; and that, if agreeable to him, they would return to their
churches before the winter. After writing this letter, which was full of
supplications and entreaties, the bishops waited for a time for a reply;
but as no answer was granted them, they afterwards returned to their own
cities.

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p6"></span>What I have above stated clearly proves
that the bishops who were convened at Ariminum confirmed the decrees
which had of old been set forth at Nicæa. Let us now consider how it was
that they eventually assented to the formulary of faith compiled by
Valens and Ursacius and their followers. Various accounts have been
given me of this transaction. Some say that the emperor was offended at
the bishops having departed from Ariminum without his permission, and
allowed Valens and his partisans to govern the churches of the West
according to their own will, to set forth their own formulary, to eject
<span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xix-Page_315"></span>those who refused to sign it from the
churches, and to ordain others in their place. They say that, taking
advantage of this power, Valens compelled some of the bishops to sign
the formulary, and that he drove many who refused compliance, from their
churches, and first of all Liberius, bishop of Rome. It is further
asserted that when Valens and his adherents had acted in this manner in
Italy, they resolved to handle the Eastern churches in the same way. As
these persecutors were passing through Thrace, they stopped, it is said,
at Nicæa, a city of that province. They there convened a council, and
read the formulary of Ariminum, which they had translated into the Greek
language, and by representing that it had been approved by a general
council, they obtained its adoption at Nicæa; they then cunningly
denominated it the Nicæan formulary of faith, in order, by the
resemblance of names, to deceive the simple, and cause it to be mistaken
for the ancient formulary set forth by the Nicæan council. Such is the
account given by some parties. Others say that the bishops who were
convened at the council of Ariminum were wearied by their detention in
that city, as the emperor neither honored them with a reply to their
letter, nor granted them permission to return to their own churches; and
that, at this juncture, those who had espoused the opposite heresy
represented to them that it was not right that divisions should exist
between the priests of the whole world for the sake of one word, and
that it was only requisite to admit that the Son is like unto the Father
in order to put an end to all disputes; for that the bishops of the East
would never rest until the term “substance” was rejected. By these
representations, it is said, the members of the council were at length
persuaded to assent to the formulary which Ursacius had so sedulously
pressed upon them. Ursacius and his partisans, being apprehensive lest
the deputies sent by the council to the emperor should declare what
firmness was in the first place evinced by the Western bishops, and
should expose the true cause of the rejection of the term
“consubstantial,” detained these deputies at Nicæa in Thrace throughout
the winter, under the pretext that no public conveyance could be then
obtained, and that the roads were in a bad state for traveling; and they
then induced them, it is said, to translate the formulary they had
accepted from Latin into Greek, and to send it to the Eastern bishops.
By this means, they anticipated that the formulary would produce the
impression they intended without the fraud being detected; for there was
no one to testify that the members of the council of Ariminum had not
voluntarily rejected the term “substance” from deference to the Eastern
bishops, who were averse to the use of that word. But this was evidently
a false account; for all the members of the council, with the exception
of a few, maintained strenuously that the Son is like unto the Father in
substance, and the only differences of opinion existing between them
were that some said that the Son is of the same substance as the Father,
while others asserted that he is of like substance with the Father. Some
state this matter in one form, others in a different one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[314:1331](2020381.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iii.ix.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p3"></span>In addition to the references in 18,
Athan. *Synodis,* 55; Ep. *ad. Afros episcopos,* 3, 4. Documents
reproduced in Soc. ii. 37.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[314:1332](2020381.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iii.ix.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p4"></span>The reply of the bishops to Constantius,
also reproduced in Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 20, from Athan. *de Synodis,*
55. Soz. presents the best general grouping of the facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Events which took place in the Eastern Churches: Marathonius,
Eleusius of Cyzicus, and Macedonius expel those who maintain the Term
“Consubstantial.” Concerning the Churches of the Novatians; how one
Church was Transported; the Novatians enter into Communion with the
Orthodox.](2020382)
