[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020474)  [Next](2020476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Another Heresy,
that of the Sabbatians, is originated by the Novatians. Their Synod in
Sangarus. Account in Greater Detail of the Easter Festival*.

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p2.1"></span>A division</span> arose during the same
reign among the Novatians <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553)
concerning the celebration of the festival of Easter, and from this
dispute originated another, called the Sabbatian. Sabbatius, who, with
Theoctistus and Macarius, had been ordained presbyter by Marcian,
adopted the opinion of the co-presbyters, who had been convened at
Pazoucoma <span id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) during the reign of
Valens, and maintained that the feast of the Passover (Easter) ought to
be celebrated by Christians as by Jews. He seceded from the Church at
first for the purpose of exercising greater austerity, for he professed
to adopt a very austere mode of life. He also declared that one motive
of his secession was, that many persons who participated in the
mysteries appeared to him to be unworthy of the honor. When, however,
his design of introducing innovations was detected, Marcian expressed
his regret at having ordained him, and, it is said, was often heard to
exclaim that he would rather have laid his hands upon thorns than upon
the head of Sabbatius. Perceiving that the people of his diocese were
being rent into two factions, Marcian summoned all the bishops of his
own persuasion to Sangarus, a town of Bithynia, near the seashore, not
far from the city of Helenopolis. When they had assembled, they summoned
Sabbatius, and asked him to state the cause of his grievance; and as he
merely complained of the diversity prevailing in regard to the feast,
they suspected that he made this a pretext to disguise his love of
precedency, and made him <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xviii-Page_389"></span>declare upon oath that he would never
accept the episcopal office. When he had taken the required oath, all
were of the same opinion, and they voted to hold the church together,
for the difference prevailing in the celebration of the Paschal feast
ought by no means to be made an occasion for separation from communion;
and they decided that each individual should be at liberty to observe
the feast according to his own judgment. They enacted a canon on the
subject, which they styled the “Indifferent (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p4.4"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p4.5"></span>διάφορος</span>) Canon.” Such were the
transactions of the assembly at Sangarus. From that period Sabbatius
adhered to the usage of the Jews; and unless all happened to observe the
feast at the same time, he fasted, according to the custom, but in
advance, and celebrated the Passover with the usual prescriptions by
himself. He passed the Saturday, from the evening to the appointed time,
in watching and in offering up the prescribed prayers; and on the
following day he assembled with the multitude, and partook of the
mysteries. This mode of observing the feast was at first unnoticed by
the people but as, in process of time, it began to attract observation,
and to become more generally known, he found a great many imitators,
particularly in Phrygia and Galatia, to whom this celebration of the
feast became a national custom. Eventually he openly seceded from
communion, and became the bishop of those who had espoused his
sentiments, as we shall have occasion to show in the proper place.

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p5"></span>I am, for my own part, astonished
that Sabbatius and his followers attempted to introduce this innovation.
The ancient Hebrews, as is related by Eusebius, <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) on the testimony of Philo,
Josephus, Aristobulus, and several others, offered the sacrifices after
the vernal equinox, when the sun is in the first sign of the zodiac,
called by the Greeks the Ram, and when the moon is in the opposite
quarter of the heavens, and in the fourteenth day of her age. Even the
Novatians themselves, who have studied the subject with some accuracy,
declare that the founder of their heresy and his first disciples did not
follow this custom, which was introduced for the first time by those who
assembled at Pazoucoma; and that at old Rome the members of this sect
still observe the same practice as the Romans, who have not deviated
from their original usage in this particular, the custom having been
handed down to them by the holy apostles Peter and Paul. Further, the
Samaritans, who are scrupulous observers of the laws of Moses, never
celebrate this festival till the first-fruits have reached maturity;
they say it is, in the law, called the Feast of First-Fruits, and before
these appear, it is not lawful to observe the feast; and, therefore,
necessarily the vernal equinox must precede. Hence arises my
astonishment that those who profess to adopt the Jewish custom in the
celebration of this feast, do not conform to the ancient practice of the
Jews. With the exception of the people above mentioned, and the
Quartodecimani of Asia, all heresies, I believe, celebrate the Passover
in the same manner as the Romans and the Egyptians. The Quartodecimani
are so called because they observe this festival, like the Jews, on the
fourteenth day of the moon, and hence their name. The Novatians observe
the day of the resurrection. They follow the custom of the Jews and the
Quartodecimani, except when the fourteenth day of the moon falls upon
the first day of the week, in which case they celebrate the feast so
many days after the Jews, as there are intervening days between the
fourteenth day of the moon and the following Lord’s day. The Montanists,
who are called Pepuzites and Phrygians, celebrate the Passover according
to a strange fashion which they introduced. They blame those who
regulate the time of observing the feast according to the course of the
moon, and affirm that it is right to attend exclusively to the cycles of
the sun. They reckon each month to consist of thirty days, and account
the day after the vernal equinox as the first day of the year, which,
according to the Roman method of computation, would be called the ninth
day before the calends of April. It was on this day, they say, that the
two great luminaries appointed for the indication of times and of years
were created. This they prove by the fact that every eight years the sun
and the moon meet together in the same point of the heavens. The moon’s
cycle of eight years is accomplished in ninety-nine months, and in two
thousand nine hundred and twenty-two days; and during that time there
are eight revolutions made by the sun, each comprising three hundred and
sixty-five days, and the fourth part of a day. For they compute the day
of the creation of the sun, mentioned in Sacred Writ, to have been the
fourteenth day of the moon, occurring after the ninth day before the
calends of the month of April, and answering to the eighth day prior to
ides of the same month. They always celebrate the Passover on this day,
when it falls on the day of the resurrection; otherwise they celebrate
it on the following Lord’s day; for it is written according to their
assertion that the feast may be held on any day between the fourteenth
and twenty-first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[388:1554](2020475.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p3"></span>Soc. v. 21, 22. Soz. has independent
material.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[388:1555](2020475.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p4.1"></span>Παζουκώμῃ</span> ; Soc. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xviii-p4.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xviii-p4.3"></span>ν Πάζῳ κώμῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[389:1556](2020475.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="iii.xii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xviii-p6"></span>Eus. *H. E.* vii. 32. Extracts from
the canons of Anatolius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A List Worthy of Study, Given by the Historian, of Customs among
Different Nations and Churches.](2020476)
