[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020020)  [Next](2020022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Of Spyridon, Bishop of
the Cypriots.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>With</span> respect to Spyridon, so great was
his sanctity while a shepherd, that he was thought worthy of being made
a Pastor of men: and having been assigned the bishopric of one of the
cities in Cyprus named Trimithus, on account of his extreme humility he
continued to feed his sheep during his incumbency of the bishopric. Many
extraordinary things are related of him: I shall however record but one
or two, lest I should seem to wander from my subject. Once about
midnight, thieves having clandestinely entered his sheepfold attempted
to carry off some of the sheep. But God who protected the shepherd
preserved his sheep also; for the thieves were by an invisible power
bound to the folds. At daybreak, when he came to the sheep and found the
men with their hands tied behind them, he understood what was done: and
after having prayed he liberated the thieves, earnestly admonishing and
exhorting them to support themselves by honest labor, and not to take
anything unjustly. He then gave them a ram, and sent them away,
humorously adding, ‘that ye may not appear to have watched all night in
vain.’ This is one of the miracles in connection with Spyridon. Another
was of this kind. He had a virgin daughter named Irene, who was a
partaker of her father’s piety. An acquaintance entrusted to her keeping
an ornament of considerable value: she, to guard it more securely, hid
what had been deposited with her in the ground, and not long afterwards
died. Subsequently the owner of the property came to claim it; and not
finding the virgin, he began an excited conversation with the father, at
times accusing him of an attempt to defraud him, and then again
beseeching him to restore the deposit. The old man, regarding this
person’s loss as his own misfortune, went to the tomb of his daughter,
and called upon God to show him before its proper season the promised
resurrection. Nor was he disappointed in his hope: for the virgin again
reviving appeared to her father, and having pointed out to him the spot
where she had hidden the ornament, she once more departed. Such
characters as these adorned the churches in the <span id="page_19">p.
19</span> <span id="ii.iv.xii-Page_19"></span>time of the emperor
Constantine. These details I obtained from many inhabitants of Cyprus. I
have also found a treatise composed in Latin by the presbyter Rufinus,
from which I have collected these and some other things which will be
hereafter adduced. <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[19:199](2020021.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p3"></span>On the use Socrates made of Rufinus, and
the question of his knowledge of Latin therein involved, see Introd. p.
x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Eutychian the Monk.](2020022)
