[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020245)  [Next](2020247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—*Nestorius of Antioch
promoted to the See of Constantinople. His Persecution of the Heretics.*

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p2.1"></span>After</span> the death of Sisinnius, on
account of the spirit of ambitious rivalry displayed by the
ecclesiastics of Constantinople, the emperors resolved that none of that
church should fill the vacant bishopric, notwithstanding the fact that
many eagerly desired to have Philip ordained, and no less a number were
in favor of the election of Proclus. They therefore sent for a
stranger <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) from Antioch, whose
name was Nestorius, <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) a native of
Germanicia, <span id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) distinguished for
his excellent voice and fluency of speech; qualifications which they
judged important for the instruction of the people. After three months
had elapsed therefore, Nestorius was brought from Antioch, being greatly
lauded by some for his temperance: but what sort of a disposition he was
of in other respects, those who possessed any discernment were able to
perceive from his first sermon. Being ordained on the 10th of April,
under the consulate of Felix and Taurus, <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) he immediately uttered those famous
words, before all the people, in addressing the emperor, ‘Give me, my
prince, the earth purged of heretics, and I will give you heaven as a
recompense. Assist me in destroying heretics, and I will assist you in
vanquishing the Persians.’ <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) Now
although these utterances were extremely gratifying to some of the
multitude, who cherished a senseless antipathy to the very name of
heretic; yet those, as I have said, who were skillful in predicating a
man’s character from his expressions, did not fail to detect his levity
of mind, and violent and vainglorious temperament, inasmuch as he had
burst forth into such vehemence without being able to contain himself
for even the shortest space of time; and to use the proverbial phrase,
‘before he had tasted the water of the city,’ showed himself a furious
persecutor. Accordingly on the fifth day after his ordination, having
determined to demolish a chapel in which the Arians were accustomed to
perform their devotions privately, he drove these people to desperation;
for when they saw the work of destruction going forward in their chapel,
they threw fire into it, and the fire spreading on all sides reduced
many of the adjacent buildings also to ashes. A tumult accordingly arose
on account of this throughout the city, and the Arians burning to
revenge themselves, made preparations for that purpose: but God the
Guardian of the city suffered not the mischief to gather to a climax.
From that time, however, they branded Nestorius as an ‘incendiary,’ and
it was not only the heretics who did this, but those also of his own
faith. For he could not rest, but seeking every means of harassing those
who embraced not his own sentiments, he continually disturbed the public
tranquillity. He annoyed the Novatians also, being incited to jealousy
because Paul their bishop was everywhere respected for his piety; but
the emperor by his admonitions checked his fury. With what calamities he
visited the Quartodecimans throughout Asia, Lydia, and Caria, and what
multitudes perished in a popular tumult of which he was the cause at
Miletus and Sardis, I think proper to pass by in silence. What
punishment he suffered for all these enormities, and for that unbridled
license of speech in which he indulged himself, I shall mention somewhat
later. <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_992"></span>[169:993](2020246.htm#fr_992) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p3.2"></span>πήλυδα</span>, perhaps in a contemptuous
sense = ‘an imported fellow.’

<span id="fn_993"></span>[169:994](2020246.htm#fr_993) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p4"></span>Founder of Nestorianism (Nestorian church
and heresy). For details on Nestorianism, see Assemani, *Bibliotheca
Oriental.* tom. IV., said to be the most exhaustive work on the subject,
ancient and modern alike, being a volume of 950 pp. and occupied with
Nestorianism alone. ‘It collects information from all quarters,
especially from the Oriental writers, concerning the history, ritual,
organization, schools, and missions.’ (Stokes, in Smith and Wace.) The
peculiar characteristic of the Nestorian Christology will appear in the
sequel of Socrates’ account. Other accessible sources of information on
Nestorianism and Nestorius will be found in the standard ecclesiastical
histories. Cf. Neander, *Hist. of the Christ. Church,* Vol. II. p.
446–524; Schaff, *Hist. of the Christ. Church,* Vol. III. p. 714–734;
Kurtz, *Church Hist.* Vol. I. p. 334; also Gibbon, *Decline and Fall of
the Rom. Empire,* chap. 47.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[169:995](2020246.htm#fr_994) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p5"></span>A city in Cilicia, on the western border
of Syria.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[169:996](2020246.htm#fr_995) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p6"></span>428 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_996"></span>[169:997](2020246.htm#fr_996) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p7"></span>‘What the bishops and especially the
prelates of the greater churches said in their first sermon to the
people was very carefully observed among the early Christians. For from
that sermon a conjecture was made as to the faith, doctrine, and temper
of every bishop. Hence the people were wont to take particular notice,
and remember their sayings. A remark of this nature occurs above, Bk.
II. chap. 43, concerning the first sermon of Eudoxius, bishop of
Constantinople. And Theodoret and Epiphanius declare the same concerning
the first sermon of Melitius to the people.’—<span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxix-p7.1"></span>Valesius</span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[169:998](2020246.htm#fr_997) <span
id="ii.x.xxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxix-p8"></span>Below, chap. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Burgundians embrace Christianity under Theodosius the
Younger.](2020247)
