[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020239)  [Next](2020241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*After the Death of
the Emperor Honorius John usurps the Sovereignty at Rome. He is
destroyed through the Prayers of Theodosius the Younger.*

<span id="ii.x.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxiii-p2.1"></span>When</span> the Emperor Honorius died
Theodosius—now sole ruler—having received the news concealed the truth
as long as possible, misleading the people sometimes with one report,
and then with another. But he privately dispatched a military force to
Salonæ, a city of Dalmatia, that in the event of any revolutionary
movement in the West there might be resources at hand to check it; and
after making these provisional arrangements, he at length openly
announced his uncle’s death. In the meantime John, the superintendent of
the emperor’s secretaries, <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) not
content with the dignity to which he had already attained, seized upon
the sovereign authority; and sent an embassy to the emperor Theodosius,
requesting that he might be recognized as his colleague in the empire.
But that prince first caused the ambassadors to be arrested, then sent
off Ardaburius, the commander-in-chief of the army, who had greatly
distinguished himself in <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="ii.x.xxiii-Page_166"></span>the Persian war. <span
id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) He, on arriving at Salonæ, set sail
from thence for Aquileia. And he was fortunate as was thought, but
fortune was adverse to him as it afterwards appeared. For a contrary
wind having arisen, he was driven into the usurper’s hand. The latter
having seized him became more sanguine in his hope that the emperor
would be induced by the urgency of the case to elect and proclaim him
emperor, in order to preserve the life of his general-in-chief. And the
emperor was in fact greatly distressed when he heard of it, as was also
the army which had been sent against the usurper, lest Ardaburius should
be subjected to evil treatment by the usurper. Aspar the son of
Ardaburius, having learnt that his father was in the usurper’s power,
and aware at the same time that the party of the rebels was strengthened
by the accession of immense numbers of barbarians, knew not what course
to pursue. Then again at this crisis the prayer of the pious emperor
prevailed. For an angel of God, under the appearance of a shepherd,
undertook the guidance of Aspar and the troops which were with him, and
led him through the lake near Ravenna—for in that city the usurper was
then residing—and there detained the military chief. Now, no one had
ever been known to have forded that lake before; but God then rendered
that passable, which had hitherto been impassable. Having therefore
crossed the lake, as if going over dry ground, they found the gates of
the city open, and overpowered the usurper. This event afforded that
most devout emperor an opportunity of giving a fresh demonstration of
his piety towards God. For the news of the usurper’s being destroyed,
having arrived while he was engaged at the exhibition of the sports of
the Hippodrome, he immediately said to the people: ‘Come now, if you
please, let us leave these diversions, and proceed to the church to
offer thanksgivings to God, whose hand has overthrown the usurper.’ Thus
did he address them; and the spectacles were immediately forsaken and
neglected, the people all passing out of the circus singing praises
together with him, as with one heart and one voice. And arriving at the
church, the whole city again became one congregation; and once in the
church they passed the remainder of the day in these devotional
exercises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_966"></span>[165:967](2020240.htm#fr_966) <span
id="ii.x.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxiii-p3"></span>So also Zosimus, V. 40.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[166:968](2020240.htm#fr_967) <span
id="ii.x.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxiii-p4"></span>See above, chap. 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Valentinian a Son of Constantius and Placidia, Aunt of
Theodosius, is proclaimed Emperor.](2020241)
