[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020308)  [Next](2020310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*How the Iberians
received the Faith of Christ*.

<span id="iii.vii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.vii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is said that during this reign
the Iberians, <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) a large and
warlike barbarian nation, confessed Christ. <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) They dwelt to the north beyond
Armenia. A Christian woman, who had been taken captive, induced them to
renounce the religion of their fathers. She was very faithful and godly,
and did not, amongst foreigners, remit her accustomed routine of
religious duty. To fast, to pray night and day, and to praise God,
constituted her delight. The barbarians inquired as to the motives of
her endurance: she simply answered, that it was necessary in this way to
worship the Son of God; but the name of Him who was to be worshiped, and
the manner of worshiping, appeared strange to them. It happened that a
boy of the country was taken ill, and his mother, according to the
custom of the Iberians, took him around from house to house, in hope
that some one might be found capable of curing the disease, and the
change from the suffering might be easy for the afflicted. As no one
capable of healing him could be found, the boy was brought to the
captive, and she said, “as to medicines, I have neither experience nor
knowledge, nor am I acquainted with the mode of applying ointments or
plasters; but, O woman, I believe that Christ whom I worship, the true
and great God, will become the Saviour of thy child.” Then she prayed
for him immediately and freed him from the disease, although just before
it was believed that he was about to die. A little while after, the wife
of the governor of the nation was, by an incurable disease, brought nigh
unto death; yet she too was saved in the same manner. And thus did this
captive teach the knowledge of Christ, by introducing Him as the
dispenser of health, and as the Lord of life, of empire, and of all
things. The governor’s wife, convinced by her own personal experience,
believed the words of the captive, embraced the Christian religion, and
held the woman in much honor. The king, astonished at the celerity of
the cure, and the miraculousness and healing of faith, learned the cause
from his wife, and commanded that the captive should be rewarded with
gifts. “Of gifts,” said the queen, “her estimate is very low, whatever
may be their value; she makes much of the service she renders to her God
only. Therefore if we wish to gratify her, or desire to do what is safe
and right, let us also worship God, who is mighty and a Saviour, and
who, at His will, gives continuance unto kings, casts down the high,
renders the illustrious abject, and saves those in terrible straits.”
The queen continued to argue in this excellent manner, but the sovereign
of Iberia remained in doubt and unconvinced, as he reflected on the
novelty of the matters, and also respected the religion of his fathers.
A little while after, he went into the woods with his attendants, on a
hunting excursion; all of a sudden thick clouds arose, and a heavy air
was everywhere diffused by them, so as to conceal the heavens and the
sun; profound night and great darkness pervaded the wood. Since each of
the hunters was alarmed for his own safety, they scattered in different
directions. The king, while thus wandering alone, thought of Christ, as
men are wont to do in times of danger. He determined that if he should
be delivered from his present emergency, he would walk before God and
worship Him. At the very instant that these thoughts were upon his mind,
the darkness was dissipated, the air became serene, the rays of the sun
penetrated into the wood, and the king went out in safety. He informed
his wife of the event that had befallen him, sent for the captive, and
commanded her to teach him in what way he ought to worship Christ. When
she had given as much instruction as it was right for a woman to say and
do, he called together his subjects and declared to them plainly the
Divine mercies which had been vouchsafed to himself and to his wife, and
although uninitiated, he declared to his people the doctrines of Christ.
The whole nation was persuaded to embrace Christianity, the men being
convinced by the representations of the king, and the women by those of
the queen and the captive. And speedily with the general consent of the
entire nation, they prepared most zealously to build a church. When the
external walls were completed, machines were brought to raise up the
columns, and fix them upon their pedestals. It is related, that when the
first and second columns had been righted by these means, great
difficulty was found in fixing the third column, neither art nor
physical strength being of any <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iii.vii.vii-Page_264"></span>avail, although many were present to
assist in the pulling. When evening came on, the female captive remained
alone on the spot, and she continued there throughout the night,
interceding with God that the erection of the columns might be easily
accomplished, especially as all the rest had taken their departure
distressed at the failure; for the column was only half raised, and
remained standing, and one end of it was so embedded in its foundations
that it was impossible to move it downward. It was God’s will that by
this, as well as by the preceding miracle, the Iberians should be still
further confirmed about the Deity. Early in the morning, when they were
present at the church, they beheld a wonderful spectacle, which seemed
to them as a dream. The column, which on the day before had been
immovable, now appeared erect, and elevated a small space above its
proper base. All present were struck with admiration, and confessed,
with one consent, that Christ alone is the true God. Whilst they were
all looking on, the column slipped quietly and spontaneously, and was
adjusted as by machinery on its base. The other columns were then
erected with ease, and the Iberians completed the structure with greater
alacrity. The church having been thus speedily built, the Iberians, at
the recommendation of the captive, sent ambassadors to the Emperor
Constantine, bearing proposals for alliance and treaties, and requesting
that priests might be sent to their nation. On their arrival, the
ambassadors related the events that had occurred, and how the whole
nation with much care worshiped Christ. The emperor of the Romans was
delighted with the embassy, and after acceding to every request that was
proffered, dismissed the ambassadors. Thus did the Iberians receive the
knowledge of Christ, and until this day they worship him carefully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[263:1153](2020309.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="iii.vii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vii-p3"></span>By the Iberians we are to understand,
not the people of Spain (for they had a church among them as early as
the time of Irenæus; see *adv. Hæres.* i. 3, ed. Harvey), but the people
of that name in Asia. Cf. Soc. i. 20, who says these Iberians migrated
from Spain.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[263:1154](2020309.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="iii.vii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vii-p4"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 10; Soc. i. 20; Soz.
takes directly from Ruf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Armenians and Persians embraced Christianity.](2020310)
