[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020066)  [Next](2020068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Athanasius, intimidated
by the Emperor’s Threats, returns to Rome again.*

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xvii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time another accusation was
concocted against Athanasius by the Arians, who invented this pretext
for it. The father of the Augusti had long before granted an allowance
of corn to the church of the Alexandrians for the relief of the
indigent. This, they asserted, had usually been sold by Athanasius, and
the proceeds converted to his own advantage. The emperor, giving
credence to this slanderous report, threatened Athanasius with death, as
a penalty; who, becoming alarmed at the intimation of this threat, took
to flight, and kept himself concealed. When Julius, bishop of Rome, was
apprised of these fresh machinations of the Arians against Athanasius,
and had also received the letter of the then deceased Eusebius, he
invited the persecuted Athanasius to come to him, having ascertained
where he was secreted. The epistle also of the bishops who had been some
time before assembled at Antioch, just then reached him; and at the same
time others from the bishops in Egypt, assuring him that the entire
charge against Athanasius was a fabrication. On the receipt of these
contradictory communications, Julius first replied to the bishops who
had written to him from Antioch, complaining of the acrimonious feeling
they had evinced in their letter, and charging them with a violation of
the canons, because they had not requested his attendance at the
council, <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) seeing that the
ecclesiastical law required that the churches should pass no decisions
contrary to the views of the bishop of Rome: he then censured them with
great severity for clandestinely attempting to pervert the faith; in
addition, that their former proceedings at Tyre were fraudulent, because
the investigation of what had taken place at Mareotes was on one side of
the question only; not only this, but that the charge respect<span
id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="ii.v.xvii-Page_44"></span>ing
Arsenius had plainly been proved a false charge. Such and similar
sentiments did Julius write in his answer to the bishops convened at
Antioch; we should have inserted here at length, these as well as those
letters which were addressed to Julius, did not their prolixity
interfere with our purpose. But Sabinus, the advocate of the Macedonian
heresy, of whom we have before spoken, has not incorporated the letters
of Julius in his Collection of Synodical Transactions; <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) although he has not omitted that which
the bishops of Antioch sent to Julius. This, however, is usual with him;
he carefully introduces such letters as make no reference to, or wholly
repudiate the term *homoousion*; while he purposely passes over in
silence those of a contrary tendency. This is sufficient on this
subject. Not long after this, Paul, pretending to make a journey from
Thessalonica to Corinth, arrived in Italy: upon which both the
bishops <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) made an appeal to the
emperor of those parts, laying their respective cases before him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[43:289](2020067.htm#fr_288) <span
id="ii.v.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p3"></span>Sozom. X. 3 follows Socrates. The
contents of the letter written by Julius to the Eusebians, found in
Athanasius’ *Apologia contra Arianos,* c. 20, are different from those
here given by Socrates. Julius there complains of their ignoring his
invitation to the synod at Rome, but says nothing of any canon such as
is mentioned here. Cf. ch. 8, note 2.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[44:290](2020067.htm#fr_289) <span
id="ii.v.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p4"></span>See above, ch. 15.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[44:291](2020067.htm#fr_290) <span
id="ii.v.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p5"></span>Athanasius and Paul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor of the West requests his Brother to send him Three
Persons who could give an Account of the Deposition of Athanasius and
Paul. Those who are sent publish Another Form of the Creed.](2020068)
