[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020052)  [Next](2020054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Athanasius, encouraged by
the Letter of Constantine the Younger, returns to Alexandria.*

<span id="ii.v.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.iii-p2.1"></span>Constantine Cæsar</span> to the members of the
Catholic Church of the Alexandrians.

<span id="ii.v.iii-p3"></span>It cannot, I conceive, have escaped the
knowledge of your devout minds, that Athanasius, the expositor of the
venerated law, was sent for a while unto the Gauls, lest he should
sustain some irreparable injury from the perverseness of his
blood-thirsty adversaries, whose ferocity continually endangered his
sacred life. To evade this \[perverseness\], therefore, he was taken
from the jaws of the men who threatened him into a city under my
jurisdiction, where, as long as it was his appointed residence, he has
been abundantly supplied with every necessity: although his
distinguished virtue trusting in divine aid would have made light of the
pressure of a more rigorous fortune. And since our sovereign, my father,
Constantine Augustus of blessed memory, was prevented by death from
accomplishing his purpose of restoring this bishop to his see, and to
your most sanctified piety, I have deemed it proper to carry his wishes
into effect, having inherited the task from him. With how great
veneration he has been regarded by us, ye will learn on his arrival
among you; nor need any one be surprised at the honor I have put upon
him, since I have been alike influenced by a sense of what was due to so
excellent a personage, and the knowledge of your affectionate solicitude
respecting him. May Divine Providence preserve you, beloved brethren.

<span id="ii.v.iii-p4"></span>Relying on this letter, Athanasius came to
Alexandria, and was most joyfully received by the people of the city.
Nevertheless as many in it as had embraced Arianism, combining together,
entered into conspiracies against him, by which frequent seditions were
excited, affording a pretext to the Eusebians for accusing him to the
emperor of having taken possession of the Alexandrian church on his own
responsibility, in spite of the adverse judgment of a general council of
bishops. So far indeed did they succeed in pressing their charges, that
the emperor became exasperated, and banished him from Alexandria. How
indeed this came about I shall hereafter explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Death of Eusebius Pamphilus, Acacius succeeds to the
Bishopric of Cæsarea.](2020054)
