[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020315)  [Next](2020317) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*The Martyrdom of
Bishop Milles and his Conduct. Sixteen Thousand Distinguished Men in
Persia suffer Martyrdom under Sapor, besides Obscure Individuals*.

<span id="iii.vii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period Milles suffered
martyrdom. He originally served the Persians in a military capacity, but
afterwards abandoned that vocation, in order to embrace the apostolical
mode of life. It is related that he was ordained bishop over a Persian
city, and he underwent a variety of sufferings, and endured wounds and
drawings; and that, failing in his efforts to convert the inhabitants to
Christianity, he uttered imprecations against the city, and departed.
Not long after, some of the principal citizens offended the king, and an
army with three hundred elephants was sent against them; the city was
utterly demolished and its land was ploughed and sown. Milles, taking
with him only his wallet, in which was the holy Book of the Gospels,
repaired to Jerusalem in prayer; thence he proceeded to Egypt in order
to see the monks. The extraordinary and admirable works which we have
heard that he accomplished, are attested by the Syrians, who have
written an account of his actions and life. For my own part, I think
that I have said enough of him and of the other martyrs who suffered in
Persia during the reign of Sapor; for it would be difficult to relate in
detail every circumstance respecting them, such as their names, their
country, the mode of completing their martyrdom, and the species of
torture to which they were subjected; for they are innumerable, since
such methods are jealously affected by the Persians, even to the extreme
of cruelty. I shall briefly state that the number of men and women whose
names have been ascertained, and who were martyred at this period, have
been computed to be sixteen thousand; while the multitude outside of
these is beyond enumeration, and <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xiv-Page_268"></span>on this account to reckon off their
names appeared difficult to the Persians and Syrians and to the
inhabitants of Edessa, who have devoted much care to this matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constantine writes to Sapor to stay the Persecution of the
Christians.](2020317)
