[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020051)  [Next](2020053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*Eusebius, Bishop of
Nicomedia, and his Party, by again endeavoring to introduce the Arian
Heresy, create Disturbances in the Churches.*

<span id="ii.v.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>After</span> the death of the Emperor
Constantine, Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis of Nicæa,
imagining that a favorable opportunity had arisen, used their utmost
efforts to expunge the doctrine of *homoousion,* and to introduce
Arianism in its place. They, nevertheless, despaired of effecting this,
if Athanasius should return to Alexandria: in order therefore to
accomplish their designs, they sought the assistance of that presbyter
by whose means Arius had been recalled from exile a little before. How
this was done shall now be described. The presbyter in question
presented the will and the request of the deceased king to his son
Constantius; who finding those dispositions in it which he was most
desirous of, for the empire of the East was by his father’s will
apportioned to him, treated the presbyter with great consideration,
loaded him with favors, and ordered that free access should be given him
both to the palace and to himself. This license soon obtained for him
familiar intercourse with the empress, as well as with her eunuchs.
There was at that time a chief eunuch of the imperial bed-chamber named
Eusebius; him the presbyter persuaded to adopt Arian’s views, after
which the rest of the eunuchs were also prevailed on to adopt the same
sentiments. Not only this but the empress also, under the influence of
the eunuchs and the presbyters, became favorable to the tenets of Arius;
and not long after the subject was introduced to the emperor himself.
Thus it became gradually diffused throughout the court, and among the
officers of the imperial household and guards, until at length it spread
itself over the whole population of the city. The chamberlains in <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span id="ii.v.ii-Page_37"></span>the palace
discussed this doctrine with the women; and in the family of every
citizen there was a logical contest. Moreover, the mischief quickly
extended to other provinces and cities, the controversy, like a spark,
insignificant at first, exciting in the auditors a spirit of contention:
for every one who inquired the cause of the tumult, found immediately
occasion for disputing, and determined to take part in the strife at the
moment of making the inquiry. By general altercation of this kind all
order was subverted; the agitation, however, was confined to the cities
of the East, those of Illyricum and the western parts of the empire
meanwhile were perfectly tranquil, because they would not annul the
decisions of the Council of Nicæa. As this affair increased, going from
bad to worse, Eusebius of Nicomedia and his party looked upon popular
ferment as a piece of good fortune. For only thus they thought they
would be enabled to constitute some one who held their own sentiments
bishop of Alexandria. But the return of Athanasius at that time defeated
their purpose; for he came thither fortified by a letter from one of the
Augusti, which the younger Constantine, who bore his father’s name,
addressed to the people of Alexandria, from Treves, a city in
Gaul. <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) A copy of this epistle is
here subjoined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[37:263](2020052.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ii.v.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii-p3"></span>There is some difference of opinion as to
the exact year of the recall of Athanasius. Baronius and others allege
that this took place in 338 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, the year after the death of
Constantine; but Valesius maintains that Athanasius was recalled the
year preceding. This he infers from the words of Athanasius (*Apol. c.
Arian,* 61), and the title of the letter which Constantine the younger
addressed to the church in Alexandria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius, encouraged by the Letter of Constantine the Younger,
returns to Alexandria.](2020053)
