[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020396)  [Next](2020398) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—*Julian inflicted Evils
upon the Inhabitants of Cæsarea. Bold Fidelity of Maris, Bishop of
Chalcedon*.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.iv-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same time, the emperor erased
Cæsarea, <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368) the large and
wealthy metropolis of Cappadocia, situated near Mount Argeus, from the
catalogue of cities, and even deprived it of the name of Cæsarea, which
had been conferred upon it during the reign of Claudius Cæsar, its
former name having been Mazaca. <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) He had <span id="page_329">p.
329</span> <span id="iii.x.iv-Page_329"></span>long regarded the
inhabitants of this city with extreme aversion, because they were
zealously attached to Christianity, and had formerly destroyed the
temple of the ancestral Apollo and that of Jupiter, the tutelar deity of
the city. The temple dedicated to Fortune, <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) the only one remaining in the city,
was overturned by the Christians after his accession; and on hearing of
the deed, he hated the entire city intensely and could scarce endure it.
He also blamed the pagans, who were few in number, but who ought, he
said, to have hastened to the temple, and, if necessary, to have
suffered cheerfully for Fortune. He caused all possessions and money
belonging to the churches of the city and suburbs of Cæsarea to be
rigorously sought out and carried away; about three hundred pounds of
gold, obtained from this source, were conveyed to the public treasury.
He also commanded that all the clergy should be enrolled among the
troops under the governor of the province, which is accounted the most
arduous and least honorable service among the Romans.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p6"></span>He ordered the Christian populace to be
numbered, women and children inclusive, and imposed taxes upon them as
onerous as those to which villages are subjected.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p7"></span>He further threatened that, unless their
temples were speedily re-erected, his wrath would not be appeased, but
would be visited on the city, until none of the Galileans remained in
existence; for this was the name which, in derision, he was wont to give
to the Christians. There is no doubt but that his menaces would have
been fully executed had not death quickly intervened.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p8"></span>It was not from any feeling of compassion
towards the Christians that he treated them at first with greater
humanity than had been evinced by former persecutors, but because he had
discovered that paganism had derived no advantage from their tortures,
while Christianity had been especially increased, and had become more
honored by the fortitude of those who died in defense of the faith.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p9"></span>It was simply from envy of their glory,
that instead of employing fire and the sword against them, and
maltreating their bodies like former persecutors, and instead of casting
them into the sea, or burying them alive in order to compel them to a
change of sentiment, he had recourse to argument and persuasion, and
sought by these means to reduce them to paganism; he expected to gain
his ends more easily by abandoning all violent measures, and by the
manifestation of unexpected benevolence. It is said that on one
occasion, when he was sacrificing in the temple of Fortune at
Constantinople, Maris, <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371) bishop
of Chalcedon, presented himself before him, and publicly rebuked him as
an irreligous man, an atheist, and an apostate. Julian had nothing in
return to reproach him with except his blindness, for his sight was
impaired by old age, and he was led by a child. According to his usual
custom of uttering blasphemies against Christ, Julian afterward added in
derision, “The Galilean, thy God, will not cure thee.” Maris replied, ‘I
thank God for my blindness, since it prevents me from beholding one who
has fallen away from our religion.’ Julian passed on without giving a
reply, for he considered that paganism would be more advanced by a
personal and unexpected exhibition of patience and mildness towards
Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[328:1369](2020397.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p3"></span>The record is unique with Soz. Cf. the
allusion in Greg. Naz. *Or. cont. Julianum*, i. 92; and Am. Marcel. xx.
9. 1, 2 (Mazaca).

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[328:1370](2020397.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p4"></span>Am. Marcel. in quotation above; and
Philost. ix. 12, who says that the original name of Cæsarea was Mazaca,
from Mosoch, afterwards changed into Mazaca by inflection.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[329:1371](2020397.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.iv-p5.1"></span>Τὸ Τυχείον</span> was the Byzantine term for
the temple of the city genius. This one is mentioned by Greg. Naz. *Or.
cont. Julianum,* i. 92, as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.iv-p5.2"></span>Τύχη</span>; similarly in *Or.* xviii. 34.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[329:1372](2020397.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p10"></span>Concerning this Maris, see Soc. iii. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Julian restores Liberty to the Christians, in order to execute
Further Troubles in the Church. The Evil Treatment of Christians he
devised.](2020398)
