[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020306)  [Next](2020308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Constantine destroyed the
Places dedicated to the Idols, and persuaded the People to prefer
Christianity*.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>As</span> many nations and cities throughout
the whole realm of his subjects retained a feeling of fear and
veneration towards their vain idols, which led them to disregard the
doctrines of the Christians, and to have a care for their ancient
customs, and the manners and feasts of their fathers, it appeared
necessary to the emperor to teach the governors to suppress their
superstitious rites of worship. He thought that this would be easily
accomplished if he could get <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="iii.vii.v-Page_262"></span>them to despise their temples and the
images contained therein. <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) To
carry this project into execution he did not require military aid; for
Christian men belonging to the palace went from city to city bearing
imperial letters. The people were induced to remain passive from the
fear that, if they resisted these edicts, they, their children, and
their wives, would be exposed to evil. The vergers and the priests,
being unsupported by the multitude, brought out their most precious
treasures, and the idols called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.v-p3.1"></span>διοπετῆ</span>, <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) and through these servitors, the
gifts were drawn forth from the shrines and the hidden recesses in the
temples. The spots previously inaccessible, and known only to the
priests, were made accessible to all who desired to enter. Such of the
images as were constructed of precious material, and whatever else was
valuable, were purified by fire, and became public property. The brazen
images which were skillfully wrought were carried to the city, named
after the emperor, and placed there as objects of embellishment, where
they may still be seen in public places, as in the streets, the
hippodrome, and the palaces. Amongst them was the statue of Apollo which
was in the seat of the oracle of the Pythoness, and likewise the statues
of the Muses from Helicon, the tripods from Delphos, and the much
extolled Pan, which Pausanias the Lacedæmonian and the Grecian cities
had devoted,—after the war against the Medes.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p5"></span>As to the temples, some were stripped of
their doors, others of their roofs, and others were neglected, allowed
to fall into ruin, or destroyed. The temple of Æsculapius in Ægis, a
city of Cilicia, and that of Venus at Aphaca, near Mount Lebanon and the
River Adonis, were then undermined and entirely destroyed. Both of these
temples were most highly honored and reverenced by the ancients; as the
Ægeatæ were wont to say, that those among them who were weakened in body
were delivered from diseases because the demon manifested himself by
night, and healed them. And at Aphaca, it was believed that on a certain
prayer being uttered on a given day, a fire like a star descended from
the top of Lebanon and sunk into the neighboring river; they affirmed
that this was Urania, for they call Aphrodite by this name. The efforts
of the emperor succeeded to the utmost of his anticipations; for on
beholding the objects of their former reverence and fear boldly cast
down and stuffed with straw and hay, the people were led to despise what
they had previously venerated, and to blame the erroneous opinion of
their ancestors. Others, envious at the honor in which Christians were
held by the emperor, deemed it necessary to imitate the acts of the
ruler; others devoted themselves to an examination of Christianity, and
by means of signs, of dreams, or of conferences with bishops and monks,
were convinced that it was better to become Christians. From this
period, nations and citizens spontaneously renounced their former
opinion. At that time a port of Gaza, called Majuma, wherein
superstition and ancient ceremonies had been hitherto admired, turned
unitedly with all its inhabitants to Christianity. The emperor, in order
to reward their piety, deemed them worthy of the greatest honor, and
distinguished the place as a city, a status it had not previously
enjoyed, and named it Constantia: thus honoring the spot on account of
its piety, by bestowing on it the name of the dearest of his children.
On the same account, also, Constantine in Phœnicia is known to have
received its name from the emperor. But it would not be convenient to
record every instance of this kind, for many other cities about this
time went over to religion, and spontaneously, without any command of
the emperor, destroyed the adjacent temples and statues, and erected
houses of prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[262:1149](2020307.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 54–58; iv. 38; Soc. i.
18; Zos. ii. 31.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[262:1150](2020307.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p4"></span>*i.e.*“sent down from Jupiter.” Such were
the Palladium of Troy, the Ancile at Rome, and “the image” of Diana,
“which fell down from Jupiter,” mentioned in [Acts xix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035)<span id="iii.vii.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Reason why under Constantine, the Name of Christ was spread
throughout the Whole World.](2020308)
