[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020214)  [Next](2020216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Of Sisinnius Bishop
of the Novatians. His Readiness at Repartee.*

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p2.1"></span>It</span> will not be out of place here, I
conceive, to give some account of Sisinnius. He was, as I have often
said, <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) a remarkably eloquent man,
and well-instructed in philosophy. But he had particularly cultivated
logic, and was profoundly skilled in the interpretation of the holy
Scriptures; insomuch that the heretic Eunomius often shrank from the
acumen which his reasoning displayed. As regards his diet he was not
simple; for although he practised the strictest moderation, yet his
table was always sumptuously furnished. He was also accustomed to
indulge himself by wearing white garments, and bathing twice a day in
the public baths. And when some one asked him ‘why he, a bishop, bathed
himself twice a day?’ he replied, ‘Because it is inconvenient to bathe
thrice.’ Going one day from courtesy to visit the bishop Arsacius, he
was asked by one of the friends of that bishop, ‘why he wore a garment
so unsuitable for a bishop? and where it was written that an
ecclesiastic should be clothed in white?’ ‘Do you tell me first,’ said
he, ‘where it is written that a bishop should wear black?’ When he that
made the inquiry knew not what to reply to this counter-question: ‘You
cannot show,’ rejoined Sisinnius, ‘that a priest should be clothed in
black. But Solomon is my authority, whose exhortation is, “Let thy
garments be white.” <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) And our
Saviour in the Gospels appears clothed in white raiment: <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) moreover he showed Moses and Elias to
the apostles, clad in white garments.’ His prompt reply to these and
other questions called forth the admiration of those present. Again when
Leontius bishop of Ancyra in Galatia Minor, who had taken away a church
from the Novatians, was on a visit to Constantinople, Sisinnius went to
him, and begged him to restore the church. But he received him rudely,
saying, ‘Ye Novatians ought not to have churches; for ye take away
repentance, and shut out Divine mercy.’ As Leontius gave utterance to
these and many other such revilings against the Novatians, Sisinnius
replied: ‘No one repents more heartily than I do.’ And when Leontius
asked him ‘Why do you repent?’ ‘That I came to see you,’ said he. On one
occasion John the bishop having a contest with him, said, ‘The city
cannot have two bishops.’ <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) ‘Nor
has it,’ said Sisinnius. John being irritated at this response, said,
‘You see you pretend that you alone are the bishop.’ ‘I do not say
that,’ rejoined Sisinnius; ‘but that I am not bishop in your estimation
only, who am such to others.’ John being still more chafed at this
reply, said, ‘I will stop your preaching; for you are a heretic.’ To
which Sisinnius good-humoredly replied, ‘I will give you a reward, if
you will relieve me from so arduous a duty.’ John being softened a
little by this answer, said, ‘I will not make you cease to preach, if
you find speaking so troublesome.’ So facetious was Sisinnius, and so
ready at repartee: but it would be tedious to dwell further on his
witticisms. Wherefore by means of a few specimens we have illustrated
what sort of a person he was, deeming these as sufficient. I will merely
add that he was celebrated for erudition, and on account of it all the
bishops who succeeded him loved and honored him; and not only they but
all the leading members of the senate also esteemed and admired him. He
is the author of many works: but they are characterized by too great an
affectation of elegance of diction, and a lavish intermingling of poetic
expressions. On which account he was more <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="ii.ix.xxiii-Page_153"></span>admired as a speaker
than as a writer; for there was dignity in his countenance and voice, as
well as in his form and aspect, and every movement of his person was
graceful. On account of these features he was loved by all the sects,
and he was in especial favor with Atticus the bishop. But I must
conclude this brief notice of Sisinnius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_896"></span>[152:897](2020215.htm#fr_896) <span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p3"></span>Cf. V. 10 and 21.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[152:898](2020215.htm#fr_897) <span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p4"></span>[Eccl. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008)<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[152:899](2020215.htm#fr_898) <span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p5"></span>[Matt.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002), [Mark
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#003), [Luke
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#029)<span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>. On the clothing of the clergy, see
Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* VI. 4. 18.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[152:900](2020215.htm#fr_899) <span
id="ii.ix.xxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xxiii-p6"></span>The canons forbade the existence of two
authoritative bishops in one city. Cf. V. 5, note 3. It was supposed to
be an apostolic tradition that prescribed this practice, and the
faithful always resisted and condemned any attempts to consecrate a
second bishop in a city. Thus ‘when Constantius proposed that Liberius
and Felix should sit as co-partners in the Roman see and govern the
church in common, the people with one accord rejected the proposal,
crying out “One God, one Christ, one bishop.” The rule, however, did not
apply to the case of coadjutors, where the bishop was too old or infirm
to discharge his episcopal duties.’ See Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* II.
13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of the Emperor Arcadius.](2020216)
