[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020479)  [Next](2020481) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Exaction of
Tribute in Antioch, and Demolition of the Statues of the Emperor.
Embassy headed by Flavian the Chief Priest*.

<span id="iii.xii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>In</span> this time, on account of the
necessities of war, it seemed best to the officials whose concern it
was, to impose more than the customary taxes; for this reason the
populace of Antioch in Syria revolted; <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) the statues of the emperor and
empress were thrown down and dragged by ropes through the city, and, as
is usual on such occasions, the enraged multitude uttered every
insulting epithet that passion could suggest. The emperor determined to
avenge this insult by the death of many of the citizens of Antioch; the
people were struck dumb at the mere announcement; the rage of the
citizens had subsided, and had given place to repentance; and, as if
already subjected to the threatened punishment, they abandoned
themselves to groans and tears, and supplicated God to turn away the
anger of the emperor, and made use of some threnodic hymns for their
litanies. They deputed <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxiii-Page_393"></span>Flavian, their bishop, to go on an
embassy to Theodosius; but on his arrival, finding that the resentment
of the emperor at what had occurred was unabated, he had recourse to the
following artifice. He caused some young men accustomed to sing at the
table of the emperor to utter these hymns with the litanies of the
Antiochans. It is said that the humanity of the emperor was excited; he
was overcome by pity at once; his wrath was subdued, and as his heart
yearned over the city, he shed tears on the cup which he held in his
hand. It is reported that, on the night before the sedition occurred, a
spectre was seen in the form of a woman of prodigious height and
terrible aspect, pacing through the streets of the city, lashing the air
with an ill-sounding whip, similar to that which is used in goading on
the beasts brought forward at the public theatres. It might have been
inferred that the sedition was excited by the agency of some evil and
malicious demon. There is no doubt but that much bloodshed would have
ensued, had not the wrath of the emperor been stayed by his respect for
this sacerdotal entreaty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[392:1564](2020480.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="iii.xii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxiii-p3"></span>Soz. is again independent. Cf.
Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 20; Chrysost. *Homiliæ,* xxi., *de Statuis ad
populum Antiochenum habitæ*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Victory of Theodosius the Emperor over Eugenius.](2020481)
