[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020507)  [Next](2020509) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Calamities suffered
by the People after the Expulsion of John. The Plots against him of
Assassination*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxi-p2.1"></span>After</span> his deposition, John held no
more assemblies in the church, but quietly remained in the episcopal
dwelling-house. <span id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) At the
termination of the season of Quadragesima, on the same holy night in
which the yearly festival in commemoration of the resurrection of Christ
is celebrated, the followers of John were expelled from the church by
the soldiers and his enemies, who attacked the people while still
celebrating the mysteries. Since this occurrence was unforeseen, a great
disturbance arose in the baptistery. The women wept and lamented, and
the children screamed; the priests and the deacons were beaten, and were
forcibly ejected from the church, in the priestly garments in which they
had been officiating. They were charged with the commission of such
disorderly acts as can be readily conceived by those who have been
admitted to the mysteries, but which I consider it requisite to pass
over in silence, lest my work should fall into the hands of the
uninitiated.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxi-p4"></span>When the people perceived the plot,
they did not use the church on the following day, but celebrated the
Paschal feast in the very spacious public baths called after the Emperor
Constantius. Bishops and presbyters, and the rest, whose right it is to
administer church matters, officiated. Those who espoused the cause of
John were present with the people. They were, however, driven hence, and
then assembled on a spot without the walls of the city, which the
Emperor Constantine, before the city had been built, had caused to be
cleared and inclosed with palisades, for the purpose of celebrating
there the games of the hippodrome. From that period, the people held
separate assemblies, sometimes, whenever it was feasible, in that
locality, and sometimes in another. They obtained the name of Johnites.
About this time, a man who was either possessed of a <span
id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xxi-Page_413"></span>devil, or who feigned to have one, was
seized, having a poniard on his person, with the intention of
assassinating John. He was apprehended by the people as one who had been
hired for this plot, and led to the prefect; but John sent some bishops
of his party to free him from custody before he had been questioned by
torture. Some time afterwards, a slave of Elpidius the presbyter, who
was an avowed enemy of the deacon, was seen running as swiftly as
possible towards the episcopal residence. A passer-by endeavored to stop
him, in order to ascertain the cause of so much haste; but instead of
answering him, the slave plunged his poniard into him. Another person,
who happened to be standing by, and who cried out at seeing the other
wounded, was also wounded in a similar way by the slave; as was likewise
a third bystander. All the people in the neighborhood, on seeing what
had occurred, shouted that the slave ought to be arrested. He turned and
fled. When those who were pursuing called out to those ahead to seize
the fugitive, a man, who just then came out from the baths, strove to
stop him, and was so grievously wounded that he fell down dead on the
spot. At length, the people contrived to encircle the slave. They seized
him, and conveyed him to the palace of the emperor, declaring that he
had intended to have assassinated John, and that the crime ought to be
visited with punishment. The prefect allayed the fury of the people by
putting the delinquent into custody, and by assuring them that justice
should have its course against him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[412:1611](2020508.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxi-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 18; Pallad. *ibid.* Soz. has
much distinctive material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Unlawful Expulsion of John from his Bishopric. The Trouble which
followed. Conflagration of the Church by Fire from Heaven. Exile of John
to Cucusus.](2020509)
