[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020139)  [Next](2020141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*The Emperor banishes
Evagrius and Eustathius. The Arians persecute the Orthodox.*

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>When</span> this had been accomplished the
Arians renewed their persecution of the Homoousians: and the emperor was
very soon informed of what had taken place, and apprehending the
subversion of the city in consequence of some popular tumult,
immediately sent troops from Nicomedia to Constantinople; ordering that
both he who had been ordained, and the one who had ordained him, should
be apprehended and sent into exile in different regions. Eustathius
therefore was banished to Bizya a city of Thrace; and Evagrius was
conveyed to another place. After this the Arians, becoming bolder,
grievously harassed the orthodox party, frequently beating them,
reviling them, causing them to be imprisoned, and fined; in short they
practiced distressing and intolerable annoyances against them. The
sufferers were induced to appeal to the emperor for protection against
their adversaries if haply they might obtain some relief from this
oppression. But whatever hope of redress they might have cherished from
this quarter, was altogether frustrated, inasmuch as they thus merely
spread their grievances before him who was the very author of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Certain Presbyters burnt in a Ship by Order of Valens. Famine in
Phrygia.](2020141)
