[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020107)  [Next](2020109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.x"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Of Hilary Bishop of
Poictiers.*

<span id="ii.vi.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.x-p2.1"></span>There</span>, however, Hilary bishop of
Poictiers (a city of Aquitania Secunda) had anticipated him, having
previously confirmed the bishops of Italy and Gaul in the doctrines of
the orthodox faith; for he first had returned from exile to these
countries. Both therefore nobly combined their energies in defense of
the faith: and Hilary being a very eloquent man, maintained with great
power the doctrine of the *homoousion* in books which he wrote in Latin.
In these he gave sufficient support \[to the doctrine\] and unanswerably
confuted the Arian tenets. These things took place shortly after the
recall of those who had been banished. But it must be observed, that at
the same time Macedonius, Eleusius, Eustathius, and Sophronius, with all
their partisans, who had but the one common designation Macedonians,
held frequent Synods in various places. <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) Having called together those of
Seleucia who embraced their views, they anathematized the bishops of the
other party, that is the Acacian: and rejecting the creed of Ariminum,
they confirmed that which had been read at Seleucia. This, as I have
stated in the preceding book, <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513)
was the same as had been before promulgated at Antioch. When they were
asked by some one, ‘Why have ye, who are called Macedonians hitherto,
retained communion with the Acacians, as though ye agreed in opinion, if
ye really hold different sentiments?’ they replied thus, through
Sophronius, bishop of Pompeiopolis, a city of Paphlagonia: ‘Those in the
West,’ said he, ‘were infected with the homoousian error as with a
disease: Aëtius in the East adulterated the purity of the faith by
introducing the assertion of a dissimilitude of substance. Now both of
these dogmas are illegitimate; for the former rashly blended into one
the distinct persons of the Father and the Son, binding them together by
that cord of iniquity the term *homoousion;* while Aëtius wholly
separated that affinity of nature of the Son to the Father, by the
expression *anomoion,* unlike as to substance or essence. Since then
both these opinions run into the very opposite extremes, the middle
course between them appeared to us to be more consistent with truth and
piety: we accordingly assert that the Son is “like the Father as to
subsistence.”’

<span id="ii.vi.x-p5"></span>Such was the answer the Macedonians made by
Sophronius to that question, as Sabinus assures us in his *Collection of
the Synodical Acts.* But in decrying Aëtius as the author of the
Anomoion doctrine, and not Acacius, they flagrantly disguise the truth,
in order to seem as far removed from the Arians on the one side, as from
the Homoousians on the other: for their own words convict them of having
separated from them both, merely from the love of innovation. With these
remarks we close our notice of these persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_512"></span>[84:513](2020108.htm#fr_512) <span
id="ii.vi.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.x-p3"></span>Sozom. V. 14; Theodoret, *Hæret. Fabul.*
IV.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[84:514](2020108.htm#fr_513) <span
id="ii.vi.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.x-p4"></span>II. 10. 39.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Julian extracts Money from the Christians.](2020109)
