[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020174)  [Next](2020176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*The Emperor orders a
Convention composed of All the Various Sects. Arcadius is proclaimed
Augustus. The Novatians permitted to hold their Assemblies in the City
of Constantinople: Other Heretics driven out.*

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xi-p2.1"></span>Great</span> disturbances occurred in other
cities also, as the Arians were ejected from the churches. But I cannot
sufficiently admire the emperor’s prudence in this contingency. For he
was unwilling to fill the cities with disturbance, as far as this was
dependent on him, and so after a very short time <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) he called together a general
conference of the sects, thinking that by a discussion among their
bishops, their mutual differences might be adjusted, and unanimity
established. And this purpose of the emperor’s I am persuaded was the
reason that his affairs were so prosperous at that time. In fact by a
special dispensation of Divine Providence the barbarous nations were
reduced to subjection under him: and among others, Athanaric king of the
Goths made a voluntary surrender of himself to him, <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714) with all his people, and died soon
after at Constantinople. At this juncture the emperor proclaimed his son
Arcadius Augustus, on the sixteenth of January, in the second
consulate <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) of Merobaudes and
Saturnilus. Not long afterwards in the month of June, under the same
consulate, the bishops of every sect arrived from all places: the
emperor, therefore, sent for Nectarius the bishop, and consulted with
him on the best means of freeing the Christian religion from
dissensions, and reducing the church to a state of unity. ‘The subjects
of controversy,’ said he, ‘ought to be fairly discussed, that by the
detection and removal of the sources of discord, a universal agreement
may be effected.’ Hearing this proposition Nectarius fell into
uneasiness, and communicated it to Agelius bishop of the Novatians,
inasmuch as he entertained the same sentiments as himself in matters of
<span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="ii.viii.xi-Page_123"></span>faith. This man, though eminently pious,
was by no means competent to maintain a dispute on doctrinal points; he
therefore proposed to refer the subject to Sisinnius <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) his reader, as a fit person to manage
a conference. Sisinnius, who was not only learned, but possessed of
great experience, and was well informed both in the expositions of the
sacred Scriptures and the principles of philosophy, being convinced that
disputations, far from healing divisions usually create heresies of a
more inveterate character, gave the following advice to Nectarius,
knowing well that the ancients have nowhere attributed a beginning of
existence to the Son of God, conceiving him to be co-eternal with the
Father, he advised that they should avoid dialectic warfare and bring
forward as evidences of the truth the testimonies of the ancients. ‘Let
the emperor,’ said he, ‘demand of the heads of each sect, whether they
would pay any deference to the ancients who flourished before schism
distracted the church; or whether they would repudiate them, as
alienated from the Christian faith? If they reject their authority, then
let them also anathematize them: and should they presume to take such a
step, they would themselves be instantly thrust out by the people, and
so the truth will be manifestly victorious. But if, on the other hand,
they are not willing to set aside the fathers, it will then be our
business to produce their books, by which our views will be fully
attested.’ Nectarius having heard these words of Sisinnius, hastened to
the palace, and acquainted the emperor with the plan which had been
suggested to him; who at once perceiving its wisdom and propriety,
carried it into execution with consummate prudence. For without
discovering his object, he simply asked the chiefs of the heretics
whether they had any respect for and would accept the teachings of those
teachers who lived previous to the dissension in the church? As they did
not repudiate them, but replied that they highly revered them as their
masters; the emperor enquired of them again whether they would defer to
them as accredited witnesses of Christian doctrine? At this question,
the leaders of the several parties, with their logical champions,—for
many had come prepared for sophistical debate,—found themselves
extremely embarrassed. For a division was caused among them as some
acquiesced in the reasonableness of the emperor’s proposition while
others shrunk from it, conscious that it was by no means favorable to
their interests: so that all being variously affected towards the
writings of the ancients, they could no longer agree among themselves,
dissenting not only from other sects, but those of the same sect
differing from one another. Accordant malice therefore, like the tongue
of the giants of old, was confounded, and their tower of mischief
overturned. <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) The emperor
perceiving by their confusion that their sole confidence was in subtle
arguments, and that they feared to appeal to the expositions of the
fathers, had recourse to another method: he commanded every sect to set
forth in writing their own peculiar tenets. Accordingly those who were
accounted the most skillful among them, drew up a statement of their
respective creeds, couched in terms the most circumspect they could
devise; a day was appointed, and the bishops selected for this purpose
presented themselves at the palace. Nectarius and Agelius appeared as
the defenders of the ‘homoousian’ faith; Demophilus supported the Arian
dogma; Eunomius himself undertook the cause of the Eunomians; and
Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, represented the opinions of those who were
denominated Macedonians. The emperor gave them all a courteous
reception; and receiving from each their written avowal of faith, he
shut himself up alone, and prayed very earnestly that God would assist
him in his endeavors to ascertain the truth. Then perusing with great
care the statement which each had submitted to him, he condemned all the
rest, inasmuch as they introduced a separation of the Trinity, and
approved of that only which contained the doctrine of the *homoousion.*
This decision caused the Novatians to flourish again, and hold their
meetings within the city: for the emperor delighted with the agreement
of their profession with that which he embraced, promulgated a law
securing to them the peaceful possession of their own church buildings,
and assigned to their churches equal privileges with those to which he
gave his more especial sanction. But the bishops of the other sects, on
account of their disagreement among themselves, were despised and
censured even by their own followers: so that overwhelmed with
perplexity and vexation they departed, addressing consolatory letters to
their adherents, whom they exhorted not to be troubled because many had
deserted them and gone over to the homoousian party; for they said,
‘Many are called, but few chosen’ <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) —an expression which they never used
when on account of force and terror the majority of the people was on
their side. Nevertheless the orthodox believers were not wholly exempt
from inquietude; for the affairs of the Antiochian church caused
divisions among those who were present at the Synod. The bishops of
Egypt, Arabia and Cyprus, combined against Flavian, <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="ii.viii.xi-Page_124"></span>and
insisted on his expulsion from Antioch: but those of Palestine,
Phœnicia, and Syria, contended with equal zeal in his favor. What result
issued from this contest I shall describe in its proper place. <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_713"></span>[122:714](2020175.htm#fr_713) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p3"></span>Socrates according to his custom omits
all mention of events in the Western Church. Some of them are quite
important; e.g. the council of Aquileia called by the Emperor Gratian.
See Hefele, *Hist. of Church Councils,* Vol. II. p. 375 *seq.*

<span id="fn_714"></span>[122:715](2020175.htm#fr_714) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p4"></span>This was in 382 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.xi-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> as appears from the *Fasti* of
Idatius. Cf. also Zosimus, IV. 34, and Jerome, *Chronicon.*

<span id="fn_715"></span>[122:716](2020175.htm#fr_715) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p5"></span>383 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.xi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_716"></span>[123:717](2020175.htm#fr_716) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p6"></span>For a further account of Sisinnius, see
VI. 22.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[123:718](2020175.htm#fr_717) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p7"></span>Referring no doubt to the Tower of Babel
and the dispersion of its builders, [Gen. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#008)<span id="ii.viii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[123:719](2020175.htm#fr_718) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p8"></span>[Matt. xx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)<span id="ii.viii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[124:720](2020175.htm#fr_719) <span
id="ii.viii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xi-p9"></span>Below, chap. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Gratian is slain by the Treachery of the Usurper
Maximus. From Fear of him Justina ceases persecuting Ambrose.](2020176)
