[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020500)  [Next](2020502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Perversity of
Theophilus. St. Epiphanius: his Residence at Constantinople and
Preparation to excite the People against John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Theophilus</span> kept his designs against
John as secret as possible; and wrote to the bishops of every city,
condemning the books of Origen. <span
id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) It also occurred to him that it
would be advantageous to enlist Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis, in
Cyprus, on his side, a man who was revered for his life, and was the
most distinguished of his contemporaries; and he therefore formed a
friendship with him, although he had formerly blamed him for asserting
that God possessed a human form. As if repentant of having ever
entertained any other sentiment, Theophilus wrote to Epiphanius to
acquaint him that he now held the same opinions as himself, and to move
attacks against the books of Origen, as the source of such nefarious
dogmas. Epiphanius had long regarded the writings of Origen with
peculiar aversion, and was therefore easily led to attach credit to the
epistle of Theophilus. He soon after assembled the bishops of Cyprus
<span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xiv-Page_408"></span>together, and prohibited the
examination of the books of Origen. He also wrote to the other bishops,
and, among others, to the bishop of Constantinople, exhorting them to
convene synods, and to make the same decision. Theophilus, perceiving
that there could be no danger in following the example of Epiphanius,
who was the object of popular praise, and who was admired for the virtue
of his life, whatever his opinion might be, passed a vote similar to
that of Epiphanius, with the concurrence of the bishops under his
jurisdiction. John, on the other hand, paid little attention to the
letters of Epiphanius and Theophilus. Those among the powerful and the
clergy, who were opposed to him, perceived that the designs of
Theophilus tended to his ejection from the bishopric, and therefore
endeavored to procure the convention of a council in Constantinople, in
order to carry this measure into execution. Theophilus, knowing this,
exerted himself to the utmost in convening this council. He commanded
the bishops of Egypt to repair by sea to Constantinople; he wrote to
request Epiphanius and the other Eastern bishops to proceed to that city
with as little delay as possible, and he himself set off on the journey
thither by land. Epiphanius was the first to sail from Cyprus; he landed
at Hebdomos, a suburb of Constantinople; and after having prayed in the
church erected at that place, he proceeded to enter the city. In order
to do him honor, John went out with all his clergy to meet him.
Epiphanius, however, evinced clearly by his conduct that he believed the
accusations against John; for, although invited to reside in the
ecclesiastical residences, he would not continue there, and refused to
meet with John in them. He also privately assembled all the bishops who
were residing in Constantinople, and showed them the decrees which he
had issued against the discourses of Origen. He persuaded some of the
bishops to approve of these decrees, while others objected to them.
Theotimus, bishop of Scythia, strongly opposed the proceedings of
Epiphanius, and told him that it was not right to cast insult on the
memory of one who had long been numbered with the dead; nor was it
without blasphemy to assail the conclusion to which the ancients had
arrived on the subject, and to set aside their decisions. While
discoursing in this strain, he drew forth a book of Origen’s which he
had brought with him; and, after reading aloud a passage conducive to
the education of the Church, he remarked that those who condemned such
sentiments acted absurdly, for they were in danger of insulting the
subjects themselves about which these words treated. John still had
respect for Epiphanius, and invited him to join in the meetings of his
church, and to dwell with him. But Epiphanius declared that he would
neither reside with John nor pray with him publicly, unless he would
denounce the works of Origen and expel Dioscorus and his companions. Not
considering it just to act in the manner proposed until judgment had
been passed on the case, John tried to postpone matters. When the
assembly was about to be held in the Church of the Apostles, those
ill-disposed to John planned that Epiphanius should go beforehand and
publicly decry the books of Origen to the people, and Dioscorus and his
companions as the partisans of this writer; and also to attack the
bishop of the city as the abetter of those heretics. And some concerned
themselves in this; for by this means it was supposed that the
affections of the people would be alienated from their bishop. The
following day, when Epiphanius was about entering the church, in order
to carry his design into execution, he was stopped by Serapion, at the
command of John, who had received intimation of the plot. Serapion
proved to Epiphanius that while the project he had devised was unjust in
itself, it could be of no personal advantage to him; for that if it
should excite a popular resurrection, he would be regarded as
responsible for the outrages that might follow. By these arguments
Epiphanius was induced to relinquish his attack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[407:1603](2020501.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="iii.xiii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xiv-p3"></span>Mainly after Soc. vi. 10, 12, 14;
Pallad. *Dialog.* 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Son of the Empress and St. Epiphanius. Conference between the
“Long Brothers” and Epiphanius, and his Re-Embarkation for Cyprus.
Epiphanius and John.](2020502)
