[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020466)  [Next](2020468) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Concerning Martyrius of
Cilicia. Translation of the Remains of St. Paul the Confessor, and of
Meletius, Bishop of Antioch*.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.x-p2.1"></span>Nectarius</span> made himself acquainted with
the routine of sacerdotal ceremonies under the instruction of
Cyriacus, <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) bishop of Adana,
whom he had requested Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, to leave with him for
a short period. Nectarius also retained several other Cilicians with
him, amongst whom was Martyrius, his physician, who had been a witness
of the irregularities of his youth. Nectarius was desirous of ordaining
him deacon; but Martyrius refused the honor under the plea of his own
unworthiness of such a divine service, and called upon Nectarius himself
to witness as to the course of his past life. To this Nectarius replied
as follows: “Although I am now a priest, do you not know that my past
career was a more guilty one than yours, inasmuch as you were but an
instrument in my numerous profligacies?” “But you, O blessed one,”
replied Martyrius, “were cleansed by baptism, and were then accounted
worthy of the priesthood. Both these ordinances are appointed by the
Divine law for purification from sin, and it seems to me that you now
differ in no respect from a new-born infant; but I long ago received
holy baptism, and have since continued in the same abusive course.” It
was under this plea that he excused himself from receiving ordination;
and I commend the man for his refusal, and therefore would give him a
part in my history.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p4"></span>The Emperor Theodosius, on being informed
of various events connected with Paul, <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) formerly bishop of Constantinople,
caused his body to be removed to the church erected by Macedonius, his
enemy, and buried there. This temple is a spacious and most
distinguished edifice, and is still named after Paul. Hence many persons
who are ignorant of the facts of the case, particularly women and the
mass of the people, imagine that Paul, the apostle, is interred therein.
The remains of Meletius were at the same time conveyed to Antioch, and
deposited near the tomb of Babylas the martyr. It is said that through
every public way, by the command of the emperor, the relics were
received within the walls in every city, contrary to Roman custom, and
were honored with singing of psalms antiphonally in such places, until
they were transferred to Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[382:1534](2020467.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p3"></span>Most of this chapter is independent with
Soz.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[382:1535](2020467.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p5"></span>Soc. v. 9. Soz. is independent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ordination of Flavian as Bishop of Antioch, and Subsequent
Occurrences on Account of the Oath.](2020468)
