[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020441)  [Next](2020443) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*Eunomius and his
Teacher Aëtius, their Affairs and Doctrines. They were* <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="iii.xi.xxvi-Page_363"></span>*the
first who broached One Immersion for the Baptism*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time, Eunomius, <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) who had held the church in Cyzicus
in place of Eleusius, and who presided over the Arian heresy, devised
another heresy besides this, which some have called by his name, but
which is sometimes denominated the Anomian heresy. Some assert that
Eunomius was the first who ventured to maintain that divine baptism
ought to be performed by one immersion, and to corrupt, in this manner,
the apostolical tradition which has been carefully handed down to the
present day. He invented, it is said, a mode of discipline contrary to
that of the Church, and disguised the innovation under gravity and
greater severity. He was an artist in words and contentions, and
delighted in arguments. The generality of those who entertain his
sentiments have the same predilections. They do not applaud a good
course of life or manner, or mercy towards the needy, unless exhibited
by persons of their own sect, so much as skill in disputation and the
power of triumphing in debates. Persons possessed of these
accomplishments are accounted pious above all others among them. Others
assert, I believe more truthfully, that Theophronius, a native of
Cappadocia, and Eutychius, both zealous propagators of this heresy,
seceded from communion with Eunomius during the succeeding reign, and
innovated about the other doctrines of Eunomius and about the divine
baptism. They asserted that baptism ought not to be administered in the
name of the Trinity, but in the name of the death of Christ. It appears
that Eunomius broached no new opinion on the subject, but was from the
beginning firmly attached to the sentiments of Arius, and remained so.
After his elevation to the bishopric of Cyzicus, he was accused by his
own clergy of introducing innovations in doctrine. Eudoxius, ruler of
the Arian heresy at Constantinople, summoned him and obliged him to give
an account of his doctrines to the people; finding, however, no fault in
him, Eudoxius exhorted him to return to Cyzicus. Eunomius, however,
replied, that he could not remain with people who regarded him with
suspicion; and, it is said, seized the opportunity for secession,
although it seems that, in taking this step he was really actuated by
the resentment he felt at the refusal which Aëtius, his teacher, had met
with, of being received into communion. Eunomius, it is added, dwelt
with Aëtius, and never deviated from his original sentiments. Such are
the conflicting accounts of various individuals; some narrate the
circumstances in one way, and some in another. But whether it was
Eunomius, or any other person, who first made these innovations upon the
tradition of baptism, it seems to me that such innovators, whoever they
may have been, were alone in danger, according to their own
representation, of quitting this life without having received the divine
baptism; for if, after they had been baptized according to the mode
recommended from the beginning, they found it impossible to rebaptize
themselves, it must be admitted that they introduced a practice to which
they had not themselves submitted, and thus undertook to administer to
others what had never been administered to them by themselves nor by
others. Thus, after having laid down the dogma by some non-existent
principle and private assumption, they proceeded to bestow upon others
what they had not themselves received. The absurdity of this assumption
is manifest from their own confession; for they admit that the
uninitiated have not the power to baptize others. Now, according to
their opinion, he who has not been baptized in conformity with their
tradition is unbaptized as one not properly initiated, and they confirm
this opinion by their practice, inasmuch as they rebaptize all those who
join their sect, although previously initiated according to the
tradition of the Catholic Church. These varying dogmas are the sources
of innumerable troubles to religion; and many are deterred from
embracing Christianity by the diversity of opinion which prevails in
matters of doctrine.

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi-p4"></span>The disputes daily became stronger,
and, as in the beginning of heresies, they grew; for they had leaders
who were not deficient in zeal or power of words; indeed, it appears
that the greater part of the Catholic Church would have been subverted
by this heresy, had it not found opponents in Basil and Gregory, the
Cappadocians. The reign of Theodosius began a little while after; he
banished the founders of heretical sects from the populous parts of the
empire to the more desert regions.

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi-p5"></span>But, lest those who read my history
should be ignorant of the precise nature of the two heresies to which I
have more especially alluded, I think it necessary to state that Aëtius,
the Syrian, was the originator of the heresy usually attributed to
Eunomius; and that, like Arius, he maintained that the Son is dissimilar
from the Father, that He is a created being, and was created out of what
had no previous existence. Those who held these views were formerly
called Aëtians; but afterwards, during the reign of Constantius, when,
as we have stated, some parties maintained that the Son is
consubstantial with the Father, and others that He is like in substance
to the Father, and <span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxvi-Page_364"></span>when the council of Ariminum had
decreed that the Son is only to be considered like unto the Father,
Aëtius was condemned to banishment, as guilty of impiety and blasphemy
against God. For some time subsequently his heresy seemed to have been
suppressed; for neither any other man of note, nor even Eunomius,
ventured openly upon undertaking its defense. But when Eunomius was
raised to the church of Cyzicus in place of Eleusius, he could no longer
quietly restrain himself, and in open debate he brought forward again
the tenets of Aëtius. Hence, as it often happens that the names of the
original founders of heretical sects pass into oblivion, the followers
of Eunomius were designated by his own name, although he merely renewed
the heresy of Aëtius, and promulgated it with greater boldness than was
done by him who first handed it down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[363:1483](2020442.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iii.xi.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvi-p3"></span>Philost. many sections, especially from
vi. to x. 4; he says in iii. 21, that he had written an encomium of
Eunomius. Soc. iv. 7, 13, v. 24. The many opinions gathered up by Soz.
were probably contributed by Sabinus. There is more original judgment in
this chapter than in any other. Cf. the great treatises of Basil and
Greg. Nyssa against Eunomius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Account Given, by Gregory the Theologian, of Apolinarius and
Eunomius, in a Letter to Nectarius. Their Heresy was distinguished by
the Philosophy of the Monks who were then Living, for the Heresy of
these two held Nearly the Entire East.](2020443)
