[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020286)  [Next](2020288) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Account of St. Spyridon:
His Modesty and Steadfastness*.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>Spyridon, <span
id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) bishop of Trimythun in Cyprus,
flourished at this period. To show his virtues, I think the fame which
still prevails about him suffices. The wonderful works which he wrought
by Divine assistance are, it appears, generally known by those who dwell
in the same region. I shall not conceal the facts which have come to me.
</span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p4"></span>He was a peasant, was married, and had
children; yet was not, on this account, deficient in spiritual
attainments. It is related that one night some wicked men entered his
sheepfold, and were in the act of stealing his sheep, when they were
suddenly bound, and yet no one bound them. The next day, when he went to
the fold, he found them fettered, and released them from their invisible
bonds; but he censured them for having preferred to steal what it was
lawful for them to win and take, and also for making such a great
exertion by night: yet he felt compassion towards them, and, desirous of
affording them instruction, so as to induce them to lead a better life,
he said to them, “Go, and take this ram with you; for you are wearied
with watching, and it is not just that your labor should be so blamed,
that you should return empty-handed from my sheepfold.” This action is
well worthy admiration, but not less so is that which I shall now
relate. An individual confided a deposit to the care of his daughter,
who was a virgin, and was named Irene. For greater security, she buried
it; and it so happened that she died soon after, without mentioning the
circumstance to any one. The person to whom the deposit belonged came to
ask for it. Spyridon knew not what answer to give <span id="page_247">p.
247</span> <span id="iii.vi.xi-Page_247"></span>him, so he searched the
whole house for it; but not being able to find it, the man wept, tore
his hair, and seemed ready to expire. Spyridon, moved with pity, went to
the grave, and called the girl by name; and when she answered, he
inquired about the deposit. After obtaining the information desired, he
returned, found the treasure in the place that had been signified to
him, and gave it to the owner. As I have entered upon this subject, it
may not be amiss to add this incident also.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p5"></span>It was a custom with this Spyridon to
give a certain portion of his fruits to the poor, and to lend another
portion to those who wished it as a gratuity; but neither in giving nor
taking back did he ever himself distribute or receive: he merely pointed
out the storehouse, and told those who resorted to him to take as much
as they needed, or to restore what they had borrowed. A certain man who
had borrowed in this way, came as though he were about to return it, and
when as usual he was directed to replace his loan in the storehouse, he
saw an opportunity for an injustice; imagining that the matter would be
concealed, he did not liquidate the debt, but fraudulently pretending to
have discharged his obligation, he went away as though he had made the
return. This, however, could not be long concealed. After some time the
man came back again to borrow, and was sent to the storehouse, with
permission to measure out for himself as much as he required. Finding
the storehouse empty, he went to acquaint Spyridon, and this latter said
to him, “I wonder, O man, how it is that you alone have found the
storehouse empty and unsupplied with the articles you require: reflect
whether you have restored the first loan, since you are in need a second
time: were it otherwise, what you seek would not be lacking. Go, trust,
and you will find.” The man felt the reproof and acknowledged his error.
The firmness and the accuracy in the administration of ecclesiastical
affairs on the part of this divine man are worthy of admiration. It is
said that on one occasion thereafter, the bishops of Cyprus met to
consult on some particular emergency. Spyridon was present, as likewise
Triphyllius, <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) bishop of the
Ledri, a man otherwise eloquent, who on account of practicing the law,
had lived alone while at Berytus. <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093)

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p8"></span>When an assembly had convened, having
been requested to address the people, Triphyllius had occasion, in the
middle of his discourse, to quote the text, “Take up thy bed and
walk,” <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) and he substituted the
word “couch” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p9.2"></span>σκίμπους</span>), for the word “bed” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.xi-p9.3"></span>κράββατος</span> ).
Spyridon was indignant, and exclaimed, “Art thou greater than he who
uttered the word ‘bed,’ that thou art ashamed to use his words?” When he
had said this, he turned from the throne of the priest, and looked
towards the people; by this act he taught them to keep the man who is
proud of eloquence within bounds and he was fit to make such a rebuke;
for he was reverenced and most illustrious for his works: at the same
time he was the superior of that presbyter in age and in the priesthood.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p10"></span>The reception which Spyridon gave to
strangers will appear from the following incident. In the quadragesima,
it happened that a traveler came upon a journey to visit him on one of
those days in which it was his custom to keep a continuous fast with his
household, <span id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) and on the day
appointed for tasting food, he would remain without nourishment to
mid-day. Perceiving that the stranger was much fatigued, Spyridon said
to his daughter, “Come, wash his feet and set meat before him.” The
virgin replying that there was neither bread nor barley-food in the
house, for it would have been superfluous to provide such things at the
time of the fast, Spyridon first prayed and asked forgiveness, and bade
her to cook some salt pork which chanced to be in the house. When it was
prepared, he sat down to table with the stranger, partook of the meat,
and told him to follow his example. But the stranger declining, under
the plea of being a Christian, he said to him, “It is for that very
reason that you ought not to decline partaking of the meat; for the
Divine word shows that to the pure all things are pure.” <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) Such are the details which I had to
relate concerning Spyridon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[246:1092](2020287.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p3.1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p3.2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p3.3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p3.4"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 5; Soc. i. 8, 12. Ruf. gives
the first two stories; Soc. copies and gives credit; Soz. appends three
more, and gives credit to himself only throughout. Ruf. had already
said, “sed et multa alia ejus feruntur gesta mirabilia, quæ etiam nunc
ore omnium celebrantur.”</span></span></span></span>

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[247:1093](2020287.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p6"></span>This Triphyllius is mentioned by Hieron.
*de vir. illust.* i. 92, as the author of a commentary on the Song of
Solomon, which his biographer had read; and of many other works which
had not come into his hands.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[247:1094](2020287.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p7"></span>Berytus in Phœnicia was celebrated for
its school of law, in which, among others, Gregory Thaumaturgus is said
to have studied. Biographers, imitating Valesius, have imagined that
Sozomen studied there.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[247:1095](2020287.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p9"></span>[Matt. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="iii.vi.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[247:1096](2020287.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p11.1"></span>τῆς τεσσαρακοστῆς ενστάσης</span>. While it
was Lent and probably Holy Week. See Tertull. *de Pat.* 13, and *de
Jejun.* 14.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[247:1097](2020287.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p12"></span>[Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span id="iii.vi.xi-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Organization of the Monks: its Origin and
Founders.](2020288)
