[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020022)  [Next](2020024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, and Theognis Bishop of Nicæa, who had been banished for
agreeing in Opinion with Arius, having published their Recantation, and
assented to the Creed, are reinstated in their Sees.*

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>Eusebius <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) and Theognis having sent a penitential
confession to the principal bishops, were <span id="page_20">p.
20</span> <span id="ii.iv.xiv-Page_20"></span>by an imperial edict
recalled from exile and restored to their own churches, displacing those
who had been ordained in their places; Eusebius \[displacing\] Amphion,
and Theognis Chrestus. This is a copy of their written retraction:
</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p4"></span>‘We having been sometime since condemned
by your piety, without a formal trial, ought to bear in silence the
decisions of your sacred adjudication. But since it is unreasonable that
we by silence should countenance caluminators against ourselves, we on
this account declare that we entirely concur with you in the faith; and
also that, after having closely considered the import of the term
*consubstantial,* we have been wholly studious of peace, having never
followed the heresy. After suggesting whatever entered our thought for
the security of the churches, and fully assuring those under our
influence, we subscribed the declaration of faith; we did not subscribe
the anathematizing; not as objecting to the creed, but as disbelieving
the party accused to be such as was represented, having been satisfied
on this point, both from his own letters to us, and from personal
conversations. But if your holy council was convinced, we not opposing
but concurring in your decisions, by this statement give them our full
assent and confirmation: and this we do not as wearied with our exile,
but to shake off the suspicion of heresy. If therefore ye should now
think fit to restore us to your presence, ye will have us on all points
conformable, and acquiescent in your decrees: especially since it has
seemed good to your piety to deal tenderly with and recall even him who
was primarily accused. It would be absurd for us to be silent, and thus
give presumptive evidence against ourselves, when the one who seemed
responsible has been permitted to clear himself from the charges brought
against him. Vouchsafe then, as is consistent with that Christ-loving
piety of yours, to remind our most religious emperor, to present our
petitions, and to determine speedily concerning us in a way becoming
yourselves.’

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p5"></span>Such was the language of the recantation
of Eusebius and Theognis; from which I infer that they had subscribed
the articles of faith which had been set forth, but would not become
parties to the condemnation of Arius. It appears also that Arius was
recalled before them; but, although this may be true, yet he had been
forbidden to enter Alexandria. This is evident from the fact that he
afterwards devised a way of return for himself, both into the church and
into Alexandria, by having made a fictitious repentance, as we shall
show in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[19:202](2020023.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.4"></span>This is not in its place according to
chronological order, inasmuch as it occurred in 328 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.iv.xiv-p3.5"></span>a.d.</span> It appears also
from the accounts of the other historians of this period that Socrates
does not give the correct reason for the banishment of Eusebius and
Theognis. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 20; also Sozom. I.
21.</span></span></span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After the Synod, on the Death of Alexander, Athanasius is
constituted Bishop of Alexandria.](2020024)
