[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020182)  [Next](2020184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Reformation of
Abuses at Rome by the Emperor Theodosius.*

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xix-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor Theodosius during his
short stay in Italy, conferred the greatest benefit on the city of Rome,
by grants on the one hand, and abrogations on the other. His largesses
were indeed very munificent; and he removed two most infamous abuses
which existed in the city. One of them was the following: there were
buildings of immense magnitude, erected in ancient Rome in former times,
in which bread was made for distribution among the people. <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) Those who had the charge of these
edifices, who Mancipes <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) were
called in the Latin language, in process of time converted them into
receptacles for thieves. Now as the bake-houses in these structures were
placed underneath, they build taverns at the side of each, where they
kept prostitutes; by which means they entrapped many of those who went
thither either for the sake of refreshment, or to gratify their lusts,
for by a certain mechanical contrivance they precipitated them from the
tavern into the bake-house below. This was practiced chiefly upon
strangers; and such as were in this way kidnapped were compelled to work
in the bake-houses, where many of them were immured until old age, not
being allowed to go out, and giving the impression to their friends that
they were dead. It happened that one of the soldiers of the emperor
Theodosius fell into this snare; who being shut up in the bake-house,
and hindered from going out, drew a dagger which he wore and killed
those who stood in his way: the rest being terrified, suffered him to
escape. When the emperor was made acquainted with the circumstance he
punished the Mancipes, and ordered these haunts of lawless and abandoned
characters to be pulled down. This was one of the disgraceful nuisances
of which the emperor purged the imperial city: the other was of this
nature. When a woman was detected in adultery, they punished the
delinquent not in the way of correction but rather of aggravation of her
crime. For shutting her up in a narrow brothel, they obliged her to
prostitute herself in a most disgusting manner; causing little bells to
be rung at the time of the unclean deed that those who passed might not
be ignorant of what was doing within. This was doubtless intended to
brand the crime with greater ignominy in public opinion. As soon as the
emperor was apprised of this indecent usage, he would by no means
tolerate it; but having ordered the *Sistra* <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) —for so these places of penal
prostitution were denominated—to be pulled down, he appointed other laws
for the punishment of adulteresses. <span
id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) <span id="page_128">p. 128</span>
<span id="ii.viii.xix-Page_128"></span>Thus did the emperor Theodosius
free the city from two of its most discreditable abuses: and when he had
arranged all other affairs to his satisfaction, he left the emperor
Valentinian at Rome, and returned himself with his son Honorius to
Constantinople, and entered that city of the 10th of November, in the
consulate of Tatian and Symmachus. <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_745"></span>[127:746](2020183.htm#fr_745) <span
id="ii.viii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p3"></span>In the earlier periods of Roman history
the government undertook to regulate the price of corn, so as to protect
the poorer classes; in time of scarcity the government was to purchase
the grain and sell it at a moderate price. This provision was gradually
changed into a dispensation of public charity, at first by the sale of
the grain below cost, and afterwards by the gratuitous distribution of
the same. Some time before the reign of Aurelian, 270–275 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.viii.xix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, the
distribution of grain seems to have given place to the distribution of
bread. Such distribution was made after the reign of Constantine at
Constantinople as well as at Rome. See Smith, *Dict. of the Greek and
Rom. Antiq.*, art. *Leges Frumentariæ*.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[127:747](2020183.htm#fr_746) <span
id="ii.viii.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p4"></span>Originally this name was applied to all
farmers-general of the public revenues. See Smith, *Dict. of Greek and
Rom. Antiq.*, art. <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.xix-p4.1"></span>Manceps</span>.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[127:748](2020183.htm#fr_747) <span
id="ii.viii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p5"></span>Lit. = ‘bells.’ Cf. Smith, *Dict. of
Greek and Rom. Antiq.*, art. <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.xix-p5.1"></span>Sistrum</span>.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[127:749](2020183.htm#fr_748) <span
id="ii.viii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p6"></span>From a law of Constantine’s (*Cod.* 9.
30) whose genuineness is, however, disputed, the punishment of adultery
was death. The same punishment appears to have been inflicted in
specific cases mentioned by Am. Marcellinus. *Rerum Gestarum,* XXVII. 1.
28. Whence it appears that Socrates must have been misinformed
concerning the facts mentioned here.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[128:750](2020183.htm#fr_749) <span
id="ii.viii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xix-p7"></span>391 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.xix-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Office of Penitentiary Presbyters and its
Abolition.](2020184)
