[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020156)  [Next](2020158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="page_115">p. 115</span>
<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-Page_115"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII</span>.—*The Emperor Valens,
appeased by the Oration of Themistius the Philosopher, abates his
Persecution of the Christians.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the meanwhile Valens, making his
residence at Antioch, was wholly undisturbed by foreign wars; for the
barbarians on every side restrained themselves within their own
boundaries. Nevertheless, he himself waged a most cruel war against
those who maintained the ‘homoousian’ doctrine, inflicting on them more
grievous punishments every day; until the philosopher Themistius by his
*Appealing Oration* <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) somewhat
moderated his severity. In this speech he tells the emperor, ‘That he
ought not to be surprised at the difference of judgment on religious
questions existing among Christians; inasmuch as that discrepancy was
trifling when compared with the multitude of conflicting opinions
current among the heathen; for these amount to above three hundred; that
dissension indeed was an inevitable consequence of this disagreement;
but that God would be the more glorified by a diversity of sentiment,
and the greatness of his majesty be more venerated, from the fact of its
not being easy to have a knowledge of Him.’ The philosopher having said
these and similar things, the emperor became milder, but did not
completely give up his wrath; for although he ceased to put
ecclesiastics to death, he continued to send them into exile, until this
fury of his also was repressed by the following event.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_667"></span>[115:668](2020157.htm#fr_667) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p3"></span>This oration of Themistius is extant
in a Latin translation by Dudithius appended to G. Remo’s *Themisttii
Phil. orationes sex augustales,* and entitled, *ad Valentem, pro
Libertate relligionis*. The passage alluded to by Socrates is found in
Dudithius as follows: ‘Wherefore, in regard God has removed himself at
the greatest distance from our knowledge, and does not humble to the
capacity of our understanding; it is a sufficient argument that he does
not require one and the same law and rule of religion from all persons,
but leaves every man a license and faculty concerning himself, according
to his own, not another man’s, liberty and choice. Whence it also
happens that a greater admiration of the Deity, and a more religious
veneration of his eternal majesty, is engendered in the minds of men.
For it usually comes to pass that we loathe and disregard those things
which are readily apparent and prostrated to every understanding.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Goths, under the Reign of Valens, embrace
Christianity.](2020158)
