[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020068)  [Next](2020070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Of the Creed sent by the
Eastern Bishops to those in Italy, called the Lengthy Creed.* <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294)

<span id="ii.v.xix-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p3.1"></span>After</span> the lapse of about three years
from the events above recorded, the Eastern bishops again assembled a
Synod, and having composed another form of faith, they transmitted it to
those in Italy by the hands of Eudoxius, at that time bishop of
Germanicia, and Martyrius, and Macedonius, who was bishop of
Mopsuestia <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) in Cilicia. This
expression of the Creed, being written in more lengthy form, contained
many additions to <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="ii.v.xix-Page_45"></span>those which had preceded it, and was set
forth in these words:

<span id="ii.v.xix-p5"></span>‘We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom the whole family
in heaven and upon earth is named; and in his only-begotten Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, who was begotten of the Father before all ages; God of
God; Light of Light; through whom all things in the heavens and upon the
earth, both visible and invisible, were made: who is the Word, and
Wisdom, and Power, and Life, and true Light: who in the last days for
our sake was made man, and was born of the holy virgin; who was
crucified, and died, and was buried, and rose again from the dead on the
third day, and ascended into heaven, and is seated at the right hand of
the Father, and shall come at the consummation of the ages, to judge the
living and the dead, and to render to every one according to his works:
whose kingdom being perpetual shall continue to infinite ages; for he
sits at the right hand of the Father, not only in this age, but also in
that which is to come. We believe also in the Holy Spirit, that is, in
the Comforter, whom the Lord according to his promise sent to his
apostles after his ascension into heaven, to teach them and bring all
things to their remembrance, through whom also the souls of those who
sincerely believe on him are sanctified. But those who assert that the
Son was made of things not in being, or of another substance, and not of
God, or that there was a time or age when he did not exist, <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) the holy catholic Church accounts as
aliens. The holy and catholic Church likewise anathematizes those also
who say that there are three Gods, or that Christ is not God before all
ages, or that he is neither Christ, nor the Son of God, or that the same
person is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, or that the Son was not
begotten, or that the Father begat not the Son by his own will or
desire. Neither is it safe to affirm that the Son had his existence from
things that were not, since this is nowhere declared concerning him in
the divinely inspired Scriptures. Nor are we taught that he had his
being from any other pre-existing substance besides the Father, but that
he was truly begotten of God alone; for the Divine word teaches that
there is one unbegotten principle without beginning, the Father of
Christ. But those who unauthorized by Scripture rashly assert that there
was a time when he was not, ought not to preconceive any antecedent
interval of time, but God only who without time begat him; for both
times and ages were made through him. Yet it must not be thought that
the Son is co-inoriginate, <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) or
co-unbegotten <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) with the Father:
for there is properly no father of the co-inoriginate or co-unbegotten.
But we know that the Father alone being inoriginate and
incomprehensible, <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) has ineffably
and incomprehensibly to all begotten, and that the Son was begotten
before the ages, but is not unbegotten like the Father, but has a
beginning, viz. the Father who begat him, for “the head of Christ is
God.” <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) Now although according to
the Scriptures we acknowledge three things or persons, viz. that of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, we do not on that
account make three Gods: since we know that that there is but one God
perfect in himself, unbegotten, inoriginate, and invisible, the God and
Father of the only-begotten, who alone has existence from himself, and
alone affords existence abundantly to all other things. But neither
while we assert that there is one God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the only-begotten, do we therefore deny that Christ is God
before the ages, as the followers of Paul of Samosata do, who affirm
that after his incarnation he was by exaltation deified, in that he was
by nature a mere man. We know indeed that he was subject to his God and
Father: nevertheless he was begotten of God, and is by nature true and
perfect God, and was not afterwards made God out of man; but was for our
sake made man out of God, and has never ceased to be God. Moreover we
execrate and anathematize those who falsely style him the mere
unsubstantial word of God, having existence only in another, either as
the word to which utterance is given, or as the word conceived in the
mind: and who pretend that before the ages he was neither the Christ,
the Son of God, the Mediator, nor the Image of God; but that he became
the Christ, and the Son of God, from the time he took our flesh from the
virgin, about four hundred years ago. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) For they assert that Christ had the
beginning of his kingdom from that time, and that it shall have an end
after the consummation of all things and the judgment. Such persons as
these are the followers of Marcellus and Photinus, the Ancyro-Galatians,
who under pretext of establishing his sovereignty, like the Jews set
aside <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="ii.v.xix-Page_46"></span>the eternal existence and deity of Christ,
and the perpetuity of his kingdom. But we know him to be not simply the
word of God by utterance or mental conception, but God the living Word
subsisting of himself; and Son of God and Christ; and who did, not by
presence only, co-exist and was conversant with his Father before the
ages, and ministered to him at the creation of all things, whether
visible or invisible, but was the substantial Word of the Father, and
God of God: for this is he to whom the Father said, “Let us make man in
our image, and according to our likeness:” who in his own person
appeared to the fathers, gave the law, and spake by the prophets; and
being at last made man, he manifested his Father to all men, and reigns
to endless ages. Christ has not attained any new dignity; but we believe
that he was perfect from the beginning, and like his Father in all
things; and those who say that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the
same person, impiously supposing the three names to refer to one and the
same thing and person, we deservedly expel from the church because by
the incarnation they render the Father, who is incomprehensible and
insusceptible of suffering, subject to comprehension and suffering. Such
are those denominated Patropassians <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) among the Romans, and by us
Sabellians. For we know that the Father who sent, remained in the proper
nature of his own immutable deity; but that Christ who was sent, has
fulfilled the economy of the incarnation. In like manner those who
irreverently affirm that Christ was begotten not by the will and
pleasure of his Father; thus attributing to God an involuntary necessity
not springing from choice, as if he begat the Son by constraint, we
consider most impious and strangers to the truth because they have dared
to determine such things respecting him as are inconsistent with our
common notions of God, and are contrary indeed to the sense of the
divinely-inspired Scripture. For knowing that God is self-dependent and
Lord of himself we devoutly maintain that of his own volition and
pleasure he begat the Son. And while we reverentially believe what is
spoken concerning him; <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) “The Lord
created me the beginning of his ways on account of his works”: yet we do
not suppose that he was made similarly to the creatures or works made by
him. For it is impious and repugnant to the church’s faith to compare
the Creator with the works created by him; or to imagine that he had the
same manner of generation as things of a nature totally different from
himself: for the sacred Scriptures teach us that the alone only-begotten
Son was really and truly begotten. Nor when we say that the Son is of
himself, and lives and subsists in like manner to the Father, do we
therefore separate him from the Father, as if we supposed them
dissociated by the intervention of space and distance in a material
sense. For we believe that they are united without medium or interval,
and that they are incapable of separation from each other: the whole
Father embosoming the Son; and the whole Son attached to and eternally
reposing in the Father’s bosom. Believing, therefore, in the altogether
perfect and most holy Trinity, and asserting that the Father is God, and
that the Son also is God, we do not acknowledge two Gods, but one only,
on account of the majesty of the Deity, and the perfect blending and
union of the kingdoms: the Father ruling over all things universally,
and even over the Son himself; the Son being subject to the Father, but
except him, ruling over all things which were made after him and by him;
and by the Father’s will bestowing abundantly on the saints the grace of
the Holy Spirit. For the Sacred Oracles inform us that in this consists
the character of the sovereignty which Christ exercises.

<span id="ii.v.xix-p14"></span>‘We have been compelled, since the
publication of our former epitome, to give this more ample exposition of
the creed; not in order to gratify a vain ambition, but to clear
ourselves from all strange suspicion respecting our faith which may
exist among those who are ignorant of our real sentiments. And that the
inhabitants of the West may both be aware of the shameless
misrepresentations of the heterodox party; and also know the
ecclesiastical opinion of the Eastern bishops concerning Christ,
confirmed by the unwrested testimony of the divinely-inspired
Scriptures, among all those of unperverted minds.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_294"></span>[44:295](2020069.htm#fr_294) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p2"></span>This creed was called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xix-p2.1"></span>μακρόστιχος</span> from
its length, and the date of its promulgation must be put after the
Council of Sardica, according to Hefele. See Hefele, *History of the
Church Councils,* Vol. II. p. 85, 89, and 180 (ed. T. & T. Clark).

<span id="fn_295"></span>[44:296](2020069.htm#fr_295) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p4.1"></span>Μόψου ἑστία</span>, lit. ‘the hearth of
Mopsus,’ son of Apollo and Manto, daughter of Tiresias, according to the
Greek mythology. Mopsuestia has become famous in the history of the
church through its great citizen, Theodore. Cf. Smith and Wace, *Dict.
of Christ. Biog.*

<span id="fn_296"></span>[45:297](2020069.htm#fr_296) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p6"></span>This is the end of the first creed adopted
at Antioch, as given in the preceding chapter; it is couched in almost
identical terms in both these versions. The rest of the version here
given is the addition that constitutes the characteristic of the
‘Lengthy Creed.’

<span id="fn_297"></span>[45:298](2020069.htm#fr_297) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p7.1"></span>συνάναρχον</span> . It has been thought
advisable to retain the above uncouth rendering of this word, as also of
one or two others immediately following, on the ground that the
etymological precision at which they aim compensates for their
non-classical ring.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[45:299](2020069.htm#fr_298) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p8.1"></span>συναγέννητον</span> .

<span id="fn_299"></span>[45:300](2020069.htm#fr_299) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p9.2"></span>νέφικτον</span>.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[45:301](2020069.htm#fr_300) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p10"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[45:302](2020069.htm#fr_301) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p11"></span>“There has arisen in our days a certain
Marcellus of Galatia, the most execrable of all heretics, who with a
sacrilegious mind and impious mouth and wicked argument will needs set
bounds to the perpetual, eternal, and timeless kingdom of our Lord
Christ, saying that he began to reign four hundred years since, and
shall end at the dissolution of the present world.’ This is the
description given of the heresy here hinted at by the synodical letter
of the Oriental bishops at Sardica. On Marcellus and the various
opinions concerning him, see Zahn, *Marcellus von Ancyra,* Gotha, 1867;
also monographs on Marcellus by Rettberg (1794) and by Klose (1837 and
1859). Cf. Neander, *Hist. of Chr. Ch.* Vol. II. p. 394.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[46:303](2020069.htm#fr_302) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p12"></span>Cf. Tertull. *Adv. Prax.* i. and ii.;
Epiph. *Hær.* LVII.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[46:304](2020069.htm#fr_303) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p13"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="ii.v.xix-p13.1"></span>.
The ancient bishops quote the LXX *verbatim.* The English versions
(Authorized and Revised) follow the Hebrew, ‘The <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p13.2"></span>Lord</span> possessed me in the beginning of
his way, before his works of old.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Council at Sardica.](2020070)
