[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020002)  [Next](2020004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="ii.ii-Page_vii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Prefatory Note.</span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> basis of the present edition of
Socrates’ *Ecclesiastical History* is the translation in Bagster’s
series mentioned in the Introduction, Part IV. The changes introduced,
however, are numerous. The translation was found unnecessarily free; so
far as the needs of the English idiom require freedom no fault could, of
course, have been found with the translation; but the divergences from
the original in multitudes of cases were not warranted by any such need;
they were more probably induced by the prevailing style of rhetoric
common in the days when the translation was made. The change which has
gradually come about in this respect called for modifications in the
present edition. Many more might have been introduced without damage to
the work. But it was felt that the scope and purpose of the edition only
called for the most necessary of these changes.

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>In the preparation of the notes the editions
of Hussey and Reading, containing Valesius’ and Reading’s annotations,
were freely used. Whenever a note was taken bodily from these, it has
been quoted and duly credited. It was thought best, however, usually to
condense and reduce the number and bulk of these notes and introduce
sparingly such new notes as were suggested by more recent study in
ecclesiastical history.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>The Introduction is almost altogether
dependent on the literature quoted in Part I. The writer claims no
original discovery respecting Socrates or his work. The facts had been
diligently collected by his predecessors; he has simply rearranged them
and put them into expression such as, to his mind, suits the
requirements of the plan of the series.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>A.C. Zenos.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction.](2020004)
