[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020376)  [Next](2020378) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—</span>*The Emperor Constantius
repairs to Sirmium, recalls Liberius, and restores him to the Church of
Rome; he also commands Felix to assist Liberius in the Sacerdotal
Office*.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after these events, the
emperor returned to Sirmium from Rome; on receiving a deputation from
the Western bishops, he recalled Liberius from Berœa. <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319) Constantius urged him, in the
presence of the deputies of the Eastern bishops, and of the other
priests who were at the camp, to confess that the Son is not of the same
substance as the Father. He was instigated to this measure by Basil,
Eustathius, and Eusebius, who possessed great influence over him. They
had formed a compilation, in one document, of the decrees against Paul
of Samosata, and Photinus, bishop of Sirmium; to which they subjoined a
formulary of faith drawn up at Antioch at the consecration of the
church, as if certain persons had, under the pretext of the term
“consubstantial,” attempted to establish a heresy of their own.
Liberius, Athanasius, Alexander, Severianus, and Crescens, a priest of
Africa, were induced to assent to this document, as were likewise
Ursacius, Germanius, bishop of Sirmium, Valens, bishop of Mursa, and as
many of the Eastern bishops as were present. They partially approved of
a confession of faith drawn up by Liberius, in which he declared that
those who affirm that the Son is not like unto the Father in substance
and in all other respects, are excommunicated. For when Eudoxius and his
partisans at Antioch, who favored the heresy of Aëtius, received the
letter of Hosius, they circulated the report that Liberius had renounced
the term “consubstantial,” and had admitted <span id="page_310">p.
310</span> <span id="iii.ix.xv-Page_310"></span>that the Son is
dissimilar from the Father. After these enactments had been made by the
Western bishops, the emperor permitted Liberius to return to Rome. The
bishops who were then convened at Sirmium <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320) wrote to Felix, who governed the
Roman church, and to the other bishops, desiring them to receive
Liberius. They directed that both should share the apostolical throne
and discharge the priestly duties in common, with harmony of mind; and
that whatever illegalities might have occurred in the ordination of
Felix, or the banishment of Liberius, might be buried in oblivion. The
people of Rome regarded Liberius as a very excellent man, and esteemed
him highly on account of the courage he had evinced in opposing the
emperor, so that they had even excited seditions on his account, and had
gone so far as to shed blood. Felix survived but a short time; and
Liberius found himself in sole possession of the church. This event was,
no doubt, ordained by God, that the seat of Peter might not be
dishonored by the occupancy of two bishops; for such an arrangement is a
sign of discord, and is foreign to ecclesiastical law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[309:1320](2020377.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p3"></span>Athan. *Hist. Arian.* 35–41; Epistles of
Liberius, *M. P.* L. 8; Hil. *Fragm*. iv.–vi.; Theodoret, *H. E.* ii.
17; Ruf. i. 22; Philost. iv. 3; Soc. ii. 37; Sulp. Sev. *H. S.* ii. 39.
Many independent details.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[310:1321](2020377.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p4"></span>The fourth Sirmium council, <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 358.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor purposed, on account of the Heresy of Aëtius and the
Innovations in Antioch, to convene a Council at Nicomedia; but as an
Earthquake took place in that City, and many other Affairs intervened,
the Council was first convened at Nicæa, and afterwards at Ariminum and
Seleucia. Account of Arsacius, the Confessor.](2020378)
