[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020312)  [Next](2020314) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Pusices, Superintendent
of the Artisans of Sapor*.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>Pusices</span>, the superintendent of the
king’s artisans, was present at the execution; perceiving that Anannias
trembled as the necessary preparations for his death were being made, he
said to him, “O old man, close your eyes for a little while and be of
good courage, for you will soon behold the light of Christ.” No sooner
had he uttered these words than he was arrested and conducted before the
king; and as he frankly avowed himself a Christian, and spoke with great
freedom to the king concerning his opinion and the martyrs, he was
condemned to an extraordinary and most cruel death, because it was not
lawful to address the king with such boldness. The executioners pierced
the muscles of his neck in such a manner as to extract his tongue. On
the charge of some persons, his daughter, who had devoted herself to a
life of holy virginity, was arraigned and executed at the same time. The
following year, on the day on which the passion of Christ was
commemorated, and when preparations were being made for the celebration
of the festival commemorative of his resurrection from the dead, Sapor
issued a most cruel edict throughout Persia, condemning to death all
those who should confess themselves to be Christians. It is said that a
greater number of Christians suffered by the sword; for the Magi sought
diligently in the cities and villages for those who had concealed
themselves; and many voluntarily surrendered themselves, lest they
should appear, by their silence, to deny Christ. Of the Christians who
were thus unsparingly sacrificed, many who were attached to the palace
were slain, and amongst these was Azades, <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) a eunuch, who was especially
beloved by the king. On hearing of his death, Sapor was overwhelmed with
grief, and put a stop to the general slaughter of the Christians; and he
directed that the teachers of religion should alone be slain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[266:1161](2020313.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p3"></span>Assemanus, *Bibl. Orient.* t. i. 189,
speaks of Azades as the eunuch of Artascirus, ruler of Adiabene, who was
a cousin of Sapor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tarbula, the Sister of Symeon, and her Martyrdom.](2020314)
