[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020488)  [Next](2020490) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*Education, Training,
Conduct, and Wisdom of the Great John Chrysostom; his Promotion to the
See; Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, becomes his Confirmed Opponent*.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p2.1"></span>Nectarius</span> died about this
period, <span id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) and lengthened
debates were held on the ordination of a successor. They all voted for
different individuals, and it seemed impossible for all to unite on one,
and the time passed heavily. There was, however, at Antioch on the
Orontes, a certain presbyter named John, a man of noble birth and of
exemplary life, and possessed of such wonderful powers of eloquence and
persuasion that he was declared by the sophist, Libanius the Syrian, to
surpass all the orators of the age. When this sophist was on his
death-bed he was asked by his friends who should take his place. “It
would have been John,” replied he, “had not the Christians taken him
from us.” Many of those who heard the discourses of John in the church
were thereby excited to the love of virtue and to the reception of his
own religious sentiments. <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) For
by living a divine life he imparted zeal from his own virtues to his
hearers. He produced convictions similar to his own, because he did not
enforce them by rhetorical art and strength, but expounded the sacred
books with truth and sincerity. For a word which is ornamented by deeds
customarily shows itself as worthy of belief; but without these the
speaker appears as an impostor and a traitor to his own words, even
though he teach earnestly. Approbation in both regards was due to John.
He devoted himself to a prudent course of life and to a severe public
career, while he also used a clear diction, united with brilliance in
speech.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p5"></span>His natural abilities were excellent,
and he improved them by studying under the best masters. He learned
rhetoric from Libanius, and philosophy from Andragathius. When it was
expected that he would embrace the legal profession and take part in the
career of an advocate, he determined to exercise himself in the sacred
books and to practice philosophy according to the law of the Church. He
had as teachers of this philosophy, Carterius and Diodorus, two
celebrated presidents of ascetic institutions. Diodorus was afterwards
the governor of the church of Tarsus, and, I have been informed, left
many books of his own writings in which he explained the significance of
the sacred words and avoided allegory. John did not receive the
instructions of these men by himself, but persuaded Theodore and
Maximus, who had been his companions under the instruction of Libanius,
to accompany him. Maximus afterwards became bishop of Seleucia, in
Isauria; and Theodore, bishop of Mompsuestia, in Cilicia. Theodore was
well conversant with the sacred books and with the rest of the
discipline of rhetoricians and philosophers. After studying the
ecclesiastical laws, and frequenting the society of holy men, he was
filled with admiration of the ascetic mode of life and condemned city
life. He did not persevere in the same purpose, but after changing it,
he was drawn to his former course of life; and, to justify his conduct,
cited many examples from ancient history, with which he was well
acquainted, and went back into the city. On hearing that he was engaged
in business and intent on marriage, John composed an epistle, <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) more divine in language and thought
than the mind of man could produce, and sent it to him. Upon reading it,
he repented and immediately gave up his possessions, renounced his
intention of marrying, and was saved by the advice of John, and returned
to the philosophic career. This seems to me a <span id="page_400">p.
400</span> <span id="iii.xiii.ii-Page_400"></span>remarkable instance of
the power of John’s eloquence; for he readily forced conviction on the
mind of one who was himself habituated to persuade and convince others.
By the same eloquence, John attracted the admiration of the people;
while he strenuously convicted sinners even in the churches, and
antagonized with boldness all acts of injustice, as if they had been
perpetrated against himself. This boldness pleased the people, but
grieved the wealthy and the powerful, who were guilty of most of the
vices which he denounced.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p7"></span>Being, then, held in such high
estimation by those who knew him by experience, and by those who were
acquainted with him through the reports of others, John was adjudged
worthy, in word and in deed, by all the subjects of the Roman Empire, to
be the bishop of the church of Constantinople. The clergy and people
were unanimous in electing him; their choice was approved by the
emperor, who also sent the embassy which should conduct him; and, to
confer greater solemnity on his ordination, a council was convened. Not
long after the letter of the emperor reached Asterius, the general of
the East; he sent to desire John to repair to him, as if he had need of
him. On his arrival, he at once made him get into his chariot, and
conveyed him with dispatch to a military station, Pagras so-called,
where he delivered him to the officers whom the emperor had sent in
quest of him. Asterius acted very prudently in sending for John before
the citizens of Antioch knew what was about to occur; for they would
probably have excited a sedition, and have inflicted injury on others,
or subjected themselves to acts of violence, rather than have suffered
John to be taken from them.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p8"></span>When John had arrived at
Constantinople, and when the priests were assembled together, Theophilus
opposed his ordination; and proposed as a candidate in his stead, a
presbyter of his church named Isidore, who took charge of strangers and
of the poor at Alexandria. I have been informed by persons who were
acquainted with Isidore, that from his youth upwards he practiced the
philosophic virtues, near Scetis. Others say that he had gained the
friendship of Theophilus by being a participant and a familiar in a very
perilous undertaking. For it is reported that during the war against
Maximus, Theophilus intrusted Isidore with gifts and letters
respectively addressed to the emperor and to the tyrant, and sent him to
Rome, desiring him to remain there until the termination of the war,
when he was to deliver the gifts, with the letters, to him, who might
prove the victor. Isidore acted according to his instructions, but the
artifice was detected; and, fearful of being arrested, he fled to
Alexandria. Theophilus from that period evinced much attachment towards
him, and, with a view of recompensing his services, strove to raise him
to the bishopric of Constantinople. But whether there was really any
truth in this report, or whether Theophilus desired to ordain this man
because of his excellence, it is certain that he eventually yielded to
those who decided for John. <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584)
He feared Eutropius, who was artfully eager for this ordination.
Eutropius then presided over the imperial house, and they say he
threatened Theophilus, that unless he would vote with the other bishops,
he would have to defend himself against those who desired to accuse him;
for many written accusations against him were at that time before the
council.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[399:1582](2020489.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p3"></span>Pallad. *Dialog. de vita Chrys.* 5, 6;
Soc. vi. 2, 3; Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 27. Soz. works his material for the
most part independently.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[399:1583](2020489.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p4"></span>Some of the disciples of Libanius, who
had the habit of attending the public instructions of John in the
church, were converted by him to the faith of Christ.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[399:1584](2020489.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p6"></span>Chrys. *ad Theodorum lapsum,* xlvii. 1.
Migne.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[400:1585](2020489.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p9"></span>Soc. also attests to the presence of
Theophilus at the ordination of [John. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#002)<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>;
Pallad. *Dialog.* 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rapid Promotion of John to the Bishopric, and more Vehement
Grappling with its Affairs. He re-establishes Discipline in the Churches
everywhere. By sending an Embassy to Rome, he abolished the Hostility to
Flavian.](2020490)
