[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020045)  [Next](2020047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII</span>.—*After the
Banishment of Athanasius, Arius having been sent for by the Emperor,
raises a Disturbance against Alexander Bishop of Constantinople.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>While</span> these things were taking
place, the thirtieth year of Constantine’s reign was completed. But
Arius with his adherents having returned to Alexandria, again disturbed
the whole city; for the people of Alexandria were exceedingly indignant
both at the restoration of this incorrigible heretic with his partisans,
and also because their bishop Athanasius had been sent to exile. When
the emperor was apprised of the perverse disposition of Arius, he once
more ordered him to repair to Constantinople, to give an account of the
commotions he had afresh endeavored to excite. It happened at that time
that Alexander, who had some time before succeeded Metrophanes, presided
over the church at Constantinople. That this prelate was a man of
devoted piety was distinctly manifested by the conflict he entered into
with Arius; for when Arius arrived and the people were divided into two
factions and the whole city was thrown into confusion: some insisting
that the Nicene Creed should be by no means infringed on, while others
contended that the opinion of Arius was consonant to reason. In this
state of affairs, Alexander was driven to straits: more especially since
Eusebius of Nicomedia had violently threatened that he would cause him
to be immediately deposed, unless he admitted Arius and his followers to
communion. Alexander, however, was far less troubled at the thought of
his own deposition as fearful of the subversion of the principles of the
faith, which they were so anxious to effect: and regarding himself as
the constituted guardian of the doctrines recognized, and the decisions
made by the council at Nicæa, he exerted himself to the utmost to
prevent their being violated or depraved. Reduced to this extremity, he
bade farewell to all logical resources, and made God his refuge,
devoting himself to continued fasting and never ceased from praying.
Communicating his purpose to no one, he shut himself up alone in the
church called *Irene:* there going up to the altar, and prostrating
himself on the ground beneath the holy communion table, he poured forth
his fervent prayers weeping; and this he ceased not to do for many
successive nights and days. What he thus earnestly asked from God, he
received: for his petition was such a one: ‘If the opinion of Arius were
correct, he might not be permitted to see the day appointed for its
discussion; but that if he himself held the true faith, Arius, as the
author of all these evils, might suffer the punishment due to his
impiety.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Arius.](2020047)
