[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020076)  [Next](2020078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Macedonius having
possessed himself of the See of Constantinople inflicts much Injury on
those who differ from him.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxvii-p2.1"></span>At</span> that time Paul having been removed
in the manner described, Macedonius became ruler of the churches in
Constantinople; who, acquiring very great ascendancy over the emperor,
stirred up a war among Christians, of a no less grievous kind than that
which the usurpers themselves were waging. For having prevailed on his
sovereign to co-operate with him in devastating the churches, he
procured that whatever pernicious measures he determined to pursue
should be ratified by law. And on this account throughout the several
cities an edict was proclaimed, and a military force appointed to carry
the imperial decrees into effect. Accordingly those who acknowledged the
doctrine of consubstantiality were expelled not only from the churches,
but also from the cities. Now at first they were satisfied with
expulsion; but as the evil grew they resorted to the worse extremity of
inducing compulsory communion with them, caring but little for such a
desecration of the churches. Their violence indeed was scarcely less
than that of those who had formerly obliged the Christians to worship
idols; for they applied all kinds of scourgings, a variety of tortures,
and confiscation of property. Many were punished with exile; some died
under the torture; and others were put to death while they were being
led into exile. These atrocities were exercised throughout all the
eastern cities, but especially at Constantinople; the internal strife
which was but slight before was thus savagely increased by Macedonius,
as soon as he obtained the bishopric. The cities of Greece, however, and
Illyricum, with those of the western parts, still enjoyed tranquillity;
inasmuch as they preserved harmony among themselves, and continued to
adhere to the rule of faith promulgated by the council of Nicæa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius' Account of the Deeds of Violence committed at
Alexandria by George the Arian.](2020078)
