[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020302)  [Next](2020304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="iii.vii.i-Page_258"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*The Discovery of the
Life-Bringing Cross and of the Holy Nails*.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.i-p3.1"></span>When</span> the business at Nicæa had been
transacted as above related, the priests returned home. The emperor
rejoiced exceedingly at the restoration of unity of opinion in the
Catholic Church, and desirous of expressing in behalf of himself, his
children, and the empire, the gratitude towards God which the unanimity
of the bishops inspired, he directed that a house of prayer should be
erected to God at Jerusalem <span id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138)
near the place called Calvary. At the same time his mother Helena
repaired to the city for the purpose of offering up prayer, and of
visiting the sacred places. Her zeal for Christianity made her anxious
to find the wood which had formed the adorable cross. But it was no easy
matter to discover either this relic or the Lord’s sepulchre; for the
Pagans, who in former times had persecuted the Church, <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139) and who, at the first promulgation
of Christianity, had had recourse to every artifice to exterminate it,
had concealed that spot under much heaped up earth, and elevated what
before was quite depressed, as it looks now, and the more effectually to
conceal them, had enclosed the entire place of the resurrection and
Mount Calvary within a wall, and had, moreover, ornamented the whole
locality, and paved it with stone. They also erected a temple to
Aphrodite, and set up a little image, so that those who repaired thither
to worship Christ would appear to bow the knee to Aphrodite, and that
thus the true cause of offering worship in that place would, in course
of time, be forgotten; and that as Christians would not dare fearlessly
to frequent the place or to point it out to others, the temple and
statue would come to be regarded as exclusively appertaining to the
Pagans. At length, however, the place was discovered, and the fraud
about it so zealously maintained was detected; some say that the facts
were first disclosed by a Hebrew who dwelt in the East, and who derived
his information from some documents which had come to him by paternal
inheritance; but it seems more accordant with truth to suppose that God
revealed the fact by means of signs and dreams; for I do not think that
human information is requisite when God thinks it best to make manifest
the same. When by command of the emperor the place was excavated deeply,
the cave whence our Lord arose from the dead was discovered; and at no
great distance, three crosses were found and another separate piece of
wood, on which were inscribed in white letters in Hebrew, in Greek, and
in Latin, the following words: “Jesus of Nazareth, the king of the
Jews.” These words, as the sacred book of the gospels relates, were
placed by command of Pilate, governor of Judæa, over the head of Christ.
There yet, however, remained a difficulty in distinguishing the Divine
cross from the others; for the inscription had been wrenched from it and
thrown aside, and the cross itself had been cast aside with the others,
without any distinction, when the bodies of the crucified were taken
down. For according to history, the soldiers found Jesus dead upon the
cross, and they took him down, and gave him up to be buried; while, in
order to accelerate the death of the two thieves, who were crucified on
either hand, they broke their legs, and then took down the crosses, and
flung them out of the way. It was no concern of theirs to deposit the
crosses in their first order; for it was growing late, and as the men
were dead, they did not think it worth while to remain to attend to the
crosses. A more Divine information than could be furnished by man was
therefore necessary in order to distinguish the Divine cross from the
others, and this revelation was given in the following manner: There was
a certain lady of rank in Jerusalem who was afflicted with a most
grievous and incurable disease; Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem,
accompanied by the mother of the emperor and her attendants, repaired to
her bedside. After engaging in prayer, Macarius signified by signs to
the spectators that the Divine cross would be the one which, on being
brought in contact with the invalid, should remove the disease. He
approached her in turn with each of the crosses; <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="iii.vii.i-Page_259"></span>but when two of the
crosses were laid on her, it seemed but folly and mockery to her for she
was at the gates of death. When, however, the third cross was in like
manner brought to her, she suddenly opened her eyes, regained her
strength, and immediately sprang from her bed, well. It is said that a
dead person was, in the same way, restored to life. The venerated wood
having been thus identified, the greater portion of it was deposited in
a silver case, in which it is still preserved in Jerusalem: but the
empress sent part of it to her son Constantine, together with the nails
by which the body of Christ had been fastened. Of these, it is related,
the emperor had a head-piece and bit made for his horse, according to
the prophecy of Zechariah, who referred to this period when he said,
“that which shall be upon the bit of the horse shall be holy to the Lord
Almighty.” <span id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140) These things,
indeed, were formerly known to the sacred prophets, and predicted by
them, and at length, when it seemed to God that they should be
manifested, were confirmed by wonderful works. Nor does this appear so
marvelous when it is remembered that, even among the Pagans, it was
confessed that the Sibyl had predicted that thus it should be,—

<span id="iii.vii.i-p7"></span>“Oh most blessed tree, on which our Lord
was hung.” <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141)

<span id="iii.vii.i-p9"></span>Our most zealous adversaries cannot deny
the truth of this fact, and it is hence evident that a pre-manifestation
was made of the wood of the cross, and of the adoration (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.i-p9.1"></span>σέβας</span>) it
received.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p10"></span>The above incidents we have related
precisely as they were delivered to us by men of great accuracy, by whom
the information was derived by succession from father to son; and others
have recorded the same events in writing for the benefit of posterity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[258:1139](2020303.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p4"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 25–40; Soc. i. 9,
Letter to Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[258:1140](2020303.htm#fr_1139) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p5"></span>Ruf *H. E.* i. 7, 8; Soc. *H. E.* I. 17;
Sulp. Sev. *H. S*. ii. 33, 34, another story of the identification. Soz.
furnishes an additional story about the discovery, which he, however,
confutes.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[259:1141](2020303.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p6"></span>[Zech. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020)<span id="iii.vii.i-p6.1"></span>.
(LXX).

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[259:1142](2020303.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p8"></span>Sib. Or. vi. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Helena, the Mother of the Emperor; she visited
Jerusalem, built Temples in that City, and performed other Godly Works:
Her Death.](2020304)
