[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020508)  [Next](2020510) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Unlawful Expulsion
of John from his Bishopric. The Trouble which followed. Conflagration of
the Church by Fire from Heaven. Exile of John to Cucusus*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxii-p2.1"></span>From</span> this period the most zealous
of the people guarded John alternately, stationing themselves about the
episcopal residence by night and by day. <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) The bishops who had condemned him
complained of this conduct as a violation of the laws of the Church,
declared that they could answer for the justice of the sentence that had
been enacted against him, and asserted that tranquillity would never be
restored among the people until he had been expelled from the city. A
messenger having conveyed to him a mandate from the emperor enjoining
his immediate departure, John obeyed, and escaped from the city,
unnoticed by those who had been appointed to guard him. He made no other
censure than that, in being sent into banishment without a legal trial
or any of the forms of the law, he was treated more severely than
murderers, sorcerers, and adulterers. He was conveyed in a little bark
to Bithynia, and thence immediately continued his journey. Some of his
enemies were apprehensive lest the people, on hearing of his departure,
should pursue him, and bring him back by force, and therefore commanded
the gates of the church to be closed. When the people who were in the
public places of the city heard of what had occurred, great confusion
ensued; for some ran to the seashore as if they would follow him, and
others fled hither and thither, and were in great terror since the wrath
of the emperor was expected to visit them for creating so much
disturbance and tumult. Those who were within the church barred the
exits still further by rushing together upon them, and by pressing upon
one another. With difficulty they forced the doors open by the use of
great violence; one party shattered them with stones, another was
pulling them toward themselves, and was thus forcing the crowd backward
into the building. Meanwhile the church was suddenly consumed on all
sides with fire. The flames extended in all directions, and the grand
house of the senatorial council, adjacent to the church on the south,
was doomed. The two parties mutually accused each other of incendiarism.
The enemies of John asserted that his partisans had been guilty of the
deed from revenge, on account of the vote that had been passed against
him by the council. These latter, on the other hand, maintained that
they had been calumniated, and that the deed was perpetrated by their
enemies, with the intention of burning them in the church. While the
fire was spreading from late afternoon until the morning, and creeping
forward to the material which was still standing, the officers who held
John in custody conveyed him to Cucusus, a city of Armenia, which the
emperor by letter had appointed as the place of residence for the
condemned man. Other officers were commissioned to arrest all the
bishops and clerics who had favored the cause of John, and to imprison
them in Chalcedon. Those citizens who were suspected of attachment to
John were sought out and cast into prison, and compelled to pronounce
anathema against him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[413:1612](2020509.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxii-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 18; Pallad. *ibid.* and
Chrys. *Ep. ad Inn.;* Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 34. Soz. has distinct
material. Cf. Zos. v. 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Arsacius elected to succeed John. The Evils wrought against the
Followers of John. St. Nicarete.](2020510)
