[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020532)  [Next](2020534) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Discovery of the
Relics of Zechariah the Prophet, and of Stephen the Proto-Martyr*.

<span id="iii.xiv.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xvii-p2.1"></span>I shall</span> first speak of the relics
of the prophet. <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641)
Caphar-Zechariah is a village of the territory of Eleutheropolis, a city
of Palestine. The land of this district was cultivated by Calemerus, a
serf; he was well disposed to the owner, but hard, discontented, and
unjust towards his neighboring peasants. Although he possessed these
defects of character, the prophet stood by him in a dream, and
manifested himself; pointing out a particular garden, he said to him,
“Go, dig in that garden at the distance of two cubits from the hedge of
the garden by the road leading to the city of Bitheribis. You will there
find two coffins, the inner one of wood, the other of lead. Beside the
coffins you will see a glass vessel full of water, and two serpents of
moderate size, but tame, and perfectly innoxious, so that they seem to
be used to being handled.” Calemerus followed the directions of the
prophet at the designated place and zealously applied himself to the
task. When the sacred depository was disclosed by the afore-mentioned
signs, the divine prophet appeared to him, clad in a white stole, which
makes me think that he was a priest. At his feet outside of the coffin
was lying a child which had been honored with a royal burial; for on its
head was a golden crown, its feet were encased in golden sandals, and it
was arrayed in a costly robe. The wise men and priests of the time were
greatly perplexed about this child, who and whence he might be and for
what reason he had been so clothed. It is said that Zechariah, the
superior of a monastic community at Gerari, found an ancient document
written in Hebrew, which had not been received among the canonical
books. In this document it was stated that when Zechariah the prophet
had been put to death by Joash, king of Judah, the family of the monarch
was soon visited by a dire calamity; for on the seventh day after the
death of the prophet, one of the sons of Joash, whom he tenderly loved,
suddenly expired. Judging that this affliction was a special
manifestation of Divine wrath, the king ordered his son to be interred
at the feet of the prophet, as a kind of atonement for the crime against
him. Such are the particulars which I have ascertained on the subject.

<span id="iii.xiv.xvii-p4"></span>Although the prophet had lain under
the earth for so many generations, he appeared sound; his hair was
closely shorn, his nose was straight; his beard moderately grown, his
head quite short, his eyes rather sunken, and concealed by the eyebrows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[427:1642](2020533.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="iii.xiv.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xvii-p3"></span>An independent chapter, built on local
story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: General Indexes](2020534)
