[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020059)  [Next](2020061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.x"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*The Bishops assembled at
Antioch, on the Refusal of Eusebius of Emisa to accept the Bishopric of
Alexandria, ordain Gregory, and change the Language of the Nicene
Creed.*

<span id="ii.v.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.x-p2.1"></span>Now</span> at that time Eusebius having been
proposed and fearing to go to Alexandria, the Synod at Antioch
designated Gregory as bishop of that church. This being done, they
altered the creed; not as condemning anything in that which was set
forth at Nicæa, but in fact with a determination to subvert and nullify
the doctrine of consubstantiality by means of frequent councils, and the
publication of various expositions of the faith, so as gradually to
establish the Arian views. How these things issued we will set forth in
the course of our narrative; but the epistle then promulgated respecting
the faith was as follows: <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="ii.v.x-p4"></span>‘We have neither become followers of
Arius,—for how should we who are bishops be guided by a presbyter?—nor
have we embraced any other faith than that which was set forth from the
beginning. But being constituted examiners and judges of his sentiments,
we admit their soundness, rather than adopt them from him: and you will
recognize this from what we are about to state. We have learned from the
beginning to believe in one God of the Universe, the Creator and
Preserver of all things both those thought of and those perceived by the
senses: and in one only-begotten Son of God, subsisting before all ages,
and co-existing with the Father who begat him, through whom also all
things visible and invisible were made; who in the last days according
to the Father’s good pleasure, descended, and assumed flesh from the
holy virgin, and having fully accomplished his Father’s will, that he
should suffer, and rise again, and ascend into the heavens, and sit at
the right hand of the Father; and is coming to judge the living and the
dead, continuing King and God for ever. We believe also in the Holy
Spirit. And if it is necessary to add this, we believe in the
resurrection of the flesh, and the life everlasting.’

<span id="ii.v.x-p5"></span>Having thus written in their first epistle,
they sent it to the bishops of every city. But after remaining some time
at Antioch, as if to condemn the former, they published another letter
in these words:

<span id="ii.v.x-p6"></span><span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="ii.v.x-Page_40"></span>*Another Exposition of the Faith.*

<span id="ii.v.x-p7"></span>In conformity with evangelic and apostolic
tradition, we believe in one God the Father Almighty, the Creator and
Framer of the universe. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, his Son, God the
only-begotten, through whom all things were made: begotten of the Father
before all ages, God of God, Whole of Whole, Only of Only, Perfect of
Perfect, King of King, Lord of Lord; the living Word, the Wisdom, the
Life, the True Light, the Way of Truth, the Resurrection, the Shepherd,
the Gate; immutable and inconvertible; the unaltering image of the
Divinity, Substance and Power, and Counsel and Glory of the Father; born
‘before all creation’; who was in the beginning with God, God the Word,
according as it is declared in the Gospel, <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) and the Word was God, by whom all
things were made, and in whom all things subsist: who in the last days
came down from above, and was born of the virgin according to the
Scriptures; and was made man, the Mediator between God and men, the
Apostle of our Faith, and the Prince of Life, as he says, <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) ‘I came down from heaven, not to do
mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.’ Who suffered on our
behalf, and rose again for us on the third day, and ascended into the
heavens, and is seated at the right hand of the Father; and will come
again with glory and power to judge the living and the dead. \[We
believe\] also in the Holy Spirit, who is given to believers for their
consolation, sanctification, and perfection; even as our Lord Jesus
Christ commanded his disciples, saying, <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) ‘Go and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit’;
that is to say of the Father who is truly the Father, of the Son who is
truly the Son, and of the Holy Spirit who is truly the Holy Spirit,
these words not being simply or insignificantly applied, but accurately
expressing the proper subsistence, glory, and order, of each of these
who are named: so that there are three in person, but one in
concordance. Holding therefore this faith in the presence of God and of
Christ, we anathematize all heretical and false doctrine. And if any one
shall teach contrary to the sound and right faith of the Scriptures,
affirming that there is or was a period or an age before the Son of God
existed, let him be accursed. And if any one shall say that the Son is a
creature as one of the creatures, or that he is offspring as one of the
offsprings, and shall not hold each of the aforesaid doctrines as the
Divine Scriptures have delivered them to us: or if any one shall teach
or preach any other doctrine contrary to that which we have received,
let him be accursed. For we truly and unreservedly believe and follow
all things handed down to us from the sacred Scriptures by the prophets
and apostles.

<span id="ii.v.x-p11"></span>Such was the exposition of the faith
published by those then assembled at Antioch, to which Gregory also
subscribed as bishop of Alexandria, although he had not yet entered that
city. The Synod having done these things, and legislated some other
canons, was dissolved. At this time it happened that public affairs also
were disturbed. The nation called Franks made incursions into the Roman
territories in Gaul, and at the same time there occurred violent
earthquakes in the East, and especially at Antioch, which continued to
suffer concussions during a whole year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[39:272](2020060.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ii.v.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p3"></span>Athanas. *de Synodd.* 22, 23.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[40:273](2020060.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ii.v.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p8"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[40:274](2020060.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ii.v.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p9"></span>[John vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span id="ii.v.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[40:275](2020060.htm#fr_274) <span
id="ii.v.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p10"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.v.x-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Arrival of Gregory at Alexandria, tended by a Military
Escort, Athanasius flees.](2020061)
