[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020069)  [Next](2020071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*Of the Council at
Sardica.* <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)

<span id="ii.v.xx-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xx-p3.1"></span>The</span> Western prelates on account of their
being of another language, and not understanding this exposition, would
not admit of it; saying that the Nicene Creed was sufficient, and that
they would not waste time on anything beyond it. But when the emperor
had again written to insist on the restoration to Paul and Athanasius of
their respective sees, but without effect in consequence of the
continual agitation of the people—these two bishops demanded that
another Synod should be convened, so that <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> <span id="ii.v.xx-Page_47"></span>their case, as well as other
questions in relation to the faith might be settled by an ecumenical
council, for they made it obvious that their deposition arose from no
other cause than that the faith might be the more easily perverted.
Another general council was therefore summoned to meet at Sardica,—a
city of Illyricum,—by the joint authority of the two emperors; the one
requesting by letter that it might be so, and the other, of the East,
readily acquiescing in it. It was the eleventh year after the death of
the father of the two Augusti, during the consulship of Rufinus and
Eusebius, <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) that the Synod of
Sardica met. According to the statement of Athanasius <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) about 300 bishops from the western
parts of the empire were present; but Sabinus says there came only
seventy from the eastern parts, among whom was Ischyras of
Mareotes, <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) who had been ordained
bishop of that country by those who deposed Athanasius. Of the rest,
some pretended infirmity of body; others complained of the shortness of
the notice given, casting the blame of it on Julius, bishop of Rome,
although a year and a half had elapsed from the time of its having been
summoned: in which interval Athanasius remained at Rome awaiting the
assembling of the Synod. When at last they were convened at Sardica, the
Eastern prelates refused either to meet or to enter into any conference
with those of the West, unless they first excluded Athanasius and Paul
from the convention. But as Protogenes, bishop of Sardica, and Hosius,
bishop of Cordova, a city in Spain, would by no means permit them to be
absent, the Eastern bishops immediately withdrew, and returning to
Philippopolis in Thrace, held a separate council, wherein they openly
anathematized the term *homoousios;* and having introduced the
Anomoian <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) opinion into their
epistles, they sent them in all directions. On the other hand those who
remained at Sardica, condemning in the first place their departure,
afterwards divested the accusers of Athanasius of their dignity; then
confirming the Nicene Creed, and rejecting the term *anomoion,* they
more distinctly recognized the doctrine of consubstantiality, which they
also inserted in epistles addressed to all the churches. Both parties
believed they had acted rightly: those of the East, because the Western
bishops had countenanced those whom they had deposed; and these again,
in consequence not only of the retirement of those who had deposed them
before the matter had been examined into, but also because they
themselves were the defenders of the Nicene faith, which the other party
had dared to adulterate. They therefore restored to Paul and Athanasius
their sees, and also Marcellus of Ancyra in Lesser Galatia, who had been
deposed long before, as we have stated in the former book. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) At that time indeed he exerted himself
to the utmost to procure the revocation of the sentence pronounced
against him, declaring that his being suspected of entertaining the
error of Paul of Samosata arose from a misunderstanding of some
expressions in his book. It must, however, be noticed that Eusebius
Pamphilus wrote three entire books against Marcellus, <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) in which he quotes that author’s own
words to prove that he asserts with Sabellius the Libyan, and Paul of
Samosata, that the Lord \[Jesus\] was a mere man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[46:305](2020070.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p2"></span>Cf. Sozom. III. 11; Theodoret, *H. E*. II.
7; also Hefele, *Hist. of the Church Councils*, Vol. II. p. 87–176.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[47:306](2020070.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p4"></span>347 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xx-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_306"></span>[47:307](2020070.htm#fr_306) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p5"></span>Athanasius’ statement is that those who
were present at the Council of Sardica, together with those who
afterwards subscribed the Synodical Epistle sent to them and those who
before the council had written in his behalf out of Phrygia, Asia, and
Isauria, were in all about three hundred and forty. So in his *Apol.
contra Arianos,* c. 50. In his *Ep. ad Solitar.* c. 15, he gives the
number of those who met at Sardica as about one hundred and seventy,—no
more.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[47:308](2020070.htm#fr_307) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p6"></span>Cf. I. 27.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[47:309](2020070.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xx-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xx-p7.2"></span>νομοίου</span>, ‘different,’ ‘unlike.’

<span id="fn_309"></span>[47:310](2020070.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p8"></span>I. 36.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[47:311](2020070.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.v.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xx-p9"></span>There are two works of Eusebius extant
against Marcellus. The one described here is *de Ecclesiastica Theologia
adversus Marcellum,* in three books; the other is entitled *contra
Marcellum,* and consists of two books. As there is no mention of the
latter, it is doubtful whether Socrates had ever seen them. At the end
of the second book, Eusebius asserts that he had written at the request
of the bishops who had excommunicated Marcellus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defense of Eusebius Pamphilus.](2020071)
