<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa085)  [Next](psa087) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 86](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 86:0</span></span>

Title. - A Prayer of David. We have here one of the five Psalms entitled
Tephillahs or prayers. This Psalm consists of praise as well as prayer,
but it is in all parts so directly addressed to God that it is most
fitly called "a prayer." A prayer is none the less but all the more a
prayer because veins of praise run through it. This Psalm would seem to
have been specially known as David's prayer; even as the ninetieth is
"the prayer of Moses." David composed it, and no doubt often expressed
himself in similar language; both the matter and the wording are
suitable to his varied circumstances and expressive of the different
characteristics of his mind. In many respects it resembles [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001), which bears the same title,
but in other aspects it is very different; the prayers of a good man
have a family likeness, but they vary as much as they agree. We may
learn from the present Psalm that the great saints of old were
accustomed to pray very much in the same fashion as we do; believers in
all ages are of one genus. The name of God occurs very frequently in
this Psalm, sometimes it is Jehovah, but more commonly Adonai, which it
is believed by many learned scholars was written by the Jewish
transcribers instead of the sublimer title, because their superstitious
dread led them to do so: we, labouring under no such tormenting fear,
rejoice in Jehovah, our God. It is singular that those who were so
afraid of their God, that they dared not write his name, had yet so
little godly fear, that they dared to alter his word.

Division. - The Psalm is irregular in its construction but may be
divided into three portions, each ending with a note of gratitude or of
confidence: we shall therefore read from [Psa
86:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001), and then, after another pause
at the end of [Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013), we will
continue to the end.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001). -

I. A singular request - that the Lord should bow his ear.

II\. A singular plea - "I am poor and needy."

III\. The singular grace of God will answer the request, because
singular grace has made the petitioner feel his need.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002). -

I. The blessing sought is present, spiritual, complete and final
preservation.

II\. Our reasons for expecting it are -

1\. Our belonging to God - "I am holy."

2\. God's belonging to us - "my God."

3\. Our faith, which has the promises.

4\. Our fruits, which prove our faith - "thy servant."

[Psa 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003). - Importunity.

I. When she pleads - "daily."

II\. How she pleads - "I cry."

III\. To whom she pleads - "unto thee."

IV\. For what she pleads - "be merciful."

[Psa 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003). - "I will cry daily" for
pardoning, sanctifying, assisting, preserving, providing and guiding
mercy. - William Jay.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004). -

I. The believer's joy is from God - "Rejoice," etc.

II\. The believer's joy is in God - "unto thee," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004). - The great lift.

I. The heavy weight - "my soul."

II\. The weak worker - "I lift."

III\. The great height - "unto thee."

IV\. The appointed machinery - means of grace; and,

V. The expected aid - "Rejoice," etc.

[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005). - Encouraging thoughts of
God.

I. He has goodness in his essence.

II\. He has forgiveness in readiness.

III\. He has mercy in action, flowing forth from him plenteously.

IV\. His very discrimination is gracious - "all them that call upon
him."

[Psa 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006). - The praying man desires
above all things an answer. Objections to such an expectation. Grounds
for continuing to expect, and duties incumbent upon those who realise
such expectations.

[Psa 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006). - "The voice of
supplication." It is the voice of weakness, of penitence, of faith, of
hope, of the new nature, of knowledge, etc.

[Psa 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007). - 1. Help needed. 2. Help
sought. 3. Help found. - G. R.

[Psa 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007). -

I. A time to be expected - "day of my trouble."

II\. A resolve to be practised - "I will call upon thee."

III\. A result to be experienced - "thou wilt answer me."

[Psa 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007). - Prayer is the design of
trouble, the evidence that it is sanctified, its solace, and the medium
of deliverance from it. - William Jay.

[Psa 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008). -

I. God is one; the only God: characters of false gods inferior far.

II\. His works are unique. Nature, providence, grace, all peculiar in
many respects. A good theme for a thoughtful preacher.

[Psa 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009). - The certain conversion of
the world as opposed to modern theories.

[Psa 86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010). -

I. God is "great," therefore great things may be expected of him.

II\. He is unsearchable, therefore "wondrous things" may be expected of
him.

III\. He is irresistible, therefore impossibilities to others may be
expected of him: "Thou art God alone." - G. R.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011). - In the disposition of
mind which is expressed in these words, the believer stands opposed to
four descriptions of character.

I. The ignorant and thoughtless sinner, who neither regards his way nor
his end.

II\. The Antinomian, who is zealous for doctrines, and averse from the
practice of religion.

III\. The Pharisee, who disregards religious sentiment, and makes
practice all in all.

IV\. The hypocrite, who appears to be divided between religion and the
world. - John Hyatt, 1811.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011). - The Christian as a
scholar, a man of action, and a man of devotion.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011). - Holiness taught, truth
practised, God adored; and thus the life perfected.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011) (middle clause). - We
should walk in the belief of the truth, its practice, enjoyment, and
profession. - William Day.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011) (third clause). - The
necessity, benefit, and reasonableness of whole-heartedness in religion.

[Psa 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012). - The art of praising God
by heart.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013). -

I. Where I might have been - "the lowest hell."

II\. What thou hast done for me - "hast delivered."

III\. What thou art doing - "great is thy mercy."

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013) (first clause). - God's
mercy great in election, redemption, calling, pardon, upholding, etc. It
is so, at this very moment, in supplying my needs, preserving from
danger, consoling in sorrow, etc. Great is thy mercy towards me - so
great a sinner, with such needs, so provoking, so full of doubts, etc.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013), [Psa
86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014), [Psa
86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015). - The three verses describe
salvation, consequent persecution, and all-sufficient consolation.

[Psa 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015). - The shades of the light
of love. Compassion upon suffering, grace towards unworthiness,
long-suffering to provocation, mercy towards sin, truth towards the
promise.

[Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016). -

I. My pedigree - "son of thine handmaid."

II\. My occupation - "thy servant."

III\. My character - needing "mercy."

IV\. My request - "turn unto me."

[Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016). - In what respects a
servant of God may be girt with divine power.

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017). - What inward feelings and
outward providences are "tokens for good."

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The prophet David has penned two Psalms which he has eminently
appropriated to himself as his own: the one is styled David's prayer,
though many other Psalms are prayers - it is Psalm 86; the other David's
praise. Ps. 145. The first his tephilla, the latter his tehilla; in each
of these he makes a solemn rehearsal of the very words of Moses, in [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007). In Psalm 86 he brings them in as
they were a support unto his faith in his distresses from sins and
miseries, to which use he puts them, [Psa 86:3, 19 86:4, 19 86:6, 19
86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003). And again, [Psa 86:16, 19
86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016), he makes a plea of these words
by way of prayer. In Psalm 145, he brings them in as they are an elogium
or celebration of the glorious nature and excellencies of God, to excite
the sons of men to love and praise him. - Thomas Goodwin.

Title

This Psalm was published under the title of "A Prayer of David"; not as
if David sung all his prayers, but into some of his songs he inserted
prayers; for a Psalm will admit the expression of any pious and devout
affections. But it is observable how very plain the language of this
Psalm is, and how little there is in it of poetical flights or figures,
in comparison with some other Psalms; for the flourishes of wit are not
the proper ornaments of prayer. - Matthew Henry.

Title

There was much, very much, of God's peculiar character, his glorious
name, brought to view in the close of the last Psalm. This may account
for its being followed by another, "A Prayer of David," almost equally
full of the character of Jehovah. The key-note of this Psalm is
Jehovah's name. - Andrew A. Bonar.

Whole Psalm

Christ prays throughout the whole of this Psalm. All the words are
spoken exclusively by Christ, who is both God and man. - Psalt.
Cassiodori, 1491.

Whole Psalm

In this Psalm Christ the Son of God and Son of Man, one God with the
Father, one man with men, to whom we pray as God; prays in the form of a
servant. For he prays for us, and he prays in us, and he is prayed to by
us. He prays for us as our Priest. He prays in us as our Head. He is
prayed to by us as our God. - Psalt. Pet. Lombard. 1474.

[Psa 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

"Bow down thine ear, O Lord." As the careful physician doth to his
feeble patient: so Basil glosseth here. - John Trapp.

[Psa 86:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

"Poor,... holy," "trusteth,... I cry." The petitioner is first described
as poor, then holy, next trusting, after that crying, finally, lifted up
to God. And each epithet has its fitting verb; bow down to the poor,
preserve the holy, save the trusting, be merciful to him who cries,
rejoice the lifted-up. It is the whole gamut of love from the
Incarnation to the Ascension; it tells us that Christ's humiliation will
be our glory and joy. - Neale and Littledale's Commentary.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

"Holy." The word has been variously translated: - Godly, De Muis,
Ainsworth and others; charitable, or beneficent, Piscator; merciful or
tenderhearted, Mariana; diligently or earnestly compassionate, Vatablus;
meek, Calvin; a beloved one, Version of American Bible Union; one whom
thou lovest, Perowne; a devoted or dedicated man, Weiss.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

"For I am Holy." Some have objected to David's pleading his own good
character; but if he did not go beyond the truth, and the occasion
called for it, there was nothing wrong in his so doing. Job, David,
Peter, John and Paul all did it, [Job
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#005); [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016); [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010); [Co1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001). Nor is it presumptuous to ask God
to show mercy to us for we show it to others; or to forgive us for we
forgive others, [Mat 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007); [Mat
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014), [Mat
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015). - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

"I am holy ... thy servant which trusteth in thee." They that are holy,
yet must not trust in themselves, or in their own righteousness, but
only in God and his grace. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

"Save thy servant that trusteth in thee." When God saves his servant, he
saves what belongs to himself; and, when he saves him that trusts in
him, he shows himself to be just and faithful, in carrying out what he
promised. - Bellarmine.

[Psa 86:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

The aspirations after holiness which are found in this Psalm, coupled
with its earnest invocation of mercy from the God with whom there is
forgiveness, render it peculiarly applicable to those whose daily access
is to a throne of needed grace. Christians know that while their
standing is the blameless perfection of the Lord their righteousness,
they are in many things offenders still. Nor do we ever fully prove the
preciousness of Jesus as our portion, except we are drawn to him by that
Spirit which reveals to us a nakedness and poverty within ourselves,
which his blessed fulness can alone redress.

There is a consciousness of personal sanctification through faith ([Psa
86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)) associated with an acutely
sensitive perception of intrinsic worthlessness, such as only finds
relief in the remembrance of unaltered grace ([Psa
86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)), which, to the exercised spirit
of one really growing in the knowledge of God, will address itself with
an especial acceptance. - Arthur Pridham.

[Psa 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003)

"Be merciful unto me." Lest any should by the former words, ("I am
holy,") suspect him to be a merit-monger, he beggeth mercy with instancy
and constancy of request. - John Trapp.

[Psa 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003)

"I cry unto thee daily." A great difference between saints and sinners
in prayer is that sinners who pray at all, pray only when they are in
trouble, whereas saints cry daily unto God. Compare [Job
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#010). - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"Rejoice the soul of thy servant," etc. As I have not found rest in
anything created, I have raised up my soul on the wings of thought and
desire to thee my Creator. Love bears one's soul up; and it has been
truly said, that the soul is more where it loves, than where it actually
is. Thought and desire are the wings of love; for he that loves is borne
on to, and abides in, what he loves, by thinking constantly on, and
longing for, the object of his love. Whoever truly, and from his heart,
loves God, by thinking on him and longing for him, lifts up his soul to
God; while, on the contrary, whoever loves the earth, by thinking on and
coveting the things of the earth, lets his soul down to its level. -
Bellarmine.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift my soul." If thou hadst corn in thy rooms
below, thou wouldst take it up higher, lest it should grow rotten.
Wouldest thou remove thy corn, and dost thou suffer thy heart to rot on
the earth? Thou wouldest take thy corn up higher: lift up thy heart to
heaven. And how can I, dost thou say? What ropes are needed? What
machines? What ladders? Thy affections are the steps; thy will the way.
By loving thou mountest, by neglect thou descendest. Standing on the
earth thou art in heaven, if thou lovest God. For the heart is not so
raised as the body is raised: the body to be lifted up changes its
place: the heart to be lifted up changes its will. - Augustine.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul," intimates that he had brought
himself to the Lord as a living sacrifice, even as the heave-offering in
the tabernacle - to show that it belonged to God and to his altar, and,
that man had no part in it - was lifted up by the hands of the priests.
- Benjamin Weiss.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"I lift up my soul." It denotes the devotion, fervency, heartiness, and
sincerity of his prayer; the doing of it with a true heart, the lifting
up of the heart with the hands unto God, [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041); or by way of offering unto the
Lord, not the body only, but the soul or heart also; or as a deposition
committed into his hands. - John Gill.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"Lord." Here, and in all the verses in this psalm where, אדני, Adonai,
occurs, many MSS read יהוה, Yehovah. The Jews, out of reverence to the
incommunicable name Jehovah pronounce אדהי where יהוה is in the text. It
is, therefore, not improbable that יהוה is the true reading in all these
places. - Note to Calvin in loc.

[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)

"For thou, Lord, art good," and whither should beggars go but to the
door of the good house-keeper? Matthew Henry.

[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)

"Ready to forgive." The mercy of God is a ready mercy, and his pardons
are ready for his people; his pardons and mercies are not to seek, he
hath them at hand, he is "good and ready to forgive." Whereas most men,
though they will forgive, yet they are not ready to forgive, they are
hardly brought to it, though they do it at last. But God is "ready to
forgive"; he hath, as it were, pardons ready drawn (as a man who would
be ready to do a business, he will have such writings as concern the
passing of it ready); there is nothing to do but to put in the date and
the name; yea indeed, the date and the name are put in from all
eternity. Thus the Scripture speaks to show how forward God is to do
good; he needs not set his heart to it; his heart is ever in the
exactest fitness. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)

"Plenteous in mercy." It is a thing marvellously satisfactory and
pleasing to the heart of a man to be still taking from a great heap; and
upon this ground are those proverbial sayings, There is no fishing like
to a fishing in the sea, no service like the service of a king: because
in one there is the greatest plenty and abundance of that kind of
pleasure that fishers look after; and for them that serve, and must live
by their service, there is none like that of princes, because they have
abundance of reward and opportunity whereby to recompense the services
of those that do wait and attend upon them...

And upon the same ground is it that the Scriptures, in several places,
do not only assert and testify that God is merciful and gracious, but
abundant in mercy and full of grace; and not simply that there is
redemption in him, but plenteousness of redemption [Psa
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008), [Psa
130:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007); [Isa
55:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007); "Let the wicked forsake his
way," etc.; "Let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy; and
unto our God, for he will abundantly pardon. The commodity which we
stand in need of is mercy and the pardon of our sins, in case we have
been unholy and ungodly creatures; this commodity is abundantly in God.
There it is treasured up as Waters are in the store-house of the sea;
there is no end of the treasures of his grace, mercy, pardon, and
compassion. There is no man, being in want, but had ten times rather go
to a rich man's door to be relieved, than to the door of a poor man, if
he knoweth the rich man to be as liberal and bountifully disposed as the
poor man can be." - John Goodwin.

[Psa 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006)

"Supplications." תּחנוּנותי, deprecations. The Psalmist forms a peculiar
Hebrew word, feminine plural, not found elsewhere, to convey more
impressively the idea of suppliant weakness. - A. R. Fausset.

[Psa 86:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)

There are two kinds of doubt which are wont in the hour of temptation to
assail the soul; the doubt as to God's willingness, and the doubt as to
God's power to succour. The first of these the Psalmist has already put
from him; he now shows that he has overcome the second. God is able as
well as willing to help, and every being on the face of the earth who
receives help, receives it from the hand of Him who is the only God, and
who shall one day be recognized (so speaks the strong prophetic hope
within him, [Psa 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009)) as the only
God. - J. J. S. Perowne.

[Psa 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009), [Psa
86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010)

"All nations shall worship before thee," because as King of Nations,
thou art great, thy sovereignty absolute and incontestable, thy Majesty
terrible and unsupportable, thy power universal and irresistible, thy
riches vast and inexhaustible, thy dominion boundless and
unquestionable; and for the proof of this, "thou doest wondrous things,"
which all nations admire, and from whence they might easily infer that
"thou art God alone;" not only none like thee, but none beside thee. -
Matthew Henry.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Teach me thy way" "I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart." Here is
the "Via, Veritas, Vita" of the Gospel ([Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)). "Via tua, Veritas tua, Vita
tua, Christus." Christ is our Way, Truth, and Life, because he is Man
united to God, and is one substance with the Father. - Christopher
Wordsworth.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Teach me." There is no point on which the world is more dark than that
of its own ignorance - we might truly say, "it is ignorant of its
ignorance" - it knows enough when it learns by rote a few first
principles of religion; it comforts itself that it is not atheistical
because it believes that there is a God; but as to knowing his ways,
laws, mind, or any such things, with them it has nothing at all to do.
The people of the world do not care for enlightenment; they feel no
pressing need for it; in all probability they have an instinctive
feeling that if enlightened they would know a little more than they wish
to know, that their newly-acquired knowledge would interfere with their
old habits and ways, and this is one reason why all spiritual teaching
which goes beneath the surface is distasteful to the majority of men.
They cannot bear to be brought into contact with God, in anything but a
general way; the particulars of his character may not agree over well
with the particulars of their lives!

It is the fashion in the present day to talk of man's enlightenment, and
to represent human nature as upheaving under its load, as straining
towards a knowledge of truth; such is not in reality the case, and
whenever there is an effort in the-mind untaught of the Spirit, it is
directed towards God as the great moral and not as the-great spiritual
Being. A man untaught of the Holy Ghost may long to know a moral, he can
never desire to know a spiritual Being. - John Hyatt, 1767-1826.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Teach." The common version of the verb here is too vague, as it fails
to bring out the peculiar suitableness of the term to express the kind
of teaching here specifically meant. The original meaning of the Hebrew
word is to point out or mark the way. - J. A. Alexander.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"I will walk in thy truth." Conform to Scripture. Let us lead Scripture
lives. Oh that the Bible might be seen to be printed in our lives! Do
what the Word commands. Obedience is an excellent way of commenting upon
the Bible.

Let the Word be the sun-dial by which you set your life. What are we the
better for having the Scriptures, if we do not direct all our speeches
and actions according to it? What is a carpenter better for his rule
about him, if he sticks it at his back, and never makes use of it for
measuring and squaring? So, what are we the better for the rule of the
Word, if we do not make use of it, and regulate our lives by it? -
Thomas Watson.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"I will walk in thy truth." Walking, in the Scripture, takes in the
whole of our conversation or conduct: and to walk in anything, intends a
fulness of it. For a man to walk in pride, is something more than to be
proud: it says, that pride is his way, his element; that he is wholly
under the influence of it. - William Jay.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Unite my heart to fear thy name." The end which he desired to secure
was that he might truly fear God, or properly reverence and honour him;
the means which he saw to be necessary for this was that his "heart"
might be "united" in this one great object; that is, that his heart
might be single in its views and purposes; that there might be no
distracting purposes; that one great aim might be always before him. The
word rendered unite - יחד, yâhhad - occurs as a verb only in three
places. In [Gen 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006) it is rendered
united: "Unto their assembly, mine hour, be not thou united." In [Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020) it is translated joined. "Thou
shalt not be joined unto them." The adverb - יחר, ya-hhad occurs often,
and is rendered together, [Gen 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006);
[Gen 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006), [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008), [Gen
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019); [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007); et saepe. The idea is that of
union, or conjunction; of being together; of constituting one; and this
is accomplished in the heart when there is one great ruling object
before the mind which nothing is allowed to interfere with. It may be
added, that there is no more appropriate prayer which a man can offer
than that his heart may have such unity of purpose, and that nothing may
be allowed to Interfere with that one supreme purpose. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Unite my heart," etc. Sincerity drives but one design, and that is to
please and enjoy God; and what can more establish and fix the soul In
the hour of temptation than this? The reason why the hypocrite is
unstable in all his ways, is given us by the apostle he is "a
double-minded man," a man of two souls in one body; as a profane wretch
once boasted, that he had one soul for God, and another for any thing.
But all the designs of a gracious heart are united in one; and so the
entire stream of his affections runs strong.

It is base by-ends and self-interests, that, like a great many ditches
cut out of the bank of a river, draw away the stream out of its proper
channel, and make its waters fail. But if the heart be united for God,
then we may say of such a Christian, as was said of a young Roman, "What
he does is done with all his might." A man of only one design, puts out
all his strength to carry it; nothing can stand before him.

Sincerity brings a man's will into subjection to the will of God; and
this being done, the greatest danger and difficulty is over with such a
man. This is that holy oil which makes the wheels of the soul run
nimbly, even in the difficult paths of obedience. - John Flavel.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Unite my heart."

Give me thine heart but as I gave it thee:

Or give it me at least as I

Have given mine

To purchase thine.

I halv'd it not when I did die;

But gave myself wholly to set thee free.

The heart I gave thee was a living heart.

And when thy heart by sin was slain,

I laid down mine

To ransom thine,

That thy dead heart might live again,

And live entirely perfect, not in part.

But whilst thine heart's divided, it is dead

Dead unto me, unless it live

To me alone,

It is all one

To keep all, and a part to give:

For what's a body worth without an head!

Yet, this is worse, that what thou keep'st from me

Thou dost bestow upon my foes;

And those not mine

Alone, but thine;

The proper causes of thy woes,

From whom I gave my life to set thee free.

Have I betroth'd thee to myself, and shall

The devil, and the world, intrude

Upon my right,

E'en in my sight?

Think not thou canst me so delude:

I will have none, unless I may have all.

I made it all, I gave it all to thee,

I gave all that I had for it:

If I must lose,

I'd rather choose

Mine interest in all to quit:

Or keep it whole, or give it whole to me.

\- Francis Quarles, in "The School of the Heart."

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Unite my heart to fear thy name."

In knotts, to be loosed never,

Knitt my heart to thee for ever,

That I to thy name may beare

Fearful love and loving feare.

\- Francis Davison.

[Psa 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)

"I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy name." We glorify God by praising him. Doxology, or praise,
is a God-exalting work. [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)
:23. "Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me." The Hebrew word, Bara, to
create, and Barak, to praise, are little different, because the end of
creation is to praise God. Though nothing can add to God's essential
glory, yet praise exalts him in the eyes of others. When we praise God,
we spread his fame and renown, we display the trophies of his
excellency. In this manner the angels glorify him; they are the
choristers of heaven, and do trumpet forth his praise. Praising God is
one of the highest and purest acts of religion. In prayer we act like
men; in praise we act like angels. Believers are called "temples of
God," [Co1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016). When our tongues
praise, then the organs of God's spiritual temple are sounding. How sad
it is that God hath no more glory from us in this way! Many are full of
murmuring and discontent, but seldom bring glory to God, by giving him
the praise due to his name. We read of the saints having harps in their
hands, the emblems of praise. Many have tears in their eyes and
complaints in their mouths, but few have harps in their hands, blessing
and glorifying God. Let us honour God this way. Praise is the quit-rent
we pay to God: while God renews our lease, we must renew our rent. -
Thomas Watson.

[Psa 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)

"I will praise thee, O Lord," etc. Such a soul as David was is enlarged
to talk high of God: "I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my
heart: and I will glorify thy name for evermore." Alas! poor creature,
how canst thou praise him "for evermore"? A soul fired with desire to
praise God, burns after both more perfect things and more lasting than
it is able to perform. "To will is present with it," etc. See but the
reachings and longings of such a soul, how it swells in desires to
glorify God! - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)

"With all rail heart." When my heart is united to fear thy name, then
shall I praise thee with my whole heart. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)

"Hell" is put metaphorically for great and extreme dangers, or miseries
which seem irrecoverable and remediless; these are figuratively called
hell, because hell, properly taken, is a place from whence there is no
recovery. There's no release from the chains of darkness: all changes
are on earth; heaven and hell know none. When David praises the Lord for
delivering his soul from the lowest hell, he meaneth an estate on earth
of the lowest and deepest danger imaginable: mercy helped him at the
worst. To be as low as hell, is to be at the lowest. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)

"The lowest hell." According to Jewish traditions, there are seven
different regions, in the abode of departed souls. - Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)

"Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell." Some one having a
troublesome cause was to be sent to prison: another comes and defends
him; what does he say when he thanks him? Thou hast delivered my soul
out of prison. A debtor was to be tortured: his debt is paid; he is said
to be delivered from being tortured. They were not in all these evils;
but because they were in such due course towards them, that unless aid
had been brought, they would have been in them, they rightly say that
they are delivered from thence, whither they were not suffered by their
deliverers to be taken. - Augustine.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013), [Psa
86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)

There is no stronger argument of God's infallible readiness to grant our
requests, than the experience of his former concessions. So David
reasons, "The Lord that delievered me out of the paw of the lion, and
out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine," [Sa1 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037). This is the
argument a priori, the voice of a strong faith, that persuades the
conscience God will be gracious to him, because he hath been gracious.
The prophet thus often comforted his soul. "Thou hast enlarged me when I
was in distress;" therefore, "have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer,"
[Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). So, "Thou hast delivered my
soul from the lowest hell;" therefore, "O turn unto me, and have mercy
upon me." Let the justiciaries deduce arguments from their own present
merits, my soul from God's former mercies. Thou, O Lord, madest me good,
restoredst me when I was evil; therefore have mercy upon me, miserable
sinner, and give me thy salvation. Thus Paul grounded his assurance
because the Lord had stood with him, and delivered him out of the lion's
mouth; therefore the Lord shall deliver me still, from every evil work,
and preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017), [Ti2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018). - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)

"Thou, O Lord, Adonai, art a God; El, the strong God, full of
compassion;" the same words as Moses useth. Instead of Jehovah, Adonai
is used, "O Lord;" but then El, strong God, is the same word.

The meaning is, let all the strength and power thou the strong God hast
in thee be for my advantage. Now, is it not a bold request to say, Lord,
wilt thou give me all thy strength to help me? A very bold request
indeed; but his mercy moves him to grant it. Thus then petition him.
Thou art a God merciful and gracious, give thy strength to me! Thou, O
God, givest all thy attributes up to thy children, to serve their
advantage, as well as to serve thy own glory; give me thy strength! -
Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)

"Full of compassion." The original word Rachum is very emphatical; it
signifies such tenderness as parents have toward their children when
their bowels yearn within them. - "Critical and Practical Exposition of
the Pentateuch." 1748.

[Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)

"Save the son of thine handmaid." Deliver me, who am as completely thy
property, as the offspring of a female slave born in her master's house,
and which belongs of right to him. [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014); [Jer
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014). - William Keatinge Clay.

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

"Show me a token for good." These words do not, as some think,
necessarily imply David's asking for some specific or miraculous token
he regards deliverance itself as a token. We ask whether it be not true,
that in the same measure as we recognise the mysteriously governing
influence of God in every-day events, we regard those things as signs
and miracles, which to others appear common-place? - Augustus F.
Tholuck.

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

Perhaps, the "token for good" means that spiritual joy which he asked
for in the beginning of the Psalm, when he said, "Rejoice the soul of
thy servant;" for such joy to a holy soul in tribulation is the clearest
sign of the grace of God, and on the sight of it all manner of
persecutors are confounded; and then the meaning would be, "shew me a
token for good;" give me the grace of that spiritual joy that will
appear exteriorly in my countenance, "that they which hate me may see"
such calmness and tranquillity of soul, "and be confounded," for thou, O
Lord, hast helped me in the struggle, consoled me in my sorrow, and hast
already converted my sadness into interior joy and gladness. - Robert
Bellarmine.

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

"Show me a token for good," may be rendered "make me a sign for good."
Weiss paraphrases it, "make of me such a sign or monument of good that
all my enemies may be arrested by it, and be daunted at injuring a man
so assisted by the Lord."

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

"Hast holpen me," in struggle; "and comforted me," in sorrow. -
Augustine.

[Psalms 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 86:1</span></span>

1 Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

2 Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that
trusteth in thee.

3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

4 Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up
my soul.

5 For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy
unto all them that call upon thee.

6 Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
supplications.

7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer
me.

[Psa 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

"Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me." In condescension to my
littleness, and in pity to my weakness, "bow down thine ear, O Lord."
When our prayers are lowly by reason of our humility, or feeble by
reason of our sickness, or without wing by reason of our despondency,
the Lord will bow down to them, the infinitely exalted Jehovah will have
respect unto them. Faith, when she has the loftiest name of God on her
tongue, and calls him Jehovah, yet dares to ask from him the most tender
and condescending acts of love. Great as he is he loves his children to
be bold with him. "For I am poor and needy" - doubly a son of poverty,
because, first, poor and without supply for my needs, and next, needy,
and so full of wants though unable to supply them. Our distress is a
forcible reason for our being heard by the Lord God, merciful, and
gracious, for misery is ever the master argument with mercy. Such
reasoning as this would never be adopted by a proud man, and when we
hear it repeated in the public congregation by those great ones of the
earth who count the peasantry to be little better than the earth they
tread upon, it sounds like a mockery of the Most High. Of all despicable
sinners those are the worst who use the language of spiritual poverty
while they think themselves to be rich and increased in goods.

[Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

"Preserve my soul." Let my life be safe from my enemies, and my
spiritual nature be secure from their temptations. He feels himself
unsafe except he be covered by the divine protection. "For I am holy." I
am set apart for holy uses, therefore do not let thine enemies commit a
sacrilege by injuring or defiling me: I am clear of the crimes laid to
my charge, and in that sense innocent; therefore, I beseech thee, do not
allow me to suffer from unjust charges: and I am inoffensive, meek, and
gentle towards others, therefore deal mercifully with me as I have dealt
with my fellow men. Any of these renderings may explain the text,
perhaps all together will expound it best. It is not self-righteous in
good men to plead their innocence as a reason for escaping from the
results of sins wrongfully ascribed to them; penitents do not bedaub
themselves with mire for the love of it, or make themselves out to be
worse than they are out of compliment to heaven. No, the humblest saint
is not a fool, and he is as well aware of the matters wherein he is
clear as of those wherein he must cry "peccavi." To plead guilty to
offences we have never committed is as great a lie as the denial of our
real faults. "O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee."
Lest any man should suppose that David trusted in his own holiness he
immediately declared his trust in the Lord, and begged to be saved as
one who was not holy in the sense of being perfect, but was even yet in
need of the very elements of salvation. How sweet is that title, "my
God," when joined to the other, "servant;" and how sweet is the hope
that on this ground we shall be saved; seeing that our God is not like
the Amalekitish master who left his poor sick servant to perish. Note
how David's poor I am (or rather the I repeated without the am) appeals
to the great I Am with that sacred boldness engendered by the necessity
which breaks through stone walls, aided by the faith which removes
mountains.

[Psa 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003)

"Be merciful unto me, O Lord." The best of men need mercy, and appeal to
mercy, yea to nothing else but mercy; they need it for themselves, and
crave it eagerly of their God as a personal requisite. "For I cry unto
thee daily." Is there not a promise that importunity shall prevail? May
we not, then, plead our importunity as an argument with God. He who
prays every day, and all the day, for so the word may mean, may rest
assured that the Lord will hear him in the day of his need. If we cried
sometimes to man, or other false confidences, we might expect to be
referred to them in the hour of our calamity, but if in all former time
we have looked to the Lord alone, we may be sure that he will not desert
us now. See how David pleaded, first that he was poor and needy, next
that he was the Lord's set-apart one, then that he was God's servant and
had learned to trust in the Lord, and lastly that he had been taught to
pray daily; surely these are such holy pleadings as any tried believer
may employ when wrestling with a prayer-hearing God, and with such
weapons the most trembling suppliant may hope to win the day.

[Psa 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

"Rejoice the soul of thy servant." Make my heart glad, O my Master, for
I count it my honour to call myself again and again thy servant, and I
reckon thy favour to be all the wages I could desire. I look for all my
happiness in thee only, and therefore "unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up
my soul." As the heliotrope looks to the sun for its smile, so turn I my
heart to thee. Thou art as the brazen serpent to my sick nature, and I
lift up my soul's eye to thee that I may live. I know that the nearer I
am to thee the greater is my joy, therefore be pleased to draw me nearer
while I am labouring to draw near. It is not easy to lift a soul at all;
it needs a strong shoulder at the wheel when a heart sticks in the miry
clay of despondency: it is less easy to lift a soul up to the Lord, for
the height is great as well as the weight oppressive; but the Lord will
take the will for the deed, and come in with a hand of almighty grace to
raise his poor servant out of the earth and up to heaven.

[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)

"For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive." Good at giving and
forgiving; supplying us with his good, and removing our evil. Here was
the great reason why the Psalmist looked to the Lord alone for his joy,
because every joy-creating attribute is to be found in perfection in
Jehovah alone. Some men who would be considered good are so
self-exaltingly indignant at the injuries done them by others, that they
cannot forgive; but we may rest assured that the better a being is, the
more willing he is to forgive, and the best and highest of all is ever
ready to blot out the transgressions of his creatures. "And plenteous in
mercy unto all them that call upon thee." God does not dispense his
mercy from a slender store which perchance may be so impoverished as to
give out altogether, but out of a cornucopia he pours forth the infinite
riches of his mercy: his goodness flows forth in abounding streams
towards those who pray and in adoring worship make mention of his name.
David seems to have stood in the cleft of the rock with Moses, and to
have heard the name of the Lord proclaimed even as the great lawgiver
did, for in two places in this Psalm he almost quotes verbatim the
passage in [Exo 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006) - "The Lord God,
merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth."

[Psa 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006)

"Give car, O Lord, unto my prayer." Even the glory which his spirit had
beheld did not withdraw him from his prayer, but rather urged him to be
more fervent in it; hence he implores the Lord to hear his requests.
"Attend to the voice of my supplications." Here are repetitions, but not
vain repetitions. When a child cries it repeats the same note, but it is
equally in earnest every time, and so was it with the suppliant here.
Note the expression, "the voice of my supplications," as if they were
not all voice but were partly made up of inarticulate noise, yet amid
much that was superfluous there really was a distinct voice, an inner
meaning, a living sense which was the heart's intention. This he would
have the Lord sift out from the chaff, and hear amid the mingled din.
May our prayers never be voiceless; may the soul's intent always give
them a live core of meaning.

[Psa 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007)

"In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer
me." A pious resolve backed by a judicious reason. It is useless to cry
to those who cannot or will not hear; once convince men that prayer has
no effect upon God, and they will have no more of it. In these busy
days, and especially in troublous times, men cannot afford to waste time
in entreaties which must be unavailing. Our experience confirms us in
the belief that Jehovah the living God really does aid those who call
upon him, and therefore we pray and mean to pray, not because we are so
fascinated by prayer that for its own sake we would continue in it if it
proved to be mere folly and superstition, as vain philosophers assert;
but because we really, indeed, and of a truth, find it to be a practical
and effectual means of obtaining help from God in the hour of need.
There can be no reason for praying if there be no expectation of the
Lord's answering. Who would make a conscience of pleading with the
winds, or find a solace in supplicating the waves? The mercy seat is a
mockery if there be no hearing nor answering. David, as the following
verses show, believed the Lord to be a living and potent God, and indeed
to be "God alone," and it was on that account that he resolved in every
hour of trouble to call upon him.

[Psalms 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 86:8</span></span>

8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are there
any works like unto thy works.

9 An nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O
Lord; and shall glorify thy name.

10 For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God alone.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to
fear thy name.

12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy name for evermore.

13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul
from the lowest hell.

[Psa 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)

"Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord." There are gods by
delegated office, such as kings and magistrates, but they are as nothing
in the presence of Jehovah; there are also gods by the nomination of
superstition, but these are vanity itself, and cannot be compared with
the living and true God. Even if the heathen idols were gods, none of
them in power or even in character, could be likened unto the
self-existent, all-creating God of Israel. If every imaginary deity
could start into actual existence, and become really divine, yet would
we choose Jehovah to be our God, and reject all others. "Neither are
there any works like unto thy works." What have the false gods ever made
or unmade? What miracles have they wrought? When did they divide a sea,
or march through a wilderness scattering bread from the skies? O
Jehovah, in thy person and in thy works, thou art as far above all gods
as the heavens are above the nethermost abyss.

[Psa 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009)

"All nations whom thou hast made," and these include all mankind, since
they all come of the first Adam - thy creature, and their lives are all
distinct creations of thine omnipotence. All these "shall come" with
penitent hearts, in thine own way, to thine own self, "and worship
before thee, O Lord." Because thou art thus above all gods, the people
who have been so long deceived shall at last discover thy greatness, and
shall render thee the worship which is thy due: thou hast created them
all, and unto thee shall they all yield homage. This was David's reason
for resorting to the Lord in trouble, for he felt that one day all men
would acknowledge the Lord to be the only God. It makes us content to be
in the minority to-day, when we are sure that the majority will be with
us to-morrow, ay, and that the truth will one day be carried unanimously
and heartily. David was not a believer in the theory that the world will
grow worse and worse, and that the dispensation will wind up with
general darkness, and idolatry. Earth's sun is to go down amid tenfold
night if some of our prophetic brethren are to be believed. Not so do we
expect, but we look for a day when the dwellers in all lands shall learn
righteousness, shall trust in the Saviour, shall worship thee alone, O
God, "and shall glorify thy name." The modern notion has greatly damped
the zeal of the church for missions, and the sooner it is shown to be
unscriptural the better for the cause of God. It neither consorts with
prophecy, honours God, nor inspires the church with ardour. Far hence be
it driven.

[Psa 86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010)

"For thou art great." He had before said, "thou art good;" it is a grand
thing when greatness and goodness are united; it is only in the Divine
Being that either of them exists absolutely, and essentially. Happy is
it for us that they both exist in the Lord to an equal degree. To be
great and not good might lead to tyranny in the King, and for him to be
good and not great might involve countless calamities upon his subjects
from foreign foes, so that either alternative would be terrible; let the
two be blended, and we have a monarch in whom the nation may rest and
rejoice. "And doest wondrous things." Being good, he is said to be ready
to forgive; being great, he works wonders: we may blend the two, for
there is no wonder so wonderful as the pardon of our transgressions. All
that God does or makes has wonder in it; he breathes, and the wind is
mystery; he speaks, and the thunder astounds us; even the commonest
daisy is a marvel, and a pebble enshrines wisdom. Only to fools is
anything which God has made uninteresting: the world is a world of
wonders. Note that the verb doest is in the present, the Lord is doing
wondrous things, they are transpiring before our eyes. Where are they?
Look upon the bursting buds of spring or the maturing fruits of autumn,
gaze on the sky or skim the sea, mark the results of providence and the
victories of grace, everywhere at all times the great Thaumaturge
stretches forth his rod of power. "Thou art God alone." Alone wast thou
God before thy creatures were; alone in godhead still art thou now that
thou hast given life to throngs of beings; alone for ever shalt thou be,
for none can ever rival thee. True religion makes no compromises, it
does not admit Baal or Dagon to be a god; it is exclusive and
monopolizing, claiming for Jehovah nothing less than all. The vaunted
liberality of certain professors of modern thought is not to be
cultivated by believers in the truth. "Philosophic breadth" aims at
building a Pantheon, and piles a Pandemonium; it is not for us to be
helpers in such an evil work. Benevolently intolerant, we would, for the
good of mankind, as well as for the glory of God, undeceive mankind as
to the value of their compromises, - they are mere treason to truth. Our
God is not to be worshipped as one among many good and true beings, but
as God alone; and his gospel is not to be preached as one of several
saving systems, but as the one sole way of salvation. Lies can face each
other beneath one common dome; but in the temple of truth the worship is
one and indivisible.

[Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

"Teach me thy way, O Lord." Instruct me thus at all times, let me live
in thy school; but teach me now especially since I am in trouble and
perplexity. Be pleased to shew me the way which thy wisdom and mercy
have prepared for my escape; behold I lay aside all wilfulness, and only
desire to be informed as to thy holy and gracious mind. Not my way give
me, but thy way teach me, I would follow thee and not be wilful: "I will
walk in thy truth." When taught I will practise what I know, truth shall
not be a mere doctrine or sentiment to me, but a matter of daily life.
The true servant of God regulates his walk by his master's will, and
hence he never walks deceitfully, for God's way is ever truth.
Providence has a way for us, and it is our wisdom to keep in it. We must
not be as the bullock which needs to be driven and urged forward because
it likes not the road, but be as men who voluntarily go where their
trusted friend and helper appoints their path.

"Unite my heart to fear thy name." Having taught me one way, give me one
heart to walk therein, for too often I feel a heart and a heart, two
natures contending, two principles struggling for sovereignty. Our minds
are apt to be divided between a variety of objects, like trickling
streamlets which waste their force in a hundred runnels; our great
desire should be to have all our life-floods poured into one channel and
to have that channel directed towards the Lord alone. A man of divided
heart is weak, the man of one object is the man. God who created the
bands of our nature can draw them together, tighten, strengthen, and
fasten them, and so braced and inwardly knit by his uniting grace, we
shall be powerful for good, but not otherwise. To fear God is both the
beginning, the growth, and the maturity of wisdom, therefore should we
be undividedly given up to it, heart, and soul.

[Psa 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)

"I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart." When my heart is
one, I will give thee all of it. Praise should never be rendered with
less than all our heart, and soul, and strength, or it will be both
unreal and unacceptable. This is the second time in the Psalm that David
calls the Lord "my God," the first time he was in an agony of prayer
([Psa 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)), and now he is in an
ecstacy of praise. If anything can make a man pray and praise, it is the
knowledge that the Lord is his God. "And I will glorify thy name for
evermore;" into eternity gratitude will prolong its praise. God has
never done blessing us, let us never have done blessing him. As he ever
gives us grace, let us ever render to him the glory of it.

[Psa 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)

"For great is thy mercy toward me." Personal experience is ever the
master singer, Whatever thou art to others, to me thy mercy is most
notable. The Psalmist claims to sing among the loudest, because his debt
to divine mercy is among the greatest. "And thou hast delivered my soul
from the lowest hell." From the direst death and the deepest dishonour
David had been kept by God, for his enemies would have done more than
send him to hell had they been able. His sense of sin also made him feel
as if the most overwhelming destruction would have been his portion had
not grace prevented, therefore does he speak of deliverance from the
nethermost abode of lost spirits. There are some alive now who can use
this language unfeignedly, and he who pens these lines most humbly
confesses that he is one. Left to myself to indulge my passions, to rush
onward with my natural vehemence, and defy the Lord with recklessness of
levity, what a candidate for the lowest abyss should I have made myself
by this time. For me, there was but one alternative, great mercy, or the
lowest hell. With my whole heart do I sing, "Great is thy mercy towards
me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell."

The Psalmist here again touches a bold and joyful note, but soon he
exchanges it for the mournful string.

[Psalms 86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 86:14</span></span>

14 O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent
men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before them.

15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious,
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

17 Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.

[Psa 86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014)

"O God, the proud are risen against me." They could not let God's poor
servant alone, his walk with God was as smoke to their eyes, and
therefore they determined to destroy him. None hate good men so fiercely
as do the high-minded and domineering. "And the assemblies of violent
men have sought after roll soul." Unitedly oppressors sought the good
man's life; they hunted in packs, with keen scent, and eager foot. In
persecuting times many a saint has used these words in reference to
Papal bishops and inquisitors. "And have not set thee before them." They
would not have molested the servant if they had cared one whit for the
master. Those who fear not God are not afraid to commit violent and
cruel acts. An atheist is a misanthrope. Irreligion is akin to
inhumanity.

[Psa 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)

"But thou, O Lord." What a contrast! We get away from the hectorings and
blusterings of proud but puny men to the glory and goodness of the Lord.
We turn from the boisterous foam of chafing waves to the sea of glass
mingled with fire, calm and serene. "Art a God full of compassion, and
gracious, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth." A truly
glorious doxology, in which there is not one redundant word. As we have
before observed, it is mainly transcribed from [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006). Here is compassion for the weak
and sorrowing, grace for the undeserving, longsuffering for the
provoking, mercy for the guilty, and truth for the tried. God's love
assumes many forms, and is lovely in them all. Into whatsoever state we
may be cast, there is a peculiar hue in the light of love which will
harmonize with our condition; love is one and yet sevenfold, its white
ray contains the chromatic scale. Are we sorrowful? We find the Lord
full of compassion. Are we contending with temptation? His grace comes
to our aid. Do we err? He is patient with us. Have we sinned? He is
plenteous in mercy. Are we resting on his promise? He will fulfil it
with abundant truth.

[Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)

"O turn unto me." As though the face of God had been before averted in
anger, the suppliant pleads for a return of conscious favour. One turn
of God's face will turn all our darkness into day. "And have mercy upon
me," that is all he asks, for he is lowly in heart; that is all he
wants, for mercy answereth all a sinner's needs. "Give thy strength unto
thy servant." Gird me with it that I may serve thee, guard me with it
that I may not be overcome. When the Lord gives us his own strength we
are sufficient for all emergencies, and have no cause to fear any
adversaries. "And save the son of thine handmaid." He meant that he was
a home-born servant of God. As the sons of slaves were their master's
property by their birth, so he gloried in being the son of a woman who
herself belonged to the Lord. What others might think a degrading
illustration he uses with delight, to show how intensely he loved the
Lord's service; and also as a reason why the Lord should interpose to
rescue him, seeing that he was no newly-purchased servant, but had been
in the house from his very birth.

[Psa 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

"Shew me a token for good." Let me be assured of thy mercy by being
delivered out of trouble. "That they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed."

"Some token of thy favour show,

Some sign which all my foes may see:

And fill'd with blank confusion know,

My comfort and my help in thee."

What bodes good to me shall make them quail and blush. Disappointed and
defeated, the foes of the good man would feel ashamed of what they had
designed. "Because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me." God
doth nothing by halves, those whom he helps he also consoles, and so
makes them not merely safe but joyful. This makes the foes of the
righteous exceedingly displeased, but it brings to the Lord double
honour. Lord, deal thou thus with us evermore, so will we glorify thee,
world without end. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 87](psa087)

</div>
