<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa038)  [Next](psa040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 39:0</span></span>

Title - To the Chief Musician, even to Jeduthun. Jeduthun's name, which
signifies praising or celebrating, was a most appropriate one for a
leader in sacred psalmody. He was one of those ordained by the King's
order "for song in the house of the Lord with cymbals, psalteries, and
harps" ([Ch1 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#006)), and his children
after him appear to have remained in the same hallowed service, even so
late as the days of Nehemiah. To have a name and a place in Zion is no
small honour, and to hold this place by a long entail of grace is an
unspeakable blessing. O that our households may never lack a man to
stand before the Lord God of Israel to do him service. David left this
somewhat sorrowful ode in Jeduthun's hands because he thought him most
fit to set it to music, or because he would distribute the sacred honour
of song among all the musicians who in their turn presided in the choir.
A Psalm of David. Such as his chequered life would be sure to produce;
fit effusion for a man so tempted, so strong in his passions, and yet so
firm in faith.

Division - The Psalmist, bowed down with sickness and sorrow, is
burdened with unbelieving thoughts, which he resolves to stifle, lest
any evil should come from their expression, [Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001), [Psa
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002). But silence creates an
insupportable grief which at last demands utterance, and obtains it in
the prayer of [Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003), which is
almost a complaint and a sigh for death, or at best, a very desponding
picture of human life. From [Psa
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)the tone is more submissive, and
the recognition of the divine hand more distinct: the cloud has
evidently passed, and the mourner's heart is relieved.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001), [Psa
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002) - "I was dumb, etc."

I. There is a time to be silent. He had been enabled to do this when
reproached and unjustly accused by others. He did it for good; others
might attribute it to sullenness, or pride, or timidity, or conscious
guilt; but he did it for good. Breathe upon a polished mirror and it
will evaporate and leave it brighter than before; endeavour to wipe it
off, and the mark will remain.

II\. There is a time to meditate in silence. The greater the silence
without, often the greater commotion within. "His heart was hot." The
more he thought, the warmer he grew. The fire of pity and compassion,
the fire of love, the fire of holy zeal burned within him.

III\. There is a time to speak. "Then spake I." The time to speak is
when the truth is clear and strong in the mind, and the feeling of the
truth is burning in the heart. The emotions burst forth as from a
volcano. [Jer 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008), [Jer
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009). The language should always be a
faithful representation of the mind and the heart.

\- G. Rogers, Tutor of the Metropolitan Tabernacle College.

[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002) - There is a sevenfold
silence.

1\. A stoical silence.

2\. A politic silence.

3\. A foolish silence.

4\. A sullen silence.

5\. A forced silence.

6\. A despairing silence.

7\. A prudent, a holy, a gracious silence.

\- Thomas Brooks' "Mute Christian."

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004) - "Make me to know mine
end."

I. What we may desire to know about our end. Not its date, place,
circumstances, but

1\. Its nature. Will it be the end of saint or sinner?

2\. Its certainty.

3\. Its nearness.

4\. Its issues.

5\. Its requirements. In the shape of attention, preparation, passport.

II\. Why ask God to make us know it? Because the knowledge is important,
difficult to acquire, and can be effectually imparted by the Lord only.

\- W. Jackson.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004) - David prays,

I. That he may be enabled continually to keep in view the end of life:
all things should be judged by their end. "Then understood I their end."
Life may be honourable, and cheerful, and virtuous here; but the end!
What will it be?

II\. That he may be diligent in the performance of all the duties of
this life. The measure of his days, how short, how much to be done, how
little time to do it in!

III\. He prays that he may gain much instruction and benefit from the
frailties of life. "That I may know," etc. My frailties may make me more
humble, more diligent, while I am able for active service; more
dependent upon divine strength, more patient and submissive to the
divine will, more ripe for heaven.

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005) (last clause) - Man is
vanity, i.e., he is mortal, he is mutable. Observe how emphatically this
truth is expressed here.

I. Every man is vanity, without exception, high and low, rich and poor.

II\. He is so at his best estate; when he is young, and strong, and
healthful, in wealth and honour, etc.

III\. He is altogether vanity, as vain as you can imagine.

IV\. Verily he is so.

V. Selah is annexed, as a note commanding observation.

\- Matthew Henry.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006) - The vanity of man, as
mortal, is here instanced in three things, and the vanity of each shown.

I. The vanity of our joys and honours: "Surely every man walketh in a
vain show."

II\. The vanity of our griefs and fears: "Surely they are disquieted in
vain."

III\. The vanity of our cares and toils: "He heapeth up riches, and
knoweth not who shall gather them."

\- Matthew Henry.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006) - The world's trinity
consists,

1\. In fruitless honours: what appears to them to be substantial honours
are but "a vain show."

2\. In needless cares. "They are disquieted in vain." Imaginary cares
are substituted for real ones.

3\. In useless riches; such as yield no lasting satisfaction to
themselves, or in their descent to others.

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007) - "What wait I for?"

1\. For what salvation as a sinner? Of works or grace - from Sinai or
Calvary.

2\. For what consolation as a sufferer? Earthly or heavenly?

3\. For what supply as a suppliant? Meagre or bountiful? Present or
future?

4\. For what communication as a servant? Miraculous or ordinary?
Pleasing or unacceptable?

5\. For what instruction as a pupil? Mental or spiritual? Elating or
humbling? Ornamental or useful?

6\. For what inheritance as a heir? Sublunary or celestial?

\- W. Jackson.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007) -

I. An urgent occasion. "And now Lord," etc. There are seasons that
should lead us specially to look up to God, and say, "Now, Lord."
"Father, the hour is come."

II\. A devout exclamation, "Now, Lord, what wait I for?" Where is my
expectation? Where my confidence? To whom shall I look? am nothing, the
world is nothing, all earthly sources of confidence and consolation
fail: "What wait I for?" In life, in death, in a dying world, in a
coming judgment, in an eternity at hand; what is it that I need?

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)

I. Prayer should be general: "Deliver me from all my transgressions." We
often need anew to say, "God be merciful to me a sinner." Afflictions
should remind us of our sins. If we pray to be delivered from all
transgressions, we are sure to be delivered from the one for which
affliction was sent.

II\. Prayer should be particular: "Make me not the reproach of the
foolish." Suffer me not so to speak or show impatience in affliction as
to give occasion even to the foolish to blaspheme. The thought that many
watch for our halting should be a preservative from sin.

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

I. The occasion referred to. "I was dumb," etc. We are not told what the
particular trial was, that each one may apply it to his own affliction,
and because all are to be viewed in the same light.

II\. The conduct of the Psalmist upon that particular occasion: "I
opened not my mouth."

1\. Not in anger and rebellion against God in murmurs or complaints.

2\. Not in impatience, or complaining, or angry feelings against men.

III\. The reason he assigns for this conduct: "Because thou didst it." -
G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010) -

I. Afflictions are sent by God. "Thy strokes." They are strokes of his
hand, not of the rod of the law, but of the shepherd's rod. Every
affliction is his stroke.

II\. Afflictions are removed by God. "Remove." He asks not for miracles,
but that God in his own way, in the use of natural means, would
interpose for his deliverance. We should seek his blessing upon the
means employed for our deliverance both by ourselves and others. "Cause
to remove," etc.

III\. Afflictions have their end from God. "I am consumed by the
conflict," etc. God has a controversy with his people. It is a conflict
between his will and their wills. The Psalmist owns himself conquered
and subdued in the struggle. We should be more anxious that this end
should be accomplished than that the affliction should be removed, and
when this is accomplished the affliction will be removed.

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)

I. The cause of our trials: "for iniquity." Oh, this trial is come to
take away my comforts, my peace of mind, and the divine smile! No, this
is all the fruit to take away their sin - the dross, none of the gold -
sin, nothing but sin.

II\. The effect of our trials. All that he counted desirable in this
life, but is not for his real good, is "consumed." His robes which are
beautiful in men's esteem are moth-eaten, but the robe of righteousness
upon his soul cannot decay.

III\. The design of our trials. They are not penal infliction, but
friendly rebukes and fatherly corrections. On Christ our Surety the
penal consequences were laid, upon us their paternal chastisements only.

IV\. The reasonableness of our trials. "Surely every man is vanity." How
in a world like this could any expect to be exempt from trials! The
world is the same to the Christian as before, and his body is the same.
He has a converted soul in an unconverted body, and how can he escape
the external ills of life?

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012) - David pleads the good
impressions made upon him by his affliction.

I. It had set him a weeping.

II\. It had set him a praying.

III\. It had helped to wean him from the world.

\- Matthew Henry.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012) (last clause) - Am I a
stranger and a sojourner with God? Let me realise, let me exemplify the
condition.

I. Let me look for the treatment such characters commonly meet with.

II\. And surely if any of my own nation be near me, I shall be intimate
with them.

III\. Let me not be entangled in the affairs of this life.

IV\. Let my affection be set on things that are above, and my
conversation be always in heaven.

V. Let me be not impatient for home; but prizing it.

\- W. Jay.

[Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)

I. The subject of his petition - not that he may escape death and live
always in this life, because he knows that he must go hence; but

1\. That he may be recovered from his afflictions; and,

2\. That he may continue longer in this life. Such a prayer is lawful
when offered in submission to the will of God.

II\. The reasons for this petition.

1\. That he may remove by his future life the calumnies that had been
heaped upon him.

2\. That he may have brighter evidences of his interest in the divine
favour.

3\. That he may become a blessing to others, his family and nation.

4\. That he might have greater peace and comfort in death; and,

5\. That he might "have an entrance ministered more abundantly," etc.

\- G. Rogers.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

"To Jeduthun." A Levite of the family of Merari, and one of the great
masters of the temple of music. The department superintended by Jeduthun
and his colleagues in the temple service was that of the "instruments of
the song of God," by which are intended the nebel or psaltery, the
kinnor or harp, and the metsiltaim or cymbals. In [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015), Jeduthun is called "the king's
seer," which would seem to indicate that he was the medium of divine
guidance to David. The name occurs in the title of [Psa
39:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001), [Psa
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001), 77; where some have thought
that it indicates some special kind of composition, and others some
instrument of music, but without reason. - William Lindsay Alexander, in
Kitto's Cyclopaedia.

Whole Psalm

The most beautiful of all the elegies in the Psalter. - H. Ewald.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

"I said." It was to himself that he said it; and it is impossible for
any other to prove a good or a wise man, without much of this kind of
speech to himself. It is one of the most excellent and distinguishing
faculties of a reasonable creature; much beyond vocal speech, for in
that, some birds may imitate us; but neither bird nor beast has anything
of this kind of language, of reflecting or discoursing with itself. It
is a wonderful brutality in the greatest part of men, who are so little
conversant in this kind of speech, being framed and disposed for it, and
which is not only of itself excellent, but of continual use and
advantage; but it is a common evil among men to go abroad, and out of
themselves, which is a madness, and a true distraction. It is true, a
man hath need of a well set mind, when he speaks to himself; for
otherwise, he may be worse company to himself than if he were with
others. But he ought to endeavour to have a better with him, to call in
God to his heart to dwell with him. If thus we did, we should find how
sweet this were to speak to ourselves, by now and then intermixing our
speech with discourses unto God. For want of this, the most part not
only lose their time in vanity, in their converse abroad with others,
but do carry in heaps of that vanity to the stock which is in their own
hearts, and do converse with that in secret, which is the greatest and
deepest folly in the world. - Robert Leighton.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

No lesson so hard to be learned of us here, as the wise and discreet
government of the tongue. David promised a singular care of this, "I
said, I will take heed," etc. Socrates reports of one Pambo, an honest,
well meaning man, who came to his friend, desiring him to teach him one
of David's Psalms, he read to him this verse. He answered: this one
verse is enough, if I learn it well. Nineteen years after, he said, in
all that time he had hardly learned that one verse. - Samuel Page.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

"That I sin not with my tongue." Man's mouth, though it be but a little
hole, will hold a world full of sin. For there is not any sin forbidden
in the law or gospel which is not spoken by the tongue, as well as
thought in the heart, or done in the life. Is it not then almost as
difficult to rule the tongue as to rule the world? - Edward Reynor.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

"I will keep a muzzle on my mouth, whilst a wicked man is before me." -
New Translation, by Charles Carter.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

"While the wicked is before me." It is a vexation to be tied to hear so
much impertinent babbling in the world, but profitable to discern and
abhor it. A wonder that men can cast out so much wind, and the more they
have to utter, the more they are prodigal of their own breath and of the
patience of others, and careless of their own reckoning. If they
believed to give account of every idle word, they would be more sparing
of foolish speaking. I like either to be silent, or to speak that that
may edify. At tables or meetings I cannot stop the mouths of others, yet
may I close mine own ears, and by a heavenly soul-speech with God divert
my mind from fruitless talking. Though I be among them I shall as little
partake their prattling as they do my meditation. - William Struther.

[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)

"I was dumb with silence," etc. That is, for a while I did what I
resolved; I was so long wholly silent, that I seemed in a manner to be
dumb, and not able to speak. "I held my peace, even from good;" that is,
I forbore to speak what I might well and lawfully enough have spoken, as
from alleging anything that I might have said in mine own defence, from
making my complaint to God, and desiring justice at his hands, and such
like; to wit, lest by degrees I should have been brought to utter
anything that was evil, and whilst I intended only to speak that which
was good, some unseemly word might suddenly slip from me; or lest mine
enemies should misconstrue anything I spake. - Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)

"I was dumb with silence." - We shall enquire what kind of dumbness or
silence this of the Psalmist was, which he is commended for, and which
would so well beseem us when we smart under the rod of God, and then the
doctrine will be, in a great measure, evident by its own light. We shall
proceed in our enquiry, 1. Negatively, to prevent mistakes. 2.
Positively, and show you what it doth import.

First, negatively. 1. This dumbness doth not import any such thing, as
if the prophet had been brought to that pass that he had nothing to say
to God by way of prayer and supplication. He was not so dumb, but that
he could pray and cry too. [Psa 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008),
[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010), [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). 2. Nor was he so dumb, as that
he could not frame to the confession and bewailing of his sins. 3. Nor
was it a dumbness of stupidity and senselessness. It doth not imply any
such thing, as if by degrees he grew to that pass, he cared not for, or
made no matter of his affliction, but set, as the proverb is, an hard
heart against his hard hap. No, he did make his moan to God, and as he
smarted, so he did lament under the sense of his afflicting hand. 4.
Neither was he so dumb as not to answer God's voice in the rod that was
upon him. 5. Much leas was he dumb, and kept silence in any such sort as
they did of whom Amos speaks ([Amo
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010)), that in their misery they took
up a resolution to mention the name of God no more, in whom they had
gloried formerly.

Secondly, affirmatively. 1. He was dumb so as neither to complain of,
nor quarrel with God's providence, nor to entertain any hard thoughts
against him. Complain to God he did; but against him he durst not. 2. He
neither did nor durst quarrel, or fall out with the ways of holiness for
all his sufferings, a thing we are naturally prone unto. 3. He was dumb,
so as not to defend himself, or justify his own ways before God, as if
they were righteous, and he had not deserved what he suffered. 4. He was
dumb, so as to hearken to the voice of the rod. "I will (saith he in
another place) hear what God the Lord will speak." [Psa
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008). Now a man cannot listen to
another while he will have all the talk and discourse to himself. 5.
Lastly, the prophet was dumb, that is, he did acquiesce, and rest
satisfied with God's dispensation; and that not only as good, but as
best. - Condensed from a Funeral Sermon by Thomas Burroughes, B.D.,
entitled, "A Sovereign Remedy for all kindes of Grief," 1657.

[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)

"I held my peace." A Christian being asked what fruit he had by Christ:
Is not this fruit, said he, not to be moved at your reproaches? In cases
of this nature, we must refer all to God; si tu tacueris, Deus loquitur;
if thou hold thy peace, God speaks for thee; and if God speaks for us,
it is better than we can speak for ourselves. David saith, Obmatui, qaia
tu fecisti. "I held my peace, for it was thy doing." - Christopher
Sutton, B.D., 1629, in Disce Vivere.

[Psa 39:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)

An invalid who had been ordered a couple of pills, took them very
absurdly, for, in place of swallowing them at once, he rolled them about
in his mouth, ground them to pieces, and so tasted their full
bitterness. Gotthold was present, and thus mused: The insults and
calumnies of a slanderer and adversary are bitter pills, and all do not
understand the art of swallowing without chewing them. To the Christian,
however, they are wholesome in many ways. They remind him of his guilt,
they try his meekness and patience, they show him what he needs to guard
against, and at last they redound to his honour and glory in the sight
of him for whose sake they were endured. In respect of the pills of
slander, however, as well as the others, it is advisable not to roll
them about continually in our minds, or judge of them according to the
flesh, and the world's opinion. This will only increase their
bitterness, spread the savour of it to the tongue, and fill the heart
with proportional enmity. The true way is to swallow, keep silence and
forget. We must inwardly devour our grief, and say, "I will be dumb, and
not open my mouth, because thou didst it." The best antidotes to the
bitterness of slander, are the sweet promises and consolations of
Scripture, of which not the least is this, "Blessed are ye, when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for
great is your reward in heaven." [Mat
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011), [Mat
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012). Alas, my God I how hard it is to
swallow the pills-of obloquy, to bless them that curse me, to do good to
them that hate me, and to pray for them that despitefully use me! But,
Lord, as thou wilt have it so, give it as thou wilt have it, for it is a
matter in which, without thy grace, I can do nothing! - Christian
Scriver.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned." They
say of the loadstone (that wonder in nature), when either by
carelessness in keeping it, or by some accident it loses its virtue, yet
by laying it some good space of time in the filings of steel, it will
again recover its virtues: when the spirit of a Christian by not looking
well to it, loses of its heavenly heat and liveliness, the way of
recovery is by laying it asteep in this so warming and quickening
meditation. Oh, how burning and flaming may we often observe the spirit
of the holy Psalmist David, in his acting of meditation! Musing made him
hot, yea, burning hot at the heart. Thus oft in the beginning of a Psalm
we find his heart low and discouraged but as this musing was acted and
heightened, his spirit grew hotter, and at last flies all on a flame,
flies up to a very high pitch of heavenly heat. Oh, how do all the
conscientious practisers of meditation, ever and anon experience these
happy, heavenly heats, and heart-enlargements! Ah, if all the saints' so
glorious heart-quickenings were gathered together, what a rich chain of
pearls, pearls of rare experiences, would they make up of the
heart-warming efficacies of meditation. - Nathanael Ranew.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"I was musing." What a blessed (shall I say duty or) privilege is
prayer! Now meditation is a help to prayer. Gerson calls it the nurse of
prayer. Meditation is like oil to the lamp; the lamp of prayer will soon
go out unless meditation cherish and support it. Meditation and prayer
are like two turtles, if you separate one the other dies; a cunning
angler observes the time and season when the fish bite best, and then he
throws in the angle; when the heart is warmed by meditation, now is the
best season to throw in the angle of prayer, and fish for mercy. After
Isaac had been in the field meditating he was fit for prayer when he
came home. When the gun is full of powder it is fittest to discharge. So
when the mind is full of good thoughts, a Christian is fittest by prayer
to discharge; now he sends up whole volleys of sighs and groans to
heaven. Meditation hath a double benefit in it, it pours in and pours
out; first it pours good thoughts into the mind, and then it pours out
those thoughts again into prayer; meditation first furnisheth with
matter to pray and then it furnisheth with a heart to pray. "I was
musing," saith David, and the very next words are a prayer, "Lord, make
me to know mine end." I muse on the works of thy hands, I stretch forth
my hands to thee. The musing of his head made way for the stretching
forth of his hands in prayer. When Christ was upon the Mount, then he
prayed: so when the soul is upon the mount of meditation, now it is in
tune for prayer. Prayer is the child of meditation meditation leads the
van, and prayer brings up the rear. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"Musing." Meditation is prayer in bullion, prayer in the ore, soon
melted and run into holy desires. The laden cloud soon drops into rain,
the piece charged soon goes off when fire is put to it. A meditating
soul is in proxima potentia to prayer. This was an ejaculatory prayer
shot from his soul when in the company of the wicked. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"The fire burned." My thoughts kindled my passions. - Matthew Pool.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"The fire burned." Meditate so long till thou findest thy heart grow
warm in this duty. If, when a man is cold you ask how long he should
stand by the fire? sure, till he be thoroughly warm, and made fit for
his work. So, Christian, thy heart is cold; never a day, no, not the
hottest day in summer, but it freezeth there; now stand at the fire of
meditation till thou findest thy affections warmed, and thou art made
fit for spiritual service. David mused till his heart waxed hot within
him. I will conclude this with that excellent saying of Bernard. "Lord,
I will never come away from thee without thee." Let this be a
Christian's resolution, not to leave off his meditations of God till he
find something of God in him; some moving of the bowels after God; some
flamings of love, [Sol 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004). - Thomas
Watson.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

His company was bad, but his thoughts were good; even while the wicked
was before him his heart was hot within him, while he was musing the
fire burned. His thoughts inflame his affections with holy zeal, and
this holy fire, as by an ante-peristasis, burnt so much the hotter for
the frost of cursed contrariety that was about it. When the careful
magistrates or officers of a city break into a suspected house in the
night-time, the great question is, What company have you here? So when
God breaks in upon our dark hearts, the enquiry is, What thoughts have
you here? Why do thoughts arise in your minds? Are ye not become judges
of evil thoughts? [Luk 24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038); [Jam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004). - Faithful Teat.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"Then spake I with my tongue, Lord," etc. It is, indeed, a happy
circumstance when that silence which has long been preserved is first
broken before the Lord. - John Morison.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"Lord, make me to know mine end," etc. But did not David know this? Yes,
he knew it, and yet he desires to know it. It is very fit we should ask
of God that he would make us to know the things that we do know; I mean,
that what we know emptily and barely, we may know spiritually and
fruitfully, and if there be any measure of this knowledge, that it may
increase and grow more.... We know we must die, and that it is no long
course to the utmost period of life; yet our hearts are little
instructed by this knowledge. - Robert Leighton.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"Lord, make me to know mine end." David would know his end, not so much
his death - the end consuming, as Christ the Lord of life - the end and
perfection of all our desires; or know it, not for vain science, but in
his experience feel the reward of his patience. Though thy chastisement
be sharp, it will be but short, and therein sweet; thou shalt lie still
and be quiet, thou shalt sleep and be at rest, [Job
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013), [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017), [Job
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018), [Job
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019). How few and evil soever thy days
be in the world, by patience and rolling thyself upon God they will
prove unto thee both long enough and good. - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"Lord, make me to know mine end," etc. Seeing that both sorrow and joy
are both able to kill you, and your life hangeth upon so small a thread,
that the least gnat in the air can choke you, as it choked a pope of
Rome; a little hair in your milk strangle you, as it did a councilor in
Rome; a stone of a raisin stop your breath, as it did the breath of
Anacreon put not the evil day far from you, which the ordinance of God
hath put so near; "Remember your Creator in time, before the days comes
wherein you shall say, We have no pleasure in them;" walk not always
with your faces to the east, sometimes have an eye to the west, where
the sun goeth down; sit not ever in the prow of the ship, sometimes go
to the stern; "stand in your watch-towers," as the creature doth ([Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019)), and wait for the hour of your
deliverance; provide your armies before that dreadful king cometh to
fight against you with his greater forces; order your houses before you
die, that is, dispose of your bodies and souls, and all the implements
of them both; let not your eyes be gadding after pleasure, nor your ear
itching after rumours, nor your minds wandering in the fields, when
death is in your houses; your bodies are not brass, nor your strength
the strength of stones, your life none inheritance, your breath no more
than as the vapour and smoke of the chimney within your nostrils, or as
a stranger within your gates, coming and going again, not to return any
more till the day of final redemption. - John King.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"Lord, make me to know mine end," etc. 'Tis worthy your notice, that
passage you read of in Scripture, [Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002). Samuel, when he had anointed
Saul king, and the people had chosen him, what signal doth he give him,
to confirm him anointed? It was to go to Rachel's sepulchre. Now the
reason is this, that he might not be glutted with the preferments and
honours he was entering upon. The emperors of Constantinople, in their
inaugurations, on their coronation days, had a mason come and show them
several marble stones, and ask them to choose which of those should be
made ready for their grave-stones. And so we read of Joseph of
Arimathea, that he had his tomb in his garden, to check the pleasures of
the place. - Christopher Love.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"How frail I am." Between Walsall and Iretsy, in Cheshire, is a house
built in 1636, of thick oak framework, filled in with brick. Over the
window of the tap-room is still legible, cut in the oak, the following
Latin inscription: - Fleres si scires unum tua tempora mensera; rides
cure non scis si sit forsitan una dies. The sense of which is "You would
weep if you knew that your life was limited to one month, yet you laugh
while you know not but it may be restricted to a day." How sad the
thought, that with this silent monitor, this truthful sermon before
their very eyes, numbers have revelled in soul-destructive inebriation!
And yet this is but a likeness of what we see constantly about us. -
Quoted in a Monthly Periodical.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"My days." Man's life is styled days because it is not conferred upon us
by wholesale, by months and years, but by retail of days, hours,
minutes, moments, as to check our curiosity in making enquiry how long
we have to live ([Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)); so
acquainting us with the brevity thereof, we may learn to depend upon
God's bounty for the loan of our life, employ it for his glory, and
every day prepare for the Bridegroom, Christ. - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"My days an handbreath." That is one of the shortest measures. We need
not long lines to measure our lives by: each one carries a measure about
with him, his own hand; that is the longest and fullest measure. It is
not so much as a span: that might possibly have been the measure of old
age in the infancy of the world, but now it is contracted to a
handbreath, and that is the longest. But how many fall short of that!
Many attain not to a finger-breadth: multitudes pass from the womb to
the grave; and how many end their course within the compass of
childhood! - Robert Leighton.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreath." The line wherewith
our lives are measured, is made both of coarse and fine thread. 1. It is
measured by itself, and considerable in its own frailty; so the just
length of it is "an handbreadth." 2. Secondly, with eternity, so it is
found to be as nothing: "Mine age is as nothing before thee"...."An
handbreath," and is that all? So he saith, that exactly measureth them
all, and whatsoever else was created with his own hand. A handbreath is
one of the shortest kind of measures. There is an ell, a cubit, and a
palm or handbreath, whereof there be two kinds, the greater and the
less. The greater handbreath is the whole space betwixt the top of the
thumb and the little finger, when the hand is extended, called a span,
in account near twelve inches. The lesser handbreadth, in a more proper
and strict signification, is the just breadth of the four fingers of the
hand closed together, here chiefly intended, this interpretation best
agreeing with the original, and complying most with the prophet's mind,
by the unanimous consent of the choice interpreters. - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Mine age is as nothing before thee." 1. David might truly have said,
Mine age is short in respect of Methuselah's; the days of Methuselah are
said to be nine hundred sixty and nine years; the days of David, by
computation of the time when he began and how long he reigned were not
much above three score and ten, so that he lived not so many tens as
Methuselah did hundreds. 2. David might have said, Mine age is very
short in comparison of the age of the world. St. Paul saith of the
fashion of this Macrocosm, it passeth away ([Co1
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)); but the age of the microcosm,
man, passeth away far swifter. 3. David might have said, Mine age in
this world is exceeding little in comparison of the duration of the
other world. 4. Finally, David might have said, Mine age is scarcely
anything before the angels, whose duration began with this world and
shall continue in the world to come, and so is coetaneous with both the
worlds. But all these are far short of this comparison which he here
maketh of his age with God which is eternal, both a parte ante, and a
parte post, from everlasting to everlasting. - Nathanael Hardy.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"As nothing." If a man be so diminutive a creature, compared with the
fabric of that great world, and the world itself so little that it
cannot contain the Lord, so little and light that he feels not the
weight thereof upon the tip of his finger, man will well merit the name
"nothing," when he is placed before the Lord. The keel of man's life is
laden with more vanity than verity and substance, if the searcher of the
reins and heart come aboard to view it. Ten thousand of our days will
not make God one year, and a thousand of our years in his sight are but
"as a day when it is past, and as a watch in the night." As drops of
rain are unto the sea, and as a gravel stone is in comparison of the
sand, so are a thousand years to the days everlasting. - Edmund
Layfielde.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity." The Holy
Spirit is pleased elsewhere to speak more sparingly, as it were, in
favour of man; he discovers the nakedness, but yet comes backward to
cast a garment of lenity over it, that somewhat shadows the shame of it.
"Man is like to vanity ([Psa 144:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004));
their days consume in vanity ([Psa
78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)); Man is vanity" ([Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)); but here with open mouth and
unveiled terms full of emphasis, he proclaims every man to be abstracted
vanity; and as if that were short he adds, he is all vanity; mere
vanity, all manner of vanity, altogether vanity: nothing else, nothing
less; yea, somewhat more than vanity, "lighter than vanity" ([Psa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009)); and "vanity of vanities." [Ecc
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002). And that no place of dubitation
may be left, he ushers the doctrine unto our hearts with a strong
asseveration; assuredly, in truth, without all controversy, "man is
altogether vanity." - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity." Bythner
expounds it thus. "Every man at his best state is altogether vanity;"
hoc est omni ex parte, ita ut vanitas et miseria quae per creaturas
frustratim spargitur in uno homine aggregata videatur: sic homo evadit
compendium omnium vanitatum quae in creaturis extant: that is, he is the
sink and centre of all the vanities in the world; he is as it were the
universe of vanity. - Quoted in William Reynold's Funeral Sermon for the
Honourable Francis Pierrepont, 1657.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Every Adam standing is all Abel." - See Hebrew Text.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Selah." A little word, yet of no small difficulty to explain. Left out
of the Bible by the vulgar translators, as though it were impertinent,
where, let them consider, whether they come not within the verge of that
malediction in [Rev 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019). The ancient
interpreters did not much meddle with it, and our editions leave it
uninterpreted. But seeing "whatsoever things were written afore-time
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope" ([Rom
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)), and till "heaven and earth
pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the law, till all
be fulfilled" ([Mat 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)), we have
sufficient warrant after the example of the learned, and encouragement
to make enquiry after the mind of the Holy Spirit, in that which he hath
both commanded to be written, and hath commended unto us. Wherein, like
the crystal glass, I will rather present you with the true visage of
antiquity, than use any new-framed feature or painting of my own.

Selah is mentioned seventy-four times in the Scripture, whereof
seventy-one in the book of Psalms, and thrice in the prophet Habakkuk,
which is written Psalm-wise; and it is ever placed in the end of a Psalm
or verse, four places only excepted, where, like the sun in the midst of
the planets, it is seated to con-join the precedent words with the
subsequent, and communicate splendour unto both. There was a threefold
use of it in ancient times, whereof the first concerned the music; the
second, the matter handled unto which it was affixed; and the third, the
men or congregation assembled in the temple of the Lord, which two last
may still have place among us Christians, who are ingrafted into the
stock Christ, from whence the Jews were cut off, but from the first we
cannot properly suck such nourishment as once they did.

First of the music. The king's choir ([Ch1
25:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001); [Psa
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001), Επιγραφή; [Ch1
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041)) learned five things by it:

1st. To make a little pause, stop, or stay, when they came to Selah, and
to meditate awhile upon the matter foregoing.

2nd. They knew by that cessation and interval that King David, as he was
prophesying unto the people, and praising God upon the loud sounding
cymbals, was at that instant inspired and taught some new lesson.
Wherefore, as men being in serious discourse, when they hear a sudden
noise hold their peace to listen, saying, hark! see, lo! so David's
heart being smitten by the voice of God's Spirit, the music ceased,
stopped, and he checked himself as it were thus: "Speak, Lord, for thy
servant heareth."

3rd. It signifieth the change and variation of the music in some
strains, or of the metre, or sense, or disjunction of the rhyme, or
ceasing of some one sort of music, which howsoever St. Hierome makes
some scruple of. The Septuagint, as often as they meet with Selah in the
Hebrew text, in their Greek version translated it, the change of the
song.

4th. It directed them to sing the same verse over again whereunto Selah
was annexed. Lastly, it was their instruction to elevate and lift up
their voices, praising God with louder voices and loud sounding cymbals.
"Selah" called upon them for louder strains of music and shrillness of
voice. Hut seeing the Jewish harmony and sweet melody is overwhelmed in
the ruins of their glorious temple, we remain unskilled in their notes,
which doth obscure our annotations upon it. Let this suffice for the
"music."

II\. "Selah" concerns the text of Scripture itself, or the matter
handled, in five branches. 1st. Some think it to be only an ornament of
speech, to grace the language with a sweet emphasis; or a
non-significant word to complete the harmony, lest the verse should halt
for want of a foot, but this conjecture is infirm, and many feet wide
from the truth.

2nd. It is not only an adoration of speech, but signifies an end of that
verse, matter, or Psalm, where it is found, and it is ever in the end of
Psalm and verse, these four places only exempted from this rule: [Psa
55:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019); [Psa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003); [Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003), [Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009). For as we write "finis" at the
end of a book, song, or poem, so the Jews underwrite "Selah," "Salome,"
or "Amen," at the end or finishing of any canticle or work. And the
modern Jews at this day, following the opinion of Aben-Ezra, take
"Selah" to be the same with "Amen," using it at the end of their
epitaphs and prayers twice or thrice indifferently; thus: "Amen, Selah,
Amen, Selah," which receives some credit from this that the particular
Psalms end with "Selah" ([Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)),
and the books of Psalms with "Amen." For whereas the Psalter is divided
into five books, four of them end with "Amen" - so be it. As you shall
find: [Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013), the end of the first
book; [Psa 72:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019), the end of the
second book; [Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052), the end of
the third; and [Psa 106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048), the
conclusion of the fourth.

3rd. Selah is an hyperbole or illustration of the truth by way of excess
in advancing and enlarging it, to make the truth and sense more clear
and evident, as if we should say, "that is wonderful!" or, "that is
excellent!" and sometimes by way of aggravation that is "monstrous,"
"intolerable," "horrible!" "The Lord came from Teman and the holy One
from Mount Paran. Selah." [Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003).
Selah. 1. God came with great dignity, excellency, and ample majesty.
"Many there be that say of my soul there is no help for him in God.
Selah." [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). Selah, as if he had
said, Oh, monstrous, and horrible blasphemy, to excommunicate a child
out of the favour of his heavenly Father; and limit his mercy whose hand
is omnipotent to relieve all that rely upon him.

4th. It serves to declare the eternity of the truth revealed in that
Psalm or verse, though perhaps it only began then to be manifested to
the church, or more fully at that time than in former ages. Howsoever,
the people unto whom it was published, or the persons unto whom it was
sent, were otherwise persuaded at the first publication of it. That it
was a veritie from everlasting and shall continue for ever: instance
[Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008), "Salvation belongs unto the
Lord, thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah." As if he had said, "This
is a thing beyond all controversy true, that God hath ever delivered,
and will for ever bless his people." This doctrine is sempeternal and
durable, that the mercy of the Lord endureth for ever. Psalm 136.

5th. It did instruct them to meditate seriously upon those themes where
"Selah" was engraven, as containing matter worthy of singular
observation, meditation, and remembrance, as either concerning Christ,
"Who is the King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory.
Selah." [Psa 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010). The mysteries of
grace. "The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Selah." [Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007). Man's duty ([Psa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004); [Psa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)), or frailty ([Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020); [Psa
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004)). That as the diamond is of
greater value than other precious stones, and the sum is more glorious
than the planets, so those sentences are more resplendent, than other
parcels of Scripture. Which though at the first bare view, it doth not
always so appear, there being other texts of Holy Writ more excellent
(if it were meet to make any comparison) where Selah is not found, yet
if we dive into the occasion, scope, and nature of the sentence, we
shall more willingly accept, when we consider, that it is an usual
custom of the Holy Spirit, for our singular instruction and benefit, to
propound things of a low and inferior nature to our deepest meditation.
Instance [Psa 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016). "The Lord is known
by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands," which is shut up with "Higgaion Selah," meditation
Selah, as if he had said, here is a matter worthy of observation and
eternal meditation; the righteous should never forget this, that the
wicked perish in their own counsels, and are taken in their own net. An
observation worthy to be engraven in every religious person's bosom,
that God will one time or other be known among the wicked by his most
severe judgments executed upon them, though they would never learn by
his patience and mercies to acknowledge him for their Lord. Thus far of
the matter. Now it remains for a conclusion to unfold the several
instructions which "Selah" afforded unto the congregation, which are
these six.

1st. It served as a note of attention and inattention of the mind to
what was sung or said, that wheresoever they cast an eye upon "Selah,"
they might conceive they heard the Lord's voice from heaven speaking.
"Hear this, all ye people, give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world.
Both high and low, rich and poor together." [Psa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001), [Psa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002). That as their voices were lift
up in singing, so much more their hearts and affections might be
elevated, that their voice and hearts being both in tune, the joint
harmony might be sweet in the ears of the Lord.

2ndly. It was a note of affirmation, whereby they declared their consent
and assent unto the truth delivered, as we say when we approve of
another's speech; right, just, you say truly, it is most certain. So
their "Selah" was as much as true, certain, excellent. Instance, [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004), "I cried unto the Lord with my
voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill. Selah," i.e., It is most
certain that the Lord knows the secrets of our hearts, and is the judge
of the quick and dead, and will pass most righteous sentence upon us,
giving to every man according to his deeds in the flesh, whether good or
evil. [Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003). "Thou lovest evil
more than good; and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah." -
that is to say, undeniable, we all confess it, our own experience and
sorrows have made us know this, that those who have not the fear of God
before their eyes love to speak and do all the mischief they are able
against God's people, to hurt them rather than help them, to wound their
innocent reputation rather than preserve it.

3rdly. It was a devout ejaculation of the heart and soul unto God,
wishing and desiring the accomplishment of what was spoken or promised.
Instance, [Hab 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013). - "Thou wentest
forth for the salvation of thy people. Selah." As if he had said, Lord,
I beseech thee, evermore go out so to deliver thine anointed. [Psa
55:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017). "Evening, and morning, and
at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice. He hath
delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me; for
there were many with me. God shall hear, and afflict them, even he that
abideth of old. Selah," i.e., O Lord, I entreat thee, ever bow down an
ear unto my humble suit, and rise up against them that rise up against
me.

4thly. It denoted their admiration at some strange, unusual effect,
whether the work of God, or wickedness of man. [Psa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003). "He shall send from heaven and
save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. Selah," i.e.,
Oh, wonderful and admirable goodness of God, that is pleased to send
sometimes his angel from heaven, always his mercy and truth, to deliver
his poor perplexed servants from them that are too strong and mighty for
them, [Psa 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003). "Strangers are risen
up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul: they have not set God
before them. Selah," i.e., Oh, horrible impiety and cruelty to hunt
after the life of the saints, and cast the God of life and his
remembrance behind their backs.

5thly. Of humiliation and consternation of their mind, by the
consideration of God's incomprehensible majesty, and their own great
frailty and misery. Instance, [Psa
66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007). "He ruleth by his power for
ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebellious exalt
themselves. Selah," i.e., here is matter of humiliation before the King
of all the world, [Psa 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007), [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008). "O God, when thou wentest forth
before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness. Selah,"
i.e., my yet? heart trembled to consider; I am moved out of my place, to
reflect upon that majesty before whom "the earth shook, the heavens also
dropped at the presence of God; even Sinai itself was moved at the
presence of God, the God of Israel." [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). "When thou with rebukes dost
correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a
moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah." As if he should say, this may
humble the proudest heart in the world, and cast him down to the ground.

6thly. It was a note of Doxology and praising of God in a special
manner, not much unlike, or the very same with this, "For thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever." As for example,
"All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee, they shall
sing to thy name. Selah," [Psa 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#004).
"Yea, Lord, in thee will we boast all the day long, and praise thy name
for ever. Selah," [Psa 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008). "Blessed
be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things. And
blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory; so be it, even so be it." [Psa
72:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018), [Psa
72:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019). - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

"Man walketh in a vain shew." I see that we who live are nothing else
but images, and a vain shadow. - Sophocles.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006) (first clause)

When in the Bristol election, his competitor died, Burke said, "What
shadows we are, and what shadows we pursue." - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

Every carnal man walks in a vain shew, and yet how vain is he of his
shew of vanity! He is "disquieted in vain," and it is only vanity which
disquiets him. He labours all his life for the profit of riches, and yet
in death his riches will not profit him. He that views an ox grazing in
a fat pasture, concludes that he is but preparing for the day of
slaughter. - William Seeker.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

"He heapeth up riches." This is the great foolishness and disease,
especially of old age, that the less way a man has to go, he makes the
greater provision for it. When the hands are stiff, and fit for no other
labour, they are fitted and composed for scraping together. - Robert
Leighton.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

"He heapeth up riches." The Hebrew word rendered, "He heapeth up,"
signifies to rake together; in which there is an allusion to the
husbandman's collecting his corn together before he carries it to the
barn. The metaphor is elegant, intimating the precariousness of human
life, and the vanity of human acquisitions; which though heaped up
together like corn, by one person, may soon become the possession of
another. - Samuel Burder.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,

Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,

To the last syllable of recorded time;

And all our yesterdays have lighted fools

The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!

Life's but a walking shadow; a poor player,

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,

And then is heard no more; it is a tale

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,

Signifying nothing.

William Shakespeare.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

The plentiful showers of tears which stand in our eyes when we come from
the womb, and when we draw to the tomb, are faithful witnesses of man's
vanity. We bid the world "good morrow" with grief, and "good night" with
a groan. - Edmund Layfielde.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

"Lord, what wait I for?"

At first her mother earth she holdeth deare,

And doth embrace the world and worldly things;

She flies close by the ground and houers here

And mounts not up with her celestiall wings.

Yet under heaven she cannot light on ought

That with her heavenly nature doth agree;

She cannot rest, she cannot fix her thought,

She cannot in this world contented bee.

Then as a bee which among weeds doth fall.

Which seeme sweet flowers with lustre fresh and gay

She lights on that, and this, and tasteth all,

But pleased with none, doth rise, and soare away.

So, when the soule finds here no true content,

And like Noah's doue, can no sure footing take,

She doth returne from whence she first was sent.

And flies to Him, that first her wings did make.

Sir John Davies.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

O loose this frame, this knot of man untie,

That my free soul may use her wing,

Which is now pinioned with mortality,

As an entangled, hamper'd thing.

What have I left that I should stay and groan?

The most of me to heaven is fled;

My thoughts and joys are all pack'd up and gone,

And for their old acquaintance plead.

George Herbert.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

"My hope is in thee." Sweet is it that our hope should rest in him who
is never shaken; should abide in him who never changeth; should bind us
to him who can hold us fast to himself, who alone is the full
contentment of the soul; should, as it were, enter into him; since "in
him is our being," who is love. - E. B. Pusey, D.D., 1853.

[Psa 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)

Make me not the reproach of the foolish." Let not their prosperity and
my misery give them occasion to deride and reproach me for my serving of
thee and trusting in thee to so little purpose. - Matthew Pool.

[Psa 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)

"Make me not the reproach of the foolish." Doubt not this; that of all
the bitter agony which will be the portion of the lost soul at that,
"Depart, ye cursed," not the least will be the bitter reproaches and
derision of those evil spirits who have seduced him to his ruin. "For
this morsel of meat to have sold thy birthright! For the fleshly
pleasures of a few days to have bartered thine eternal jewel! For a few
grains of yellow earth to have missed the city with streets of gold, and
gates of several pearls! O fool, beyond all folly! O madman, beyond all
insanity! Truly we have need to pray with all earnestness, 'Make me not
the reproach of the foolish.'" - Origen, quoted by J. M. Neale.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

"I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it." See David's
carriage here; it was a patience not constrained, but from satisfaction
of spirit: he saw love in his affliction, and that sweetened his soul. -
Joseph Symonds.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

"I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it." God is
training up his children here. This is the true character of his
dealings with them. The education of his saints is the object he has in
view. It is training for the kingdom; it is education for eternity....
It is the discipline of love. Every step of it is kindness. There is no
wrath nor vengeance in any part of the process. The discipline of the
school may be harsh and stern; but that of the family is love, We are
sure of this; and the consolation which it affords is unutterable. Love
will not wrong us. There will be no needless suffering. Were this but
kept in mind there would be fewer hard thoughts of God amongst men, even
when his strokes are most severe. I know not a better illustration of
what the feelings of a saint should be, in the hour of bitterness, than
the case of Richard Cameron's father. The aged saint was in prison "for
the Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ." The bleeding
head of his martyred son was brought to him by his unfeeling
persecutors, and he was asked derisively if he knew it. "I know it, I
know it," - said the father, as he kissed the mangled forehead of his
fair-haired son - "it is my son's, my own dear son's! It is the Lord!
good is the will of the Lord, who cannot wrong me or mine, but who hath
made goodness and mercy to follow us all our days." - Horatius Bonar, in
"The Night of Weeping," 1847.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

"Because thou didst it." This holy man had a breach made both at his
body and spirit at this time; he was sick and sad; yet he remembers from
whose hand the blow came. Thou, Lord, didst it; thou, whom I love
dearly, and so can take it kindly; thou whom I have offended, and so
take it patiently; yea, thou, who mightest have cast me into a bed of
flames, instead of my bed of sickness, and therefore I accept thy
correction thankfully. Thus he catches at the blow without retorting it
back upon God by any quarrelling discontented language. - William
Gurnall

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

"Because thou didst it." We digest not a blow from our equals, but a
blow from our king we can well digest. If the King of kings lays his
hand on our backs, let us, beloved, lay our hands on our mouths. I am
sure this stopped David's mouth from venting fretful speeches. "I held
my tongue and said nothing." Why didst thou so, David? "Because thou,
Lord, didst it;" and God gives this testimony of such an one; that he is
a prudent man that keeps silence at an evil time. [Amo
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013). - Nicholas Estwick, B.D., 1644.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

Perkins, in his "Salve for a Sick Man," gives the "last words" of many
holy men, among others of Calvin: - "I held my tongue, because thou,
Lord, hast done it - I mourned as a dove - Lord, thou grindest me to
powder, but it sufficeth me because it is thy hand."

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

I wondered once at providence, and called white providence black and
unjust, that I should be smothered in a town where no soul will take
Christ off my hand. But providence hath another lustre with God than
with my bleared eyes. I proclaim myself a blind body, who knoweth not
black and white, in the unco course of God's providence. Suppose that
Christ should set hell where heaven is and devils up in glory beside the
elect angels (which yet cannot be), I would I had a heart to acquiesce
in his way, without further dispute. I see that infinite wisdom is the
mother of his judgments, and that his ways pass finding out. I cannot
learn, but I desire to learn, to bring my thoughts, will, and lusts in
under Christ's feet, that he may trample upon them. But, alas! I am
still upon Christ's wrong side. - Samuel Rutherford.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

A little girl, in the providence of God, was born deaf and dumb. She was
received, and instructed, at an institution established for these
afflicted ones. A visitor was one day requested to examine the children
thus sadly laid aside from childhood's common joys. Several questions
were asked, and quickly answered by means of a slate and pencil. At
length the gentleman wrote, "Why were you born deaf and dumb?" A look of
anguish clouded for the moment the expressive face of the little girl;
but it quickly passed, as she took her slate, and wrote, "Even so,
Father; for so it seemeth good in thy sight." - Mrs. Rogers, in "The
Shepherd King."

[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)

"Remove thy plague away from me:" thy plague and mine; thine by
affliction, mine by passion; thine because thou didst send it, mine
because I endure it; thine because it comes from thy justice, mine
because it answers my injustice; remit what I have done, and remove what
thou hast done. But whosoever laid it on, the Lord will take off. -
Thomas Adams.

[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)

"Remove," etc. Having first prayed off his sin, he would now pray off
his pain, though it less troubled him; and for ease he repaireth to
Jehovah that healeth, as well as woundeth. [Hos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001). - John Trapp.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

"Thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth." The meaning may
be, As the moth crumbles into dust under the slightest pressure, or the
gentlest touch, so man dissolves with equal ease, and vanishes into
darkness, under the finger of the Almighty. - Paxton's Illustrations of
Scripture.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

"Thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth." Moths I must not
omit naming. I once saw some knives, the back bone hafts of which were
said to have been half-consumed by them. I also saw the remains of a
hair-seated sofa which had been devoured. It is no uncommon thing to
find dresses consumed in a single night. In [Isa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006), "wax old" probably refers to a
garment that is moth-eaten. So in [Psa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007), and [Psa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009), "consumed" means moth-eaten; and
again in [Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). - John Gadsby.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

"Like a moth." The moths of the East are very large and beautiful, but
short lived. After a few showers these splendid insects may be seen
fluttering in every breeze, but the dry weather, and their numerous
enemies, soon consign them to the common lot. Thus the beauty of man
consumes away like that of this gay rover, dressed in his robes of
purple, and scarlet, and green. - John Kitto.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

The body of man is as a "garment" to the soul: in this garment sin hath
lodged a "moth," which, by degrees, fretteth and weareth away, first,
the beauty, then the strength, and, finally, the contexture of its
parts. Whoever has watched the progress of a consumption, or any other
lingering distemper, nay, the slow and silent devastations of time
alone, in the human frame, will need no farther illustration of this
just and affecting similitude; but will discern at once the propriety of
the reflection which follows upon it. - "Surely every man is vanity."
George Horne.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

"Surely every man is vanity." What is greatness? Can we predicate it of
man, independently of his qualities as an immortal being? or of his
actions, independently of principles and motives? Then the glitter of
nobility is not superior to the plumage of the peacock; nor the valour
of Alexander to the fury of a tiger; nor the sensual delights of
Epicurus to those of any animal that roams the forest. - Ebenezer
Porter, D.D., in Lectures on Homiletics, 1834.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"Hear my prayer, O Lord," etc. Now, in this prayer of David, we find
three things, which are the chief qualifications of all acceptable
prayers. The first is humility. He humbly confesses his sins, and his
own weakness and worthlessness. We are not to put on a stoical, flinty
kind of spirit under our affliction, that so we may seem to shun
womanish repinings and complaints, lest we run into the other evil, of
despising the hand of God, but we are to humble our proud hearts, and
break our unruly passions.... The second qualification of this prayer
is, fervency and importunity, which appears in the elegant gradation of
the words, "Hear my prayer," my words; if not that, yet "Give ear to my
cry," which is louder; and if that prevail not, yet, "Hold not thy peace
at my tears," which is the loudest of all; so David, elsewhere, calls it
"the voice of my weeping." ... The third qualification is faith, "He who
comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him." [Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006).
And, certainly, as he that comes to God must believe this, so he that
believes this, cannot but come to God; and if he be not presently
answered, "he that believes makes no haste," he resolves patiently to
wait for the Lord, and to go to no other. - Condensed from Robert
Leighton.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"Hold not thy peace at my tears." We may, in all humility, plead our
heart-breakings and weepings in sense of want of mercies which we crave,
and our pantings and faintings after the same. - Thomas Cobbett.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were." Both in thy judgment expressed ([Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)), and in their own opinion ([Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)), Upon which account thou didst
take a special care of them, and therefore do so to me also. - Matthew
Pool.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"1 am a stranger with thee and a sojourner." How settled soever their
condition be, yet this is the temper of the saints upon earth - to count
themselves but strangers. All men indeed are strangers and sojourners,
but the saints do best discern it, and most freely acknowledge it.
Wicked men have no firm dwelling upon earth, but that is against their
intentions; their inward thought and desire is that they may abide for
ever; they are strangers against their wills, their abode is uncertain
in the world, and they cannot help it. And pray mark, there are two
distinct words used in this case, strangers and sojourners. A stranger
is one that hath his abode in a foreign country, that is not a native
and a denizen of the place, though he liveth there, and in opposition to
the natives he is called a stranger: as if a Frenchman should live in
England, he is a stranger. But a sojourner is one that intendeth not to
settle, but only passeth through a place, and is in motion travelling
homeward. So the children of God in relation to a country of their own
in another place, namely, heaven, they are denizens there, but strangers
in the world; and they are sojourners and pilgrims in regard of their
motion and journey towards their country. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"A stranger." 1. A stranger is one that is absent from his country, and
from his father's house: so are we, heaven is our country, God is there,
and Christ is there. 2. A stranger in a foreign country is not known,
nor valued according to his birth and breeding; so the saints walk up
and down in the world like princes in disguise. 3. Strangers are liable
to inconveniences, so are godly men in the world. Religion, saith
Tertullian, is like a strange plant brought from a foreign country, and
doth not agree with the nature of the soil, it thriveth not in the
world. 4. A stranger is patient, standeth not for ill usage, and is
contented with pilgrims, fare and lodging. We are now abroad, and must
expect hardship. 5. A stranger is wary, that he may not give offence,
and incur the hatred and displeasure of the natives. 6. A stranger is
thankful for the least favour; so we must be thankfully contented with
the things God hath bestowed upon us: anything in a strange country is
much. 7. A stranger, that hath a journey to go, would pass over it as
soon as he can, and so we, who have a journey to heaven desire to be
dissolved. 8. A stranger buyeth not such things as he cannot carry with
him; he doth not buy trees, house, household stuff, but jewels and
pearls, and such things as are portable. Our great care should be to get
the jewels of the covenant, the graces of God's Spirit, those things
that will abide with us. 9. A stranger's heart is in his country; so is
a saint's. 10. A stranger is inquisitive after the way, fearing lest he
should go amiss, so is a Christian. 11. A stranger provides for his
return, as a merchant, that he may return richly laden. So we must
appear before God in Sion. What manner of persons ought we to be? Let us
return from our travel well provided. - Condensed from Thomas Manton.

[Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)

"O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more." Man in his corrupt state is like Nebuchadnezzar, he hath a
beast's heart, that craves no more than the satisfaction of his sensual
appetite; but when renewed by grace, then his understanding returns to
him, by which he is enabled in praying for temporals to elevate his
desires to a nobler end. Doth David pray that some farther time may be
added to his temporal life? It is not out of a fond love for this world,
but to prepare himself the better for another. Is he comforted with
hopes of a longer stay here? It is not this world's carnal pleasures
that kindle this joy in his holy breast, but the advantage that thereby
he shall have for praising God in the land of the living.... "O spare
me, that I may recover strength." David was not yet recovered out of
that sin which had brought him exceeding low as you may perceive, [Psa
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010), [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). And the good man cannot think
of dying with any willingness till his heart be in a holier frame: and
for the peace of the gospel, serenity of conscience and inward joy;
alas! all unholiness is to it as poison is to the spirits which drink
them up. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)

"O spare me," etc. Attachment to life, the feeling cherished by the
Psalmist, when he thus appealed to the Sovereign of the universe, varies
in its character with the occasions and the sentiments by which it is
elicited and confirmed. Take one view of it, and you pronounce it
criminal; take another, and you pronounce it innocent; take a third, and
you pronounce it laudable. I. Life may inspire a criminal attachment,
warranting our censure. The most obvious and aggravated case is that in
which the attachment has its foundations in the opportunities which life
affords, of procuring "the wages of unrighteousness," and "the pleasures
of sin." II. Life may inspire an innocent attachment, awakening our
sympathy.... Life is a scene in which we often descry a verdant and
luxuriant spot, teeming with health, and ease, and harmony, and joy. We
have beheld the husbands and the wives whose interwoven regards have,
from year to year, alleviated all their afflictions, and heightened all
their privileges. We have beheld the parents and the children whose
fellowship has yielded them, through the shifting seasons, a daily
feast. There are indulgent masters, and faithful servants; some
neighbourhoods are undisturbed; some Christian societies are exquisitely
attractive; here and there we have intercourse with those individuals in
whom are seen the beauties of high character irradiated by the beams of
general prosperity. You would pronounce no censure on a man thus happily
connected, were he, when beginning to languish, as one "going the way of
all the earth, to cry," "O spare me, that I may recover strength, before
I go hence, and be no more." III. The last view which is has been
proposed to take of human life, shows that it may inspire a laudable
attachment, at once challenging our approbation, and urging us to bring
our minds under its influence. The language before us admits of being
illustrated as the prayer of a penitent, a saint, and a philanthropist.
1. Commend him who pleads for life as a penitent, Was it recently that
the Holy Spirit first wounded him with the arrows of conviction?
Perhaps, he doubts the source, the quality, and the result, of his
powerful feelings he knows that we may be solemnly impressed, without
being converted. There are many considerations which entitle to
favourable .opinion those who, not having arrived at a view of their
moral state, at once evident and encouraging, wish earnestly to live,
till grace shall have carried them from victory to victory, and enabled
them "to make" their "calling and election sure." Even they may fall
from their steadfastness; and these words, "O spare me, that I may
recover my strength," may proceed from the lips of a backslider, once
more blushing, trembling, and petitioning to be restored. 2. Commend
him, in the next place, who pleads for life, as a saint.... The
distinguished office of pleading, acting, and suffering, for the
advancement of the divine honour and among the profane, the sensual, the
formal, and the worldly is delegated, exclusively, to "the saints which
are upon the earth." Yet, surely he whose attachment to life is strongly
enhanced by a commission which dooms him to the contradiction of
sinners, and defers "the fulness of joy," a saint so magnanimous and
devoted, puts forth the expressions of a piety which the very angels are
compelled to revere. 3. Commend him, finally, who pleads for life as a
philanthropist. I refer to the generous patron, a man intent on doing
good. I would also refer to a fond parent. I would now refer to "a
preacher of righteousness," "a good minister of Jesus Christ." - Outline
of a sermon entitled "Attachment to Life," preached by Joseph Hughes,
M.A., as a Funeral Sermon for Rev. John Owen, M.A., 1822.

[Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)

May not the very elect and faithful themselves fear the day of judgment,
and be far from fetching comfort at it? I answer, he may. First, at his
first conversion and soon after, before he have gotten a full persuasion
of the remission of his sins. And again, in some spiritual desertion,
when the Lord seems to leave a man to himself, as he did David and
others, he may fear to think of the same. And lastly, when he hath
fallen into some great sin after he is a strong man in Christ, he may
fear death and judgment, and be constrained to pray with Job and David,
"O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more." - John Barlow's Sermon, 1618.

[Psalms 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 39:1</span></span>

1 I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I
will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.

2 I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my
sorrow was stirred.

[Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

"I said." I steadily resolved and registered a determination. In his
great perplexity his greatest fear was lest he should sin; and,
therefore, he cast about for the most likely method for avoiding it, and
he determined to be silent. It is right excellent when a man can
strengthen himself in a good course by the remembrance of a well and
wisely-formed resolve. "What I have written I have written," or what I
have spoken I will perform, may prove a good strengthener to a man in a
fixed course of right. "I will take heed to my ways." To avoid sin one
had need be very circumspect, and keep one's actions as with a guard or
garrison. Unguarded ways are generally unholy ones. Heedless is another
word for graceless. In times of sickness or other trouble we must watch
against the sins peculiar to such trials, especially against murmuring
and repining. "That I sin not with my tongue." Tongue sins are great
sins: like sparks of fire, ill-words spread, and do great damage. If
believers utter hard words of God in times of depression, the ungodly
will take them up and use them as a justification for their sinful
courses. If a man's own children rail at him, no wonder if his enemies'
mouths are full of abuse. Our tongue always wants watching, for it is
restive as an ill-broken horse; but especially must we hold it in when
the sharp cuts of the Lord's rod excite it to rebel. "I will keep my
mouth with a bridle," or more accurately, with a muzzle. The original
does not so much mean a bridle to check the tongue as a muzzle to stop
it altogether. David was not quite so wise as our translation would make
him; if he had resolved to be very guarded in his speech, it would have
been altogether commendable, but when he went so far as to condemn
himself to entire silence, "even from good," there must have been at
least a little sullenness in his soul. In trying to avoid one fault, he
fell into another. To use the tongue against God is a sin of commission,
but not to use it at all involves an evident sin of omission.
Commendable virtues may be followed so eagerly that we may fall into
vices; to avoid Scylla we run into Charybdis. "While the wicked is
before me." This qualifies the silence, and almost screens it from
criticism, for bad men are so sure to misuse even our holiest speech,
that it is as well not to cast any of our pearls before such swine; but
what if the Psalmist meant, "I was silent while I had the prosperity of
the wicked in my thoughts," then we see the discontent and questioning
of his mind, and the muzzled mouth indicates much that is not to be
commended. Yet, if we blame we must also praise, for the highest wisdom
suggests that when good men are bewildered with sceptical thoughts, they
should not hasten to repeat them, but should fight out their inward
battle upon its own battlefield. The firmest believers are exercised
with unbelief, and it would be doing the devil's work with a vengeance
if they were to publish abroad all their questionings and suspicions. If
I have the fever myself, there is no reason why I should communicate it
to my neighbours. If any on board the vessel of my soul are diseased, I
will put my heart in quarantine, and allow none to go on shore in the
boat of speech till I have a clean bill of health.

[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)

"I was dumb with silence." He was as strictly speechless as if he had
been tongueless - not a word escaped him. He was as silent as the dumb.
"I held my peace, even from good." Neither bad nor good escaped his
lips. Perhaps he feared that if he began to talk at all, he would be
sure to speak amiss, and, therefore, he totally abstained. It was an
easy, safe, and effectual way of avoiding sin, if it did not involve a
neglect of the duty which he owed to God to speak well of his name. Our
divine Lord was silent before the wicked, but not altogether so, for
before Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good confession, and asserted his
kingdom. A sound course of action may be pushed to the extreme, and
become a fault. "And my sorrow was stirred." Inward grief was made to
work and ferment by want of vent. The pent-up floods were swollen and
agitated. Utterance is the natural outlet for the heart's anguish, and
silence is, therefore, both an aggravation of the evil and a barrier
against its cure. In such a case the resolve to hold one's peace needs
powerful backing, and even this is most likely to give way when grief
rushes upon the soul. Before a flood gathering in force and foaming for
outlet the strongest banks are likely to be swept away. Nature may do
her best to silence the expression of discontent, but unless grace comes
to her rescue, she will be sure to succumb.

[Psalms 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 39:3</span></span>

3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then
spake I with my tongue,

4 Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it
is; that I may know how frail I am.

5 Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as
nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether
vanity. Selah.

6 Surely every man walketh in a vain shew; surely they are disquieted in
vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.

[Psa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)

"My heart was hot within me." The friction of inward thoughts produced
an intense mental heat. The door of his heart was shut, and with the
fire of sorrow burning within, the chamber of his soul soon grew
unbearable with heat. Silence is an awful thing for a sufferer, it is
the surest method to produce madness. Mourner, tell your sorrow; do it
first and most fully to God, but even to pour it out before some wise
and godly friend is far from being wasted breath. "While I was musing
the fire burned." As he thought upon the ease of the wicked and his own
daily affliction, he could not unravel the mystery of providence, and
therefore he became greatly agitated. While his heart was musing it was
fusing, for the subject was confusing. It became harder every moment to
be quiet; his volcanic soul was tossed with an inward ocean of fire, and
heaved to and fro with a mental earthquake; an eruption was imminent,
the burning lava must pour forth in a fiery stream. "Then spake I with
my tongue." The original is grandly laconic. "I spake." The muzzled
tongue burst all its bonds. The gag was hurled away. Misery, like
murder, will out. You can silence praise, but anguish is clamorous.
Resolve or no resolve, heed or no heed, sin or no sin, the impetuous
torrent forced for itself a channel and swept away every restraint.

[Psa 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004)

"Lord." It is well that the vent of his soul was Godward and not towards
man. Oh! if my swelling heart must speak, Lord let it speak with thee;
even if there be too much of natural heat in what I say, thou wilt be
more patient with me than man, and upon thy purity it can cast not
stain; whereas if I speak to my fellows, they may harshly rebuke me or
else learn evil from my petulance. "Make me to know my end." Did he mean
the same as Elias in his agony, "Let me die, I am no better than my
fathers?" Perhaps so. At any rate, he rashly and petulantly desired to
know the end of his wretched life, that he might begin to reckon the
days till death should put a finis to his woe. Impatience would pry
between the folded leaves. As if there were no other comfort to be had,
unbelief would fain hide itself in the grave and sleep itself into
oblivion. David was neither the first nor the last who had spoken
unadvisedly in prayer. Yet, there is a better meaning: the Psalmist
would know more of the shortness of life, that he might better bear its
transient ills, and herein we may safely kneel with him, uttering the
same petition. That there is no end to its misery is the hell of hell;
that there is an end to life's sorrow is the hope of all who have a hope
beyond the grave. God is the best teacher of the divine philosophy which
looks for an expected end. They who see death through the Lord's glass,
see a fair sight, which makes them forget the evil of life in foreseeing
the end of life. "And the measure of my days." David would fain be
assured that his days would be soon over and his trials with them; he
would be taught anew that life is measured out to us by wisdom, and is
not a matter of chance. As the trader measures his cloth by inches, and
ells, and yards, so with scrupulous accuracy is life measured out to
man. "That I may know how frail I am," or when I shall cease to be.
Alas! poor human nature, dear as life is, man quarrels with God at such
a rate that he would sooner cease to be than bear the Lord's
appointment. Such pettishness in a saint! Let us wait till we are in a
like position, and we shall do no better. The ship on the stocks wonders
that the barque springs a leak, but when it has tried the high seas, it
marvels that its timbers hold together in such storms. David's case is
not recorded for our imitation, but for our learning.

[Psa 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)

"Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth." Upon consideration,
the Psalmist finds little room to bewail the length of life, but rather
to bemoan its shortness. What changeful creatures we are! One moment we
cry to be rid of existence, and the next instant beg to have it
prolonged! A handbreadth is one of the shortest natural measures, being
the breadth of four fingers; such is the brevity of life, by divine
appointment; God has made it so, fixing the period in wisdom. The
"behold" calls us to attention; to some the thought of life's hastiness
will bring the acutest pain, to others the most solemn earnestness. How
well should those live who are to live so little! Is my earthly
pilgrimage so brief? then let me watch every step of it, that in the
little of time there may be much of grace. "And mine age is as nothing
before thee." So short as not to amount to an entity. Think of eternity,
and an angel is as a new-born babe, the world a fresh blown bubble, the
sun a spark just fallen from the fire, and man a nullity. Before the
Eternal, all the age of frail man is less than one ticking of a clock.
"Verily, every man at his best state is altogether vanity." This is the
surest truth, that nothing about man is either sure or true. Take man at
his best, he is but a man, and man is a mere breath, unsubstantial as
the wind. Man is settled, as the margin has it, and by divine decree it
is settled that he shall not be settled. He is constant only in
inconstancy. His vanity is his only verity; his best, of which he is
vain, is but vain; and this is verily true of every man, that everything
about him is every way fleeting. This is sad news for those whose
treasures are beneath the moon; those whose glorying is in themselves
may well hang the flag half-mast; but those whose best estate is settled
upon them in Christ Jesus in the land of unfading flowers, may rejoice
that it is no vain thing in which they trust.

[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)

"Surely every man walketh in a vain shew." Life is but a passing
pageant. This alone is sure, that nothing is sure. All around us shadows
mock us; we walk among them, and too many live for them as if the
mocking images were substantial; acting their borrowed parts with zeal
fit only to be spent on realities, and lost upon the phantoms of this
passing scene. Worldly men walk like travellers in a mirage, deluded,
duped, deceived, soon to be filled with disappointment and despair.
"Surely they are disquieted in vain." Men fret, and fume, and worry, and
all for mere nothing. They are shadows pursuing shadows, while death
pursues them. He who toils and contrives, and wearies himself for gold,
for fame, for rank, even if he wins his desire, finds at the end his
labour lost; for like the treasure of the miser's dream, it all vanishes
when the man awakes in the world of reality. Read change, the din of the
city streets, and remember that all this noise (for so the word means),
this breach of quiet, is made about unsubstantial, fleeting vanities.
Broken rest, anxious fear, over-worked brain, failing mind, lunacy,
these are steps in the process of disquieting with many, and all to be
rich, or, in other words, to load one's self with the thick clay; clay,
too, which a man must leave so soon. "He heapeth up riches, and knoweth
not who shall gather them." He misses often the result of his ventures,
for there are many slips between the cup and the lips. His wheat is
sheaved, but an interloping robber bears it away - as often happens with
the poor Eastern husbandman; or, the wheat is even stored, but the
invader feasts thereon. Many work for others all unknown to them.
Especially does this verse refer to those all-gathering muckrakes, who
in due time are succeeded by all-scattering forks, which scatter riches
as profusely as their sires gathered them parsimoniously. We know not
our heirs, for our children die, and strangers fill the old ancestral
halls; estates change hands, and entail, though riveted with a thousand
bonds, yields to the corroding power of time. Men rise up early and sit
up late to build a house, and then the stranger tramps along its
passages, laughs in its chambers, and forgetful of its first builder,
calls it all his own. Here is one of the evils under the sun for which
no remedy can be prescribed.

[Psalms 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 39:7</span></span>

7 And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

8 Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the
foolish.

9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.

10 Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine
hand.

11 When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his
beauty to consume away like a moth; surely every man is vanity. Selah.

12 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace
at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were.

13 O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more.

[Psa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

"And now, Lord, what wait I for?" What is there in these phantoms to
enchant me? Why should I linger where the prospect is so uninviting, and
the present so trying? It were worse than vanity to linger in the abodes
of sorrow to gain a heritage of emptiness. The Psalmist, therefore,
turns to his God, in disgust of all things else; he has thought on the
world and all things in it, and is relieved by knowing that such vain
things are all passing away; he has cut all cords which bound him to
earth, and is ready to sound "Boot and saddle, up and away." "My hope is
in thee." The Lord is self-existent and true, and therefore worthy of
the confidence of men; he will live when all the creatures die, and his
fulness will abide when all second causes are exhausted; to him,
therefore, let us direct our expectation, and on him let us rest our
confidence. Away from sand to rock let all wise builders turn
themselves, for if not today, yet surely ere long, a storm will rise
before which nothing will be able to stand but that which has the
lasting element of faith in God to cement it. David had but one hope,
and that hope entered within the veil, hence he brought his vessel to
safe anchorage, and after a little drifting all was peace.

[Psa 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)

"Deliver me from all my transgressions." How fair a sign it is when the
Psalmist no longer harps upon his sorrows, but begs freedom from his
sins! What is sorrow when compared with sin! Let but the poison of sin
be gone from the cup, and we need not fear its gall, for the bitter will
act medicinally. None can deliver a man from his transgressions but the
blessed One who is called Jesus, because he saves his people from their
sins; and when he once works this great deliverance for a man from the
cause, the consequences are sure to disappear too. The thorough
cleansing desired is well worthy of note' to be saved from some
transgressions would be of small benefit; total and perfect deliverance
is needed. "Make me not the reproach of the foolish." The wicked are the
foolish here meant: such are always on the watch for the faults of
saints, and at once make them the theme of ridicule. It is a wretched
thing for a man to be suffered to make himself the butt of unholy scorn
by apostasy from the right way. Alas, how many have thus exposed
themselves to well-deserved reproach! Sin and shame go together and from
both David would fain be preserved.

[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)

"I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it." This had
been far clearer if it had been rendered, "I am silenced, I will not
open my mouth." Here we have a nobler silence, purged of all sullenness,
and sweetened with submission. Nature failed to muzzle the mouth, but
grace achieved the work in the worthiest manner. How like in appearance
may two very different things appear! silence is ever silence, but it
may be sinful in one case and saintly in another. What a reason for
hushing every murmuring thought is the reflection, "because thou didst
it"! It is his right to do as he wills, and he always wills to do that
which is wisest and kindest; why should I then arraign his dealings?
Nay, if it be indeed the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good.

[Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)

Remove thy stroke away from me." Silence from all repining did not
prevent the voice of prayer, which must never cease. In all probability
the Lord would grant the Psalmist's petition, for he usually removes
affliction when we are resigned to it; if we kiss the rod, our Father
always burns it. When we are still, the rod is soon still. It is quite
consistent with resignation to pray for the removal of a trial. David
was fully acquiescent in the divine will, and yet found it in his heart
to pray for deliverance; indeed, it was while he was rebellious that he
was prayerless about his trial, and only when he became submissive did
he plead for mercy. "I am consumed by the blow of thine hand." Good
pleas may be found in our weakness and distress. It is well to show our
Father the bruises which his scourge has made, for peradventure his
fatherly pity will bind his hands, and move him to comfort us in his
bosom. It is not to consume us, but to consume our sins, that the Lord
aims at in his chastisements.

[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)

"When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity." God does not
trifle with his rod; he uses it because of sin, and with a view to whip
us from it; hence he means his strokes to be felt, and felt they are.
"Thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth." As the moth frets
the substance of the fabric, mars all its beauty, and leaves it worn out
and worthless, so do the chastisements of God discover to us our folly,
weakness, and nothingness, and make us feel ourselves to be as worn-out
vestures, worthless and useless. Beauty must be a poor thing when a moth
can consume it and a rebuke can mar it. All our desires and delights are
wretched moth-eaten things when the Lord visits us in his anger. "Surely
every man is vanity." He is as Trapp wittily says "a curious picture of
nothing." He is unsubstantial as his own breath, a vapour which
appeareth for a little while, and then vanisheth away. Selah. Well may
this truth bring us to a pause, like the dead body of Amasa, which,
lying in the way, stopped the hosts of Joab.

[Psa 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)

"Hear my prayer, O Lord." Drown not my pleadings with the sound of thy
strokes. Thou hast heard the clamour of my sins, Lord, hear the laments
of my prayers. "And give ear unto my cry." Here is an advance in
intensity: a cry is more vehement, pathetic, and impassioned, than a
prayer. The main thing was to have the Lord's ear and heart. "Hold not
thy peace at my tears." This is a yet higher degree of importunate
pleading. Who can withstand tears, which are the irresistible weapons of
weakness? How often women, children, beggars, and sinners, have betaken
themselves to tears as their last resort, and therewith have won the
desire of their hearts! - "This shower, blown up by tempest of the
soul," falls not in vain. Tears speak more eloquently than ten thousand
tongues; they act as keys upon the wards of tender hearts, and mercy
denies them nothing, if through them the weeper looks to richer drops,
even to the blood of Jesus. When our sorrows pull up the sluices of our
eyes, God will ere long interpose and turn our mourning into joy. Long
may he be quiet as though he regarded not, but the hour of deliverance
will come, and come like the morning when the dewdrops are plentiful.
"For I am a stranger with thee." Not to thee, but with thee. Like thee,
my Lord, a stranger among the sons of men, an alien from my mother's
children. God made the world, sustains it, and owns it, and yet men
treat him as though he were a foreign intruder; and as they treat the
Master, so do they deal with the servants. "'Tis no surprising thing
that we should be unknown." These words may also mean, "I share the
hospitality of God," like a stranger entertained by a generous host.
Israel was bidden to deal tenderly with the stranger, and the God of
Israel has in much compassion treated us poor aliens with unbounded
liberality. "And a sojourner, as all my lathers were." They knew that
this was not their rest; they passed through life in pilgrim guise, they
used the world as travellers use an inn, and even so do I. Why should we
dream of rest on earth when our fathers' sepulchres are before our eyes?
If they had been immortal, their sons would have had an abiding city
this side the tomb; but as the sires were mortal, so must their
offspring pass away. All of our lineage, without exception, were passing
pilgrims, and such are we. David uses the fleeting nature of our life as
an argument for the Lord's mercy, and it is such a one as God will
regard. We show pity to poor pilgrims, and so will the Lord.

[Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)

"O spare me." Put by thy rod. Turn away thine angry face. Give me
breathing time. Do not kill me. "That I may recover strength." Let me
have sufficient cessation from pain, to be able to take repose and
nourishment, and so recruit my wasted frame. He expects to die soon, but
begs a little respite from sorrow, so as to be able to rally and once
more enjoy life before its close. "Before I go hence, and be no more."
So far as this world is concerned, death is a being no more; such a
state awaits us, we are hurrying onward towards it. May the short
interval which divides us from it be gilded with the sunlight of our
heavenly Father's love. It is sad to be an invalid from the cradle to
the grave, far worse to be under the Lord's chastisements by the month
together, but what are these compared with the endurance of the endless
punishment threatened to those who die in their sins!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 40](psa040)

</div>
