<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa050)  [Next](psa052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 51:0</span></span>

Title - To the chief Musician - Therefore not written for private
meditation only, but for the public service of song. Suitable for the
loneliness of individual penitence, this matchless Psalm is equally well
adapted for an assembly of the poor in spirit. A Psalm of David. It is a
marvel, but nevertheless a fact, that writers have been found to deny
David's authorship of this Psalm, but their objections are frivolous,
the Psalm is David-like all over. It would be far easier to imitate
Milton, Shakespeare, or Tennyson, than David. His style is altogether
sui generis, and it is as easily distinguishable as the touch of
Rafaelle or the colouring of Rubens. "When Nathan the prophet came unto
him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba." When the divine message had
aroused his dormant conscience and made him see the greatness of his
guilt he wrote this Psalm. He had forgotten his Psalmody while he was
indulging his flesh, but he returned to his harp when his spiritual
nature was awakened, and he poured out his song to the accompaniment of
sighs and tears. The great sin of David is not to be excused, but it is
well to remember that his case has an exceptional collection of
specialities in it. He was a man of very strong passions a soldier, and
an Oriental monarch having despotic power; no other king of his time
would have felt any compunction for having acted as he did, and hence
there were not around him those restraints of custom and association
which, when broken through, render the offence the more monstrous. He
never hints at any form of extenuation, nor do we mention these facts in
order to apologise for his sin, which was detestable to the last degree;
but for the warning of others, that they may reflect that the like
licentiousness in themselves at this day might have even a graver guilt
in it than in the erring King of Israel. When we remember his sin, let
us dwell most upon his penitence, and upon the long series of
chastisements which rendered the after part of his life such a mournful
history.

Divisions - It will be simplest to note in the first twelve verses the
penitent's confessions and plea for pardon, and then in the last seven
his anticipatory gratitude and the wall in which he resolves to display
it.

Hints to Preachers

\[The Psalm is upon its surface so full of suggestions for sermons that
I have not attempted to offer any of my own, but have merely inserted a
selection from Mr. G. Rogers and others.\]

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001) -

I. The Prayer.

1\. For mercy, not justice, Mercy is the sinner's attribute - as much a
part of the divine nature as justice. The possibility of sin is implied
in its existence. The actual commission of sin is implied in its
display.

2\. For pardon, not pity merely, but forgiveness.

II\. The plea.

1\. For the pardon of great sins on account of great mercies, and
lovingkindness.

2\. Many sins on account of multitude of mercies.

3\. Hell-deserving sins on account of tender mercies. We who have sinned
are human, he who pardons is divine.

"Great God, thy nature hath no bound,

So let thy pardoning love be found."

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003) -

I. Confession. "I acknowledge," etc.

II\. Humiliation, not a mere confession with the lips, but ever before
me - in its guilt - defilement - consequences in this life and
hereafter.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), [Psa
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011), [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), [Psa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017) -

I. Scripture estimate of sin.

1\. Personal accountability - "My sin."

2\. Estimated as hateful to God - "Against thee," etc.

3\. Sin estimated as separation from God.

II\. Spiritual restoration. First step - Sacrifice of a broken spirit.
Last step - Spirit of liberty. "Thy free spirit."

\- F. W. Robertson.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004) -

1\. The person - "I."

2\. The commission - "done."

3\. The trespass - "evil."

4\. The particularity - "this."

5\. The daring of it - "in thy sight."

\- Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004) - "Against thee."

1\. Thee, an holy God - a God of pure eyes, and that cannot endure to
behold iniquity.

2\. Thee, a just God-who will punish sin.

3\. Thee, an Almighty God.

4\. Thee, a gracious God.

\- T. Horton.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004) -

I. Self-condemnation.

1\. For the greatness of sin. Not against self merely, or fellow men,
but God, This includes all guilt, for all is against him.

2\. Its effrontery, "in thy sight."

II\. Divine justification.

1\. In the permission of sin.

2\. In its punishment.

3\. In its forgiveness. God must be justified when he justifies the
ungodly.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006) - See T. Goodwin's Treatise,
entitled, "An Unregenerate Man's Guiltiness before God, in respect of
Sin and Punishment." Bk ix cap i if. \[Nichol's edition, Vol. X., p. 324
et seq.\]

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007) - Here is,

I. Faith in the fact of an atonement for sin. "I shall be clean."

II\. Faith in the method of its application. "Purge me," etc. Sprinkled
as the blood of sacrifices.

III\. Faith in its efficacy. "I shall be whiter," etc.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010) -

I. The change to be effected.

1\. A clean heart.

2\. A right spirit.

II\. The power by which it is accomplished.

1\. A creative power, such as created the world at first.

2\. A renewing power, such as continually renews the face of the earth.

III\. The acquirement of these blessings. The prayer, "Create," etc.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011) (first clause) - I am not
cast away, and would be thankful. I deserve to be cast away, and ought
to be penitential. I am afraid of being cast away, and must be
prayerful. "Cast me not away."

1\. From thy protecting presence into danger.

2\. From thy loving presence into wrath.

3\. From thy joyous presence into distress.

4\. From thy affluent presence into destitution.

5\. From thy gracious presence into despair.

Sin hurries us away from God; grace hastens us into his embrace: the
former severs, and the latter unites, God and the soul. - W. Jackson.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011) -

I. There is often much comfort in much grief. "Cast me not," etc. A
consciousness of still having the divine presence and a dread of losing
it, prompts the prayer.

II\. There is often much faith in much fear. "Take not," etc. Faith in
the spirit works within him while he fears.

[Psa 51:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012) - A threefold desire:

1\. To be happy - "Restore," etc.

2\. To be consistent - "Uphold," etc.

3\. To be useful - "Then will I teach," etc.

\- W. Jackson.

[Psa 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013) -

I. It is not our duty to seek the conversion of others until we are
converted ourselves.

II\. The greater enjoyment we have in the ways of God, the more
faithfully and earnestly we shall make them known to others.

III\. The more faithfully and earnestly we make them known to others the
more they will be influenced by them.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015) -

I. Confession. His lips are sealed on account -

1\. Of his fall - and well they might be.

2\. Of natural timidity.

3\. Of want of zeal.

II\. Petition. "Open thou," etc. Not my understanding merely and heart,
but "lips."

III\. Resolution. Then he would speak freely in God's praise.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015) -

I. When God does not open our lips we had better keep them closed.

II\. When he does open them we ought not to close them.

III\. When he opens them it is not to speak in our own praise, and
seldom in praise of others, but always in his own praise.

IV\. We should use this prayer whenever we are about to speak in his
name. "O Lord, open," etc.

[Psa 51:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016) -

I. Men would gladly do something towards their own salvation if they
could. "Thou desirest not," etc., else would I give it.

II\. All that they can do is not of the least avail. All the ceremonial
observances of Jewish or Gentile churches could not procure pardon for
the least transgression of the moral law.

III\. The only offering of man which God will not despise is a broken
and a contrite heart.

IV\. All other requirement for his salvation God himself will provide.

[Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018) -

I. For whom is the prayer offered - for the church or Zion?

1\. Next to our own welfare we should seek the welfare of Zion.

2\. All should seek it by prayer.

II\. For what is the prayer offered?

1\. The kind of good, not worldly or ecclesiastical, but spiritual.

2\. The measure of good. "In thy good pleasure. Thine own love to it,
and what thou hast already done for it.

3\. The continuance of good. "Build," etc. Its doctrines, graces, zeal.

[Psa 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019) -

I. When we are accepted of God our offerings are accepted. "Then," etc.

II\. We should then make the richest offerings in our power, our time,
talents, influence, etc.

1\. Holy obedience.

2\. Self-sacrifices, not half offerings, but whole "burnt-offerings;"
not lambs merely, but "bullocks."

3\. Zeal for divine ordinances. "Upon thine altar."

III\. God will take pleasure in such services. "Then shalt thou be
pleased."

1\. Because from his own redeemed.

2\. Because given in the name of the Redeemer. With such sacrifices God
is well pleased.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

"After he had gone in to Bathsheba." This was the devil's nest-egg that
caused many sins to be laid, one to, and upon another. See the woful
chain of David's lust, 2 Sam. 11 and 12 - John Trapp.

Title

"When Nathan the prophet came unto him as he (i.e., David) had come unto
Bathsheba." The significant repetition of the phrase came unto, is lost
in the English and most other versions. "As" is not a mere particle of
time, simply equivalent to when, but suggests the ideas of analogy,
proportion, and retaliation. - J. A. Alexander.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is the brightest gem in the whole book, and contains
instruction so large, and doctrine so precious, that the tongue of
angels could not do justice to the full development. - Victorinus
Strigelius, 1524-1569.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is often and fitly called The Sinner's Guide. In some of its
versions it often helps the returning sinner. Athanasius recommends to
some Christians, to whom he was writing, to repeat it when they awake at
night. All evangelical churches are familiar with it. Luther says,
"There is no other Psalm which is oftener sung or prayed in the church."
This is the first Psalm in which we have the word Spirit used in
application to the Holy Ghost. - William S. Plumer.

Whole Psalm

I cannot doubt the prophetic bearing of this Psalm upon the nation of
Israel. In the latter day they shall consider their ways: repentance and
self-loathing will be the result. Blood-guiltiness heavier than that of
David has to be removed from that nation. They will become the teachers
of the Gentiles when first the iniquity of their own transgression has
been purged away. - Arthur Pridham.

Whole Psalm

This is the most deeply affecting of all the Psalms, and I am sure the
one most applicable to me. It seems to have been the effusion of a soul
smarting under the sense of a recent and great transgression. My God,
whether recent or not, give me to feel the enormity of my manifold
offences, and remember not against me the sins of my youth. What a mine
of rich matter and expression for prayer! Wash, cleanse me, O Lord, and
let my sin and my sinfulness be ever before me. Let me feel it chiefly
as sin against thee, that my sorrow may be of the godly sort. Give me to
feel the virulence of my native corruption, purge me from it thoroughly,
and put truth into my inward parts, that mine may be a real turning from
sin unto the Saviour. Create me anew, O God. Withdraw not thy Spirit.
Cause me to rejoice in a present salvation. Deliver me, O God, from the
blood-guiltiness of having offended any of thy little ones; and so open
my lips that I may speak of the wondrous things thou hast done for my
soul! May I offer up spiritual sacrifices; and oh! let not any
delinquencies of mine bring a scandal upon thy church; but do thou so
purify and build her up, that even her external services, freed from all
taint of corruption or hypocrisy, may be well-pleasing in thy sight. -
Thomas Chalmers.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Have mercy upon me, O God." I tremble and blush to mention my name, for
my former familiarities with thee only make me more confounded at being
recognised by thee after my guilt. I therefore say not, "Lord, remember
David," as on a happier occasion; nor as propitiating thee, I used to
say, to thy "servant," or, "to the son of thy handmaid." I suggest
nothing that should recall my former relation to thee, and so enhance my
wickedness. Ask not, then, Lord, who I am, but only forgive me who
confess my sin, condemn my fault, and beseech thy pity. "Have mercy upon
me, O God." I dare not say my God, for that were presumption. I have
lost thee by sin, I have alienated myself from thee by following the
enemy, and therefore am unclean. I dare not approach thee, but standing
afar off and lifting up my voice with great devotion and contrition of
heart, I cry and say, "Have mercy upon me, O God." - From "A Commentary
on the Seven Penitential Psalms, chiefly from ancient sources." By the
Right Rev. A. P. Forbes, Bishop of Brechin, 1857.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Have mercy." The Hebrew word here translated have mercy, signifieth
without cause or desert; [Psa 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019);
[Psa 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004); [Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023); and freely, without paying any
price, [Exo 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#011). And it is made use
of in [Lev 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008), where Noah is said to
have found grace in the eyes of the Lord, that is special favour, such
as the Lord beareth to his chosen in Christ Jesus. - Charles de
Coetlogon, A. M., in "The Portraiture of the Christian Penitent," 1775.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Mercy, lovingkindness," "tender mercies." I cannot but observe here,
the gradation in the sense of the three words made use of, to express
the divine compassion, and the propriety of the order in which they are
placed, which would be regarded as a real excellence and beauty in any
classical writer. The first, הנּגי, denotes that kind of affection which
is expressed by moaning over any object that we love and pity that
στοργὴ, natural affection and tenderness, which even brute creatures
discover to their young ones, by the several noises which they
respectively make over them; and particularly the shrill noise of the
camel, by which it testifies its love to its foal. The second, כּהסדּך,
denotes a strong proneness, a ready, large, and liberal disposition to
goodness and compassion powerfully prompting to all instances of
kindness and bounty; flowing as freely and plentifully as milk into the
breasts, or as waters from a perpetual fountain. This denotes a higher
degree of goodness than the former. The third, דהמיך, denotes what the
Greeks express by σπλαγχϚίζεσφαι; that most tender pity which we signify
by the moving of the heart and bowels, which argues the highest degree
of compassion of which human nature is susceptible. And how reviving is
the belief and consideration of these abundant and tender compassions of
God to one in David's circumstances, whose mind laboured under the
burthen of the most heinous complicated guilt, and the fear of the
divine displeasure and vengeance! - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"According to the multitude." Men are greatly terrified at the multitude
of their sins, but here is a comfort - our God hath multitude of
mercies. If our sins be in number as the hairs of our head, God's
mercies are as the stars of heaven; and as he is an infinite God, so his
mercies are infinite; yea, so far are his mercies above our sins, as he
himself is above us poor sinners. By this that the Psalmist seeketh for
multitude of mercies, he would show how deeply he was wounded with his
manifold sins, that one seemed a hundred. Thus it is with us, so long as
we are under Satan's guiding, a thousand seem but one; but if we betake
ourselves to God's service, one will seem a thousand. - Archibald
Symson.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Tender mercies," or, according to Zanchy in his treatise upon the
attributes of God, such a kind of affection as parents feel when they
see their children in any extremity. [Kg1
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#026). - Charles de Coetlogon.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Blot out my transgressions." מתה, mecheh, wipe out. There is reference
here to an indictment: the Psalmist knows what it contains; he pleads
guilty, but begs that the writing may be defaced; that a proper fluid
may be applied to the parchment, to discharge the ink, that no record of
it may ever appear against him: and this only the mercy, lovingkindness,
and tender compassions of the Lord can do. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Blot out my transgressions." What the Psalmist alludes to is not, as
Mr. LeClerc imagines, debts entered into a book, and so blotted out of
it when forgiven; but the wiping or cleansing of a dish, so as nothing
afterwards remains in it. The meaning of the petition is, that God would
entirely and absolutely forgive him, so as that no part of the guilt he
had contracted might remain, and the punishment of it might be wholly
removed. - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Blot out," or, as it is used in [Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014), utterly extirpate, so as that
there shall not be any remembrance of them for ever. [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Isa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022). - Charles de Coetlogon.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"My transgressions." Conscience, when it is healthy, ever speaks thus:
"My transgressions." It was not the guilt of them that tempted you: they
have theirs; but each as a separate agent, has his own degree of guilt.
Yours is your own: the violation of your own and not another's sense of
duty; solitary, awful, unabated, adhering to you alone of all the
spirits of the universe. - Frederick William Robertson.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001), [Psa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Transgressions".. "iniquity" ..."sin." 1. It is transgression, פּשׁע,
pesha, rebellion. 2. It is iniquity, עין, avon, crooked dealing. 3. It
is sin, הטּאח, chattath, error and wandering. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me." David prays that the Lord would wash him; therefore sin
defiles, and he was made foul and filthy by his sin; and to wash him
much, and to rinse and bathe him, to show that sin had exceedingly
defiled him and stained him both in soul and body, and made him
loathsome, and therefore he desireth to be washed, and cleansed, and
purged from the pollution of sin. Hence we may learn what a vile,
filthy, and miserable thing sin is in the sight of God: it staineth a
man's body, it staineth a man's soul, it maketh him more vile than the
vilest creature that lives: no toad is so vile and loathsome in the
sight of man, as a sinner, stained and defiled with sin, is in the sight
of God, till he be cleansed and washed from it in the blood of Christ. -
Samuel Smith.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me," etc כּבּס is peculiarly applied to the washing and cleansing
of garments as fullers wash and cleanse their cloths. [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007); [Exo
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010); [Lev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015). - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me throughly from mine iniquity." No other washing will do it but
lava tu, wash thou; so foul, as it will need his washing throughly. -
Samuel Page, in "David's Broken Heart," 1646.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me throughly." Heb multiply to wash me; by which phrase he implies
the greatness of his guilt, and the insufficiency of all legal washings,
and the absolute necessity of some other and better thing to wash him,
even of God's grace, and the blood of Christ. - Matthew Pool.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me... cleanse me." But why should David speak so superfluously?
use two words when one would serve? For if we be cleansed, what matter
is it whether it be by washing or no? Yet David had great reason for
using both words; for he requires not that God would cleanse him by
miracle, but by the ordinary way of cleansing, and this was washing; he
names therefore washing as the means, and cleansing as the end: he names
washing as the work a-doing, and cleansing as the work done; he names
washing as considering the agent, and cleansing as applying it to the
patient; and indeed, as in the figure of the law there was not, so in
the verity of the gospel there is not any ordinary means of cleansing,
but only by washing; and therefore out of Christ our Saviour's side
there flowed water and blood. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Cleanse me from my sin." Observe, it is from the guilt, and not from
the punishment, that he thus asks deliverance. That the sword should
never depart from his house; that the sin, begun, not only secretly even
in its full accomplishment, but far more secretly in the recesses of
David's heart, should be punished before all Israel and before the sun;
that the child so dear to David should be made one great punishment of
his offence; these things, so far as this Psalm is concerned, might, or
might not be. It is of the offence against God; of the defiling,
although it were not then so expressly declared, God's temple by
impurity, that David speaks. - Ambrose, in J. M. Neale's Commentary.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Sin." The original word signifies to miss an aim, as an archer does who
shoots short of his mark, beyond, or beside it. It is also used for
treading aside, or tripping, in the act of walking. In a spiritual sense
it denotes deviation from a rule, whether by omission or commission. -
Thomas T. Biddulph, A. M., in Lectures on the Fifty-first Psalm, 1835.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

Sin is filthy to think of, filthy to speak of, filthy to hear of, filthy
to do; in a word, there is nothing in it but vileness. - Archibald
Symson.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"For I acknowledge my transgressions," etc. To acknowledge our
transgressions, there is confession; and to have our sin ever before us,
there is conviction and contrition. To acknowledge our transgressions, I
say, is to confess our sins; to call them to mind, to bring them back to
our remembrance what we can; to own them with shame, and to declare them
with sorrow; to reckon them up one by one, to give in a particular
account of them, as far as our memory will serve, and to spread them
before the Lord, as Hezekiah did Rabshakeh's letter, and in an humble
sense of our own vileness to implore his goodness, that he would
multiply his mercies over us, as we have multiplied our transgressions
against him, in the free and full forgiveness of them all. To have our
sin ever before us, is throughly to be convinced of it, to be
continually troubled in mind about it, to be truly humbled under the
sense of it, and to be possest of those dreads and terrors of conscience
which may never let us rest or enjoy any quiet within our own breast
till we have reconciled ourselves to a gracious God for it. - Adam
Littleton.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"I acknowledge my, transgressions: and my sin is ever before me." There
cannot be agnitio if there be not cognitio peccati, an acknowledging,
unless there precede a knowledge of sin. David puts them together. If
our sins be not before us, how can we set them before God? And
therefore, to the right exercise into our lives, that we may be enabled
to see our sins. He that hath not yet asked himself that question, Quid
feci? What have I done? can never make the confession, sic feci, thus
and thus have I done; and in this respect I would, though not require,
yet advise it as a pious and prudent practice, and that which I doubt
not but many Christians have found benefit by, to keep a constant daily
catalogue, as of mercies received, so of sins committed. - Nathanael
Hardy.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"I," "my," "my." David did not think it sufficient to acknowledge that
the whole human race were sinners; but as if he stood alone in the
world, and was the only offender in it, he says, "'I acknowledge my
transgressions; and my sin is ever before me." - Charles de Coetlogon.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"My sin." David owneth his sin, and confesseth it his own. Here is our
natural wealth: what can we call our own but sin? Our food and raiment,
the necessaries of life, are borrowings. We came hungry and naked into
the world, we brought none of these with us, and we deserved none of
them here. Our sin came with us, as David after confesseth. We have
right of inheritance in sin, taking it by traduction and transmission
from our parents; we have right of possession. So Job: "Thou makest me
to possess the sins of my youth." - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"My sin." It is sin, as sin, not its punishment here, nor hereafter, not
simply any of its evil consequences; but sin, the sin against God, the
daring impiety of my breaking the good and holy law of this living,
loving God. - Thomas Alexander, D.D., in "The Penitent's Prayer," 1861.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"Ever before me." Sorrow for sin exceeds sorrow for suffering, in the
continuance and durableness thereof: the other, like a landflood,
quickly come, quickly gone; this is a continual dropping or running
river, keeping a constant stream. "My sins," saith David, "are ever
before me;" so also is the sorrow for sin in the soul of a child of God,
morning, evening, day, night, when sick, when sound, feasting, fasting,
at home, abroad, ever within him. This grief begins at his conversion,
continues all his life, ends only at his death. - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"Before me." Coram populo, before the people; shame to him: coram
ecclesia, before the church; grief to them: coram inimicis, before the
enemies; joy to them: coram Deo, before God; anger against him: coram
Nathane, before Nathan; a chiding. But if any hope of repentance and
amendment, it is in peccatum meum coram me, my sin before me. Here is
the distress of a sinner, he never discerneth how unhappy he is, till
his sin is before him. - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight." This verse is differently expounded by different persons, and it
has ever been considered, that this one little point is the greatest
difficulty that is met with in the whole Psalm. Although, therefore, I
leave it to others to go according to their own interpretations, yet I
have a good hope that I shall be enabled to give thee true and genuine
meaning of the text. This, then, I would first of all advise the reader
to do - to bear in mind that which I observed at the beginning of the
Psalm, that David is here speaking in the person of all the saints, and
not in his own person only, nor in his own person as an adulterer.
Although I do not say it might not be, that it was this fall which, as a
medium, brought him under the knowledge of himself and of his whole
human nature, and made him think thus: "Behold! I, so holy a king, who
have with so much pious devotedness observed the law and the worship of
God, have been so tempted and overcome by the inbred evil and sin of my
flesh, that I have murdered an innocent man, and have for adulterous
purposes taken away his wife! And is not this an evident proof that my
nature is more deeply infected and corrupted by sin than ever I thought
it was? I who was yesterday chaste am today an adulterer! I who
yesterday had hands innocent of blood, am today a man of
blood-guiltiness!" And it might be that in this way he derived the
feeling sense of his entire sinfulness, from his fall into adultery and
murder, and from thence drew this conclusion - that neither the tree nor
the fruits of human nature were good, but that the whole was so deformed
and lost by sin, that there was nothing sound left in the whole of
nature. This I would have the reader bear in mind first of all, if he
desire to have the pure meaning of this passage. In the next place, the
grammatical construction is to be explained, which seems to be somewhat
obscure. For what the translator has rendered by the preterperfect,
ought to be the present: "Against thee only do I sin;" that is, I know
that before thee I am nothing but a sinner; or, before thee I do nothing
but evil continually; that is, my whole life is evil and depraved on
account of sin. I cannot boast before thee of merit or of righteousness,
but am evil altogether, and in thy sight this is my character - I do
evil. I have sinned, I do sin, and shall sin to the end of the chapter.
- Martin Luther.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"Against thee, thee only have I sinned." Is there not matter here to
make us at a stand? For, to say, "Against thee have I sinned," is most
just and fit; but to say, "Against thee only I have sinned," seems
something hard. It had perhaps been a fit speech in the mouth of our
first parent Adam; he might justly have said to God, "Against thee only
have I sinned," who never sinned against any other; but for us to say
it, who commit sins daily against our neighbours, and especially for
David to say it, who had committed two notorious sins against his
neighhour and faithful friend Uriah, what unfitter speech could possibly
be devised? But is it not that these actions of David were great wrongs
indeed, and enormous iniquities against Uriah; but can we properly say
they were sins against Uriah? For what is sin, but a transgression of
God's law? And how then can sin be committed against any but against him
only whose law we transgress? Or is it, that it may justly be said,
"Against thee only have I sinned," because against others perhaps in a
base tenure, yet only against God in capite? Or is it, that David might
justly say to God, "Against thee only have I sinned;" because from
others he might appeal, as being a king and having no superior; but no
appealing from God, as being King of kings and supreme Lord over all? Or
is it that we may justly say, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned,"
seeing that Christ hath taken and still takes all our sins upon him; and
every sin we commit is as a new burthen laid upon his back, and upon his
back only? Or is it, lastly, that I may justly say, "Against thee, thee
only, have I sinned," because in thy sight only I have done it? For from
others, I could hide it, and did conceal it? But what can be hidden from
thy all-seeing eye? And yet if this had been the worst, that I had
sinned only against thee, though this had been bad enough, and
infinitely too much, yet it might perhaps have admitted reconcilement;
but to do this evil, "in thy sight," as if I should say, I would do it
though thou stand thyself and look on, and as if in defiance; what sin
so formidable? what sin can be thought of so unpardonable? A sin of
infirmity may admit apology; a sin of ignorance may find out excuse; but
a sin of defiance can find no defence. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"Against thee, thee only, have I sinned." There is a godly sorrow which
leads a man to life; and this sorrow is wrought in a man by the Spirit
of God, and in the heart of the godly; that he mourns for sin because it
has displeased God, who is so dear and so sweet a Father to him. And
suppose he had neither a heaven to lose, nor a hell to gain, yet he is
sad and sorrowful in heart because he has grieved God. - John Welch,
1576-1622.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"Have I sinned." Me, me, adsum, qui feci: Here, here am I that did it. I
whom thou tookest from following the ewes great with lambs, whose
sheep-hook thou hast changed for a sceptre, whose sheep for thine own
people Israel, upon whose head thou hast set a crown of pure gold. I
whom thou didst lately invest in the full monarchy of thy people; to
whom thou gavest the possession of Jerusalem from the Jebusites; I who
settled peace, religion, and courts of justice in Jerusalem, that thou
mightest be served and honoured, and I would fain have built thee an
house there; Ego, I, to whom God committed the trust of government to
rule others, the trust of judgment to punish others, as king over his
inheritance. I, to whom God committed the care of others' souls to guide
them by his word, to direct them by good counsel, to allure them by his
gracious promises, to terrify them by his threatenings, as the Lord's
holy prophet. I, who both ways as king and prophet should have been an
example of holiness and righteousness to all Israel. Nathan said, Tu es
homo, thou art the man, in just accusation, and now David saith, Ego sum
homo, I am the man, in humble confession. - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"1 have done this evil." We may find this in experience, that there be
many who will not stick at a general speech that they be sinners, and
yet will scarcely be known of one special evil to account for. If you
fall with them into the several commandments, they will be ready to
discover a conceit that there is scarce one that they are faulty in. In
the first commandment they acknowledge no God but one; in the second,
they do not worship images; in the third, they swear as little as any,
and never but for the truth; in the fourth they keep their church on
Sundays as well as most; in the second table, there is neither treason,
nor murder, nor their, nor whoredom, nor the like gross sin, but
concerning it they are ready to protest their innocency. He that shall
hear them in particular, I do not see how he shall believe them in the
general, when they say they be sinners; for when you arraign them at the
several commandments they are ready to plead not guilty to them all. So
long as men are thus without sense and apprehension of particulars,
there is no hope of bringing them ever unto good. Happy is he that is
pricked to the heart with the feeling of "this evil." The truth of
repentance for that one, will bring him to a thorough repentance for his
whole estate. This one evil throughly understood, brought David on his
knees, brake his heart, melted his soul, made him cry for pardon, beg
for purging, and importune the Lord for a free spirit to establish him.
- Samuel Hieron, in "David's Penitential Psalm opened," 1617.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"In thy sight." David was so bent upon his sin, as that the majesty and
presence of God did not awe him at all: this is a great aggravation of
sin, and which makes it to be so much the more heinous. For a thief to
steal in the very sight of the judge, is the highest piece of impudence
that may be; and thus it is for any man to offend in the sight of God
and not to be moved with it. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"That thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when
thou judgest." But hath not David a defence for it here, and that a very
just one? For, in saying, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, that
thou mightest be justified in thy saying," doth he not speak as though
he had sinned to do God a pleasure? therefore sinned that God might be
justified? And what can be more said for justifying of God? But far is
it from David to have any such meaning; his words import not a lessening
but an aggravating of his sin, as spoken rather thus: Because a judge
may justly be taxed of injustice if he lay a greater punishment upon an
offender than the offence deserves; therefore to clear thee, O God, from
all possibility of erring in this kind, I acknowledge my sins to be so
heinous, my offences so grievous, that thou canst never be unmerciful in
punishing though thy punishing should be never so unmerciful. For how
can a judge pass the bounds of equity where the delinquent hath passed
all bounds of iniquity? and what error can there be in thy being severe
when the greatness of my guilt is a justification of severity? That thou
canst not lay so heavy a doom upon me, which I have not deserved? Thou
canst not pronounce so hard a sentence against me, which I am not worthy
of. If thou judge me to torture, it is but mildness; if to die the
death, it is but my due; if to die everlastingly, I cannot say it were
unjust. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

"Behold I was shapen in iniquity," etc." He said not, "Behold, this evil
have I done," but "Behold I was conceived in sin," etc. He says not,
"Behold, I, David," a king, that have received such-and-such mercies
from God, who would have given me more (as God told him), who had that
entire communion with him, and graces from him, I, even I, have done
this evil. No; he keeps it in till he came to this, and then his heart
could hold no longer: "Oh, behold I was conceived in sin." His
debasement was at his auge here. And to whom is it he uttered this
behold? What, to man? No; his meaning is not to call on men, q.d., O ye
sons of men, behold! That is but his secondary aim, arising out of his
having penned it, and delivered it unto the church; but when he uttered
it, it was to God, or rather afore God, and yet not as calling on God to
behold, for that needed not. David had elsewhere said, "God looked
down," etc., "and beheld the sons of men," when speaking of this very
corruption. He therefore knew God beheld it sufficiently; but he utters
it afore God, or, as spoken of himself between God and himself, thereby
to express his own astonishment and amazement at the sight and
conviction of this corruption, and at the sight of what a monster he saw
himself to be in the sight of God in respect of this sin. It was a
behold of astonishment at himself, as before the great and holy God; and
therefore it was he seconds and follows it with another behold made unto
God: "Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts." And it is as if
he had said in both, Oh, how am I in every way overwhelmed, whilst with
one eye cast on myself I see how infinitely corrupt I am in the very
constitution of my nature; and with the other eye I behold and consider
what an infinite holy God thou art in thy nature and being, and what an
holiness it is which thou requirest. I am utterly overwhelmed in the
intuition of both these, and able to behold no more, nor look up unto
thee, O holy God! - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

"Behold, I was shapen in iniquity," etc. We are not to suppose that
David here reflects upon his parents as the medium of transmitting to
him the elements of moral evil: and that by the introduction of the
doctrine of original sin he intended to extenuate the enormity of his
own crimes. On the contrary, we are to regard him as afflicting himself
by the humbling consideration that his very nature was fallen, that his
transgressions flowed from a heart naturally at enmity with God; that he
was not a sinner by accident, but by a depravity of purpose extending to
the inmost desires and purposes of the soul; that there was "a law in
his members, warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the law of sin and death" ([Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)); and that he was one of a race
of guilty beings, none of whom could plead an exemption from an evil
heart of unbelief, ready at all times to depart from the living God.
Till we see sin in the fountain of the heart, we shall never truly mourn
over it in the life and conversation. - John Morison.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

"Behold, I was shapen in iniquity." He is not low enough down yet, he
must come lower. It is not enough for him to confess that the water is
filthy at the pool; he goes back to the source, and confesses that the
whole river is polluted up to its head. The source is unclean; the very
spring wells forth foul waters. - Thomas Alexander.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

"I was shapen in iniquity." I shall not easily be persuaded to think
that parents, who are sinners themselves and too much under the
influence of bad affections and passions, will be very likely to produce
children without transmitting to them some of those disorders and
corruptions of nature with which they themselves are infected. And if
this be a difficulty, I would beg leave to observe that it is a
difficulty which affects natural as well as revealed religion. Since we
must take human nature as it is, and if it be really in a state of
disorder and corruption, and cannot be otherwise, considering the common
law of its production, the difficulty must have been as ancient as the
first man that was born; and therefore can be no objection against the
truth of revelation, but it must be equally so against natural religion,
which must equally allow the thing, if it be in reality a fact, with
revelation itself. - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

Infants are no innocents, being born with original sin; the first sheet
wherein they are wrapped is woven of sin, shame, blood, and filth. [Eze
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004), etc. They are said to sin as
they were in the loins of Adam, just as Levi is said to pay tithes to
Melchisedek, even in the loins of his forefather Abraham ([Heb
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009), [Heb
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#010)); otherwise infants would not
die, for death is the wages of sin ([Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)); and the reign of death is
procured by the reign of sin, which hath reigned over all mankind except
Christ. All are sinners, infected with the guilt and filth of sin; the
rot (according to the vulgar saying) overrunneth the whole flock. Hence
David reflects upon original sin as the cause of all his actuals,
saying, "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother
conceive me." Thus man's malady begins betimes, even in our conception:
this subtle serpent sowed his tares very early, so that we are all "born
in sin." [Joh 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034). - Christopher
Ness's "Divine Legacy," 1700.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

Notwithstanding all that Grotius and others have said to the contrary, I
believe David to speak here of what is commonly called original sin; the
propensity to evil which every man brings into the world with him, and
which is the fruitful source whence all transgression proceeds. - Adam
Clarke.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"Behold." Before he entereth on any of the parts of the verse he useth
the particle of admiration, "Behold;" which he never useth but in some
remarkable manner, thereby the more to raise us up to the contemplation
of such great matters to be told. - Archibald Symson.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"Thou desirest truth in the inward parts." Thou lovest truth, not
shadows or images, but realities; thou lovest truth in the inward parts,
inside truth, a true heart, a pure conscience: he is a Christian who is
one inwardly. [Rom 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029). - John Ball.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"Truth in the inward parts." A great French pear is called le bon
Chretien, the good Christian, because they say it is never rotten at the
core. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"In the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom." Piscator, in his
annotations on this Psalm, puts this sense upon it, that David should
bless God for having made him to know this special wisdom in this hidden
thing or matter, and had brought the knowledge thereof home, as a point
of saving wisdom, to the hidden man of his heart, so as to see fully and
clearly this native corruption as the cause of all sin and on that
account to cause him to lay it to heart. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"In the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom." It is one thing
to be wise headed and wise tongued, and another to be wise hearted, and
therefore in Scripture nothing more ordinary than to set forth wisdom
that is true indeed by the heart. God himself is said to be wise of
heart. Foolish creatures are like Ephraim, "a silly dove without heart."
They may have head enough, notion enough, flashing light, appearing to
others enough, but they are without a heart; they have not the great
work there, a new head and an old heart, a full head and an empty heart,
a light and burning profession, and a dark, dead, and cold heart; he
that takes up in such a condition is a fool and an errant fool. - John
Murcot, 1657.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"And in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom." Some read
it, "In the hidden part thou hadst made me to know wisdom;" that thou
hadst done, but I have fallen from my high state, marred thy handiwork.
"By one plunge into lust I have fallen and fouled myself." - Arthur
Jackson.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

The copulative particle which connects the two clauses, implies the
correspondence between the revelation of the divine will on the one part
and the desire and prayer of the penitent heart on the other. "Thou
desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt
make me to know wisdom." "What I want thou hast promised to give."
Repentance and faith are the gifts of God, and the awakened mind is
conscious that they are so. - Thomas T. Biddulph.

[Psa 51:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

The right conviction of sin comprehends its being acknowledged not only
in our works, but also in our entire being. - Augustus F. Tholuck.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Purge me with hyssop." Do I well to prescribe to God with that he shall
purge me, as though I knew all God's medicines as well as himself? and
which is worse, I to prescribe and he to administer? But excuse me, O my
soul, it is not I that prescribe it to God, it is God that prescribes it
to me; for hyssop is his own receipt, and one of the ingredients
prescribed by himself to make the water of separation for curing the
leprosy.... I must confess I was glad at heart when I first heard hyssop
spoken of; to think I should be purged so-gently, and with a thing that
may so easily be had, for hyssop grows in every garden; and then I
thought I might go fetch it thence and purge myself, but now I perceive
this is not the hyssop of which Solomon writ when he writ from the cedar
to the hyssop; but this hyssop is rather the herb grace, which never
grew in garden but in that of Paradise, and which none can fetch thence
unless God himself deliver it. The truth is, this hyssop was sometimes a
cedar; the highest of all trees became the lowest of all shrubs, only to
be made this hyssop for us: for Christ indeed is the true hyssop, and
his blood the juice of hyssop that only can purge away my sins. - Sir
Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Purge me with hyssop." תּחטּאגי. Properly, expiate my sin with hyssop.
The Psalmist alludes to the purification from the leprosy ([Lev
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#052)), or from the touch of a dead
body ([Num 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#019)), both of which were
to be done by the sprinkling of water and other things with hyssop. -
Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Hyssop." The lasaf or asaf, the caper plant, the bright green creeper
which climbs out of the fissures of the rocks in the Sinaitic valleys,
has been identified on grounds of great probability with the "hyssop" or
ezob of Scripture; and thus explains whence came the green branches
used, even in the desert, for sprinkling the water over the tents of the
Israelites. - Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, in "Sinai and Palestine." 1864.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Hyssop." Between twenty and thirty different plants have been proposed,
but no one of them comes so near the above requirements as the caper
plant (Capparis spinosa). It grows "out of the wall;" its stalks supply
both bunch and rod admirably fitted for the ends indicated; and it has
ever been esteemed in the East as possessing cleansing properties. -
John Duns, D.D., in "Biblical Natural Science."

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Hyssop." What a pity that Solomon's botany is lost, in which he spoke
of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon to the hyssop that springeth
out of the wall! The cedar we know, but what is the "hyssop" of the
royal botanist? Mr. B - - , French consul of this city \[Sidon\], and an
enthusiastic botanist, exhibited to me two varieties of hyssop; one,
called zatar by the Arabs, having the fragrance of thyme, with a hot
pungent taste, and long, slender stems. A bunch of these would answer
very well for sprinkling the paschal and sacrificial blood on the lintel
and posts of the doors, and over the persons and houses cleansed from
the leprosy. Mr. B - - , however, thinks that a very small green plant,
like a moss which covers old walls in damp places, is the "hyssop" of
Solomon. This I doubt. The other kind also springs out of walls, those
of the gardens especially, and was much more likely to attract the
attention of the royal student. - W. M. Thomson, D.D., in "The Land and
the Book."

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

The paraphrase of this verse in the Chaldee is: "Thou wilt sprinkle me
like the priest, which sprinkleth the unclean with the purifying waters,
with hyssop, with the ashes of an heifer, and I shall be clean." - John
Morison.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"I shall be whiter than snow." But how is this possible? All the dyers
upon earth cannot dye a red into white; and how, then, is it possible
that my sins which are as red as scarlet should ever be made as white as
snow? Indeed such retrogradation is no work of human art; it must be
only his doing who brought the sun ten degrees back in the dial of Ahaz:
for God hath a nitre of grace that can bring not only the redness of
scarlet sins, but even the blackness of deadly sins, into its native
purity and whiteness again. But say it be possible, yet what need is
there of so great a whiteness, as to be "whiter than snow"? seeing snow
is not as paries dealbatus, a painted wall, white without and foul
within; but it is white, intus et in cute, within and without,
throughout and all over; and what eye so curious but such a whiteness
may content? Yet such a whiteness will not serve, for I may be as white
as snow and yet a leper still; as it is said of Gehazi that "he went
from Elisha a leper as white as snow;" it must be therefore whiter than
snow. And such a whiteness it is that God's washing works upon us, makes
within us; for no snow is so white in the eyes of men as a soul cleansed
from sin is in the sight of God. And yet, a whiter whiteness than this
too; for being purged from sin we shall, induere stolam album, put on
the white robe; and this is a whiteness as much whiter than snow as
angelical whiteness is more than elemental. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

In the Hebrew language there are two words to express the different
kinds of washing, and they are always used with the strictest propriety;
the one, to signify that kind of washing which pervades the substance of
the thing washed, and cleanses it thoroughly; and the other to express
that kind of washing which only cleanses the surface of a substance
which the water cannot penetrate. The former is applied to the washing
of clothes; the latter is used for washing some part of the body. By a
beautiful and strong metaphor, David uses the former word in this and
the second verse: "Wash me throughly from mine iniquity and cleanse me
from my sin;" "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow." So in [Jer
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014), the same word is applied to the
heart. - Richard Mant.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"Make me to hear joy and gladness." This is the exceeding great love of
the Lord toward his children, that he hath not only provided a sure
salvation for them through the remission of their sins in Christ Jesus,
but also seals up in their heart the testimony thereof by his Holy
Spirit of adoption, and that for their present consolation, lest they
should be swallowed up of heaviness through continual temptations.
Though he speak not to all his children as he did to Daniel, by an
angel, "O man, greatly beloved of God," nor as he did to the blessed
Virgin Mary, "Hail, Mary, freely beloved," yet doth he witness the same
to the hearts of his children by an inward testimony: when they hear it
they are alive; when they want it they are but dead; their souls refuse
all other comfort whatsoever. - William Cowper.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"Make me to hear joy and gladness." As a Christian is the most sorrowful
man in the world, so there is none more glad than he. For the cause of
his joy is greatest. In respect his misery was greatest, his delivery
greatest, therefore his joy greatest. From hell and death is he freed,
to life in heaven is he brought..... The person from whom he seeketh
this joy is God: "Make me to hear," saith he; whereby he would teach us
that this joy cometh only from God; it is he who is the fountain of joy
and all pleasure, for "all good things come from above." Natural joys
proceed from a natural and fleshly fountain; spiritual joys spring only
from God' so he who seeketh those joys beneath seeketh hot water under
cold ice. - Archibald Symson.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"Make me to hear joy and gladness." Another reference to the expiation
of the leper, whose ear was to be touched with the blood of the
trespass-offering and the oil, as well as thumb and toe, to show that
his faculties were now prepared for the service of God; so David prays
that his ears may be sanctified to the hearing of joy and gladness; this
an unsanctified heart can never receive. - W. Wilson.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"The bones which thou hast broken." God, in favour to his children, doth
afflict them for sin; and the very phrase of breaking his bones, though
it express extremity of misery and pain, yet it hath hope in it, for
broken bones by a cunning hand may be set again and return to their
former use and strength; so that a conscience distressed for sins is not
out of hope; yet upon that hope no wise man will adventure upon sin,
saying, though I am wounded, yet I may be healed again; though I am
broken, I may be repaired; for let him consider - 1. Who breaks his
bones - Thou; he that made us our bones and put them in their several
places, and tied them together with ligaments, and covered them with
flesh; he that keepeth all our bones from breaking; it must be a great
matter that must move him to break the bones of any of us. The God of
all consolation, that comforteth us in all our distresses, when he
cometh to distress us, this makes affliction weigh heavy..... 2. The
pain of the affliction exprest so feelingly in the breaking of bones,
which, as is said, is the anguish of the soul for sin, and fear of the
consuming fire of God's wrath, and the tempest, as Job calls it, of
anger. 3. The pain of setting these bones again: for, though bones
dislocated may be put in joint, and though bones broken may be set
again, yet this is not done without pain and great extremity to the
patient.

Repentance setteth all our broken, pained bones; it recovereth the soul
from the anguish thereof; but he that once feeleth the smart of a true
repentance, will say, the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season,
are as hard a bargain as ever he made, and as dear bought; they cost
tears, which are sanguis vulnerati cordis, the blood of a wounded heart;
they cost sighs and groans which cannot be expressed; they cost
watching, fasting, taming of the body to bring it in subjection, even to
the crucifying of the flesh with the lusts thereof. Therefore, let no
man adventure his bones in hope of setting them again. - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"That the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice." The displeasure
which God expressed against the sins he had been guilty of, and the deep
sense he had of the aggravated nature of them, filled him with those
pains and agonies of mind, as that he compares them to that exquisite
torture he must have felt had all his bones been crushed, for the
original word דּכּית, signifies more than broken, namely, being entirely
mashed; and he compares the joy that God's declaring himself fully
reconciled to him would produce in his mind, to that inconceivable
pleasure, which would arise from the instantaneous restoring and healing
those bones, after they had been thus broken and crushed to pieces. -
Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)

"Hide thy face from my sins." The verb סתּר properly signifies to veil,
or hide with a veil. - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)

"Hide thy face from my sins." He said in the third verse, that his sin
was always in his sight; and now he prays that God would put it out of
his sight. This is a very good order. If we hold our sins in our eyes to
pursue them, God will cast them behind his back to pardon them: if we
remember them and repent, he will forget them and forgive: otherwise,
peccatum unde homo non avertit, advertit Deus: et si advertit,
animadvertit - the sin from which man turns not, God looks to it; and if
he look to it, sure he will punish it. - William Cowper.

[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)

"All mine iniquities." See how one sin calleth to mind many thousands,
which though they lie asleep a long time, like a sleeping debt, yet we
know not how soon they may be reckoned for. Make sure of a general
pardon, and take heed of adding new sins to the old. - John Trapp.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"Create in me a clean heart, O God." O thou that createdst the first
heaven and the first earth of nothing! O thou that createst the new
heaven and the new earth (wherein dwells righteousness), when sin had
made the creature worse than nothing! O thou that createst the new
creature, the new man, fit to be an inhabitant of the new world, of the
new Jerusalem! O thou that hast said, "Behold, I make all things new:"
create thou in me, even in me, "a clean heart; and renew a right spirit
within me." - Matthew Lawrence.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"Create in me a clean heart, O God," etc. David prayeth the Lord to
create in him a new heart, not to correct his old heart, but to create
him a new heart; showing that his heart was like an old garment, so
rotten and tattered that he could make no good of it by patching or
piecing, but even must cut if off, and take a new. Therefore Paul saith,
"Cast off the old man;" not pick him and wash him till he be clean, but
cast him off and begin anew, as David did. Will ye know what this
renewing is? It is the repairing of the image of God, until we be like
Adam when he dwelt in Paradise. As there is a whole old man, so there
must be a whole new man. The old man must change with the new man,
wisdom for wisdom, love for love, fear for fear; his worldly wisdom for
heavenly wisdom, his carnal love for spiritual love, his servile fear
for Christian fear, his idle thoughts for holy thoughts, his vain words
for wholesome words, his fleshly works for sanctified works. - Henry
Smith.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"Create in me a clean heart." Creating, to speak properly, is to make of
nought, and is here used improperly. The prophet speaketh according to
his own feeling and present judgment of himself, as though he had lost
all, and had no goodness in himself. No doubt the prophet's heart was in
part clean, though not so much as he desired. These things thus opened,
here cometh a question first to be answered. Quest. Whether David could
have lost the cleanness of heart, having once had it? Ans. No. The gifts
and calling of God, that is (as I take it), the gifts of effectual
calling, are such as God never repenteth of or taketh away. Faith, hope,
and charity are abiding gifts, as sure as the election of God, which is
unchangeable. Indeed, the children of God, if we only considered them in
themselves with their enemies, might fall away, but being founded upon
the unchangeable nature of God, and immutability of his counsel, they
cannot, the gates of hell shall not prevail against them, the elect
cannot be deceived or plucked out of Christ's hands. Nay, certain it is
that David did not actually leave his former cleanness. For sure it is,
his heart smiting him (as here it did), so doing before in less matters,
it was not wholly void of cleanness. And again, it could not pray for
cleanness if it were not somewhat clean. This is most sure, that by
grievous sins much filthiness cometh to the soul, as by a boisterous
wind a tree may lose his leaves and some branches, so as that the party
sinning may be brought into as great passions almost as if he had lost
all, but the desire of grace is an infallible certainty of some grace of
that kind. The prophet therefore desireth not a clean heart because he
had it not in any sort, but because he could not so well perceive it in
himself, and take such comfort in it as he had done before, and for that
he desired it a great deal more than now he had it. So learned, so rich
men, think themselves not learned, not rich, in respect of that which
they do desire, and when the sun is up, the moon seemeth to have no
light. - George Esley, in "Certaine Godly and Learned Expositions,"
1603.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"Create in me a clean heart, O God," etc. This "creation" is from
nothing. David uses the same word of our creation which Moses uses of
"the creation of the heaven and the earth." Our creation "in Jesus
Christ" is no mere strengthening of our powers, no mere aiding of our
natural weakness by the might of the grace of God, it is not a mere
amendment, improvement of our moral habits; it is a creation out of
nothing, of that which we had not before. There was nothing in us
whereof to make it. We were decayed, corrupt, dead in trespasses and
sins. What is dead becometh not alive, except by the infusion of what it
had not. What is corrupt receiveth not soundness, save by passing away
itself and being replaced by a new production. "The old man" passeth not
into the new man, but is "put off." It is not the basis of the new life,
but a hindrance to it. It must be "put off" and the new man "put on,"
"created in Christ Jesus." - E. B. Pusey, D.D., 1853.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010) (first clause)

He used the word create (Heb bara), a word only used of the work of God,
and showing that the change in him could be wrought only by God. -
Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"A clean heart." The priest was required to make a strict examination of
the skin of the leper before he could pronounce him clean; David prays
God to make his heart clean. - W. Wilson.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"A right spirit." A steadfast spirit, i.e., a mind steady in following
the path of duty. - French and Skinner.

[Psa 51:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

Who was to do this work? Not himself; God alone. Therefore, he prays: "O
God, create - O Lord, renew; uphold by thy Spirit." - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)

"Cast me not away from thy presence." David lamented before that sin had
slain him, and made him like a dead man, wanting a heart or quickening
spirit; and now he fears lest, as the dead are abhorred by the living,
so the Lord should cast him as a dead and abominable thing out of his
presence. Whereof we learn this is one of the just punishments of sin;
it procures the casting out of a man from the face of God; and it may
let us see how dear bought are the pleasures of sin when a man to enjoy
the face of the creature deprives himself of the comfortable face of the
Creator; as David here, for the carnal love of the face of Bathsheba,
puts himself in danger to be cast out for ever from the presence of the
Lord his God. If a man could remember this in all Satan's temptations,
what it is that the deceiver offers, and what it is again that he seeks,
he would be loth to buy the perishing pleasures of sin upon such a price
as Satan selleth them, but would answer him as the apostle did Simon
Magus. "Thy money, with thyself, go into perdition;" thy gain, thy
glory, thy pleasure, and whatever thou wouldst give me to offend the
Lord my God, go with thyself into perdition, for what canst thou offer
unto me comparable to that which thou wouldst steal from me?

But how is it that he prays, "Cast me not out from thy presence"? May a
man be cast any way from it? Saith he not himself, "What way can I flee
from thy presence?" This is soon answered by distinguishing his twofold
presence - one in mercy, wherewith he refresheth and comforteth his own,
and this without intermission they enjoy who are in heaven; another, in
wrath, whereby he terrifies and torments without intermission the damned
in hell. As to them who are upon earth, certain it is he is displeased
with many, who, because they see not his angry face, regard it not,
borne out with temporal recreations of the creature, which will fail
them; and there are many, again, to whom he looks as a loving Father in
Christ, and yet they see not his merciful face by reason of many
interjected veils; but to them who once have felt the sweetness of his
favourable face it is death to want it. - William Cowper.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)

"Cast me not away from thy presence." Like the leper who is banished
from society till cleansed, or as Saul was rejected from being king,
because he obeyed not the word of the Lord. [Sa1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023). David could not but feel that
his transgressions would have deserved a similar rejection. - W. Wilson.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)

"Cast me not away." Lord, though I, alas! have cast thee from me, yet
cast me not away: hide not thy face from me, although I so often have
refused to look at thee; leave me not without help, to perish in my
sins, though I have aforetime left thee. - Fra Thom de Jesu.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)

"Take not thy Holy Spirit from me." The words of this verse imply that
the Spirit had not altogether been taken away from him, however much his
gifts had been temporarily obscured.... Upon one point he had fallen
into a deadly lethargy, but he was not "given over to a reprobate mind;"
and it is scarcely conceivable that the rebuke of Nathan the prophet
should have operated so easily and so suddenly in arousing him had there
been no latent spark of godliness still remaining.... The truth on which
we are now insisting is an important one, as many learned men have been
inconsiderately drawn into the opinion that the elect, by falling into
mortal sin, may lose the Spirit altogether, and be alienated from God.
The contrary is clearly declared by Peter, who tells us that the word by
which we are born again is an incorruptible seed ([Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)); and John is equally explicit in
informing us that the elect are preserved from falling away altogether.
[Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009). However much they may appear
for a time to have been cast off by God, it is afterwards seen that
grace must have been alive in their breast even during that interval
when it seemed to be extinct. Nor is there any force in the objection
that David speaks as if he feared that he might be deprived of the
Spirit. It is natural that the saints, when they have fallen into sin,
and have thus done what they could to expel the grace of God, should
feel an anxiety upon this point; but it is their duty to hold fast the
truth, that grace is the incorruptible seed of God, which never can
perish in any heart where it has been deposited. This is the spirit
displayed by David. Reflecting upon his offence, he is agitated with
fears, and yet rests in the persuasion that, being a child of God, he
would not be deprived of what, indeed, he had justly forfeited. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

"Restore." It is no small comfort to a man that hath lost his receipt
for a debt paid when he remembers that the man he deals with is a good
and just man, though his discharge is not presently to be found. That
God whom thou hast to deal with is very gracious; what thou hast lost he
is ready to restore (the evidence of thy grace I mean). David begged
this, and obtained it. Yea, saith faith, if it were true what thou
fearest, that thy grace was never true, there is mercy enough in God's
heart to pardon all thy former hypocrisy if thou comest in the sincerity
of thy heart; and so faith persuades the soul by an act of adventure to
cast itself upon God in Christ. Wilt not thou, saith faith, expect to
find as much mercy at God's hands as thou canst look for at a man's? It
is not beyond the line of created mercy to forgive many unkindnesses,
much falseness and unfaithfulness, upon an humble, sincere
acknowledgment of the same. The world is not so bad but it abounds with
parents who can do thus much for their children, and masters for their
servants; and is that hard for God to do which is so easy in his
creature? Thus faith vindicates God's name. And so long as we have not
lost sight of God's merciful heart, our head will be kept above water,
though we want the evidence of our own grace. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

"Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation," etc. How can God restore
that which he took not away? For, can I charge God with the taking away
the joy of his salvation from me? O gracious God, I charge not thee with
taking it, but myself with losing it; and such is the miserable
condition of us poor wretches, that if thou shouldst restore no more to
us than what thou takest from us, we should quickly be at a fault in our
estates, and our ruin would be as sudden as inevitable. But why am I so
earnest for restoring? for what good will restoring do me? and how shall
I more keep it being restored, than I kept it before being enjoyed? and
if I so enjoy it, as still to fear to lose it, what joy can there be in
such enjoying? O therefore, not restore it only, but "establish me with
thy free spirit;" that as by thy restoring I may enjoy it entirely, so
by thy establishing I may enjoy it securely. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

"Uphold me." I am tempted to think that I am now an established
Christian, that I have overcome this or that lust so long that I have
got into the habit of the opposite grace, so that there is no fear; I
may venture very near the temptation, nearer than other men. This is a
lie of Satan. I might as well speak of gunpowder getting by habit a
power of resisting fire, so as not to catch the spark. As long as powder
is wet it resists the spark, but when it becomes dry it is ready to
explode at the first touch. As long as the Spirit dwells in my heart, he
deadens me to sin, so that if lawfully called through temptation I may
reckon upon God carrying me through. But when the Spirit leaves me, I am
like dry gunpowder. Oh, for a sense of this! - Robert Murray M'Cheyne.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

"Uphold me with thy free spirit." A loving mother chooses a fitting
place, and a fitting time, to let her little child fall; it is learning
to walk, it is getting over confident, it may come to a dangerous place,
and if possessed of all this confidence, may fall and destroy itself. So
she permits it to fall at such a place, and in such a way as that it may
be hurt, wholesomely hurt, but not dangerously so. It has now lost its
confidence, and clings all the more fondly and trustingly to the strong
hand that is able to hold up all its goings. So this David, this little
child of the great God, has fallen; it is a sore fall, all his bones are
broken, but it has been a precious and a profitable lesson to him; he
has no confidence any longer in himself, his trust is not now in an arm
of flesh. "Uphold me with thy free spirit." - Thomas Alexander.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012) (last clause)

"Let a free spirit sustain me;" that is, let me not be enslaved, as I
have been, by my sinful passions. - Henry Dimock, M.A., 1791.

[Psa 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)

"Then will I teach transgressors thy ways," etc. We see our duty craves
that when we have received mercy from God for ourselves, we should make
vantage of it for the edification of others. Every talent received from
God should be put to profit, but specially the talent of mercy; as it is
greatest, so the Lord requires greater fruit of it, both for his own
glory and for the edification of our brethren. Seeing we are vessels of
mercy, should not the scent and sweet odour of mercy go from us to
others? This duty Christ craved from Peter: "And thou, when thou art
converted, confirm thy brethren." And this duty, as David here
promiseth, so we may read how he did perform it: "Come unto me, all ye
that fear God, and I will tell you what he hath done for my soul." The
property of a Christian is, fides per delecttonem efficax, faith worketh
by love. What availeth it to pretend faith toward God, where there is no
love toward thy neighbour? and wherein can thy love be declared more
than in this, to draw thy neighbour to the participation of that same
merit whereunto God hath called thee? By the law a man was bound to
bring home his neighbours wandering beast if he had met with it before;
how much more, then, to turn again his neighbour himself when he wanders
from the Lord his God? If two men walking on the way should both fall
into one pit, and the one being relieved out of it should go his way and
forget his neighbour, might it not justly be called a barbarous and
inhuman cruelty? We have all fallen into one and the same mire of
iniquity; since the Lord hath put out his merciful hand to draw us out
of this prison of sin, shall we refuse to put out our hand to see if
possibly we may draw up our brethren with us? - William Cowper (Bishop).

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014) (first clause)

"Deliver me from bloods." The term bloods in Hebrew may denote any
capital crime; and in my opinion he is here to be considered as alluding
to the sentence of death, to which he felt himself to be obnoxious, and
from which he requests deliverance. - John Calvin.

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014) (first clause)

The Chaldee reads, "Deliver me from the judgment of murder."

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)

"O God, thou God of my salvation." "O God," is a good invocation, for he
heareth prayers. Yet to distinguish him from all false gods he is so
particular as to single him from all other: "Thou God." And to magnify
him, and to re-enforce his petition, he calleth him Deum salutis, "the
God of salvation," which expresseth him able to deliver him; for it is
his nature, and his love, and his glory, to be a preserver of men. And
to bring home this joy and comfort into his own heart, he addeth,
salutis meae, "of my salvation." So it is oratio fervens, and the
apostle telleth us that such a prayer prevaileth much with God. For God
may be a Saviour and a deliverer, and yet we may escape his saving hand,
his right hand may skip us. We can have no comfort in the favours of
God, except we can apply them at home; rather we may "think on God and
be troubled." - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)

"And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness." Hierom, Basil,
Euthymius, and other ancient doctors observe that natural corruptions
and actual sins are the very rampiers which stop the free passage of
song ([Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)). So David himself
doth expound himself: "Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God: and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness." His unthankfulness did
cry, his adultery cry, his murder cry unto the Lord for revenge; but
alas I himself was mute, till God in exceeding great mercy did stop the
mouths of his clamorous adversaries, and gave him leave to speak. - John
Boys.

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)

"Aloud." This for God, for himself, for the church. 1. For God, that his
honour may be proclaimed, therefore they borrowed the voice of still and
loud instruments....2. For himself. Having received such a benefit, he
cannot contain himself, this new wine of spiritual joy which filleth his
vessel must have a vent. All passions are loud. Anger chides loud,
sorrow cries loud, fear shrieks loud, and joy sings loud. So he
expresseth the vehemency of his affection; for to whom much is forgiven,
they love much. 3. For others. Iron whetteth iron - examples of zeal and
devotion affect much, and therefore solemn and public assemblies do
generally tender the best service to God, because one provoketh another.
- Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)

"O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise."
As man is a little world in the great, so the tongue is a great world in
the little. Nihil habet medium; aut grande malum est, aut grande bonum.
It has no mean; it is either a great evil, or a great good. If good (as
Eunapius said of that famous rhetorician), a walking library, a whole
university of edifying knowledge; but if bad (as St. James doth tell us,
[Jam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)), "a world of wickedness." No
better dish for God's public service, when it is well seasoned; again,
none worse, when ill handled. So that if we desire to be doorkeepers in
God's house, let us entreat God first to be a doorkeeper in our house,
that he would shut the wicket of our mouth against unsavoury speeches,
and open the door of our lips, "that our mouth may shew forth his
praise." This was David's prayer, and ought to be thy practice, wherein
observe three points especially; who, the Lord; what, open my lips; why,
that my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. For the first - man of
himself cannot untie the strings of his own stammering tongue, but it is
God only which openeth "a door of utterance." [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003). When we have a good thought, it
is (as the school doth speak) gratia infusa; when a good word, gratia
effusa; when a good work, gratia diffusa. Man is a lock, the Spirit of
God has a key, "which openeth, and no man shutteth;" again, "shutteth,
and no man openeth." [Rev 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007). He did
open the heart of Lydia to conceive well, the ears of the prophet to
hear well, the eyes of Elisha's servant to see well, and here the lips
of David to speak well. Acts 16; [Isa
50:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001); 2 Kings 6. And therefore,
whereas in the former verse he might seem too peremptory, saying, "My
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness;" he doth, as it were,
correct himself by this latter edition and second speech: O Lord, I find
myself most unable to sing or say, but "open thou my lips," and touch
thou my tongue, and then I am sure "my mouth shall shew forth thy
praise." - John Boys.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)

"O Lord, open thou my lips," etc. Again he seems to have the case of the
leper before his mind, with the upper lip covered, and only crying
unclean, unclean; and he prays as a spiritual leper to be enabled, with
freedom and fulness, to publish abroad the praise of his God. - W.
Wilson.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015) (first clause)

He prays that his lips may be opened; in other words, that God would
afford him matter of praise. The meaning usually attached to the
expression is, that God would so direct his tongue by the Spirit as to
fit him for singing his praises. But though it is true that God must
supply us with words, and that if he do not, we cannot fail to be silent
in his praise, David seems rather to intimate that his mouth must be
shut until God called him to the exercise of thanksgiving by extending
pardon. - John Calvin.

[Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016)

"For thou desirest not sacrifice;" etc. There may be another reason why
David here affirms that God would not accept of a sacrifice, nor be
pleased with a burnt-offering. No particular sacrifices were appointed
by the law of Moses to expiate the guilt of murder and adultery. The
person who had perpetrated these crimes was, according to the divine
law, to be punished with death. David therefore may be understood as
declaring, that it was utterly vain for him to think of resorting to
sacrifices and burnt-offerings with a view to the expiation of his
guilt; that his criminality was of such a character, that the ceremonial
law made no provision for his deliverance from the doom which his deeds
of horror deserved; and that the only sacrifices which would avail were
those mentioned in the succeeding verse, "The sacrifices of a broken
heart." - John Calvin.

[Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016)

"Else would I give it thee." And good reason it is, that we who lie
daily at the beautiful gate of the temple begging alms of him, and
receiving from his open hand, who openeth his hand, and filleth with his
plenty every living thing, should not think much to return to him such
offerings of our goods as his law requireth. - Samuel Page.

[Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016), [Psa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)

And now I was thinking what were fit to offer to God for all his
lovingkindness he has showed me; and I thought upon sacrifices, for they
have sometimes been pleasing to him, and he hath oftentimes smelt a
sweet odour from them; but I considered that sacrifices were but shadows
of things to come, and are not now in that grace they have been; for old
things are past, and new are now come; the shadows are gone, the
substances are come in place. The bullocks that are to be sacrificed now
are our hearts; it were easier for me to give him bullocks for
sacrifice, than to give him my heart. But why should I offer him that he
cares not for? my heart, I know, he cares for; and if it be broken, and
offered up by penitence and contrition, it is the only sacrifice that
now he delights in. But can we think God to be so indifferent that he
will accept of a broken heart? Is a thing that is broken good for
anything? Can we drink in a broken glass? Or can we lean upon a broken
staff? But though other things may be the worse for breaking, yet a
heart is never at the best till it be broken; for till it be broken we
cannot see what is in it; till it be broken, it cannot send forth its
sweetest odour; and therefore, though God loves a whole heart in
affection, yet he loves a broken heart in sacrifice. And no marvel,
indeed, seeing it is he himself that breaks it; for as nothing but
goat's blood can break the adamant, so nothing but the blood of our
scape-goat, Jesus Christ, is able to break our adamantine hearts.
Therefore, accept, O God, my broken heart, which I offer thee with a
whole heart; seeing thou canst neither except against it for being
whole, which is broken in sacrifice, nor except against it for being
broken, which is whole in affection. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)

"The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart," etc. When speaking of thankfulness, we might have expected him
to say, "a joyful heart, or a thankful heart," but instead of that he
says, "a contrite heart." For the joy of forgiveness does not banish
sorrow and contrition for sin: this will still continue. And the deeper
the sense of sin; and the truer the sorrow for it, the more heartfelt
also will be the thankfulness for pardon and reconciliation. The tender,
humble, broken heart, is therefore the best thank-offering. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)

It may be observed that the second word, גדכּה, which we render
contrite, denotes the being bruised and broken to pieces, as a thing is
bruised in a mortar (See [Num 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008)),
and therefore, in a moral sense, signifies such a weight of sorrow as
must wholly crush the mind without some powerful and seasonable relief.
- Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)

"In thy good pleasure." Whatever we seek must ever be sought under this
restriction, "Thy good pleasure." Build thou, but do it in thine own
wise time, in thine own good way. Build thou the walls of separation
that divide the church from the world; let them be in it, not of it;
keep them from its evil. Build thou the walls that bind, that unite thy
people into one city, under one polity, that they all may be one. Build
thou, and raze thou; raze all the inner walls that divide thy people
from thy people; hasten that day when, as there is but one Shepherd, so
shall there be but one sheep-fold. - Thomas Alexander.

[Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018), [Psa
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)

Some learned Jewish interpreters, while they assign the Psalm to the
occasion mentioned in the title, conjecture that the [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)and [Psa
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)verses were added by some Jewish
bard, in the time of the Babylonish captivity. This opinion is also held
by Venema, Green, Street, French and Skinner. There does not, however,
seem to be any sufficient ground for referring the poem, either in whole
or in part, to that period. Neither the walls of Jerusalem, nor the
buildings of Zion, as the royal palace and the magnificent structure of
the temple, which we know David had already contemplated for the worship
of God ([Sa2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001), etc.), were
completed during his reign. This was only effected under the reign of
his son Solomon. [Kg1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001).

The prayer, then, in the [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)verse might have a particular
reference to the completion of these buildings, and especially to the
rearing of the temple, in which sacrifices of unprecedented magnitude
were to be offered. David's fears might easily suggest to him that his
crimes might prevent the building of the temple, which God had promised
should be erected. [Sa2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013). "The
king forgets not," observes Bishop Horne, "to ask mercy for his people
as well as for himself; that so neither his own nor their sins might
prevent either the building and flourishing of the earthly Jerusalem,
or, what was of infinitely greater importance, the promised blessing of
Messiah, who was to descend from him, and to rear the walls of the New
Jerusalem." - James Anderson's Note to Calvin, in loc.

[Psalms 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 51:1</span></span>

1 Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

2 Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

4 Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear
when thou judgest.

5 Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive
me.

6 Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden
part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow.

8 Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast
broken may rejoice.

9 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

10 Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within
me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from
me.

12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

"Have mercy upon me, O God." He appeals at once to the mercy of God,
even before he mentions his sin. The sight of mercy is good for eyes
that are sore with penitential weeping. Pardon of sin must ever be an
act of pure mercy, and therefore to that attribute the awakened sinner
flies. "According to thy lovingkindness." Act, O Lord, like thyself;
give mercy like thy mercy. Show mercy such as is congruous with thy
grace.

"Great God, thy nature hath no bound:

So let thy pardoning love be found."

What a choice word is that of our English version, a rare compound of
precious things: love and kindness sweetly blended in one -
"lovingkindness." "According unto the multitude of thy tender mercies."
Let thy most loving compassions come to me, and make thou thy pardons
such as these would suggest. Reveal all thy gentlest attributes in my
case, not only in their essence but in their abundance. Numberless have
been thine acts of goodness, and vast is thy grace; let me be the object
of thine infinite mercy, and repeat it all in me. Make my one case an
epitome of all thy tender mercies. By every deed of grace to others I
feel encouraged, and I pray thee let me add another and a yet greater
one, in my own person, to the long list of thy compassions. "Blot out my
transgressions." My revolts, my excesses, are all recorded against me;
but, Lord, erase the lines. Draw thy pen through the register.
Obliterate the record, though now it seems engraven in the rock for
ever: many strokes of thy mercy may be needed, to cut out the deep
inscription, but then thou hast a multitude of mercies, and therefore, I
beseech thee, erase my sins.

[Psa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002)

"Wash me throughly." It is not enough to blot out the sin; his person is
defiled, and he fain would be purified. He would have God himself
cleanse him, for none but he could do it effectually. The washing must
be thorough, it must be repeated, therefore he cries, "Multiply to wash
me." The dye is in itself immovable, and I, the sinner, have lain long
in it, till the crimson is ingrained: but, Lord, wash, and wash, and
wash again, till the last stain is gone, and not a trace of my
defilement is left. The hypocrite is content if his garments be washed;
but the true suppliant cries, "wash me." The careless soul is content
with a nominal cleansing, but the truly-awakened conscience desires a
real and practical washing, and that of a most complete and efficient
kind. "Wash me throughly from mine iniquity." It is viewed as one great
pollution, polluting the entire nature, and as all his own; as if
nothing were so much his own as his sin. The one sin against Bathsheba,
served to show the Psalmist the whole mountain of his iniquity, of which
that foul deed was but one falling stone. He desires to be rid of the
whole mass of his filthiness, which though once so little observed, had
then become a hideous and haunting terror to his mind. "And cleanse me
from my sin." This is a more general expression; as if the Psalmist
said, "Lord, if washing will not do, try some other process; if water
avails not, let fire, let anything be tried, so that I may but be
purified. Rid me of my sin by some means, by any means, by every means,
only do purify me completely, and leave no guilt upon my soul." It is
not the punishment he cries out against, but the sin. Many a murderer is
more alarmed at the gallows than at the murder which brought him to it.
The thief loves the plunder, though he fears the prison. Not so David:
he is sick of sin as sin; his loudest outcries are against the evil of
his transgression, and not against the painful consequences of it. When
we deal seriously with our sin, God will deal gently with us. When we
hate what the Lord hates, he will soon make an end of it, to our joy and
peace.

[Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

"For I acknowledge my transgressions." Here he sees the plurality and
immense number of his sins, and makes open declaration of them. He seems
to say, I make a full confession of them. Not that this is my plea in
seeking forgiveness, but it is a clear evidence that I need mercy, and
am utterly unable to look to any other quarter for help. My pleading
guilty has barred me from any appeal against the sentence of justice: O
Lord, I must cast myself on thy mercy, refuse me not, I pray thee. Thou
hast made me willing to confess. O follow up this work of grace with a
full and free remission! "And my sin is ever before me." My sin as a
whole is never out of my mind; it continually oppresses my spirit. I lay
it before thee because it is ever before me: Lord, put it away both from
thee and me. To an awakened conscience, pain on account of sin is not
transient and occasional, but intense and permanent, and this is no sign
of divine wrath, but rather a sure preface of abounding favour.

[Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)

"Against thee, thee only have I sinned." The virus of sin lies in its
opposition to God: the Psalmist's sense of sin towards others rather
tended to increase the force of his feeling of sin against God. All his
wrong-doing centred, culminated, and came to a climax, at the foot of
the divine throne. To injure our fellow men is sin, mainly because in so
doing we violate the law of God. The penitent's heart was so filled with
a sense of the wrong done to the Lord himself, that all other confession
was swallowed up in a broken-hearted acknowledgment of offence against
him. "And done this evil in thy sight." To commit treason in the very
court of the king and before his eye is impudence indeed: David felt
that his sin was committed in all its filthiness while Jehovah himself
looked on. None but a child of God cares for the eye of God, but where
there is grace in the soul it reflects a fearful guilt upon every evil
act, when we remember that the God whom we offend was present when the
trespass was committed. "That thou mightest be justified when thou
speakest, and be clear when thou judgest." He could not present any
argument against divine justice, if it proceeded at once to condemn him
and punish him for his crime. His own confession, and the judge's own
witness of the whole transaction, placed the transgression beyond all
question or debate; the iniquity was indisputably committed, and was
unquestionably a foul wrong, and therefore the course of justice was
clear and beyond all controversy.

[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

"Behold, I was shapen in iniquity." He is thunderstruck at the discovery
of his inbred sin, and proceeds to set it forth. This was not intended
to justify himself, but it rather meant to complete the confession. It
is as if he said, not only have I sinned this once, but I am in my very
nature a sinner. The fountain of my life is polluted as well as its
streams. My birth-tendencies are out of the square of equity; I
naturally lean to forbidden things. Mine is a constitutional disease,
rendering my very person obnoxious to thy wrath. "And in sin did my
mother conceive me." He goes back to the earliest moment of his being,
not to traduce his mother, but to acknowledge the deep tap-roots of his
sin. It is a wicked wresting of Scripture to deny that original sin and
natural depravity are here taught. Surely men who cavil at this doctrine
have need to be taught of the Holy Spirit what be the first principles
of the faith. David's mother was the Lord's handmaid, he was born in
chaste wedlock, of a good father, and he was himself "the man after
God's own heart;" and yet his nature was as fallen as that of any other
son of Adam, and there only needed the occasion for the manifesting of
that sad fact. In our shaping we were put out of shape, and when we were
conceived our nature conceived sin. Alas, for poor humanity! Those who
will may cry it up, but he is most blessed who in his own soul has
learned to lament its lost estate.

[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)

"Behold." Here is the great matter of consideration. God desires not
merely outward virtue, but inward purity, and the penitent's sense of
sin is greatly deepened as with astonishment he discovers this truth,
and how far he is from satisfying the divine demand. The second "Behold"
is fitly set over against the first; how great the gulf which yawns
between them! "Thou desirest truth in the inward parts." Reality,
sincerity, true holiness, heart-fidelity, these are the demands of God.
He cares not for the pretence of purity, he looks to the mind, heart,
and soul. Always has the Holy One of Israel estimated men by their inner
nature, and not by their outward professions; to him the inward is as
visible as the outward, and he rightly judges that the essential
character of an action lies in the motive of him who works it. "And in
the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom." The penitent feels
that God is teaching him truth concerning his nature, which he had not
before perceived. The love of the heart, the mystery of its fall, and
the way of its purification - this hidden wisdom we must all attain; and
it is a great blessing to be able to believe that the Lord will "make us
to know it." No one can teach our innermost nature but the Lord, but he
can instruct us to profit. The Holy Spirit can write the law on our
heart, and that is the sum of practical wisdom. He can put the fear of
the Lord within, and that is the beginning of wisdom. He can reveal
Christ in us, and he is essential wisdom. Such poor, foolish,
disarranged souls as ours, shall yet be ordered aright, and truth and
wisdom shall reign within us.

[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

"Purge me with hyssop." Sprinkle the atoning blood upon me with the
appointed means. Give me the reality which legal ceremonies symbolise.
Nothing but blood can take away my blood-stains, nothing but the
strongest purification can avail to cleanse me. Let the sin-offering
purge my sin. Let him who was appointed to atone, execute his sacred
office on me; for none can need it more than I. The passage may be read
as the voice of faith as well as a prayer, and so it runs - "Thou wilt
purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean." Foul as I am, there is such
power in the divine propitiation, that my sin shall vanish quite away.
Like the leper upon whom the priest has performed the cleansing rites, I
shall be again admitted into the assembly of thy people and allowed to
share in the privileges of the true Israel; while in thy sight also,
through Jesus my Lord, I shall be accepted. "Wash me." Let it not merely
be in type that I am clean, but by real spiritual purification, which
shall remove the pollution of my nature. Let the sanctifying as well as
the pardoning process be perfected in me. Save me from the evils which
my sin has created and nourished in me. "And I shall be whiter than
snow." None but thyself can whiten me, but thou canst in grace outdo
nature itself in its purest state. Snow soon gathers smoke and dust, it
melts and disappears; thou canst give me an enduring purity. Though snow
is white below as well as on the surface, thou canst work the like
inward purity in me, and make me so clean that only an hyperbole can set
forth my immaculate condition. Lord, do this; my faith believes thou
wilt, and well she knows thou canst.

Scarcely does Holy Scripture contain a verse more full of faith than
this. Considering the nature of the sin, and the deep sense the Psalmist
had of it, it is a glorious faith to be able to see in the blood
sufficient, nay, all-sufficient merit entirely to purge it away.
Considering also the deep, natural inbred corruption which David saw and
experienced within, it is a miracle of faith that he could rejoice in
the hope of perfect purity in his inward parts. Yet, be it added, the
faith is no more than the word warrants, than the blood of atonement
encourages, than the promise of God deserves. O that some reader may
take heart, even now while smarting under sin, to do the Lord the honour
to rely thus confidently on the finished sacrifice of Calvary and the
infinite mercy there revealed.

[Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008)

"Make me to hear joy and gladness." He prays about his sorrow late in
the Psalm; he began at once with his sin; he asks to hear pardon, and
then to hear joy. He seeks comfort at the right time and from the right
source. His ear has become heavy with sinning, and so he prays, "Make me
to hear." No voice could revive his dead joys but that which quickeneth
the dead. Pardon from God would give him double joy - "joy and
gladness." No stinted bliss awaits the forgiven one; he shall not only
have a double-blooming joy, but he shall hear it; it shall sing with
exultation. Some joy is felt but not heard, for it contends with fears;
but the joy of pardon has a voice louder than the voice of sin. God's
voice speaking peace is the sweetest music an ear can hear. "That the
bones which thou hast broken may rejoice." He was like a poor wretch
whose bones are crushed, crushed by no ordinary means, but by
omnipotence itself. He groaned under no mere flesh wounds; his firmest
and yet tenderest powers were "broken in pieces all asunder;" his
manhood had become a dislocated, mangled, quivering sensibility. Yet if
he who crushed would cure, every wound would become a new mouth for
song, every bone quivering before with agony would become equally
sensible of intense delight. The figure is bold, and so is the
supplicant. He is requesting a great thing; he seeks joy for a sinful
heart, music for crushed bones. Preposterous prayer anywhere but at the
throne of God! Preposterous there most of all but for the cross where
Jehovah Jesus bore our sins in his own body on the tree. A penitent need
not ask to be an hired servant, or settle down in desparing content with
perpetual mourning; he may ask for gladness and he shall have it; for if
when prodigals return the father is glad, and the neighbours and friends
rejoice and are merry with music and dancing, what need can there be
that the restored one himself should be wretched?

[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)

"Hide thy face from my sins." Do not look at them; be at pains not to
see them. They thrust themselves in thy way; but, Lord, refuse to behold
them, lest if thou consider them, thine anger burn, and I die. "Blot out
all mine iniquities." He repeats the prayer of the first verse with the
enlargement of it by the word "all." All repetitions are not "vain
repetitions." Souls in agony have no space to find variety of language:
pain has to content itself with monotones. David's face was ashamed with
looking on his sin, and no diverting thoughts could remove it from his
memory; but he prays the Lord to do with his sin what he himself cannot.
If God hide not his face from our sin, he must hide it for ever from us;
and if he blot not out our sins, he must blot our names out of his book
of life.

[Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

"Create." What! has sin so destroyed us, that the Creator must be called
in again? What ruin then doth evil work among mankind! "Create in me."
I, in outward fabric, still exist; but I am empty, desert, void. Come,
then, and let thy power be seen in a new creation within my old fallen
self. Thou didst make a man in the world at first; Lord, make a new man
in me! "A clean heart." In the seventh verse he asked to be clean; now
he seeks a heart suitable to that cleanliness; but he does not say,
"Make my old heart clean;" he is too experienced in the hopelessness of
the old nature. He would have the old man buried as a dead thing, and a
new creation brought in to fill its place. None but God can create
either a new heart or a new earth. Salvation is a marvellous display of
supreme power; the work in us as much as that for us is wholly of
Omnipotence. The affections must be rectified first, or all our nature
will go amiss. The heart is the rudder of the soul, and till the Lord
take it in hand we steer in a false and foul way. O Lord, thou who didst
once make me, be pleased to new make me, and in my most secret parts
renew me. "Renew a right spirit within me." It was there once, Lord, put
it there again. The law on my heart has become like an inscription hard
to read: new write it, gracious Maker. Remove the evil as I have
entreated thee; but, O replace it with good, lest into my swept, empty,
and garnished heart, from which the devil has gone out for awhile, seven
other spirits more wicked than the first should enter and dwell. The two
sentences make a complete prayer. "Create" what is not there at all;
"renew" that which is there, but in a sadly feeble state.

[Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)

"Cast me not away from thy presence." Throw me not away as worthless;
banish me not, like Cain, from thy face and favour. Permit me to sit
among those who share thy love, though I only be suffered to keep the
door. I deserve to be for ever denied admission to thy courts; but, O
good Lord, permit me still the privilege which is dear as life itself to
me. "Take not thy Holy Spirit from me." Withdraw not his comforts,
counsels, assistances, quickenings, else I am indeed as a dead man. Do
not leave me as thou didst Saul, when neither by Urim, nor by prophet,
nor by dream, thou wouldst answer him. Thy Spirit is my wisdom, leave me
not to my folly; he is my strength, O desert me not to my own weakness.
Drive me not away from thee, neither do thou go away from me. Keep up
the union between us, which is my only hope of salvation. It will be a
great wonder if so pure a Spirit deigns to stay in so base a heart as
mine; but then, Lord, it is all wonder together, therefore do this, for
thy mercy's sake, I earnestly entreat thee.

[Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

"Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation." Salvation he had known, and
had known it as the Lord's own; he had also felt the joy which arises
from being saved in the Lord, but he had lost it for awhile, and
therefore he longed for its restoration. 'None but God can give back
this joy; he can do it; we may ask it; he will do it for his own glory
and our benefit. This joy comes not first, but follows pardon and
purity: in such order it is safe, in any other it is vain presumption or
idiotic delirium. "And uphold me with thy free Spirit." Conscious of
weakness, mindful of having so lately fallen, he seeks to be kept on his
feet by power superior to his own. That royal Spirit, whose holiness is
true dignity, is able to make us walk as kings and priests, in all the
uprightness of holiness; and he will do so if we seek his gracious
upholding. Such influences will not enslave but emancipate us; for
holiness is liberty, and the Holy Spirit is a free Spirit. In the
roughest and most treacherous ways we are safe with such a keeper; in
the best paths we stumble if left to ourselves. The praying for joy and
upholding go well together; it is all over with joy if the foot is not
kept; and, on the other hand, joy is a very upholding thing, and greatly
aids holiness; meanwhile, the free, noble, loyal Spirit is at the bottom
of both.

[Psalms 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 51:13</span></span>

13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

14 Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and
my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

15 Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.

16 For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering.

17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.

19 Then, shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer
bullocks upon thine altar.

[Psa 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)

"Then will I teach transgressors thy ways." It was his fixed resolve to
be a teacher of others; and assuredly none instruct others so well as
those who have been experimentally taught of God themselves. Reclaimed
poachers make the best gamekeepers. Huntingdon's degree of S.S., or
Sinner Saved, is more needful for a soul-winning evangelist than either
M.A or D.D. The pardoned sinner's matter will be good, for he has been
taught in the school of experience, and his manner will be telling, for
he will speak sympathetically, as one who has felt what he declares. The
audience the Psalmist would choose is memorable - he would instruct
transgressors like himself; others might despise them, but, "a fellow
feeling makes us wondrous kind." If unworthy to edify saints, he would
creep in along with the sinners, and humbly tell them of divine love.
The mercy of God to one is an illustration of his usual procedure, so
that our own case helps us to understand his "ways," or his general
modes of action: perhaps, too, David under that term refers to the
preceptive part of the word of God, which, having broken, and having
suffered thereby, he felt that he could vindicate and urge upon the
reverence of other offenders. "And sinners shall be converted unto
thee." My fall shall be the restoration of others. Thou wilt bless my
pathetic testimony to the recovery of many who, like myself, have turned
aside unto crooked ways. Doubtless this Psalm and the whole story of
David, have produced for many ages the most salutary results in the
conversion of transgressors, and so evil has been overruled for good.

[Psa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)

"Deliver me from bloodguiltiness." He had been the means of the death of
Uriah, the Hittite, a faithful and attached follower, and he now
confesses that fact. Besides, his sin of adultery was a capital offence,
and he puts himself down as one worthy to die the death. Honest
penitents do not fetch a compass and confess their sins in an elegant
periphrasis, but they come to the point, call a spade a spade, and make
a clean breast of all. What other course is rational in dealing with the
Omniscient? "O God, thou God of my salvation." He had not ventured to
come so near before. It had been, "O God," up till now, but here he
cries, "Thou God of my salvation." Faith grows by the exercise of
prayer. He confesses sin more plainly in this verse than before, and yet
he deals with God more confidently: growing upward and downward at the
same time are perfectly consistent. None but the King can remit the
death penalty, it is therefore a joy to faith that God is King, and that
he is the author and finisher of our salvation. "And my torque shall
sing aloud of thy righteousness." One would rather have expected him to
say, I will sing of thy mercy; but David can see the divine way of
justification, that righteousness of God which Paul afterwards spoke of
by which the ungodly are justified, and he vows to sing, yea, and to
sing lustily of that righteous way of mercy. After all, it is the
righteousness of divine mercy which is its greatest wonder. Note how
David would preach in the last verse, and now here he would sing. We can
never do too much for the Lord to whom we owe more than all. If we could
be preacher, precentor, doorkeeper, pewopener, footwasher, and all in
one, all would be too little to show forth all our gratitude. A great
sinner pardoned makes a great singer. Sin has a loud voice, and so
should our thankfulness have. We shall not sing our own praises if we be
saved, but our theme will be the Lord our righteousness, in whose merits
we stand righteously accepted.

[Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)

"O Lord, open thou my lips." He is so afraid of himself that he commits
his whole being to the divine care, and fears to speak till the Lord
unstops his shame-silenced mouth. How marvellously the Lord can open our
lips, and what divine things we poor simpletons pour forth under his
inspiration! This prayer of a penitent is a golden petition for a
preacher. Lord, I offer it for myself and my brethren. But it may stand
in good stead any one whose shame for sin makes him stammer in his
prayers, and when it is fully answered, the tongue of the dumb begins to
sing. "And my mouth shall shew forth thy praise." If God opens the mouth
he is sure to have the fruit of it. According to the porter at the gate
is the nature of that which comes out of man's lips; when vanity, anger,
falsehood, or lust unbar the door, the foulest villanies troop out; but
if the Holy Spirit opens the wicket, then grace, mercy, peace, and all
the graces come forth in tuneful dances, like the daughters of Israel
when they met David returning with the Philistine's head.

[Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016)

"For thou desirest not sacrifice." This was the subject of the last
Psalm. The Psalmist was so illuminated as to see far beyond the symbolic
ritual; his eye of faith gazed with delight upon the actual atonement.
"Else would I give it." He would have been glad enough to present tens
of thousands of victims if these would have met the case. Indeed,
anything which the Lord prescribed he would cheerfully have rendered. We
are ready to give up all we have if we may but be cleared of our sins;
and when sin is pardoned our joyful gratitude is prepared for any
sacrifice. "Thou delightest not in burnt offering." He knew that no form
of burnt sacrifice was a satisfactory propitiation. His deep soul-need
made him look from the type to the antitype, from the external rite to
the inward grace.

[Psa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)

"The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit." All sacrifices are
presented to thee in one, by the man whose broken heart presents the
Saviour's merit to thee. When the heart mourns for sin, thou art better
pleased than when the bullock bleeds beneath the axe. "A broken heart"
is an expression implying deep sorrow, embittering the very life; it
carries in it the idea of all but killing anguish in that region which
is so vital as to be the very source of life. So excellent is a spirit
humbled and mourning for sin, that it is not only a sacrifice, but it
has a plurality of excellencies, and is pre-eminently God's
"sacrifices." "A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not
despise." A heart crushed is a fragrant heart. Men contemn those who are
contemptible in their own eyes, but the Lord seeth not as man seeth. He
despises what men esteem, and values that which they despise. Never yet
has God spurned a lowly, weeping penitent, and never will he while God
is love, and while Jesus is called the man who receiveth sinners.
Bullocks and rams he desires not, but contrite hearts he seeks after;
yea, but one of them is better to him than all the varied offerings of
the old Jewish sanctuary.

[Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)

"Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion." Let blessings according to thy
wont be poured upon thy holy hill and chosen city. Zion was David's
favourite spot, whereon he had hoped to erect a temple. The ruling
passion is so strong on him, that when he has discharged his conscience
he must have a word for Zion. He felt he had hindered the project of
honouring the Lord there as he desired, but he prayed God still to let
the place of his ark be glorious, and to establish his worship and his
worshipping people. "Build thou the walls of Jerusalem." This had been
one of David's schemes, to wall in the holy city, and he desires to see
it completed; but we believe he had a more spiritual meaning, and prayed
for the prosperity of the Lord's cause and people tie had done mischief
by his sin, and had, as it were, pulled down her walls; he, therefore,
implores the Lord to undo the evil, and establish his church. God can
make his cause to prosper, and in answer to prayer he will do so.
Without his building we labour in vain; therefore are we the more
instant and constant in prayer. There is surely no grace in us if we do
not feel for the church of God, and take a lasting interest in its
welfare.

[Psa 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)

In those days of joyful prosperity thy saints shall present in great
abundance the richest and holiest thank offerings to thee, and thou
shalt be pleased to accept them. A saved soul expects to see its prayers
answered in a revived church, and then is assured that God will be
greatly glorified. Though we bring no more sacrifices for sin, yet as
priests unto God our solemn praises and votive gifts are thank offerings
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. We bring not the Lord our least
things - our doves and pigeons; but we present him with our best
possessions - our bullocks. We are glad that in this present time we are
able to fulfil in person the declaration of this verse: we also,
forecasting the future, Wait for days of the divine presence, when the
church of God, with unspeakable joy, shall offer gifts upon the altar of
God, which will far eclipse anything beheld, in these less enthusiastic
days. Hasten it, O Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 52](psa052)

</div>
