<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa075)  [Next](psa077) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 76](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 76:0</span></span>

Title. - To the chief Musician on Neginoth. The Precentor is here
instructed to perform this song to the music of stringed instruments.
The Master of the harpers was called upon for his most skilful
minstrelsy, and truly the song is worthy of the sweetest sounds that
strings can yield. A Psalm or Song of Asaph. The style and matter
indicate the same hand as that which wrote the preceding; and it is an
admirable arrangement which placed the two in juxtaposition. Faith in
the 75th Psalm sung of victories to come, and here it sings of triumphs
achieved. The present Psalm is a most jubilant war song, a paean to the
King of kings, the hymn of a theocratic nation to its divine ruler. We
have no need to mark divisions in a song where the unity is so well
preserved.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001). - Reverence for God's name
proportionate to true knowledge of it.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002). - The peculiar relation of
God to his church.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002) (first clause). - A peaceful
church the tabernacle of God. The benefits peace confers, the evils of
strife, the causes of dissension, and the means of promoting unity.

[Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003). - Christian glories, or the
victories vouchsafed to the church over heathenism, heresy, persecution,
etc.

[Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003). -

I. Where enemies are conquered; "There;" not on the battle-field so much
as in the house of God; as Amalek by Moses on the Mount; Sennacherib by
Hezekiah in the Sanctuary.

II\. How there?

1\. By faith.

2\. By prayer. "The weapons of our warfare," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004). - The Lord, our portion,
compared with the treasures of empires.

[Psa 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004). -

I. What the world is, compared with the church: "Mountains of prey."

1\. Cruelty instead of love.

2\. Violence instead of peace.

II\. What the church is, compared with the world.

1\. "More glorious," because "more excellent."

2\. "More excellent," because "more glorious." Both are more real and
abiding. - G. R.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005). - "They have slept their
sleep." Divers kinds of deaths or sleeps for the various classes of men.

[Psa 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007). - The anger of God. A very
suggestive subject.

[Psa 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008), [Psa
76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009). -

I. The characters described: "the meek of the earth."

II\. The need implied.

1\. To be vindicated.

2\. To be saved.

III\. The divine interposition on their behalf: "Thou didst cause," etc.
"When God arose," etc.

IV\. The effect of their deliverance: "The earth feared," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010). -

I. Evil permitted for good: "The wrath," etc.

II\. Restrained for good: "The remainder," etc.

Or,

I. Ruled.

II\. Overruled. - G. R.

[Psa 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011). -

I. To whom vows may be made. Not to man, but God.

II\. What vows should be thus made.

1\. Of self-dedication.

2\. Of self-service.

3\. Of self-sacrifice.

III\. How kept: "Vow and pay."

1\. From duty.

2\. From fear of his displeasure. - G. R.

[Psa 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011). - The propriety,
obligation, pleasure, and profit of presenting gifts unto the Lord.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

No Psalm has a greater right to follow [Psa
75:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001) than this, which is inscribed
To the Precentor, with accompaniment of stringed instruments (rid. [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)), a Psalm by Asaph, a song.
Similar expressions (God of Jacob, [Psa
75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010), [Psa
77:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007); saints, wicked of the earth,
[Psa 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009), [Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)), and the same impress
throughout speak in favour of unity of authorship. In other respects
too, they form a pair: [Psa 75:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001)
prepares the way for the divine deed of judgment as imminent, which [Psa
76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001) celebrates as having taken
place. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

"In Judah is God known." God is truly and savingly known only in and
through his Son; God indeed is obscurely and darkly known in his works,
as a God of power; in his providence, as a God of authority, wisdom, and
order; in his common mercies, as a God of bounty; and in his punishments
and judgments, as a God of justice; but in Christ opened and preached in
the gospel, God is known with a clear, a comfortable, and saving
knowledge, as a father of grace and singular mercy and lovingkindness.
"In Judah" (saith the Psalmist) "is God known: his name is great in
Israel." "In Judah," in his church, where his word and ordinances are,
where Christ is preached, and the mystery of man's salvation is opened,
there God is known truly without error, perspicuously without
obscurities, and savingly without uncertainties; there he is known as a
King in his courts, for the glory and beauty which he there manifesteth;
as a teacher in his school, for the wisdom and knowledge which he there
dispenseth; as a dweller in his house, for the holy orders he there
prescribeth, and gracious rule and dominion he there erecteth and
beareth in the souls of his servants; as a bridegroom in the banqueting
house, for the spiritual dainties he there maketh, for the clear and
open manifestation of himself, and love and comforts he there
ministereth to his spiritual friends and guests; "and his name is great
in Israel;" his power, wisdom, truth, love, and goodness is much
magnified and very glorious in their apprehensions who know him in
Christ Jesus. - Alexander Grosse.

[Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

"His name." By the "name" of God here, God himself is understood; for in
so many good effects as God uttereth himself toward his kirk, so many
names he giveth to himself whereby he may be praised of her. As for
example, when he promiseth unto his kirk freely grace and mercy, his
kirk giveth him a name, and calleth him merciful. When he keepeth his
promise, and uttereth himself a faithful God to his kirk, his kirk
giveth him a name, and calleth him a true God. When he delivereth his
kirk out of danger, and sheweth him a mighty God, and terrible against
his enemies, the kirk giveth him a name, and calleth him a potent God,
and so forth in the rest of his effects: so that by the name of God is
understood here God himself, as God maketh himself to be known in his
wonderful works. - Robert Bruce.

[Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

"His name is great in Israel." Properly the great name in Israel, that
is, the church, is the name of Jesus, which is great, first, by its
efficacy: for it signifies Saviour. There is no other name under heaven
by which we must be saved. Secondly, it is great in dignity: for it is
the name that is above every name Thirdly, it is great in the breadth of
its range, [Psa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001) : "How excellent
is thy name in all the earth." - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)

"In Salem also is his tabernacle." It is not without meaning that
Jerusalem has the appellation of Salem; for it is thereby insinuated
that the tabernacle of God, notwithstanding the assaults of foes, in the
very heart of the tumults of war remained in peace. How much more now
that the invaders had been overthrown, would prosperity be enjoyed? -
Hermann Venema.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)

"In Salem also is his tabernacle." God the Holy Ghost is a spirit of
peace, he is the comforter; he seals up peace ([Co2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)). This blessed dove brings the
olive branch of peace in his mouth: now a peaceable disposition
evidenceth something of God in a man, therefore God loves to dwell
there. "In Salem is God's tabernacle:" Salem signifies peace; God dwells
in a peaceable spirit. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)

"In Salem also is his tabernacle," etc. All the old versions, as well as
the two English ones, have missed one especial force of this passage.
There is no direct reference in words to any human habitation, but to
the lair of the Lion of Judah. The word סכּו does not only mean his
tabernacle, but his covert, and is so translated in another place ([Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038)): "He hath forsaken his covert,
as the lion:" and the vaguer word מעונתו which succeeds may well be
translated by "den," or some equivalent phrase. [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009). - Simon De Mats.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002), [Psa
76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003)

The care of Salem, or Zion, lies at the bottom of all God's powerful
actings and workings among the sons of men. Every mighty work of God
throughout the world may be prefaced with these two verses. The whole
course of affairs in the world is steered by Providence in reference to
the good of Salem. - John Owen.

[Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003)

"There." Observe how it is said, "There he brake," namely, in his
temple, his habitation there. For unto that his temple doth the
coherence in the verse afore carry it, for that was last in mention, and
with the greatest emphasis. In the story we read how that Sennacherib's
overthrow was from Hezekiah's prayer in the temple; for upon
Sennacherib's letter, and Hezekiah's hearsay of the blasphemy, he took
himself thither, went instantly into the temple, and began his prayer
thus: "O thou God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims." He
invocates him under that style of his dwelling in the holiest, and so
hearing prayers there. Thus you have it recorded both in Isaiah and in
[Kg2 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#015). And how Suitably, in
answer hereunto, it is said here in the Psalm, that God gave forth
sentence presently out of his tabernacle: yea, and that so suddenly too,
as that the very execution is said to be done there, that is, from
thence. And yet again, in [Psa 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008) of
the Psalm, it is said to be a sentence from heaven too; "Thou didst
cause judgment" (so called because it was the sentence of God as a
judge) "to be heard from heaven." Thus Hezekiah prayed, and thus God
heard; and both as in the temple. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003)

"There." These men, to wit the King of Asshur and his accomplices, came
to cast out God out of his dwelling place; but he stood to the defence
of his own house, and showed them that he would not remove for their
pleasure. - Robert Bruce.

[Psa 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)

God was not known in Babylon, in Egypt, in other nations; his tabernacle
and dwelling place was not amongst them, therefore they were not
glorious. But see what is in [Psa
76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004), "Thou art more glorious and
excellent than the mountains of prey;" thou Judah, thou Israel, thou
Salem, thou Zion, that hast spiritual mercies and blessings, art more
glorious than they, whatever their glory be. Have the nations abroad
goodly towers? thou hast the temple; have they stately cities? thou hast
Jerusalem, the city of God; have they wise men? thou hast the prophets;
have they gods of gold, silver, and stones? thou hast the true living
God, Jehovah, to be thy God; have they human laws that are good? thou
hast divine laws that excel; have they temporal excellencies? thou hast
spiritual; have they the glory of the world? thou hast the glory of
heaven. - William Greenhill.

[Psa 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)

"The mountains of prey." Why are they called the mountains of prey?
There is a reference to the lairs of the lions in the mountains, whence
they rush forth upon those who come that way, and tear them in pieces.
In the same way the dwelling place of God was represented above under
the title of a tabernacle or lair. Moreover, this is a mystic epithet of
the mountains of Judah, by which it is hinted that the enemies who
venture to approach that lair are wont to be torn in sunder: a terrible
example of which had just been shown in the case of the Assyrian, there
overthrown, torn, and spoiled. Compare [Isa
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004). - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005)

"The stouthearted are spoiled." There is indicated in these words that
consternation of mind which deprives of judgment and power. The valiant
are spoiled of their heart: that is, they who at other times were wise
and courageous have now lost their heart, and have been reduced to
foolishness and stupidity. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005)

"The stouthearted are spoiled." After the breaking of their weapons
their spoliation is recorded, for that follows the slaughter of foes.
Nor is mention made of that without reason. They had come to spoil,
therefore are they deservedly spoiled. - Musculus.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005)

"The stouthearted are spoiled." Some translate it, "They are spoiled of
their stout heart." The stouthearted, the strong, are spoiled. The
strong man may be spoiled by a stronger; that's a good sense, but it is
more elegantly rendered, "they are spoiled of their stout heart;" that
is, the Lord takes their heart out of their bosom. Daring men, who fear
nothing, are turned into Magor-missabibs - fear round about; their stout
hearts are taken from them, and then they are so far from being a terror
to other men, that they run from the shadow of a man; their courage is
down; they cannot give a child a confident look, much less look dangers
or enemies in the face. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005) (last clause)

The strength and power of a man is in his hands; if they be gone, all
his hope is gone. If a man's sword be taken from him, he will do what he
can with his hands; but if his hands be gone, he may go to sleep for any
disturbance he will work. For men not to find their hands, is not to
have that power for the execution of their designs which formerly they
had. - John Owen.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005) (last clause)

As we say of a man that goes lamely or lazily, "he cannot find his
feet;" so of a man that acts lamely or lazily, or of a soldier that
fights faintly and cowardly, "he cannot find his hands," - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005), [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)

For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,

And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed,

And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,

And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever were still!

And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,

But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride:

And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,

And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

And there lay the rider distorted and pale,

With the dew on his brow and the rust on his mail;

And the tents were all silent, the banners alone,

The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown.

\- George Gordon, Lord Byron.

[Psa 76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)

"Cast into a deep sleep." It is observable, that the verb here used is
the same as is used in the narrative of the act of Jael, and of the
death of the proud enemy of Israel, Sisera, "cast into a deep sleep," by
God's power, working by the hand of a woman. - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007)

"Thou, even thou, art to be feared." The emphasis in the word "thou,"
redoubled, implies as much as if he had said, Not principalities, not
powers, not hell, not death, nor anything for themselves, but thou, O
Lord, alone art to be feared. Arguments and reasons to confirm it are
two, here laid down in the text: the first is drawn from God's anger,
who hath decreed, and accordingly executes vengeance upon all the proud.
The second is drawn from his power; not princes, not armies, not men,
not angels, are able to endure the breath of his fury; for, "Who may
stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?"... The anger of God is a
terrible, unspeakable, unsupportable, intolerable burden. Every word in
the text hath a special emphasis to prove this. "Who may stand?" Who?
Shall angels? They are but like refracted beams or rays, if God should
hide his face, they would cease to shine. Shall man? His glory and pomp,
like the colours in the rainbow, vanish away, when God puts forth in
anger the brightness of his face. Shall devils? If he speak the word
they are tumbled down from heaven like lightning. "Stand in thy sight."
"Stand." What! a reed against a cedar, a thistle in Lebanon against a
cedar in Lebanon; a feather against a flame, a grasshopper against an
Almighty, a head of glass against a rod of brass? "When once thou art
angry?... Angry." By sending out his wrath, that it wounds like arrows;
angry, in pouring it out, that it drowns like water; angry, in kindling
of it, that it burns like fire; a consuming fire, but you tell me such a
fire may be quenched; an unquenchable fire, but since that may cease to
burn, when it lacks matter, it is in one word an everlasting fire, that
never goes out. That, that's it; such anger as is never fully shown, but
in punishment of reprobates; in no punishment, but that in hell; in none
in hell, but that eternal. - John Cragge's "Cabinet of Spirituall
Jewells." 1657.

[Psa 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)

"God arose to judgment." This great judgment was wrought upon the
enemies when God rose: it was not done when God sat; for the whole time
when he sat his enemies were aloft, stirring their time, raging in
murder, oppression, and blood ... He bringeth in God here after the
manner of earthly judges after the custom of our judges; for first they
sit down, they try, seek out, and advise, and after consideration they
resolve, and after resolution they rise up, give forth judgment, and
pronounce the sentence; even so the prophet bringeth in God after the
same manner; sitting, and after sitting, rising and pronouncing the
sentence. - Robert Bruce.

[Psa 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)

"To save all the meek." We see from this passage what care God takes of
the afflicted. When he is angry with the ungodly, he is angry with them
chiefly because they have oppressed the poor and the innocent. Although
he detests all iniquity, yet he is most indignant with that which is
committed against the needy and guiltless. So in [Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001). "For the oppression of the
poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord."
So in this verse, when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of
the earth. - Musculus.

[Psa 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)

Is not this the day when the Saviour comes to reign? the day when the
results of things shall best be seen; the day when every saint with
anointed eye shall see that events all tended to the glory of God; the
day when they shall sing better far than now.

"Surely the wrath of man praiseth thee.

Thou girdest thyself with the remnant of wrath."

\- Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee." Persecutions tend to
correct the failings of good men, and to exercise and illustrate their
several graces and virtues. By these, good men are usually made much
better and more approved, while they tend to exercise our patience, to
quicken our devotion, to evidence our zeal and Christian fortitude, and
to show to the whole world what love we bear to the truth, and how much
we are willing to undergo for the honour of God. Till they have suffered
something for it, truth is too apt to grow cheap and be less prized many
times, even by those that are good men in the main; whereas we are apt
on the contrary, never to value it at a higher rate, or to be more
zealous for it, or to make better use of it, than when it is opposed and
persecuted. What more truly beneficial therefore, or tending to the
divine glory, than for God, who useth to bring good out of evil, to make
use also of the opposers of his truth, to rouse up his servants whom he
sees growing more remiss and negligent than they should be, and to
suffer such temptations to assault them, by which their drowsy minds may
be spurred on into a greater love and zeal for the truth, and a deeper
sense of the divine benefit in it, and, in general, excited to the more
diligent performance of their duty. - Richard Pearson. 1684.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"The wrath of man shall praise thee." In the Septuagint it is, The wrath
of man shall keep holy-day to thee, shall increase a festival for thee.
God many times gets up in the world on Satan's shoulders. When matters
are ravelled and disordered, he can find out the right end of the
thread, and how to disentangle us again; and when we have spoiled a
business, he can dispose it for good, and make an advantage of those
things which seem to obscure the glory of his name. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"The wrath of man shall praise thee." The wrath of wicked men against
the people of God is very tributary to his praise.

1\. It puts them upon many subtil devices and cunning stratagems, in
frustrating of which the wisdom of God and his care of his Church is
very much illustrated.

2\. The wrath of wicked men impels them to many violent and forcible
attempts upon the people of God to destroy them, and so gives him
occasion to manifest his power in their defence.

3\. It makes them sometimes fit to be his instruments in correcting his
people, and so he vindicates himself from the suspicion of being a
patron to sin in them that are nearest to him, and makes them that hate
holiness promote it in his people, and them that intend them the
greatest hurt, to do them the greatest good.

4\. It administers occasion to him for the manifestation of the power of
his grace in upholding the spirits of his people and the being of his
church in despite of all that enemies can do against them.

5\. It serves very much to adorn God's most signal undertakings for his
people in the world.

6\. It serves to manifest the glory of God's justice upon his people's
enemies in the day when he rises up to avenge himself upon them, when he
shall stand over them, lashing them with scorpions, and at every blow
mind their former cruelties. Here, take that for your inhuman rage
against my people at such a place, and that for your barbarous usage of
them at such a time. Now see how good it is to be imprisoned, beaten,
tortured, burnt, and sawn asunder. Thus the enemies themselves are often
constrained to acknowledge with Adoni-Bezek the righteous hand of God
upon them in the day of inquisition. - Condensed from John Warren's
Sermon before Parliament. 1656.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"The wrath of man." Wrath is anger accented unto the highest pitch, or
blown up into a flame. "The wrath of man," (in the original it is The
wrath of Adam, or the wrath of clay, weak, impotent man) "shall praise
thee," i.e., it shall turn to the praise and glory of God through his
overruling providence, though quite otherwise intended. God will bring
honour to himself, and serve his own holy and wise designs out of it....
This expression, "the wrath of man," imports the weakness and impotence
of it; it is but the wrath of Adam, or of red clay. How contemptibly
doth the Spirit of God speak of man, and of the power of man, in
Scripture? "Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for
wherein is he to be accounted of?" The wrath of man, when it is
lengthened out to its utmost boundaries, can only: go to the length of
killing the body or of the breaking the sheath of clay in which the soul
lodges, and then it can do no more. - Ebenezer Erskine.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"Shall praise thee." God turns the wrath of man to the praise of his
adorable sovereignty. Never have the Lord's people had such awful
impressions of the sovereignty of God, as when they have been in the
furnace of man's wrath, then they became dumb with silence. When the
Chaldean and Sabean robbers are let loose to plunder and spoil the
substance of Job, he is made to view adorable sovereignty in it, saying,
"The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away: blessed be the name of the
Lord." It is in such a case as this that God says to his own people, "Be
still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the heathen."
What work of God about the church is advanced by the wrath of men?

1\. His discovering work; for by the wind of man's wrath he separates
between the precious and the vile, betwixt the chaff and the wheat. In
the day of the church's prosperity and quiet hypocrites and true
believers are mingled together, like the chaff and the wheat in the barn
floor: but the Lord, like the husbandman, opens the door of his barn,
and puts the wind of man's wrath through it, that the world may know
which is which. O, sits, much chaff is cast up already, both among
ministers and professors; but it is like the wind and sieve, may cast up
much more yet ere all be done.

2\. God's purging work is advanced among his own children by the wrath
of men: there is much of the dross of corruption cleaves to the Lord's
people while in the wilderness. Now, the Lord heats the furnace of man's
wrath, and casts his people into it, that when he has tried them, he may
bring them forth as gold.

3\. God's uniting work is thereby advanced. In a time of peace and
external tranquility the sheep of Christ scatter and divide among
themselves; but God lets loose the dogs upon them, and then the flock
runs together; or like pieces of metal cast into the fire, they run
together in a lump.

4\. God's enlarging work, or his work of spreading the gospel, is
sometimes advanced by the wrath of man. [Act
8:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001). The gospel, like the chamomile,
the more it is trodden upon, the more it spreads. - Ebenezer Erskine.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"The remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain." "The remainder of wrath,"
i.e., what is left behind of the wrath of men, when God has glorified
himself thereby. Even after God has defeated the purposes of wicked men,
and made them contribute to his glory, yet there is abundance of wrath
remaining. But what becomes of that Wrath that is left? God shall
"restrain" it. The word signifies to gird up. However God may see fit to
slacken the bridle of his providence, and suffer wicked men to vent
their wrath and enmity, as far as it shall contribute to his glory; yet
the superplus and the remainder of his wrath that is not for his glory
and his people's profit, God will gird it up, that they shall not get it
vented.... If any wrath of man remain beyond what shall bring in a
revenue of praise unto God, he will restrain it, and bind it up like the
waters of a mill: he will suffer as much of the current of water to run
upon the wheel, as serves to carry it about and grind his corn, but the
remainder of the water he sets it off another way: so God will let out
as much of the current of man's wrath as shall serve the ends of his
glory and our good, but the remainder of the stream and current he will
restrain, and turn another way. In Isai. 28 we are told that God will
not be aye "threshing his corn, nor break it with the wheel of his cart,
nor bruise it with his horsemen, This cometh forth from the Lord of
hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working." All
this comfort is sure and certain, there is not the least peradventure
about it, that the flame of man's wrath shall praise the Lord, and the
superfluous fire shall be quenched, or hemmed in; for here we have God's
parole of honour for it: "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the
remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain." - Ebenezer Erskine.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"The remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain," חמות Chemoth "wrath," in
the plural number, seems to be put in opposition to chainorb, the single
wrath of man in the former part of the verse; to shew there is more
wrath which God is to restrain, than merely that of man. There is also
more pride which needs a like restraint; namely, that of the first
Lucifer, who sinned, and, as is thought, fell by aspiring to ascend, and
to be like the Most High. There are finally, other counsels also, as
well as other wrath and pride, besides human, which God confounds. There
is a wisdom that descendeth not from above (no, nor grows on earth) but
is devilish, [Jam 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#015). And both
wrath, pride, and wisdom, of devils as well as men, shall God restrain,
when he pleases not to turn them to his praise. Let there be hellish
plots, yet our God shall confound them. - From "A Sermon preached ...
before the Queen... By Edward \[Wetenhall\] Lord Bishop of Corke and
Rosse. 1691."

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"Thou shalt restrain." This, in the Hebrew, is expressed in one word,
תּחגּיר, which imports the begirding or binding of it in on every side,
that it shall by no means break out, but shall be kept in, as a dog in a
chain, as a lion in his den, how violent soever. - Cornelius Burges, in
"Another Sermon preached to the Honourable House Of Commons November the
fifth, 1641."

[Psa 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)

"Round about him." A description of his people, as the twelve tribes
pitched about the tabernacle, [Num
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002); and the four-and-twenty elders
were round about God's throne, [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004). So the Chaldee expoundeth it; -
Ye that dwell about his sanctuary. - Henry Ainsworth.

[Psa 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012)

"Cut off." He deals with princes as men deal with a vine, An axe is too
strong for a cluster of grapes, or a sprig of a vine; it easily cuts
them off: so God by a judgment easily cuts off the spirit of princes;
they are not able to stand against the least judgments of God: when he
puts strength into worms, or any other creatures they fall. - William
Greenhill, in a Sermon, entitled, "The Axe at the Root."

[Psa 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012)

The Lord cuts off the spirit of princes; the word is, he slips off, as
one should slip off a flower between one's fingers, or as one should
slip off a bunch of grapes from a vine, so soon is it done. How great
uncertainty have many great ones, by their miserable experience, found
in their outward glory and worldly felicity! What a change hath a little
time made in all their honours, riches, and delights! That victorious
emperor Henry the Fourth, who had fought two-and-fifty pitched battles,
fell to that poverty before he died, that he was forced to petition to
be a prebend in the church of Spier, to maintain him in his old age. And
Procopius reports of King Gillimer, who was a potent king of the
Vandals, who was so low brought, as to intreat his friend to send him a
sponge, a loaf of bread, and a harp; a Sponge to dry up his tears, a
loaf of bread to maintain his life, and a harp to solace himself in his
misery. Philip de Comines reports of a Duke of Exeter, who though he had
married Edward the Fourth's sister, yet he saw him in the Low Countries
begging barefoot. Bellisarius, the chief man living in his time, having
his eyes put out, was led at last in a string, crying, "give a halfpenny
to Bellisarius." - Jeremiah Burroughs.

[Psalms 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 76:1</span></span>

1 In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.

2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion.

3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and
the battle. Selah.

4 Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.

5 The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of
the men of might have found their hands.

6 At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast
into a dead sleep.

7 Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when
once thou art angry?

8 Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared,
and was still.

9 When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.

10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath
shalt thou restrain.

11 Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him
bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings
of the earth.

[Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

"In Judah is God known." If unknown in all the world beside, he has so
revealed himself to his people by his deeds of grace, that he is no
unknown God to them. "His name is great in Israel." To be known, in the
Lord's case, is to be honoured: those who know his name admire the
greatness of it. Although Judah and Israel were unhappily divided
politically, yet the godly of both nations were agreed concerning
Jehovah their God; and truly whatever schisms may mar the visible
church, the saints always "appear as one" in magnifying the Lord their
God. Dark is the outer world, but within the favoured circle Jehovah is
revealed, and is the adoration of all who behold him. The world knows
him not and therefore blasphemes him, but his church is full of ardour
to proclaim his fame unto the ends of the earth.

[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)

"In Salem also is his tabernacle." In the peaceful city he dwells, and
the peace is perpetuated, because there his sacred tent is pitched. The
church of God is the place where the Lord abides, and he is to her the
Lord and giver of peace. "And his dwelling place in Zion." Upon the
chosen hill was the palace of Israel's Lord. It is the glory of the
church that the Redeemer inhabits her by his Holy Spirit. Vain are the
assaults of the enemy, for they attack not us alone, but the Lord
himself. Immanuel, God with us, finds a home among his people, who then
shall work us ill?

[Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003)

"There brake he the arrows of the bow." Without leaving his tranquil
abode, he sent forth his word and snapped the arrows of his enemies
before they could shoot them. The idea is sublime, and marks the ease,
completeness, and rapidity of the divine action. "The shield, and the
sword, and the battle." Every weapon, offensive and defensive, the Lord
dashed in pieces; death-bearing bolts and life-preserving armour were
alike of no avail when the Breaker sent forth his word of power. In the
spiritual conflicts of this and every age, the like will be seen; no
weapon that is formed against the church shall prosper, and every tongue
that rises against her in judgment she shall condemn. "Selah." It is
meet that we should dwell on so soul-stirring a theme, and give the Lord
our grateful adoration, - hence a pause is inserted.

[Psa 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)

"Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey." Far
more is Jehovah to be extolled than all the invading powers which sought
to oppress his people, though they were for power and greatness
comparable to mountains. Assyria had pillaged the nations till it had
become rich with mountains of spoil, this was talked of among men as
glory, but the Psalmist despises such renown, and declares that the Lord
was far more illustrious. What are the honours of war but brags of
murder? What the fame of conquerors but the reek of manslaughter? But
the Lord is glorious in holiness, and his terrible deeds are done in
justice for the defence of the weak and the deliverance of the enslaved.
Mere power may be glorious, but it is not excellent: when we behold the
mighty acts of the Lord, we see a perfect blending of the two qualities.

[Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005)

"The stouthearted are spoiled." They came to spoil, and lo! they are
spoiled themselves. Their stout hearts are cold in death, the angel of
the pestilence has dried up their life-blood, their very heart is taken
from them. "They have slept their sleep." Their last sleep - the sleep
of death. "And none of the men of might have found their hands." Their
arms are palsied, they cannot lift a finger, for the rigor of death has
stiffened them. What a scene was that when Sennacherib's host was
utterly destroyed in one night. The hands which were furious to pull
down Jerusalem, could not even be raised from the sod, the most valiant
warriors were as weak as the palsied cripples at the temple gate, yea,
their eyes they could not open, a deep sleep sealed their vision in
everlasting darkness. O God, how terrible art thou! Thus shalt thou
fight for us, and in the hour of peril overthrow the enemies of thy
gospel. Therefore in thee will we trust and not be afraid.

[Psa 76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)

"At thy rebuke." A word accomplished all, there was no need of a single
blow. "O God of Jacob." God of thy wrestling people, who again like
their father supplant their enemy; God of the covenant and the promise,
thou hast in this gracious character fought for thine elect nation.
"Both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep." They will
neither neigh nor rattle again; still are the trampings of the horses
and the crash of the cars; the cavalry no more creates its din. The
Israelites always had a special fear of horses and scythed chariots;
and, therefore, the sudden stillness of the entire force of the enemy in
this department is made the theme of special rejoicing. The horses were
stretched on the ground, and the chariots stood still, as if the whole
camp had fallen asleep. Thus can the Lord send a judicial sleep over the
enemies of the church, a premonition of the second death, and this he
can do when they are in the zenith of power; and, as they imagine, in
the very act of blotting out the remembrance of his people. The world's
Rabshakehs can write terrible letters, but the Lord answers not with pen
and ink, but with rebukes, which bear death in every syllable.

[Psa 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007)

"Thou, even thou, art to be feared." Not Sennacherib, nor Nisroch his
god, but Jehovah alone, who with a silent rebuke had withered all the
monarch's host.

"Fear him, ye saints, and then ye shall

Have nothing else to fear."

The fear of man is a snare, but the fear of God is a great virtue, and
has great power for good over the human mind. God is to be feared
profoundly, continually, and alone. Let all worship be to him only. "And
who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?" Who indeed? The
angels fell when their rebellion provoked his justice; Adam lost his
place in Paradise in the same manner; Pharaoh and other proud monarchs
passed away at his frown; neither is there in earth or hell any who can
abide the terror of his wrath. How blest are they who are sheltered in
the atonement of Jesus, and hence have no cause to fear the righteous
anger of the Judge of all the earth.

[Psa 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008)

"Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven." So complete an
overthrow was evidently a judgment from heaven; those who saw it not,
yet heard the report of it, and said, "This is the finger of God." Man
will not hear God's voice if he can help it, but God takes care to cause
it to be heard. The echoes of that judgment executed on the haughty
Assyrian are heard still, and will ring on adown all the ages, to the
praise of divine justice. "The earth feared, and was still." All nations
trembled at the tidings, and sat in humbled awe. Repose followed the
former turmoils of war, when the oppressor's power was broken, and God
was reverenced for having given quiet to the peoples. How readily can
Jehovah command an audience! It may be that in the latter days he will,
by some such miracles of power in the realms of grace, constrain all
earth's inhabitants to attend to the gospel, and submit to the reign of
his all-glorious Son. So be it, good Lord.

[Psa 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)

"When God arose to judgment." Men were hushed when he ascended the
judgment-seat and actively carried out the decrees of justice. When God
is still the people are in tumult; when he arises they are still as a
stone. "To save all the meek of the earth." The Ruler of men has a
special eye towards the poor and despised; he makes it his first point
to right all their wrongs. "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth." They have little enough of it now, but their avenger is
strong and he will surely save them. He who saves his people is the same
God who overthrew their enemies; he is as omnipotent to save as to
destroy. Glory be unto his name. "Selah." Here pause, and let devout
contemplations adore the God of Jacob.

[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

"Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee." It shall not only be
overcome but rendered subservient to thy glory. Man with his breath of
threatening is but blowing the trumpet of the Lord's eternal fame.
Furious winds often drive vessels the more swiftly into port. The devil
blows the fire and melts the iron, and then the Lord fashions it for his
own purposes. Let men and devils rage as they may, they cannot do
otherwise than subserve the divine purposes. "The remainder of wrath
shalt thou restrain." Malice is tethered and cannot break its bounds.
The fire which cannot be utilised shall be damped. Some read it "thou
shalt gird," as if the Lord girded on the wrath of man as a sword to be
used for his own designs, and certainly men of the world are often a
sword in the hand of God, to scourge others. The verse clearly teaches
that even the most rampant evil is under the control of the Lord, and
will in the end be overruled for his praise.

[Psa 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)

"Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God." Well may we do so in memory of
such mercies and judgments. To vow or not is a matter of choice, but to
discharge our vows is our bounden duty. He who would defraud God, his
own God, is a wretch indeed. He keeps his promises, let not his people
fail in theirs. He is their faithful God and deserves to have a faithful
people. "Let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that
ought to be feared." Let surrounding nations submit to the only living
God, let his own people with alacrity present their offerings, and let
his priests and Levites be leaders in the sacred sacrifice. He who
deserves to be praised as our God does, should not have mere verbal
homage, but substantial tribute. Dread Sovereign, behold I give myself
to thee.

[Psa 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012)

"He shall cut off the spirit of princes." Their courage, skill, and life
are in his hands, and he can remove them as a gardener cuts off a slip
from a plant. None are great in his hand. Caesars and Napoleons fall
under his power as the boughs of the tree beneath the woodman's axe. "He
is terrible to the kings of the earth." While they are terrible to
others he is terrible to them. If they oppose themselves to his people,
he will make short work of them; they shall perish before the terror of
his arm, "for the Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name." Rejoice
before him all ye who adore the God of Jacob.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 77](psa077)

</div>
