<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa117)  [Next](psa119) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 118:0</span></span>

Author and Subject. - In the book of Ezra, [Ezr
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010), [Ezr
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011), we read that "when the builders
laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, they set the priests in
their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with
cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David king of
Israel. And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the Lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever
toward Israel. And all the people shouted wills a great shout, when they
praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the Lord was
laid." Now the words mentioned in Ezra are the first and last sentences
of this Psalm, and we therefore conclude that the people chanted the
whole of this sublime song; and, moreover, that the use of this
composition on such occasions was ordained by David, whom we conceive to
be its author. The next step leads us to believe that he is its subject,
at least in some degree; for it is clear that the writer is speaking
concerning himself in the first place, though he may not have strictly
confined himself to all the details of his own personal experience. That
the Psalmist had a prophetic view of our Lord Jesus is very manifest;
the frequent quotations from this song in the New Testament Prove this
beyond all question; but at the same time it could not have been
intended that every particular line and sentence should be read in
reference to the Messiah, for this requires very great ingenuity, and
ingenious interpretations are seldom true. Certain devout expositors
have managed to twist the expression of the seventeenth verse, "I shall
not die, but live," so as to make it applicable to our Lord, who did
actually die, and whose glory it is that he died; but we cannot bring
our minds to do such violence to the words of holy writ.

The Psalm seems to us to describe either David or some other man of God
who was appointed' by the divine choice to a high and honourable office
in Israel. This elect champion found himself rejected by his friends and
fellow-countrymen, and at the same time violently opposed by his
enemies. In faith in God he battles for his appointed place, and in due
time he obtains it in such a way as greatly to display the power and
goodness of the Lord. He then goes up to the house of the Lord to offer
sacrifice, and to express his gratitude for the divine interposition,
all the people blessing him, and wishing him abundant prosperity. This
heroic personage, whom we cannot help thinking to 'be David himself,
broadly typified our Lord, but not in such a manner that in all the
minutiae of his struggles and prayers we are to hunt for parallels. The
suggestion of Alexander that the speaker is a typical individual
representing the nation, is exceedingly well worthy of attention; but it
is not inconsistent with the idea that a personal leader may be
intended, since that which describes the leader will be in a great
measure true of his followers. The experience of the Head is that of the
members, and both may be spoken of in much the same terms. Alexander
thinks that the deliverance celebrated cannot be identified with any one
so exactly as with that from the Babylonian exile; but we judge it best
to refer it to no one incident in particular, but to regard it as a
national song, adapted alike for the rise of a chosen hero, and the
building of a temple. Whether a nation is re-founded by a conquering
prince, or a temple founded by the laying of its corner-stone in joyful
state, the Psalm is equally applicable.

Division. - We propose to divide the Psalm thus, from [Psa
118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001) the faithful are called upon
to magnify the everlasting mercy of the Lord; [Psa
118:5-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005) the Psalmist gives forth a
narrative of his experience, and are expression of his faith; in [Psa
118:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019) he asks admittance into the
house of the Lord, and begins the acknowledgment of the divine
salvation. In [Psa 118:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022) the
priests and people recognize their ruler, magnify the Lord for him,
declare him blessed, and bid him approach the altar with his sacrifice.
In [Psa 118:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028) the grateful hero
himself exalts God the even merciful.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001). -

I. The subject of song - "O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good."

II\. The chorus - "His mercy endureth for ever."

III\. The choir - "Let Israel now say," etc.; "Let the house of Aaron,"
etc.; "Let them that fear the Lord," etc.

IV\. The rehearsal - "Let them now say," that they may be better
prepared for universal praise hereafter.

[Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005). -

I. The season for prayer - "in distress."

II\. The answer in season - "The Lord answered me."

III\. The answer beyond the request - "And set me," etc.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006). -

I. When may a man know that God is on his side?

II\. What confidence may that man enjoy who is assured of divine aid?

[Psa 118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007). -

I. The value of true friends.

II\. The greater value of help from above.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008), [Psa
118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009). - "Beter." It is wiser, surer,
morally more right, more ennobling, more happy in result.

[Psa 118:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010). - Take a wide range and
consider what has been done, should be done, and may be done "in the
name of the Lord."

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012). -

I. Faith's innumerable annoyances.

II\. Their speedy end.

III\. Faith's complete victory.

[Psa 118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013). -

I. Our great antagonist.

II\. His fierce attacks.

III\. His evident object: "that I might fall."

IV\. His failure: "but the Lord helped me."

[Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014). -

I. Strength under affliction.

II\. Song in hope of deliverance.

III\. Salvation, or actual escape out of trial.

[Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015). - The joy of Christian
households. It is joy in salvation: it is expressed, - "The voice" : it
abides: "the voice is" : it is joy in the protection and honour given by
the Lord's right hand.

[Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015), [Psa
118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016). -

I. True joy is peculiar to the righteous.

II\. In their tabernacles: in their pilgrimage state.

III\. For salvation: rejoicing and salvation go together.

IV\. From God: "the right hand," etc.: three right hands; both the
salvation and the joy are from the hand of the Father and the Son and
the Holy Ghost; the right hand of each doeth valiantly. - G. R.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017). -

I. Good men are often in special danger: Joseph in the pit; Moses in the
ark of bulrushes; Job on the dunghill; David's narrow escapes from the
hand of Saul; Paul let down in a basket; what a fruit basket was that!
How much was suspended upon that cord! The salvation of how many!

II\. Good men have often a presentiment of their recovery from special
danger: "I shall not die, but live."

III\. Good men have a special desire for the preservation of their
lives: "live and declare the works of the Lord." - G. R.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017), [Psa
118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019), [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022). - The victory of the risen
Saviour and its far-reaching consequences:

I. Death is vanquished;

II\. the gates of righteousness are opened;

III\. the corner-stone of the church is laid. - Deichert, in Lange's
Commentary.

[Psa 118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018). -

I. The afflictions of the people of God are chastisements. "The Lord
hath chastened me."

II\. Those chastisements are often severe: "hath chastened me sore."

III\. The severity is limited: "it is not unto death." - G. R.

[Psa 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019). -

I. Access to God desired.

II\. Humbly requested: "Open to me."

III\. Boldly accepted: "I will go into them."

IV\. Gratefully enjoyed: "And praise the Lord."

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022). - In these words we may
notice the following particulars.

I. The metaphorical view in which the church is here represented,
namely, that of a house or building.

II\. The character that our Immanuel bears with respect to this
building; he is the stone in a way of eminence, without whom there can
be no building, no house for God to dwell in among the children of men.

III\. The character of the workmen employed in this spiritual structure;
they are called builders.

IV\. A fatal error they are charged with in building the house of God;
they refuse the stone of God's choosing; they do not allow him a place
in his own house.

V. Notice the place that Christ should and shall have in this building,
let the builders do their worst; he is made the head stone of the
corner. The words immediately following declare how this effected, and
how the saints are affected with the views of his exaltation,
notwithstanding the malice of hell and earth: "This is the Lord's doing,
and it is wonderful in our eyes." - Ebenezer Erskine.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), [Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023). -

I. The mystery stated.

1\. That which is least esteemed by men as a means of salvation is most
esteemed by God.

2\. That which is most esteemed by God when made known is least esteemed
by man.

II\. The mystery explained. The way of salvation is the Lord's doing,
therefore marvellous in our eyes. - G. R.

[Psa 118:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022). -

I. Christ rejected.

II\. Christ exalted.

III\. His exaltation is due to God alone.

IV\. His exaltation commences a new era.

V. His exaltation suggests a new prayer.

See Spurgeon's Sermon, No. 1,420.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024). -

I. What is spoken of.

1\. The gospel day.

2\. The sabbath day.

II\. What is said of it.

1\. It is given by God.

2\. To be joyfully received by man. - G. R.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025). - What is church
prosperity? Whence must it come? How can we obtain it?

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025). -

I. The object of the prayer.

1\. Salvation from sin.

2\. Prosperity in righteousness.

II\. The earnestness of the prayer: "I beseech thee, I beseech thee."

III\. The urgency of the prayer, "now - now" - now that the gates of
righteousness are open, now that the foundation stone is laid, now that
the gospel day has come - now, Lord! now! - G. R.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027). - "Bind the sacrifice,"
etc. Devotion is the mother, and she hath four daughters.

1\. Constancy: "Bind the sacrifice."

2\. Fervency: Bind it "with cords."

3\. Wisdom. Bind it "to the altar."

4\. Confidence. Even to the "horns" of the altar. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027). - "Bind the sacrifice
with cords," etc.

I. What is the sacrifice? Our whole selves, every talent, all our time,
property, position, mind, heart, temper, life to the last.

II\. Why does it need binding? It is naturally restive. Long delay,
temptations, wealth, rank, discouragement, scepticism, all tend to drive
it from the altar.

III\. To what is it bound? To the doctrine of atonement. To Jesus and
his work. To Jesus and our work.

IV\. What are the cords? our own vows. The need of souls. Our joy in the
work. The great reward. The. love of Christ working upon us by the Holy
Spirit.

[Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028). -

I. The gladdest fact in all the world: "Thou art my God."

II\. The fittest spirit in which to enjoy it' "Praise thee."

[Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028). -

I. The effect of Christ being sacrificed for us: "Thou art my God."

II\. The effect of our being offered as an acceptable sacrifice to him.
"I will praise thee, I will exalt thee."

Or,

I. The covenant blessing: "Thou art my God."

II\. The covenant obligation: "I will praise thee." - G. R.

[Psa 118:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029). -

I. The beginning and the end of salvation is mercy.

II\. The beginning and end of its requirements is thanksgiving. - G. R.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

This is the last of those Psalms which form the great Hallel, which the
Jews sang at the end of the passover. - Adam Clarke.

Whole Psalm

The whole Psalm has a peculiar formation. It resembles the Maschal
Psalms, for each verse has of itself its completed sense, its own scent
and hue; one thought is joined to another as branch to branch and flower
to flower. - Franz Delitzsch.

Whole Psalm

Nothing can surpass the force and majesty, as well as the richly varied
beauty, of this Psalm. Its general burden is quite manifest. It is the
prophetic expression, by the Spirit of Christ, of that exultant strain
of anticipative triumph, wherein the virgin daughter of Zion will laugh
to scorn, in the immediate prospect of her Deliverer's advent, the
congregated armies of the Man of Sin ([Psa
118:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010)). - Arthur Pridham.

Whole Psalm

The two Psalms, [Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001) and [Psa
118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001), are placed together because,
though each is a distinct portion in itself, [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001) is an exordium to that which
follows it, an address and an invitation to the Gentile and heathen
world to acknowledge and praise Jehovah.

We are now arrived at the concluding portion of the hymn, which Christ
and his disciples sung preparatory to their going forth to the Mount of
Olives. Nothing could be more appropriate or better fitted to comfort
and encourage, at that awful period, than a prophecy which, overleaping
the suffering to be endured, showed forth the glory that was afterwards
to follow, and a song of triumph, then only recited, but in due time to
be literally acted, when the cross was to be succeeded by a crown. This
Psalm is not only frequently quoted in the New Testament, but it was
also partially applied at one period of our Saviour's sojourn on earth,
and thus we are afforded decisive testimony to the purpose for which it
is originally and prophetically destined. It was partially used at the
time when Messiah, in the days of his humiliation, was received with
triumph and acclamation into Jerusalem; and we may conclude it will be
fully enacted, when our glorified and triumphant Lord, coming with ten
thousand of his saints, will again stand upon the earth and receive the
promised salutation, "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of
Jehovah." This dramatic representation of Messiah coming in glory, to
take his great power and reign among us, is apportioned to the chief
character, "the King of kings and Lord of lords," to his saints
following him in procession, and to priests and Levites, representing
the Jewish nation.

The Conqueror and his attendants sing [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001), an introductory hymn, inviting
all, Jews and Gentiles, to share in the merciful kindness of God, and to
sing his praises. It is a gathering together of all the Lord's people,
to be witnesses and partakers of his glory. [Psa
118:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001) are sung by single voices. As
the procession moves along, the theme of rejoicing is announced. The
first voice repeats, "O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good,
because his mercy endureth for ever." Another single voice calls on
Israel to acknowledge this great truth; and a third invites the house of
Aaron, the priesthood. to acknowledge their share in Jehovah's love.
[Psa 118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004) is a chorus; the whole
procession, the living, and the dead who are raised to meet Christ ([Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)), shout aloud the burden of the
song, [Psa 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001). Arrived at the
temple gate, or rather, the gate of Jerusalem, the Conqueror alone
sings, [Psa 118:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005). He begins by
recounting the circumstances of his distress. Next, he tells of his
refuge: I betook me to God, I told him my sorrows, and he heard me. The
procession, in chorus, sings [Psa
118:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008), taking up the substance of
Messiah's chant, and fully echoing the sentiment, "It is better to trust
in the Lord than to put confidence in princes." The Conqueror alone
again sings [Psa 118:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010), [Psa
118:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#011), [Psa
118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012), [Psa
118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013), [Psa
118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014). He enlarges on the magnitude
of his dangers, and the hopelessness of his situation. It was not a
common difficulty, or a single enemy, whole nations compassed him about.
The procession in chorus, [Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015),
[Psa 118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016), attributes their Lord's
great deliverance to his righteous person, and to his righteous cause.
Justice and equity and truth, all demanded that Messiah should not be
trodden down. "Was it not thine arm, O Jehovah, which has gotten thee
the victory?" Messiah now takes up the language of a conqueror, [Psa
118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017), [Psa
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018), [Psa
118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019). My sufferings were sore, but
they were only for a season. I laid down my life, and I now take it up
again: and then, with a loud voice, as when he roused Lazarus out of the
grave, he cries to those within the walls, "Open to me the gates of
righteousness: I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord." The
priests and Levites within instantly obey his command, and while they
throw open the gates, they sing, "This is the gate of the Lord, into
which the righteous shall enter." As he enters, the Conqueror alone
repeats [Psa 118:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021). His sorrows are
ended, his victory is complete. The objects for which he lived and died,
and for which his prayers were offered, are now fulfilled, and thus, in
a few short words, he expresses his joy and gratitude to God. The
priests and Levites sing in chorus [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), [Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023), [Psa
118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024). Depositaries and expounders of
the prophecies as they had long been, they now for the first time, quote
and apply one, [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), which held
a conspicuous place, but never before was intelligible to Jewish ears.
"The man of sorrows," the stone which the builders refused, is become
the headstone of the corner. The Conqueror is now within the gates, and
proceeds to accomplish his good purpose, [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068). "Hosannah, save thy people, O
Lord, and send them now prosperity," [Psa
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025). The priests and Levites are
led by the Spirit to use the words foretold by our Lord, [Mat
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039). Now at length the veil is
removed, and his people say, "Blessed be he that cometh in the name of
the Lord," [Psa 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026). The Conqueror
and his train ([Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)) now praise
God, who has given light and deliverance and salvation, and they offer
to him the sacrifice of thanksgiving for all that they enjoy. The
Conqueror alone ([Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)) next
makes a solemn acknowledgment of gratitude and praise to Jehovah, and
then, all being within the gates, the united body, triumphant
procession, priests and Levites, end, as they commenced, "O give thanks
unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever." - R. H.
Ryland, in "The Psalms restored to Messiah," 1853.

Whole Psalm

It was Luther's favourite Psalm, his beauteous Confitemini, which "had
helped him out of what neither emperor nor king, nor any other man on
earth, could have helped him." With the exposition of this his noblest
jewel, his defence and his treasure, he occupied himself in the solitude
of his Patmos (Coburg). - Franz Delitzsch.

Whole Psalm

This is my Psalm, my chosen Psalm. I love them all; I love all holy
Scripture, which is my consolation and my life. But this Psalm is
nearest my heart, and I have a peculiar right to call it mine. It has
saved me from many a pressing danger, from which nor emperor, nor kings,
nor sages, nor saints, could have saved me. It is my friend; dearer to
me than all the honours and power of the earth.... But it may be
objected, that this Psalm is common to all; no one has a right to call
it his own. Yes; but Christ is also common to all, and yet Christ is
mine. I am not jealous of my property; I would divide it with the whole
world.... And would to God that all men would claim the Psalm as
especially theirs! It would be the most touching quarrel, the most
agreeable to God - a quarrel of union and perfect charity. - Luther.
From his Dedication of his Translation of Psalm 118, to the Abbot
Frederick of Nuremberg.

[Psa 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

"For he is good." The praise of God could not be expressed in fewer
words than these, "For he is good." I see not what can be more solemn
than this brevity, since goodness is so peculiarly the quality of God,
that the Son of God himself when addressed by some one as "Good Master,"
by one, namely, who beholding his flesh, and comprehending not the
fulness of his divine nature, considered him as man only, replied, "Why
callest thou me good? There is none good but one, that is God." And what
is this but to say, If thou wishest to call me good, recognize me as
God? - Augustine.

[Psa 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

"His mercy endureth for ever." What the close of [Psa
117:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001) says of God's truth, viz.,
that it endureth for ever, the beginning of Ps. 118 says of its sister,
his mercy or loving-kindness. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

As the salvation of the elect is one, and the love of God to them one,
so should their song be one, as here four several times it is said, "His
mercy endureth for ever." - David Dickson.

[Psa 118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

Because we hear the sentence so frequently repeated here, that "the
mercy of the Lord endureth for ever," we are not to think that the Holy
Spirit has employed empty tautology, but our great necessity demands it:
for in temptations and dangers the flesh begins to doubt of the mercy of
God: therefore nothing should be so frequently impressed on the mind as
this, that the mercy of God does not fail, that the Eternal Father
wearies not in remitting our sins. - Solomon Gesner.

[Psa 118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002)

"Let Israel now say." Albeit all tile elect have interest in God's
praise for mercies purchased by Christ unto them, yet the elect of
Israel have the first room in the song; for Christ is first promised to
them, and came of them according to the flesh, and will be most
marvellous about them. - David Dickson.

[Psa 118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002)

"Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever." Let such who
have had an experience of it, acknowledge and declare it to others; not
only believe it with their hearts, and privately give thanks for it, but
with the mouth make confession of it to the glory of divine grace. -
John Gill.

[Psa 118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002), [Psa
118:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#003), [Psa
118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)

"Now." Beware of delaying. Delays be dangerous, our hearts will cool,
and our affections will fall down. It is good then to be doing while it
is called to-day, while it is called now. Now, now, now, saith David;
there be three nows, and all to teach us that for aught we know, it is
now or never, to-day or not at all; we must praise God while the heart
is hot, else our iron will cool. Satan hath little hope to prevail
unless he can persuade us to omit our duties when the clock strikes, and
therefore his skill is to urge us to put it off till another time as
fitter or better. Do it anon, next hour, next day, next week (saith he);
and why not next year? Hereafter (saith he) it will be as well as now.
This he saith indeed, but his meaning (by hereafter) is never: and he
that is not fit to-day, hath no promise but he shall be more unapt
to-morrow. We have neither God nor our own hearts at command; and when
we have lost the opportunity, God to correct us perhaps will not give us
affections. The cock within shall not crow to awaken us, the sun shall
not shine, and then we are in danger to give over quite; and if we come
once to a total omission of one duty, why not of another, and of
another, and so of all? and then farewell to us. - Richard Capel
(1586-1656) in "Tentations, their Nature, Danger, Cure."

[Psa 118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)

"Them that fear the Lord." Who were neither of "the house of Aaron,"
that is, of the priests or Levites; nor of "the house of Israel," that
is, native Jews; yet might be of the Jewish religion, and "fear the
Lord." These were called proselytes, and are here invited to praise the
Lord. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)

"God's mercy endureth for ever." That is, his covenant mercy, that
precious church privilege: this is perpetual to his people, and should
perpetually remain as a memorial in our hearts. And therefore it is that
this is the foot or burthen of these first four verses. Neither is there
any idle repetition, but a notable expression of the saints'
insatiableness of praising God for his never failing mercy. These
heavenly birds having got a note, sing it over and over. In the last
Psalm there are but six verses, yet twelve Hallelujahs. - Abraham
Wright.

[Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

Perhaps [Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005), which says, "I
called upon the Lord in distress" literally, out of the narrow gorge),
"and the Lord answered me on the open plain" - which describes the
deliverance of Israel from their captivity, - may have been sung as they
defiled from a narrow ravine into the plain; and when they arrived at
the gate of the temple, then they broke forth in full chorus into the
words, "Open to me the gates of righteousness" ([Psa
118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)). - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

It is said, "I called upon the Lord." Thou must learn to call, and not
to sit there by thyself, and lie on the bench, hang and shake thy head,
and bite and devour thyself with thy thoughts; but come on, thou
indolent knave, down upon thy knees, up with thy hands and eyes to
heaven, take a Psalm or a prayer, and set forth thy distress with tears
before God. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

"The Lord answered me, and set me in a large place." It may be rendered,
The Lord answered me largely; as he did Solomon, when he gave him more
than he asked for; and as he does his people, when he gives then a
sufficiency and an abundance of his grace; not only above their deserts,
but above their thoughts and expectations. See [Eph
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020). - John Gill.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)

"The Lord is on my side." The reason which the Psalmist gives here for
his trusting, or for his not fearing, is the great fact, that the Lord
is on his side; and the prominent idea which this brings before us is
Alliance; the making common cause, which the great God undoubtedly does,
with imperfect, yet with earnest, trusting man.

We know very well the great anxiety shown by men, in all their worldly
conflicts, to secure the aid of a powerful ally; in their lawsuits, to
retain the services of a powerful advocate; or, in their attempts at
worldly advancement, to win the friendship and interest of those who can
further the aims they have in view. When Herod was highly displeased
with the armies of Tyre and Sidon, they did not venture to approach him
until they had made Blastus, the king's chamberlain, their friend. If
such and such a person be on their side, men think that all must go
well. Who so well off as he who is able to say, "The Lord is on my
side"? - Philip Bennet Power, in "The I Will's of the Psalms,"1861.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)

God is with those he calls and employs in public service. Joshua was
exhorted to be strong and of good courage, "For the Lord thy God is with
thee" ([Jos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009)). So also was
Jeremiah, "Be not afraid of their faces; for I am with thee to deliver
thee" ([Jer 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008)). God's presence
should put life into us. When inferior natures are backed with a
superior, they are full of courage: when the master is by, the dog will
venture upon creatures greater than himself and fear not; at another
time he will not do it when his master is absent. When God is with us,
who is the supreme, it should make us fearless. It did David; "The Lord
is on my side; I will not fear what man can do unto me." Let him do his
worst, frown, threat, plot, arm, strike; the Lord is on my side, he hath
a special care for me, he is a shield unto me, I will not fear, but
hope; as it is in the next verse, "I shall see my desire on them that
hate me," I shall see them changed or mined. Our help is in the name of
the Lord, but our fears are in the name of man. - William Greenhill.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)

"I will not fear." David, (or God's people, if you will,) being taught
by experience, exults in great confidence, but does not say, the Lord is
my helper, and I shall suffer no more, knowing that while he is a
pilgrim here below he will have much to suffer from his daily enemies;
but he says, "The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do
unto me." - Robert Bellarmine.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)

"Man" does not here mean a man, but mankind, or man as opposed to God. -
Joseph Addison Alexander.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

It may perhaps be considered beneath the dignity and solemnity of our
subject to remark, that this [Psa
118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008) of this Psalm is the middle
verse of the Bible. There are, I believe, 31,174 verses in all, and this
is the 15,587th. I do not wish, nor would I advise you to occupy your
time in counting for yourselves, nor should I indeed have noticed the
subject at all, but that I wish to suggest one remark upon it, and that
is, that though we may generally look upon such calculations as only
laborious idleness, - and they certainly have been carried to the most
minute dissection of every part of Scripture, such as to how many times
the word "Lord," the word "God," and even the word "and," occurs, - yet
I believe that the integrity of the holy volume owes a vast deal to this
scruple-weighing of these calculators. I do not say, nor do I think,
that they had such motives in their minds; but whatever their reasons
were, I cannot but think that there was an overruling Providence in thus
converting these trifling and apparently useless investigations into
additional guards and fences around the sacred text. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

"It is better to trust in the Lord," etc. Luther on this text calleth
it, artem artium, et mirificam, ac suam artem, non fidere hominibus,
that is, the art of arts, and that which he had well studied, not to put
confidence in man: as for trust in God, he calleth it sacrificium omnium
gratissimum et suavissimum, et cultum omnium pulcherrimum, the most
pleasant and sweetest of all sacrifices, the best of all services we
perform to God. - John Trapp.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

"It is better to trust in the Lord." All make this acknowledgment, and
yet there is scarcely one among a hundred who is fully persuaded that
God alone can afford him sufficient help. That man has attained a high
rank among the faithful, who resting satisfied in God, never ceases to
entertain a lively hope, even when he finds no help upon earth. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

It is a great cause oftentimes why God blesseth not means, because we
are so apt to trust in them, and rob God of his glory, not waiting for a
blessing at his hands. This causeth the Lord to cross us, and to curse
his own benefits, because we seek not him, but sacrifice to our own
nets, putting confidence in outward means. Therefore when we hope for
help from them, God bloweth upon them, and turneth them to our hurt and
destruction. - Abraham Wright.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

When my enemies have been brought to contempt, let not my friend present
himself unto me as a good man, and bid me repose my hope in himself; for
still must I trust in the Lord alone. - Augustine.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008), [Psa
118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

Nothing is more profitable than dwelling on familiar truths. Was there
ever a good man who did not believe that it was better to trust in
Jehovah than rely on any created arm? Yet David here repeats this truth,
that if possible It may sink deep into every mind. - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

"It is better to trust in the Load than to put confidence in princes."
David knew that by experience, for he confided in Saul his king, at
another time in Achish, the Philistine, at another time in Ahithophel
his own most prudent minister, besides some others; and they all failed
him; but he never confided in God without feeling the benefit of it. -
Robert Bellarmine.

[Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

"It is better," etc. Literally, "Good is it to trust in Jehovah more
than to confide in man." This is the Hebrew form of comparison, and is
equivalent to what is stated in our version. "It is better," etc. It is
better,

\(1\) because man is weak, - but God is Almighty;

\(2\) because man is selfish, - but God is benevolent;

\(3\) because man is often faithless and deceitful, - God never;

\(4\) because there are emergencies, as death, in which man cannot aid
us, however faithful, kind, and friendly he may be, - but there are no
circumstances in this life, and none in death, where God cannot assist
us; and

\(5\) because the ability of man to help us pertains at best only to the
present life, - the power of God will be commensurate with eternity. -
Albert Barnes.

[Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

"Than to put confidence in princes." Great men's words, saith one, are
like dead men's shoes; he may go barefoot that waiteth for them. - John
Trapp.

[Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

They who constantly attend Upon God, and depend upon him, have a much
sweeter life, than those that wait upon princes with great observance
and expectation. A servant of the Lord is better provided for than the
greatest favourites and minions of princes. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 118:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010)

"All nations compassed me about." A multitude of enemies everywhere
cannot hinder the presence of God with us. [Act
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028). They are without; He is within,
in our hearts; they are flesh; He is Spirit: they are frail; He is
immortal and invincible. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 118:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#011)

Whether Tertullus persecute the church with his tongue, or Elymas with
his hand, God hath the command of both. Indeed the wicked are the
mediate causes of our troubles: the righteous are as the centre, the
other the circumference; which way soever they turn, they find
themselves environed; yet still the centre is fixed and immovable, being
founded upon Christ. It is good for some men to have adversaries; for
often they more fear to sin, lest they should despise them, than dislike
it for conscience, lest God should condemn them. They speak evil of us:
if true, let us amend it; if false, contemn it; whether false or true,
observe it. Thus we shall learn good out of their evil; make them our
tutors, and give them our pupilage. In all things let us watch them, in
nothing fear them: "which is to them an evident token of perdition, but
to us of salvation," [Phi 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028). The
church is that tower of David; if there be a thousand weapons to wound
us, there are a thousand shields to guard us, [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004). - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"They compassed me about like bees." Christ's enemies are so spiteful,
that in fighting against his kingdom, they regard not what become of
themselves, so they may hurt his people; but as the bee undoeth herself
in stinging, and loseth her life or her power with her sting, so do
they. All that the enemies of Christ's church can do against his people
is but to trouble them externally; their wounds are like the sting of a
bee, that is, unto pain and swelling, and a short trouble only, but are
not deadly. - David Dickson.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"They compassed me about like bees." Now, as the north-east wind of
course was adverse to any north-east progress, it was necessary that the
boat should be towed by the crew. As the rope was being drawn along
through the grass on the banks it happened that it disturbed a swarm of
bees. In a moment, like a great cloud, they burst upon the men who were
dragging; everyone of them threw himself headlong into the water and
hurried to regain the boat. The swarm followed at their heels, and in a
few seconds filled every nook and cranny of the deck. What a scene of
confusion ensued may readily be imagined.

Without any foreboding of ill, I was arranging my plants in my cabin,
when I heard all around me a scampering which I took at first to be
merely the frolics of my people, as that was the order of the day. I
called out to enquire the meaning of the noise, but only got excited
gestures and reproachful looks in answer. The cry of "Bees! bees!" soon
broke upon my ear, and I proceeded to light a pipe. My attempt was
entirely in vain; in an instant bees in thousands are about me, and I am
mercilessly stung all over my face and hands. To no purpose do I try to
protect my face with a handkerchief, and the more violently I fling my
hands about, so much the more violent becomes the impetuosity of the
irritated insects. The maddening pain is now on my cheek, now in my eye,
now in my hair. The dogs from under my bed burst out frantically,
overturning everything in their way. Losing well nigh all control over
myself, I fling myself into the river; I dive down, but all in vain, for
the stings rain down still upon my head. Not heeding the warnings of my
people, I creep through the reedy grass to the swampy bank. The grass
lacerates my hands, and I try to gain the mainland, hoping to find
shelter in the woods. All at once four powerful arms seize me and drag
me back with such force that I think I must be choked in the mud. I am
compelled to go back on board, and flight is not to be thought of.... I
felt ready, in the evening, for an encounter with half a score of
buffaloes or a brace of lions rather than have anything more to do with
bees; and this was a sentiment in which all the ship's company heartily
concurred. - George Schweinfurth, in "The Heart of Africa," 1873.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

David said of his enemies, that they came about him like "bees"; he doth
not say like wasps. For though they used their stings, yet he found
honey in them too. - Peter Smith, 1644.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"They compassed me about like bees."

As wasps, provoked by children in their play,

Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,

In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,

Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage,

All rise in arms, and with a general cry,

Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny;

Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,

So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms.

\- Homer.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"They are quenched as the fire of thorns." The illustration from the
"fire of thorns" is derived from the fact that they quickly kindle into
a blaze, and then the flame soon dies away. In Eastern countries it was
common to burn over their fields in the dry time of the year, and thus
to clear them of thorns and briers and weeds. Of course, at such a time
they would kindle quickly, and burn rapidly, and would soon be consumed.
So the Psalmist says it was with his enemies. He came upon them,
numerous as they were, as the fire runs over a field in a dry time,
burning everything before it. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"In the name of the Lord." This has been understood as the tessera, the
sentence of attack, or signal to engage, like those of Cyrus - Jupiter
is our leader and ally - Jupiter our captain and preserver. Cyropaed. 1.
3 and 7; and Gideon, [Jdg 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#018). This
interpretation being only founded on the repetition, may it not more
probably be designed as suited to the musical performance? - Samuel
Burder.

[Psa 118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013)

"Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall." The apostrophe is
strong, and probably directed to some particular person in the battle,
who had put David in great danger. - Samuel Burder.

[Psa 118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013)

"Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall." Thou hast indeed. Thou
hast done thy part, O Satan, and it has been well done. Thou hast known
all my weakest parts, thou hast seen where my armour was not buckled on
tightly, and thou hast attacked me at the right time and in the right
way. The great Spanish poet, Calderon, tells of one who wore a heavy
suit of armour for a whole year, and laid it by for one hour, and in
that hour the enemy came, and the man paid for his negligence with his
life. "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is tried
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them
that love him." - John Mason Neale.

[Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014)

"The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation." "My
strength," that I am able to resist my enemies; "my salvation," that I
am delivered from my enemies; "my song," that I may joyfully praise him
and sing of him after I am delivered. - William Nicholson, 1662.

[Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014)

Good songs, good promises, good proverbs, good doctrines are none the
worse for age. What was sung just after the passage of the Red Sea, is
here sung by the prophet, and shall be sung to the end of the world by
the saints of the Most High. - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014)

"And is become my salvation." Not that he hath become anything which he
was not before, but because his people, when they believed on him,
became what they were not before, and then he began to be salvation unto
them when turned towards him, which he was not to them when turned away
from himself. - Augustine.

[Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015)

"The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous." Every one should be careful that his dwelling is one of the
tabernacles of the righteous, and that he himself together with his
household should walk in righteousness ([Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)). And he should be so diligent in
hymns and sacred songs, that his rooms should resound with them. -
Martin Geier.

[Psa 118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016)

"The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly." Thrice he celebrateth
God's right hand, to set forth his earnest desire to say the utmost; or,
in reference to the Sacred Trinity, as some will have it. - John Trapp.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"I shall not die, but live." As Christ is risen, "we shall not die, but
live"; we shall not die eternally, but we shall live in this world, the
life of grace, and in the world to come, the life of glory; that we may
in both declare the "works" and chant the praises of God our Saviour. We
are "chastened" for our sins, but "not given over to death" and
destruction everlasting; nay, our being "chastened" is now a proof that
we are not so given over; "for what son is he whom the father chasteneth
not?" [Heb 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#007). - George Horne.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"I shall not die, but live." To live, signifies, not barely to live, but
to live comfortably, to have content with our life; to live is to
prosper. Thus the word is often used in Scripture. "I shall not die, but
live." David did not look upon himself as immortal, or that he should
never die; he knew he was subject to the statute of death: but the
meaning is, I shall not die now, I shall not die by the hands of these
men, I shall not die the death which they have designed me to; or when
he saith, "I shall not die, but live," his meaning is, I shall live
comfortably and prosperously, I shall live as a king. That which we
translate ([Sa1 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024)) "God save the
king," is, "Let the king live," that is, let him prosper, and have good
days; let him have peace with all, or victory over his enemies. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"I shall not die," etc. The following incident is worth recording:
"Wicliffe was now getting old, but the Reformer was worn out rather by
the harassing attacks of his foes, and his incessant and ever-growing
labours, than with the weight of years, for he was not yet sixty. He
fell sick. With unbounded joy the friars heard that their great enemy
was dying. Of course he was overwhelmed with horror and remorse for the
evil he had done them, and they would hasten to his bedside and receive
the expression of his penitence and sorrow. In a trice a little crowd of
shaven crowns assembled round the couch of the sick man - delegates from
the four orders of friars. 'They began fair,' wishing him 'health and
restoration from his distemper"; but speedily changing their tone, they
exhorted him, as one on the brink of the grave, to make full confession,
and express his unfeigned grief for the injuries he had inflicted on
their order. Wicliffe lay silent till they should have made an end,
then, making his servant raise him a little on his pillow, and fixing
his keen eyes upon them, he said with a loud voice, 'I shall not die,
but live, and declare the evil deeds of the friars.' The monks rushed in
astonishment and confusion from the chamber. - J. A. Wylie, in "The
History of Protestantism."

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"I shall not die," not absolutely, for see [Psa
89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048); [Heb
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027); but not in the midst of my days,
[Psa 102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024); nor according to the will
of mine enemies, who "thrust at me that I might fall," [Psa
118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013). But, on the contrary, I shall
live, not simply as he had hitherto lived, in the greatest distress,
which would be a wretched life, a living death: but lively, joyous,
happy. Of this, he says he is secure; this the word asserts. On what
foundation does he rest? [Psa 118:14, 19
118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014), "Because God had become his
salvation," and "the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly." - Jacob
Alting.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"And declare the works of the Lord." Matter of praise abounds in all the
divine works, both of the general creation and preservation and of the
redemption of our souls: chiefly, that God, besides the life of nature,
has given to us the life of grace, without which we could not properly
praise God and declare his works. - Rivetus.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"And declare the works of the Lord." In the second member of the verse,
he points out the proper use of life, God does not prolong the lives of
his people, that they may pamper themselves with meat and drink, sleep
as much as they please, and enjoy every temporal blessing; but to
magnify him for his benefits which he is daily heaping upon them. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

According to Matthesius, Luther had this verse written against his study
wall.

[Psa 118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)

"The Lord hath chastened me sore." Strong humours require strong physic
to purge them out. Where corruption is deeply rooted in the heart, a
light or small matter will not serve the turn to work it out. No; but a
great deal of stir and ado must be made with it. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)

"But he hath not given me over unto death." It might have been worse,
may the afflicted saint say, and it will be better; it is in mercy and
in measure that God chastiseth his children. It is his care that "the
spirit fail not before him, nor the souls which he hath made," [Isa
57:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016). If his child swoons in the
whipping, God lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life
into it again. - John Trapp.

[Psa 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)

"Open to me the gates of righteousness." The gates won by his
righteousness, to whom we daily say, "Thou only art holy"; the gates
which needed the "Via Dolorosa" and the cross, before they could roll
back on their hinges. On a certain stormy afternoon, after the sun had
been for three hours darkened, the world again heard of that Eden from
which, four thousand years before, Adam had been banished. "Verily I say
unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in paradise." O blessed
malefactor, who thus entered into the heavenly gardens! O happy thief,
that thus stole the kingdom of heaven! And see how valiantly he now
enters it. "Open to me the gates of righteousness." Not "God be merciful
to me a sinner"; not "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean." But
this is what is called the suppliant omnipotency of prayer. "Blessed are
they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. - John Mason
Neale.

[Psa 118:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021)

"I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me." There is a point which we
would especially notice, and that is, praise for hearing prayer. In this
point, almost above all others, God is frequently robbed of his praise.
Men pray; they receive an answer to their prayers; and then forget to
praise. This happens especially in small things; we should ever remember
that whatever is worth praying for, is worth praising for also. The fact
is, we do not recognize God in these small things as much as we should;
if we do praise, it is for the receipt of the blessing, with which we
are pleased, leaving out of account the One from whom the blessing has
come. This is not acceptable to God' we must see him in the blessing, if
we would really praise. The Psalmist says, "I will praise thee: for thou
hast heard me"; he praised not only because he had received, but also
because he had heard-because the living God, as a hearing God, was
manifested in his mercies. And when we know that God has heard us, let
us not delay our praise; if we put off our thanksgiving until perhaps
only the evening, we may forget to praise at all; and if we do praise,
it will in all probability be with only half the warmth which would
animate our song at first. God loves a quick return for his blessings;
one sentence of heartfelt thanksgiving is worth all the formalism of a
more laboured service. There is a freshness about immediate praise which
is like the bloom upon the fruit; its being spontaneous adds ineffably
to its price.

Trace, then, dear reader, a connection between your God and your
blessing. Recognize his hearing ear as well as his bounteous hand, and
be yours the Psalmist's words, "I will praise thee: for thou hast heard
me." - Philip Bennet Power.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone." "The head stone of the corner." Christ Jesus is a stone: no
firmness, but in him. A fundamental stone: no building, but on him. A
comer stone: no piecing nor reconciliation, but in him. - James Ford,
1856.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The Stone which the builders rejected," etc. To apply it to Christ "The
Stone" is the ground of all. Two things befall it; two things as
contrary as may be, - 1. Refused, cast away; then, called for again, and
made head of the building. So, two parts there are to the eye. 1. The
refusing; 2. the raising; which are his two estates, his humiliation,
and his exaltation. In either of these you may observe two degrees, a
quibus, and quosque, by whom and how far. By whom refused? We weigh the
word, aedificantes: not by men unskilful, but by workmen, professed
builders; it is so much the worse. How far? We weigh the word, -
reprobaverunt; usque ad reprobari, even to a reprobation. It is not
improbaverunt, disliked, as not fit for some eminent place; but
reprobaverunt, utterly reprobate, for any place at all.

Again, exalted, by whom? The next words are a Domino, by God, as good a
builder, nay, better than the best of them; which makes amends for the
former. And How far? Placed by him, not in any part of the building; but
in the part most in the eye (the corner), and in the highest place of
it, the very head.

So rejected, and that by the builders, and to the lowest estate: and
from the lowest estate exalted, in caput anguli, to the chiefest place
of all; and that by God himself. - Lancelot Andrewes.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone which the builders refused," etc. We need not wonder, that
not only the powers of the world are usually enemies to Christ, and that
the contrivers of policies, those builders, leave out Christ in their
building, but that the pretended builders of the church of God, though
they use the name of Christ, and serve their turn with that, yet reject
himself, and oppose the power of his spiritual kingdom. There may be wit
and learning, and much knowledge of the Scriptures, amongst those that
are haters of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the power of godliness, and
corrupters of the worship of God. It is the spirit of humility and
obedience, and saving faith, that teach men to esteem Christ, and build
upon him. The vanity and folly of these builders' opinion appears in
this, that they are overpowered by the great Architect of the church:
his purpose stands. Notwithstanding their rejection of Christ, he is
still made the head corner stone. They cast him away by their
reproaches, and by giving him up to be crucified and then cast into the
grave, causing a stone to be rolled upon this stone which they had so
rejected, that it might appear no more, and so thought themselves sure.
But even from thence did he arise, and "became the head of the corner."
- Robert Leighton.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone which the builders refused," etc. That is to say, God sent a
living, precious, chosen stone on earth; but the Jews, who then had the
building of the church, rejected that stone, and said of it, "This man,
who observeth not the Sabbath, is not of God"; and, "We have no king but
Caesar," and, "That seducer said, I will arise after three days"; and
many similar things beside. But this stone, so rejected by the builders
as unfit for raising the spiritual edifice, "is become the head of the
corner"; has been made by God, the principal architect, the bond to
connect the two walls and keep them together; that is to say, has been
made the head of the whole church, composed of Jews and Gentiles; and
such a head, that whoever is not under him cannot be saved; and whoever
is built under him, the living stone, will certainly be saved. Now all
this "is the Lord's doing." done by his election and design. without any
intervention on the part of man, and therefore, "it is wonderful in our
eyes." For who is there that must not look upon it as a wonderful thing,
to find a man crucified, dead and buried, rising, after three days, from
the dead, immortal, with unbounded power, and declared Prince of men and
angels, and a way opened through him for mortal man, to the kingdom of
heaven, to the society of the angels, to a happy immortality? - Robert
Bellarmine.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone which the builders refused." Here we behold with how strong
and impregnable a shield the Holy Ghost furnishes us against the empty
vauntings of the Papal clergy. Be it so, that they possess the name,
"chief-builders"; but if they disown Christ, does it necessarily follow
that we must disown him also? Let us rather contemn and trample under
our feet all their decrees, and let us reverence this precious stone
upon which our salvation rests. By the expression, "is become the head
of the corner," we are to understand the real foundation of the church,
which sustains the whole weight of the edifice; it being requisite that
the corners should form the main strength of buildings. - John Calvin.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone," etc. That is I, whom the great men and rulers of the people
rejected ([Sa1 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019)), as the builders
of a house reject a stone unfit to be employed in it, am now become king
over Israel and Judah; and a type of that glorious King who shall
hereafter be in like manner refused ([Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014), and [Luk
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#017)), and then be by God exalted to
be Lord of all the world, and the foundation of all men's happiness. -
Thomas Fenton.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone." The author of Historia Scholastica mentions it as a
tradition that at the building of the second temple there was a
particular stone of which that was literally true, which is here
parabolically rehearsed, viz., that it had the hap to be often taken up
by the builders, and as oft rejected, and at last was found to be
perfectly fit for the most honourable place, that of the chief
cornerstone, which coupled the sides of the walls together, the
extraordinariness whereof occasioned the speech here following: "This is
the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes." - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The head stone of the corner." How of the "corner"? The corner is the
place where two walls meet: and there be many twos in this building: the
two walls of nations, Jews and Gentiles; the two of conditions, bond and
free; the two of sex, male and female: the great two (which this
\[Easter\] day we celebrate) of the quick and the dead; above all, the
greatest two of all, heaven and earth. - Lancelot Andrewes.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"Is become the head stone of the corner."

Higher yet and ever higher, passeth he those ranks above,

Where the seraphs are enkindled, with the flame of endless love

Passeth them, for not e'en seraphs ever loved so well as he

Who hath borne for his beloved, stripes, and thorns, and shameful tree;

Ever further, ever onward, where no angel's foot may tread,

Where the four-and-twenty elders prostrate fall in mystic dread:

Where the four strange living creatures sing their hymn before the
throne.

The Despised One and rejected passeth, in his might alone;

Passeth through the dazzling rainbow, till upon the Father's fight

He is seated, his Co-equal, God of God, and Light of Light.

R. F. Littledale.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"Head stone of the corner." It is now clear to all by divine grace whom
Holy Scripture calls the corner-stone. Him in truth who, taking unto
himself from one side the Jewish, and from the other the Gentile people,
unites, as it were, two walls in the one fabric of the Church; them of
whom it is written "He hath made both one"; who exhibited himself as the
Corner-stone, not only in things below, but in things above, because he
united on earth the nations of the Gentiles to the people of Israel, and
both together to angels. For at his birth the angels exclaimed, "On
earth peace, good will toward men." - Gregory, quoted by Henry Newland,
1860.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The corner." By Bede it is rendered as a reason why the Jewish builders
refused our Saviour Christ for the head-place, Quia in uno parfete,
stare amabant. They could endure no corner; they must stand alone upon
their own single wall; be of themselves, not join with Gentiles or
Samaritans. And Christ they endured not, because they thought if he had
been head he would have inclined that way. Alias oves oportet me
adducere ([Joh 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)). Alias they
could not abide. But sure, a purpose there must be, alias oyes
adducendi, of bringing in others, of joining a corner, or else we do not
facere secundum exemplar, build not according to Christ's pattern; our
fashion of fabric is not like his. - Lancelot Andrewes.

[Psa 118:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

By the consent of all expositors, in this Psalm is typed the coming of
Christ, and his kingdom of the gospel. This is manifested by an
exaltation, by an exultation, by a petition, by a benediction. The
exaltation: [Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), "The stone
which the builder's refused is become the head stone of the corner." The
Jews refused this stone, but God hath built his church upon it.

The exaltation: [Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024), "This is
the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it." A
more blessed day than that was wherein he made man, when he had done
making the world; "Rejoice we, and be glad in it."

The petition: [Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025), "Save now,
I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity."
Thy justice would not suffer thee to save without the Messiah; he is
come, "Save now, O Lord, I beseech thee." Our Saviour is come, let mercy
and salvation come along with him.

The benediction makes all clear: [Psa
118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026), "Blessed be he that cometh in
the name of the Lord." For what David here prophesied, the people after
accomplished [Mat 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009), "Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord." The corollary or sum is in my
text: [Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027), "God is the Lord,
which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the
horns of the altar." - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

"This is the day which the Lord hath made."

1\. Here is the doctrine of the Christian sabbath: "it is the day which
the Lord hath made," has made remarkable, made holy, has distinguished
it from other days; he has made it for man; it is therefore called the
Lord's day, for it bears his image and superscription.

2\. The duty of the Sabbath, "we will rejoice and be glad in it"; not
only in the institution of the day, that there is such a day appointed,
but in the occasion of it, Christ's becoming "the head of the corner."
This we ought to rejoice in, both as his honour and our advantage.
Sabbath days must be rejoicing days, and then they are to us as the days
of heaven. See what a good Master we serve, who having instituted a day
for his service, appoints it to be spent in holy joy. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

"This is the day," etc. The "queen of days," as the Jews call the
Sabbath. Arnobius interpreteth this text of the Christian Sabbath;
others, of the day of salvation by Christ exalted to be the head
corner-stone; in opposition to that dismal day of man's fall. - John
Trapp.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

Because believers have ever cause for comfort, therefore they are
commanded always to rejoice, Phil. 3. Whether their sins or sufferings
come into their hearts, they must not sorrow as they that have no hope.
In their saddest conditions, they have the Spirit of consolation. There
is seed of joy sown within them when it is turned under the clods, and
appears not above ground. But there are special times when God calls for
this grain to spring up. They have some red letters, some holy days in
the calendar of their lives, wherein this joy, as wine at a wedding, is
most seasonable; but among all those days it never relisheth so well, it
never tasteth so pleasantly, as on a Lord's-day. Joy suits no person so
much as a saint, and it becomes no season so well as a Sabbath.

Joy in God on other days is like the birds chirping in winter, which is
pleasing; but joy on the Lord's-day is like their warbling times and
pretty notes in spring, when all other things look with a suitable
delightful aspect. "This is the day which the Lord hath made," (he that
made all days, so especially this day, but what follows?) "we will
rejoice and be glad in it." In which words we have the church's solace,
or joy, and the season, or day of it. Her solace was great: "We will
rejoice and be glad." Those expressions are not needless repetitions,
but shew the exuberancy or high degree of their joy. The season of it:
"This is the day which the Lord hath made." Compare this place with [Mat
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022), [Mat
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023), and [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011), and you will find that the
precedent verses are a prophetical prediction of Christ's resurrection,
and so this verse foretells the church's joy upon that memorable and
glorious day. And, indeed, if "a feast be made for laughter," [Ecc
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019), then that day wherein Christ
feasteth his saints with the choicest mercies may well command their
greatest spiritual mirth. A thanksgiving-day hath a double precedency of
a fast-day. On a fast-day we eye God's anger; on a thanksgiving-day we
look to God's favour, In the former we specially mind our corruptions;
in the latter, God's compassions; - therefore a fast-day calls for
sorrow, a thanksgiving-day for joy. But the Lord's-day is the highest
thanksgiving-day, and deserveth much more than the Jewish Purim, to be a
day of feasting and gladness, and a good day. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

"Day which the Lord hath made." As the sun in heaven makes the natural
day by his light, so does Christ the Sun of Righteousness make ours a
spiritual day. - Starke.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

"Day which the Lord hath made." Adam introduced a day of sadness, but
another day is made by Christ: Abraham saw his day from afar, and was
glad; we will walk even now in his light. - Johann David Friesch, 1731.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Save." With the Hebrews salvation is a wide word, comprising all the
favours of God that may lead to preservation; and therefore the Psalmist
elsewhere extends this act both to man and beast, and, as if he would
comment upon himself, expounds σῶσον save, by εὐόδωσον prosper. It is so
dear a title of God, that the prophet cannot have enough of it. - Joseph
Hall.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord." Let him have the acclamations of the
people as is usual at the inauguration of a prince; let every one of his
loyal subjects shout for joy, "Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord." This
is like vivat rex, and speaks both a hearty joy for his accession to the
crown, an entire satisfaction in his government, and a zealous affection
to the interests and honour of it. Hosanna signifies, "Save now, I
beseech thee." Lord, save me, I beseech thee; let this Saviour be my
Saviour; and in order to that my Ruler; let me be taken under his
protection, and owned as one of his willing subjects. His enemies are my
enemies; Lord, I beseech thee, save me from them. Send me an interest in
that prosperity which his kingdom brings with it to all those that
entertain it. Let my soul prosper and be in health, in that peace and
righteousness which his government brings. [Psa
72:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#003). Let me have victory over those
lusts that war against my soul, and let divine grace go on in my heart,
conquering and to conquer. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Save now," or, hosanna. Our thanksgivings on earth must always be
accompanied with prayers for further mercies, and the continuance of our
prosperity; our hallelujahs with hosannas. - Ingram Cobbin.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord," etc. Hosanna. The cry of the
multitudes as they thronged in our Lord's triumphal procession into
Jerusalem ([Mat 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009), [Mat
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#018); [Mar
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#009), [Mar
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015), [Joh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013))was taken from this Psalm, from
which they were accustomed to recite [Psa
118:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025) at the Feast of Tabernacles.
On that occasion the great Hallel, consisting of Psalms 113-118 was
chanted by one of the priests and at certain intervals the multitudes
joined in the responses, waving their branches of willow and palm, and
shouting as they waved them, Hallelujah, or Hosannah, or "O Lord, I
beseech thee, send now prosperity." This was done at the recitation of
the first and last verses of Ps. 118; but according to the school of
Hillel, at the words "Save now, we beseech thee." The school of Shammai,
on the contrary, say it was at the words, "Send now prosperity." Rabban
Gamaliel and R. Joshua were observed by R. Akiba to wave their branches
only at the words, "Save now, we beseech thee" (Mishna, Succah, [Jos
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#009)). On each of the seven days during
which the feast lasted the people thronged the court of the temple, and
went in procession about the altar, setting their boughs bending towards
it; the trumpets sounding as they shouted Hosanna. But on the seventh
day they marched seven times round the altar, shouting meanwhile the
great Hosannah to the sound of the trumpets of the Levites (Lightfoot,
Temple Service, [Jos 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#002)). The very
children who could wave the palm branches were expected to take part in
the solemnity (Mishna, Succah, [Jos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015); [Mat
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)). From the custom of waving the
boughs of myrtle and willow during the service the name Hosannah was
ultimately transferred to the boughs themselves, so that according to
Elias Levita (Thisbi. s. v.), "the bundles of the willows of the brook
which they carry at the Feast of Tabernacles are called Hosannahs." -
William Aidis Wright, in "Smith's Dictionary of the Bible," 1863.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Send now prosperity." God will send it, but his people must pray for
it. "I came for thy prayers," [Dan
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012). - John Trapp.

[Psa 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)

"Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." The difference
between Christ and Antichrist is to be noticed, because Christ did not
come in his own name, but in the name of the Father; of which he himself
testified, John 5, "I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me
not; if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." Thus
all faithful ministers of the Church must not come in their own name. or
the name of Baal. or of Mammon and their own belly, but in the name of
God, with a lawful call; concerning which see [Heb
5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001), Rom. 10 and 15 - Solomon
Gesner.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light." The Psalmist was clearly
possessed of light, for he says, "God is the Lord, which hath shewed us
light." He was evidently, then, possessed of light; and this light was
in him as "the light of life." This light had shone into his heart; the
rays and beams of divine truth had penetrated into his conscience. He
carried about with him a light which had come from God; in this light he
saw light, and in this light he discerned everything which the light
manifested. Thus by this internal light he knew what was good and what
was evil, what was sweet and what was bitter, what was true and what was
false, what was spiritual and what was natural. He did not say, This
light came from creature exertion, this light was the produce of my own
wisdom, this light was nature transmuted by some action of my own will,
and thus gradually rose into existence from long and assiduous
cultivation. But he ascribes the whole of that light which he possessed
unto God the Lord, as the sole author and the only giver of it. Now, if
God the Lord has ever showed you and me the same light which he showed
his servant of old, we carry about with us more or less of a solemn
conviction that we have received this light from him. There will indeed,
be many clouds of darkness to cover it; there will often be doubts and
fears, hovering like mists and fogs over our souls, whether the light
which we have received be from God or not. But in solemn moments when
the Lord is pleased a little to revive his work; at times and seasons
when he condescends to draw forth the affections of our hearts unto
himself, to bring us into his presence, to hide us in some measure in
the hollow of his hand, and give us access unto himself, at such moments
and seasons we carry about with us, in spite of all our unbelief, in
spite of all the suggestions of the enemy, in spite of all doubts and
fears and suspicions that rise from the depths of the carnal mind, in
spite of all these counter-workings and underminings, we carry about
with us at these times a solemn conviction that we have light, and that
this light we have received from God. And why so? Because we can look
back to a time when we walked in no such light, when we felt no such
light, when everything spiritual and heavenly was dark to us, and we
were dark to them.

Those things which the Spirit of God enables a man to do, are in
Scripture sometimes called sacrifices. "That we may offer," we read,
"spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." The apostle
speaks of "receiving of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from the
brethren at Philippi; an odour of a sweet smell; a sacrifice acceptable
and well-pleasing to God." [Phi 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018).
So he says to the Hebrew church: "But to do good and to communicate
(that is, to the wants of God's people), forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased." [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016). Well, then, these spiritual
sacrifices which a man offers unto God are bound also to the horns of
the altar. They are not well-pleasing in the sight of God, except they
are bound to the horns of the altar, so as to derive all their
acceptance from the altar. Our prayers are only acceptable to God as
they are offered through the cross of Jesus. Our praises and
thanksgivings are only acceptable to God as they are connected' with the
cross of Christ, and ascend to the Father through the propitiation of
his dear Son. The ordinances of God's house are only acceptable to God
as spiritual sacrifices, when they are bound to the horns of the altar.
Both the ordinances of the New Testament - baptism and the Lord's supper
- have been bound by the hands of God himself to the horns of the altar;
and no one either rightly went through the one, or rightly received the
other, who had not been first spiritually bound by the same hand to the
horns of the altar. Every act of liberality, every cup of cold water
given in the name of a disciple, every feeling of sympathy and
affection, every kind word, every compassionate action shown to a
brother; all and each are only acceptable to God as they ascend to him
through the mediation of his dear Son. And, therefore, every sacrifice
of our own comfort, or of our own advantage, of our own time, or of our
own money, for the profit of God's children, is only a spiritual and
acceptable sacrifice so far as it is bound to the horns of the altar,
linked on to the cross of Jesus, and deriving all its fragrance and
odour from its connection with the incense there offered by the Lord of
life and glory. - J. C. Philpot.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

How comfortable is the light! 'Tis so comfortable that light and comfort
are often put for the same thing: "God is the Lord, which hath shewed us
light." that is. the light of counsel what to do. and the light of
comfort in what we do, or after all our sufferings. Light is not only a
candle held to us to do our work by, but it comforts and cheereth us in
our work. [Ecc 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#007). - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"Shewed us light:" "bind the sacrifice." Here is somewhat received;
somewhat to be returned. God hath blessed us, and we must bless God. His
grace and our gratitude, are the two lines my discourse must run upon.
They are met in my text; let them as happily meet in your hearts, and
they shall not leave you till they bring you to heaven. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"Bind the sacrifice with cords," etc. The sacrifice we are to offer to
God, in gratitude for redeeming love, is ourselves, not to be slain upon
the altar, but "living sacrifices" ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)) to be bound to the altar;
spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise, in which our hearts must be
fixed and engaged, as the sacrifice was bound "with cords to the horns
of the altar." - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"Bind the sacrifice," etc. 'Tis a saying among the Hebrews, that the
beasts that were offered in sacrifice, they were the most struggling
beasts of all the rest; such is the nature of us unthankful beasts, when
we should love God again, we are readier to run away from him; we must
be tied to the altar with cords, to draw from us love or fear. - Abraham
Wright.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"With cords." This word is sometimes used for thick twisted cords, [Jdg
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013); sometimes for thick branches of
trees, used at some feasts, [Eze
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#011), [Lev
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040). Hereupon this sentence may two
ways be read; bind the feast with thick branches, or bind the sacrifice
with cords; both mean one thing that men should keep the festivity with
joy and thanks to God, as Israel did at their solemnities. - Henry
Ainsworth.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"Even unto the horns of the altar." Before these words must be
understood, lead it' for the victims were bound to rings fixed in the
floor. "The horns" were architectural ornaments, a kind of capitals,
made of iron or of brass, somewhat in the form of the curved horns of an
animal, projecting from the four angles of the altar. The officiating
priest, when he prayed, placed his hands on them, and sometimes
sprinkled them with the blood of the sacrifice: compare [Exo
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#003); [Lev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007), [Lev
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#018). At the end of this verse the
word saying must be supplied. - Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"Unto the horns." That is, all the court over, until you come even to
the horns of the altar, intending hereby many sacrifices or boughs. -
Henry Ainsworth.

[Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)

"God." The original for "God" gives force to this passage: Thou art my
"El" - the Mighty One; therefore will I praise thee: my "Eloah" - a
varied form with substantially the same sense, "and I will extol thee" -
lift thee high in glory and honour. - Henry Cowles.

[Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)

This "extolling the Lord" will accomplish one of the great ends of
praise, viz., his exaltation. It is true that God both can and will
exalt himself but it is at once the duty and the privilege of his people
to exalt him. His name should be upborne and magnified by them; the
glory of that name is now, as it were, committed to them: what use are
we making of the opportunity and the privilege? - Philip Bennet Power.

[Psalms 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 118:1</span></span>

1 O Give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: because his mercy
endureth for ever.

2 Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

3 Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

4 Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

[Psa 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

"O give thanks unto the Lord." The grateful hero feels that he cannot
himself alone sufficiently express his thankfulness, and therefore he
calls in the aid of others. Grateful hearts are greedy of men's tongues,
mid would monopolize them all for God's glory. The whole nation was
concerned in David's triumphant accession, and therefore it was right
that they should unite in his adoring song of praise. The thanks were to
be rendered unto Jehovah alone, and not to the patience or valour of the
hero himself. It is always well to trace our mercies to him who bestows
them, and if we cannot give him anything else, let us at any rate give
him our thanks. We must not stop short at the second agent, but rise at
once to the first cause, and render all our praises unto the Lord
himself. Have we been of a forgetful or murmuring spirit? Let us hear
the lively language of the text, and allow it to speak to our hearts:
"Cease your complainings, cease from all self-glorification, and give
thanks unto the Lord." "For he is good." This is reason enough for
giving him thanks; goodness is his essence and nature, and therefore he
is always to be praised whether we are receiving anything from him or
not. Those who only praise God because he does them good should rise to
a higher note and give thanks to him because he is good. In the truest
sense he alone is good, "There is none good but one, that is God";
therefore in all gratitude the Lord should have the royal portion. If
others seem to be good, he is good. If others are good in a measure, he
is good beyond measure. When others behave badly to us, it should only
stir us up the more heartily to give thanks unto the Lord, because h is
good; and when we ourselves are conscious that we are far from being
good, we should only the more reverently bless him that "he is good." We
must never tolerate an instant's unbelief as to the goodness of the
Lord; whatever else may be questionable, this is absolutely certain,
that Jehovah is good; his dispensations may vary, but his nature is
always the same, and always good. It is not only that he was good, and
will be good, but he is good, let his providence be what it may.
Therefore let us even at this present moment, though the skies be dark
with clouds, yet give thanks unto his name.

"Because his mercy endureth for ever." Mercy is a great part of his
goodness, and one which more concerns us than any other, for we are
sinners and have need of his mercy. Angels may say that he is good, but
they need not his mercy and cannot therefore take an equal delight in
it; inanimate creation declares that he is good, but it cannot feel his
mercy, for it has never transgressed; but man, deeply guilty and
graciously forgiven, beholds mercy as the very focus and centre of the
goodness of the Lord. The endurance of the divine mercy is a special
subject for song: notwithstanding our sins, our trials, our fears, his
mercy endureth for ever. The best of earthly joys pass away, and even
the world itself grows old and hastens to decay, but there is no change
in the mercy of God; he was faithful to our forefathers, he is merciful
to us, and will be gracious to our children and our children's children.
It is to be hoped that the philosophical interpreters who endeavour to
clip the word "for ever" into a mere period of time will have the
goodness to let this passage alone. However, whether they do or not, we
shall believe in endless mercy - mercy to eternity. The Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the grand incarnation of the mercy of God, calls upon us
at every remembrance of him to give thanks unto the Lord, for "he is
good."

[Psa 118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002)

"Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever." God had made a
covenant with their forefathers, a covenant of mercy and love, and to
that covenant he was faithful evermore. Israel sinned in Egypt, provoked
the Lord in the wilderness, went astray again and again under the
judges, and transgressed at all times; and yet the Lord continued to
regard them as his people, to favour them with his oracles, and to
forgive their sins. He speedily ceased from the chastisements which they
so richly deserved, because he had a favour towards them. He put his rod
away the moment they repented, because his heart was full of compassion.
"His mercy endureth for ever" was Israel's national hymn, which, as a
people, they had been called upon to sing upon many former occasions;
and now their leader, who had at last gained the place for which Jehovah
had destined him, calls upon the whole nation to join with him in
extolling, in this particular instance of the divine goodness, the
eternal mercy of the Lord. David's success was mercy to Israel, as well
as mercy to himself. If Israel does not sing, who will? If Israel does
not sing of mercy, who can? If Israel does not sing when the Son of
David ascends the throne, the very stones will cry out.

[Psa 118:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#003)

"Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever." The
sons of Aaron were specially set apart to come nearest to God, and it
was only because of his mercy that they were enabled to live in the
presence of the thrice holy Jehovah, who is a consuming fire. Every time
the morning and evening lamb was sacrificed, the priests saw the
continual mercy of the Lord, and in all the holy vessels of the
sanctuary, and all its services from hour to hour, they had renewed
witness of the goodness of the Most High. When the high priest went in
unto the holy place and came forth accepted, he might, above all men,
sing of the eternal mercy. If this Psalm refers to David, the priests
had special reason for thankfulness on his coming to the throne, for
Saul had made a great slaughter among them, and had at various times
interfered with their sacred office. A man had now come to the throne
who for their Master's sake would esteem them, give them their dues, and
preserve them safe from all harm. Our Lord Jesus, having made all his
people priests unto God, may well call upon them in that capacity to
magnify the everlasting mercy of the Most High. Can any one of the royal
priesthood be silent?

[Psa 118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)

"Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endureth for ever."
If there were any throughout the world who did not belong to Israel
after the flesh, but nevertheless had a holy fear and lowly reverence of
God, the Psalmist calls upon them to unite with him in his thanksgiving,
and to do it especially on the occasion of his exaltation to the throne;
and this is no more than they would cheerfully agree to do, since every
good man in the world is benefited when a true servant of God is placed
in a position of honour and influence. The prosperity of Israel through
the reign of David was a blessing to all who feared Jehovah. A truly
God-fearing man will have his eye much upon God's mercy, because he is
deeply conscious of his need of it, and because that attribute excites
in him a deep feeling of reverential awe. "There is forgiveness with
thee that thou mayest be feared."

In the three exhortations, to Israel, to the house of Aaron, and to them
that fear the Lord, there is a repetition of the exhortation to say,
"that his mercy endureth for ever." We are not only to believe, but to
declare the goodness of God; truth is not to be hushed up, but
proclaimed. God would have his people act as witnesses, and not stand
silent in the day when his honour is impugned. Specially is it our joy
to speak out to the honour and glory of God when we think upon the
exaltation of his dear Son. We should shout "Hosannah," and sing loud
"Hallelujahs" when we behold the stone which the builders rejected
lifted into its proper place.

In each of the three exhortations notice carefully the word "now." There
is no time like time present for telling out the praises of God. The
present exaltation of the Son of David now demands from all who are the
subjects of his kingdom continual songs of thanksgiving to him who hath
set him on high in the midst of Zion. Now with us should mean always.
When would it be right to cease from praising God, whose mercy never
ceases?

The fourfold testimonies to the everlasting mercy of God which are now
before us speak like four evangelists, each one declaring the very pith
and marrow of the gospel; and they stand like four angels at the four
corners of the earth holding the winds in their hands, restraining the
plagues of the latter days that the mercy and long-suffering of God may
endure towards the sons of men. Here are four cords to bind the
sacrifice to the four horns of the altar, and four trumpets with which
to proclaim the year of jubilee to every quarter of the world. Let not
the reader pass on to the consideration of the rest of the Psalm until
he has with all his might lifted up both heart and voice to praise the
Lord, "for his mercy endureth for ever."

"Let us with a gladsome mind

Praise the Lord, for he is kind;

For his mercies shall endure

Ever faithful, ever sure."

[Psalms 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 118:5</span></span>

5 I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me
in a large place.

6 The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me?

7 The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see
my desire upon them that hate me.

8 It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man.

9 It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.

10 All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord will I
destroy them.

11 They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: but in the
name of the Lord I will destroy them.

12 They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of
thorns: for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.

13 Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped
me.

14 The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.

15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.

16 The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord
doeth valiantly.

17 I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

18 The Lord hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto
death.

[Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

"I called upon the Lord in distress," or, "out of anguish I invoked
Jah." Nothing was left him but prayer, his agony was too great for aught
beside; but having the heart and the privilege to pray he possessed all
things. Prayers which come out of distress generally come out of the
heart, and therefore they go to the heart of God. It is sweet to
recollect our prayers, and often profitable to tell others of them after
they are heard. Prayer may be bitter in the offering, but it will be
sweet in the answering. The man of God had called upon the Lord when he
was not in distress, and therefore he found it natural and easy to call
upon him when he was in distress. He worshipped, he praised, he prayed:
for all this is included in calling upon God, even when he was in a
straitened condition. Some read the original "a narrow gorge"; and
therefore it was the more joy to him when he could say "The Lord
answered me, and set me in a large place." He passed out of the defile
of distress into the well-watered plain of delight. He says, "Jah heard
me in a wide place," for God is never shut up, or straitened. In God's
case hearing means answering, hence the translators rightly put, "The
Lord answered me," though the original word is "heard." The answer was
appropriate to the prayer, for he brought him out of his narrow and
confined condition into a place of liberty where he could walk at large,
free from obstruction and oppression. Many of us can join with the
Psalmist in the declarations of this verse' deep was our distress on
account of sin, and we were shut up as in a prison under the law, but in
answer to the prayer of faith we obtained the liberty of full
justification wherewith Christ makes men free, and we are free indeed.
It was the Lord who did it, and unto his name we ascribe all the glory;
we had no merits, no strength, no wisdom, all we could do was to call
upon him, and even that was his gift; but the mercy which is to eternity
came to our rescue. we were brought out of bondage, and we were made to
delight ourselves in the length and breadth of a boundless inheritance.
What a large place is that in which the great God has placed us! All
things are ours, all times are ours, all places are ours, for God
himself is ours; we have earth to lodge in and heaven to dwell in, -
what larger place can be imagined? We need all Israel, the whole house
of Aaron, and all them that fear the Lord, to assist us in the
expression of our gratitude; and when they have aided us to the utmost,
and we ourselves have done our best, all will fall short of the praises
that are due to our gracious Lord.

[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)

"The Lord is on my side," or, he is "for me." Once his justice was
against me, but now he is my reconciled God, and engaged on my behalf.
The Psalmist naturally rejoiced in the divine help; all men turned
against him, but God was his defender and advocate, accomplishing the
divine purposes of his grace. The expression may also be translated "to
me," that is to say, Jehovah belongs to me, and is mine. What infinite
wealth is here! If we do not magnify the Lord we are of all men most
brutish. "I will not fear." He does not say that he should not suffer,
but that he would not fear: the favour of God infinitely outweighed the
hatred of men, therefore setting the one against the other he felt that
he had no reason to be afraid. He was calm and confident, though
surrounded with enemies, and so let all believers be, for thus they
honour God. "What can man do unto me?" He can do nothing more than God
permits; at the very uttermost he can only kill the body, but he hath no
more that he can do. God having purposed to set his servant upon the
throne, the whole race of mankind could do nothing to thwart the divine
decree: the settled purpose of Jehovah's heart could not be turned
aside, nor its accomplishment delayed, much less prevented, by the most
rancorous hostility of the most powerful of men. Saul sought to slay
David, but David outlived Saul, and sat upon Iris throne. Scribe and
Pharisee, priest and Herodian, united in opposing the Christ of God, but
he is exalted on high none the less because of their enmity. The
mightiest man is a puny thing when he stands ill opposition to God, yea,
he shrinks into utter nothingness. It were a pity to be afraid of such a
pitiful, miserable, despicable object as a man opposed to the almighty
God. The Psalmist here speaks like a champion throwing down the gauntlet
to all comers, defying the universe in arms; a true Bayard, without fear
and without reproach, he enjoys God's favour, and he defies every foe.

[Psa 118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007)

"The Lord taketh my part with them that help me." Jehovah condescended
to be in alliance with tile good man and his comrades; his God was not
content to look on, but he took part in the struggle. What a consolatory
fact it is that the Lord takes our part, and that when he raises up
friends for us he does not leave them to fight for us alone, but he
himself as our chief defender deigns to come into the battle and wage
war on our behalf. David mentioned those that helped him, he was not
unmindful of his followers; there is a long record of David's mighty men
in the book of Chronicles, and this teaches us that we are not to
disdain or think little of the generous friends who rally around us; but
still our great dependence and our grand confidence must be fixed upon
the Lord alone. Without him the strong helpers fail; indeed, apart from
him in the sons of men there is no help; but when our gracious Jehovah
is pleased to support and strengthen those who aid us, they become
substantial helpers to us.

"Therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me." The words, "my
desire," are added by the translators; the Psalmist said, "I shall look
upon my haters: I shall look them in the face, I shall make them cease
from their contempt, I shall myself look down upon them instead of their
looking down upon me. I shall see their defeat, I shall see the end of
them." Our Lord Jesus does at this moment look down upon his
adversaries, his enemies are his footstool; he shall look upon them at
his second coming, and at the glance of his eyes they shall flee before
him, not being able to endure that look with which he shall read them
through and through.

[Psa 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

"It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man." It is
better in all ways, for first of all it is wiser: God is infinitely more
able to help, and more likely to help, than man, and therefore prudence
suggests that we put our confidence in him above all others. It is also
morally better to do so, for it is the duty of the creature to trust in
the Creator. God has a claim upon his creatures: faith, he deserves to
be trusted; and to place our reliance upon another rather than upon
himself, is a direct insult to his faithfulness. It is better in the
sense of safer, since we can never be sure of our ground if we rely upon
mortal man, but we are always secure in the hands of our God. It is
better in its effect upon ourselves: to trust in man tends to make us
mean, crouching, dependent; but confidence in God elevates, produces a
sacred quiet of spirit, and sanctifies the soul. It is, moreover, much
better to trust in God, as far as the result is concerned; for in many
cases the human object of our trust fails from want of ability, from
want of generosity, from want of affection, or from want of memory; but
the Lord, so far from failing, does for us exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or even think. This verse is written out of the
experience of many who have first of all found the broken reeds of the
creature break under them, and have afterwards joyfully found the Lord
to be a solid pillar sustaining all their weight.

[Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

"It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes."
These should be the noblest of men, chivalrous in character, and true to
the core. The royal word should be unquestionable. They are noblest in
rank and mightiest in power, and yet as a rule princes are not one whir
more reliable than the rest of mankind. A gilded vane turns with the
wind as readily as a meaner weathercock. Princes are but men, and the
best of men are poor creatures. In many troubles they cannot help us in
the least degree; for instance, in sickness, bereavement, or death;
neither can they assist us one jot in reference to our eternal state. In
eternity a prince's smile goes for nothing; heaven and hell pay no
homage to royal authority. The favour of princes is proverbially fickle,
the testimonies of worldlings to this effect are abundant. All of us
remember the words put by the world's great poet into the lips of the
dying Wolsey; their power lies in their truth: -

"O how wretched

Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours!

There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,

That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin.

More pangs and fears than wars or women have;

And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,

Never to hope again.'

Yet a prince's smile has a strange witchery to many hearts, few are
proof against that tuft-hunting which is the index of a weak mind.
Principle has been forgotten and character has been sacrificed to
maintain position at court; yea, the manliness which the meanest slave
retains has been basely bartered for the stars and garters of a
profligate monarch. He who puts his confidence in God, the great King,
is thereby made mentally and spiritually stronger, and rises to the
highest dignity of manhood; in fact, the more he trusts the more is he
free, but the fawning sycophant of greatness is meaner than the dirt he
treads upon. For this reason and a thousand others it is infinitely
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.

[Psa 118:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010)

"All nations compassed me about." The hero of the Psalm, while he had no
earthly friend upon whom he could thoroughly rely, was surrounded by
innumerable enemies, who heartily hated him. He was hemmed in by his
adversaries, and scarce could find a loophole of escape from the bands
which made a ring around him. As if by common consent all sorts of
people set themselves against him, and yet he was more than a match for
them all, because he was trusting in the name of the Lord. Therefore
does he joyfully accept the battle, and grasp the victory, crying, "but
in the name of the Lord will I destroy them," or "cut them in pieces."
They thought to destroy him, but he was sure of destroying them; they
meant to blot out his name, but he expected to render not only his own
name but the name of the Lord his God more illustrious in the hearts of
men. It takes grand faith to be calm in the day of actual battle, and
especially when that battle waxes hot; but our hero was as calm as if no
fight was raging. Napoleon said that God was always on the side of the
biggest battalions, but the Psalmist-warrior found that the Lord of
hosts was with the solitary champion, and that in his name the
battalions were cut to pieces. There is a grand touch of the ego in the
last sentence, but it is so ever-shadowed with the name of the Lord that
there is none too much of it. He recognized his own individuality, and
asserted it: he did not sit still supinely and leave the work to be done
by God by some mysterious means; but he resolved with his own trusty
sword to set about the enterprise, and so become in God's hand the
instrument of his own deliverance. He did all in the name of the Lord,
but he did not ignore his own responsibility, nor screen himself from
personal conflict, for he cried, "I will destroy them." Observe that he
does not speak of merely escaping from them like a bird out of the snare
of the fowler, but he vows that he will carry the war into his enemies'
ranks, and overthrow them so thoroughly that there should be no fear of
their rising up a second time.

[Psa 118:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#011)

"They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about." He had such a
vivid recollection of his danger that his enemies seem to live again in
his verses. We see their fierce array, and their cruel combination of
forces. They made a double ring, they surrounded him in a circle of many
ranks, they not only talked of doing so, but they actually shut him up
and enclosed him as within a wall. His heart had vividly realized his
position of peril at the time, and now he delights to call it again to
mind in order that he may the more ardently adore the mercy which made
him strong in the hour of conflict, so that he broke through a troop,
yea, swept a host to destruction. "But in the name of the Lord will I
destroy them." I will subdue them, get them under my feet, and break
their power in pieces. He is as certain about the destruction of his
enemies as he was assured of their having compassed him about. They made
the circle three and four times deep, but for all that he felt confident
of victory. It is grand to hear a man speak in this fashion when it is
not boasting, but the calm declaration of his heartfelt trust in God.

[Psa 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

"They compassed me about like bees." They seemed to be everywhere, like
a swarm of bees, attacking him at every point; nimbly flying from place
to place, stinging him meanwhile, and inflicting grievous pain. They
threatened at first to baffle him: what weapon could he use against
them? They were so numerous, so inveterate; so contemptible, yet so
audacious; so insignificant and yet so capable of inflicting agony, that
to the eye of reason there appeared no possibility of doing anything
with them. Like the swarm of flies in Egypt, there was no standing
against them; they threatened to sting a man to death with their
incessant malice, their base insinuations, their dastardly falsehoods.
He was in an evil case, but even there faith availed. All-powerful faith
adapts itself to all circumstances, it can cast out devils, and it can
drive out bees. Surely, if it outlives the sting of death, it will not
die from the sting of a bee. "They are quenched as the fire of thorns."
Their fierce attack soon came to an end, the bees lost their stings and
the buzz of the swarm subsided: like thorns which blaze with fierce
crackling and abundant flame, but die out in a handful of ashes very
speedily, so did the nations which surrounded our hero soon cease their
clamour and come to an inglorious end. They were soon hot and soon cold,
their attack was as short as it was sharp. He had no need to crush the
bees, for like crackling thorns they died out of themselves. For a third
time he adds, "for in the name of the Lord will I destroy them," or "cut
them down," as men cut down thorns with a scythe or reaping-hook.

What wonders have been wrought in the name of the Lord I It is the
battle-cry of faith before which its adversaries fly apace. "The sword
of the Lord and of Gideon" brings instant terror into the midst of the
foe. The name of the Lord is the one weapon which never fails in the day
of battle: he who knows how to use It may chase a thousand with his
single arm. Alas I we too often go to work and to conflict in our own
name, and the enemy knows it not, but scornfully enquires, "Who are ye?"
Let us take care never to venture into the presence of the foe without
first of all arming ourselves with this impenetrable mail. If we knew
this name better, and trusted it more, our life would be more fruitful
and sublime.

"Jesus, the name high over all,

In hell, or earth, or sky,

Angels and men before it fall;

And devils fear and fly."

[Psa 118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013)

"Thou hast thrust sore at me," "Thrusting, thou hast thrust at me." It
is a vigorous apostrophe, in which the enemy is described as
concentrating all his thrusting power into the thrusts which he gave to
the man of God. He thrust again and again with the keenest point, even
as bees thrust their stings into their victim. The foe had exhibited
intense exasperation, and fearful determination, nor had he been without
a measure of success; wounds had been given and received, and these
smarted much, and were exceeding sore. Now, this is true of many a tried
child of God who has been wounded by Satan, by the world, by temptation,
by affliction; the sword has entered into his bones, and left its mark.
"That I might fall." This was the object of the thrusting: to throw him
down, to wound him in such a way that he would no longer be able to keep
his place, to make him depart from his integrity, and lose his
confidence in God. If our adversaries can do this they will have
succeeded to their heart's content: if we fall into grievous sin they
will be better pleased than even if they had sent the bullet of the
assassin into our heart, for a moral death is worse than a physical one.
If they can dishonour us, and God in us, their victory will be complete.
"Better death than false of faith" is the motto of one of our noble
houses, and it may well be ours. It is to compass our fall that they
compass us; they fill us with their venom that they may fill us with
their sin. "But the Lord helped me"; a blessed "but." This is the saving
clause. Other helpers were unable to chase away the angry nations, much
less to destroy all the noxious swarms; but when the Lord came to the
rescue the hero's single arm was strong enough to vanquish all his
adversaries. How sweetly can many of us repeat in the retrospect of our
past tribulations this delightful sentence, "But the Lord helped me." I
was assailed by innumerable doubts and fears, but the Lord helped me; my
natural unbelief was terribly inflamed by the insinuations of Satan, but
the Lord helped me; multiplied trials were rendered more intense by the
cruel assaults of men, and I knew not what to do, but the Lord helped
me. Doubtless, when we land on the hither shore of Jordan, this will be
one of our songs, "Flesh and heart were failing me, and the adversaries
of my soul surrounded me in the swellings of Jordan, but the Lord helped
me. Glory be unto his name."

[Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014)

"The Lord is my strength and song," my strength while I was in the
conflict, my song now that it is ended; my strength against the strong,
and any song over their defeat. He is far from boasting of his own
valour; he ascribes his victory to its real source, he has no song
concerning his own exploits, but all his peans are unto Jehovah Victor,
the Lord whose right hand and holy arm had given him the victory. "And
is become my salvation." The poet warrior knew that he was saved, and he
not only ascribed that salvation unto God, but he declared God himself
to be his salvation. It is an all-comprehending expression, signifying
that from beginning to end, in the whole and in tile details of it, he
owed his deliverance entirely to the Lord. Thus can all the Lord's
redeemed say, "Salvation is of the Lord." We cannot endure any doctrine
which puts the crown upon the wring head and defrauds the glorious King
of his revenue of praise. Jehovah has done it all; yea, in Christ Jesus
he is all, and therefore in our praises let him alone be extolled. It is
a happy circumstance for us when we can praise God as alike our
strength, song, and salvation; for God sometimes gives a secret strength
to his people, and yet they question their own salvation, and cannot,
therefore, sing of it. Many are, no doubt, truly saved, but at times
they have so little strength, that they are ready to faint, and
therefore they cannot sing: when strength is imparted and salvation is
realised then the song is clear and full.

[Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015)

"The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of tire
righteous." They sympathised in the delight of their leader and they
abode in their tents in peace, rejoicing that one had been raised up
who, in the name of the Lord, would protect them from their adversaries.
The families of believers are happy, and they should take pains to give
their happiness a voice by their family devotion. The dwelling-place of
saved men should be the temple of praise; it is but righteous that the
righteous should praise the righteous God, who is their righteousness.
The struggling hero knew that the voice of woe and lamentation was heard
in the tents of his adversaries, for they had suffered severe defeat at
his hands; but he was delighted by the remembrance that the nation for
whom he had straggled would rejoice from one end of the land to the
other at the deliverance which God had wrought by his means. That hero
of heroes, the conquering Saviour, gives to all the families of his
people abundant reasons for incessant song now that he has led captivity
captive and ascended up on high. Let none of us be silent in our
households if we have salvation let us have joy, and if we have joy let
us give it a tongue wherewith it may magnify the Lord. If we hearken
carefully to the music which comes from Israel's tents, we shall catch a
stanza to this effect, "the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly":
Jehovah has manifested his strength, given victory to his chosen
champion, and overthrown all the armies of the foe. "The Lord is a man
of war, the Lord is his name." When he comes to blows, woe to his
mightiest opponent.

[Psa 118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016)

"The right hand of the Lord is exalted," lifted up to smite the foeman,
or extolled and magnified in the eyes of his people. It is the Lord's
right hand, the hand of his skill, the hand of his greatest power, the
hand which is accustomed to defend his saints. When that is lifted up,
it lifts up all who trust in him, and it casts down all who resist him.
"The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly." The Psalmist speaks in
triplets, for he is praising the triune God, his heart is warm and he
loves to dwell upon the note; he is not content with the praise he has
rendered, he endeavours to utter it each time more fervently and more
jubilantly than before. He had dwelt upon the sentence, "they compassed
me about," for his peril from encircling armies was fully realised; and
now he dwells upon the valour of Jehovah's right hand, for he has as
vivid a sense of the presence and majesty of the Lord. How seldom is
this the case; the Lord's mercy is forgotten and only the trial is
remembered.

[Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

"I shall not die, but live." His enemies hoped that he would die, and
perhaps he himself feared he should perish at their hand: the news of
his death may have been spread among his people, for the tongue of
rumour is ever ready with ill news, the false intelligence would
naturally cause great sorrow and despondency, but he proclaims himself
as yet alive and as confident that he shall not fall by the hand of the
destroyer. He is cheerfully assured that no arrow could carry death
between the joints of his harness, and no weapon of any sort could end
his career. His time had not yet come, he felt immortality beating
within his bosom. perhaps he had been sick, and brought to death's door,
but he had a presentiment that the sickness was not unto death, but to
the glory of God. At any rate, he knew that he should not so die as to
give victory to the enemies of God; for the honour of God and the good
of his people were both wrapped up in his continued success. Feeling
that he would live he devoted himself to the noblest of purposes: he
resolved to bear witness to the divine faithfulness, "and declare the
works of the Lord." He determined to recount the works of Jah; and he
does so in this Psalm, wherein he dwells with love and admiration upon
the splendour of Jehovah's prowess in the midst of the fight. While
there is a testimony for God to be borne by us to any one, it is certain
that we shall not be hurried from the land of the living. The Lord's
prophets shall live on in the midst of famine, and war, and plague, and
persecution, till they have uttered all the words of their prophecy; his
priests shall stand at the altar unharmed till their last sacrifice has
been presented before him. No bullet will find its billet in our hearts
till we have finished our allotted period of activity.

"Plagues and deaths around me fly,

Till he please I cannot die:

Not a single shaft can hit,

Till the God of love sees fit"

[Psa 118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)

"The Lord hath chastened me sore." This is faith's version of the former
passage, "Thou hast thrust sore at me;" for the attacks of the enemy are
chastisements from the hand of God. The devil tormented Job for his own
purposes, but in reality the sorrows of the patriarch were chastisements
from the Lord. "Chastening, Jah hath chastened me," says our poet' as
much as to say that the Lord had smitten him very severely, and made him
sorrowfully to know the full weight of his rod. The Lord frequently
appears to save his heaviest blows for his best-beloved ones; if any one
affliction be more painful than another it falls to the lot of those
whom he most distinguishes in his service. The gardener prunes his best
roses with most care. Chastisement is sent to keep successful saints
humble, to make them tender towards others, and to enable them to bear
the high honours which their heavenly Friend puts upon them. "But he
hath not given me over unto death." This verse, like the thirteenth,
concludes with a blessed "but," which constitutes a saving clause. The
Psalmist felt as if he had been beaten within an inch of his life, but
yet death did not actually ensue. There is always a merciful limit to
the scourging of the sons of God. Forty stripes save one were all that
an Israelite might receive, and the Lord will never allow that one, that
killing stroke, to fall upon his children. They are "chastened, but not
killed"; their pains are for their instruction, not for their
destruction. By these things the ungodly die, but gracious Hezekiah
could say, "By these things men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit." No, blessed be the name of God, he may chastise us,
but he will not condemn us; we must feel the smarting rod, but we shall
not feel the killing sword. He does not give us over unto death at any
time, and we may be quite sure that he has not done so while he
condescends to chasten us, for if he intended our final rejection he
would not take the pains to place us under his fatherly discipline. It
may seem hard to be under the afflicting rod, but it would be a far more
dreadful thing if the Lord were to say, "He is given unto idols, let him
alone." Even from our griefs we may distil consolation, and gather sweet
flowers from the garden in which the Lord has planted salutary rue and
wormwood. It is a cheering fact that if we endure chastening God dealeth
with us as with sons, and we may well be satisfied with the common lot
of his beloved family.

The hero, restored to health, and rescued from the dangers of battle,
now lifts up his own song unto the Lord, and asks all Israel, led on by
the goodly fellowship of the priests, to assist him in chanting a joyful
Te Deum.

[Psalms 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 118:19</span></span>

19 Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I
will praise the Lord:

20 This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.

21 I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my
salvation.

[Psa 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)

"Open to me the gates of righteousness." The grateful champion having
reached the entrance of the temple, asks for admission in set form, as
if he felt that he could only approach the hallowed shrine by divine
permission, and wished only to enter in the appointed manner. The temple
of God was meant for the righteous to enter and offer the sacrifices of
righteousness, hence the gates are called the gates of righteousness.
Righteous deeds were done within its walls, and righteous teachings
sounded forth from its courts. The phrase "the gate" is sometimes used
to signify power or empire; as, for instance, "the Sublime Porte"
signifies the seat of empire of Turkey; the entrance to the temple was
the true Sublime Porte, and what is better, it was the porta jutstitiae,
the gate of righteousness, the palace of the great King, who is in all
things just. "I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord." Only let
the gate be opened, and the willing worshipper will enter; and he will
enter in the right spirit, and for the best of purposes, that he may
render homage unto the Most High. Alas, there are multitudes who do not
care whether the gates of God's house are opened or not; and although
they know that they are opened wide they never care to enter, neither
does the thought of praising God so much as cross their minds. The time
will come for them when they shall find the gates of heaven shut against
them, for those gates are peculiarly the gates of righteousness through
which there shall by no means enter anything that defileth. Our champion
might have praised the Lord in secret, and doubtless he did so; but he
was not content without going up to the assembly, there to register his
thanksgivings. Those who neglect public worship generally neglect all
worship; those who praise God within their own gates are among the
readiest to praise him within his temple gates. Our hero had also in all
probability been sore sick, and therefore like Hezekiah he says, "The
Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the
stringed instruments all the days of my life in the house of the Lord."
Public praise for public mercies is every way most appropriate, most
acceptable to God, and most profitable to others.

[Psa 118:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#020)

"This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter." The
Psalmist loves the house of God so well that he admires the very gate
thereof, and pauses beneath its arch to express his affection for it. He
loved it because it was the gate of the Lord, he loved it because it was
the gate of righteousness, because so many godly people had already
entered it, and because in all future ages such persons will continue to
pass through its portals. If the gate of the Lord's house on earth is so
pleasant to us, how greatly shall we rejoice when we pass that gate of
pearl, to which none, but the righteous shall ever approach, but through
which all the just shall in due time enter to eternal felicity. The Lord
Jesus has passed that way, and not only set the gate wide open, but
secured an entrance for all those who are made righteous in his
righteousness: all the righteous must and shall enter there, whoever may
oppose them. Under another aspect our Lord is himself that gate, and
through him, as the new and living Way, all the righteous delight to
approach unto the Lord. Whenever we draw near to praise the Lord we must
come by this gate; acceptable praise never climbs over the wall, or
enters by any other way, but comes to God in Christ Jesus; as it is
written, "no man cometh unto the Father but by me." Blessed, for ever
blessed, be this wondrous gate of the person of our Lord.

[Psa 118:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021)

Having entered, the champion exclaims, "I will praise thee," not "I will
praise the Lord," for now he vividly realizes the divine presence, and
addresses himself directly to Jehovah, whom his faith sensibly discerns.
How well it is in all our songs of praise to let the heart have direct
and distinct communion with God himself I The Psalmist's song was
personal praise too: - "I will praise thee"; resolute praise, for he
firmly resolved to offer it; spontaneous praise, for he voluntarily and
cheerfully rendered it, and continuous praise, for he did not intend
soon to have done with it. It was a life-long vow to which there would
never come a close, "I will praise thee." "For thou hast heard me, and
art become my salvation." He praises God by mentioning his favours,
weaving his song out of the divine goodness which he had experienced. In
these words he gives the reason for his praise, - his answered prayer,
and the deliverance which he had received in consequence. How fondly he
dwells upon the personal interposition of God! "Thou hast heard me." How
heartily he ascribes the whole of his victory over his enemies to God;
nay, he sees God himself to be the whole of it: "Thou art become my
salvation." It is well to go directly to God himself, and not to stay
even in his mercy, or in the acts of his grace. Answered prayers bring
God very near to us; realised salvation enables us to realise the
immediate presence of God. Considering the extreme distress through
which the worshipper had passed, it is not at all wonderful that he
should feel his heart full of gratitude at the great salvation which God
had wrought for him, and should at his first entrance into the temple
lift up his voice in thankful praise for personal favours so great, so
needful, so perfect.

[Psalms 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 118:22</span></span>

22 The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the
corner.

23 This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

24 This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad
in it.

25 Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity.

26 Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed
you out of the house of the Lord.

27 God is the Lord, which hath showed us light: bind the sacrifice with
cords, even unto the horns of the altar.

This passage will appear to be a mixture of the expressions of the
people and of the hero himself.

[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

"The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the
corner." Here the people magnify God for bringing his chosen servant
into the honourable office, which had been allotted to him by divine
decree. A wise king and valiant leader is a stone by which the national
fabric is built up. David had been rejected by those in authority, but
God had placed him in a position of the highest honour and the greatest
usefulness, making him the chief corner-stone of the state. In the case
of many others whose early life has been spent in conflict, the Lord has
been pleased to accomplish his divine purposes in like manner; but to
none is this text so applicable as to the Lord Jesus himself- he is the
living stone, the tried stone, elect, precious, which God himself
appointed from of old. The Jewish builders, scribe, priest, Pharisee,
and Herodian, rejected him with disdain. They could see no excellence in
him that they should build upon him; he could not be made to fit in with
their ideal of a national church, he was a stone of another quarry from
themselves, and not after their mind nor according to their taste;
therefore they cast him away and poured contempt upon him, even as Peter
said, "This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders": they
reckoned him to be as nothing, though he is Lord of all. In raising him
from the dead the Lord God exalted him to be the head of his church, the
very pinnacle of her glory and beauty. Since then he has become the
confidence of the Gentiles, even of them that are afar off upon the sea,
and thus he has joined the two walls of Jew and Gentile into one stately
temple, and is seen to be the binding corner-stone, making both one.
This is a delightful subject for contemplation.

Jesus in all things hath the pre-eminence, he is the principal stone of
the whole house of God. We are accustomed to lay some one stone of a
public building with solemn ceremony, and to deposit in it any precious
things which may have been selected as a memorial of the occasion:
henceforth that corner-stone is looked upon as peculiarly honourable,
and joyful memories are associated with it. All this is in a very
emphatic sense true of our blessed Lord, "The Shepherd, the Stone of
Israel." God himself laid him where he is, and hid within him all the
precious things of the eternal covenant; and there he shall for ever
remain, the foundation of all our hopes, the glory of all our joys, the
uniting bond of all our fellowship. He is "the head over all things to
the church," and by him the church is fitly framed together, and groweth
unto a holy temple in the Lord. Still do the builders refuse him: even
to this day the professional teachers of the gospel are far too apt to
fly to any and every new philosophy sooner than maintain the simple
gospel, which is the essence of Christ: nevertheless, he holds his true
position amongst his people, and the foolish builders shall see to their
utter confusion that his truth shall be exalted over all. Those who
reject the chosen stone will stumble against him to their own hurt, and
ere long will come his second advent, when he will fall upon them from
the heights of heaven, and grind them to powder.

[Psa 118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023)

"This is the Lord's doing." The exalted position of Christ in his church
is not the work of man, and does not depend for its continuation upon
any builders or ministers; God himself has wrought the exaltation of our
Lord Jesus. Considering the opposition which comes from the wisdom, the
power, and the authority of this world, it is manifest that if the
kingdom of Christ be indeed set up and maintained in the world it must
be by supernatural power. Indeed, it is so even in the smallest detail.
Every grain of true faith in this world is a divine creation, and every
hour in which the true church subsists is a prolonged miracle. It is not
the goodness of human nature, nor the force of reasoning, which exalts
Christ, and builds up the church, but a power from above. This staggers
the adversary, for he cannot understand what it is which baffles him: of
the Holy Ghost he knows nothing. "It is marvellous in our eyes." We
actually see it; it is not in our thoughts and hopes and prayers alone,
but the astonishing work is actually before our eyes. Jesus reigns, his
power is felt, and we perceive that it is so. Faith sees our great
Master, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come; she sees and marvels. It never ceases to astonish us,
as we see, even here below, God by means of weakness defeating power, by
the simplicity of his word baffling the craft of men, and by the
invisible influence of his Spirit exalting his Son in human hearts in
the teeth of open and determined opposition. It is indeed "marvellous in
our eyes," as all God's works must be if men care to study them. In the
Hebrew the passage reads, "It is wonderfully done" : not only is the
exaltation of Jesus of Nazareth itself wonderful, but the way in which
it is brought about is marvellous' it is wonderfully done. The more we
study the history of Christ and his church the more fully shall we agree
with this declaration.

[Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

"This is the day which the Lord hath made." A new era has commenced. The
day of David's enthronement was the beginning of better times for
Israel; and in a far higher sense the day of our Lord's resurrection is
a new day of God's own making, for it is the dawn of a blessed
dispensation. No doubt the Israelitish nation celebrated the victory of
its champion with a day of feasting, music and song; and surely it is
but meet that we should reverently keep the feast of the triumph of the
Son of David. We observe the Lord's-day as henceforth our true Sabbath,
a day made and ordained of God, for the perpetual remembrance of the
achievements of our Redeemer. Whenever the soft Sabbath light of the
first day of the week breaks upon the earth, let us sing,

"This is the day the Lord hath made,

He calls the hours his own;

Let heaven rejoice, let earth be glad,

And praise surround the throne."

We by no means wish to confine the reference of the passage to the
Sabbath, for the whole gospel day is the day of God's making, and its
blessings come to us through our Lord's being placed as the head of the
corner. "We will rejoice and be glad in it." What else can we do? Having
obtained so great a deliverance through our illustrious leader, and
having seen the eternal mercy of God so brilliantly displayed, it would
ill become us to mourn and murmur. Rather will we exhibit a double joy,
rejoice in heart and be glad in face, rejoice in secret and be glad in
public, for we have more than a double reason for being glad in the
Lord. We ought to be specially joyous on the Sabbath: it is the queen of
days, and its hours should be clad in royal apparel of delight. George
Herbert says of it: -

"Thou art a day of mirth,

And where the week-days trail on ground,

Thy flight is higher as thy birth."

Entering into the midst of the church of God, and beholding the Lord
Jesus as all in all in the assemblies of his people, we are bound to
overflow with joy. Is it not written, "then were the disciples glad when
they saw the Lord"? When the King makes the house of prayer to be a
banqueting house, and we have grace to enjoy fellowship with him, both
in his sufferings and in his triumphs, we feel an intense delight, and
we are glad to express it with the rest of his people.

[Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

"Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord." Hosanna! God save our king! Let
David reign! Or as we who live in these latter days interpret it, - Let
the Son of David live for ever, let his saving help go forth throughout
all nations. This was the peculiar shout of the feast of tabernacles;
and so long as we dwell here below in these tabernacles of clay we
cannot do better than use the same cry. Perpetually let us pray that our
glorious King may work salvation in the midst of the earth. We plead
also for ourselves that the Lord would save us, deliver us, and continue
to sanctify us. This we ask with great earnestness, beseeching it of
Jehovah. Prayer should always be an entreating and beseeching. "O Lord,
I beseech thee, send now prosperity." Let the church be built up:
through the salvation of sinners may the number of the saints be
increased; through the preservation of saints may the church be
strengthened, continued, beautified, perfected. Our Lord Jesus himself
pleads for the salvation and the prosperity of his chosen; as our
Intercessor before the throne he asks that the heavenly Father would
save and keep those who were of old committed to his charge, and cause
them to be one through the indwelling Spirit. Salvation had been given,
and therefore it is asked for. Strange though it may seem, he who cries
for salvation is already in a measure saved. None can so truly cry,
"Save, I beseech thee," as those who have already participated in
salvation; and the most prosperous church is that which most imploringly
seeks prosperity. It may seem strange that, returning from victory,
flushed with triumph, the hero should still ask for salvation; but so it
is, and it could not be otherwise. When all our Saviour's work and
warfare were ended, his intercession became even more prominently a
feature of his life; after he had conquered all his foes he made
intercession for the transgressors. What is true of him is true of his
church also, for whenever she obtains the largest measure of spiritual
blessing she is then most inclined to plead for more. She never pants so
eagerly for prosperity as when she sees the Lord's doings in her midst,
and marvels at them. Then, encouraged by the gracious visitation she
sets apart her solemn days of prayer, and cries with passionate desire,
"Save now," and "Send now prosperity." She would fain take the tide at
the flood, and make the most of the day of which the Lord has already
made so much.

[Psa 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)

"Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." The champion had
done everything "in the name of the Lord": in that name he had routed
all his adversaries, and had risen to the throne, and in that name he
had now entered the temple to pay his vows. We know who it is that
cometh in the name of the Lord beyond all others. In the Psalmist's days
he was The Coming One, and he is still The Coming One, though he hath
already come. We are ready with our hosannas both for his first and
second advent; our inmost souls thankfully adore and bless him and
invoke upon his head unspeakable joys. "Prayer also shall be made for
him continually; and daily shall he be praised." For his sake everybody
is blessed to us who comes in the name of the Lord, we welcome all such
to our hearts and our homes; but chiefly, and beyond all others, we
welcome himself when he deigns to enter in and sup with us and we with
him. O sacred bliss, fit antepast of heaven! Perhaps this sentence is
intended to be the benediction of the priests upon the valiant servant
of the Lord, and if so, it is appropriately added, "We have blessed you
out of the house of the Lord." The priests whose business it was to
bless the people, in a sevenfold degree blessed the people's deliverer,
the one chosen out of the people whom the Lord had exalted. All those
whose high privilege it is to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever,
because they are made priests unto God in Christ Jesus, can truly say
that they bless the Christ who has made them what they are, and placed
them where they are. Whenever we feel ourselves at home with God, and
feel the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, "Abba Father," the first
thought of our hearts should be to bless the elder Brother, through whom
the privilege of sonship has descended to such unworthy ones. In looking
back upon our past lives we can remember many delightful occasions in
which with joy unutterable we have in the fulness of our heart blessed
our Saviour and our King; and all these memorable seasons are so many
foretastes and pledges of the time when in the house of our great Father
above we shall for ever sing, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain," and
with rapture bless the Redeemer's name.

[Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

"God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light," or "God is Jehovah," the
only living and true God. There is none other God but he. The words may
also be rendered, "Mighty is Jehovah." Only the power of God could have
brought us such light and joy as spring from the work of our Champion
and King. We have received light, by which we have known the rejected
stone to be the head of the corner, and this light has led us to enlist
beneath the banner of the once despised Nazarene, who is now the Prince
of the kings of the earth. With the light of knowledge has come the
light of joy; for we are delivered from the powers of darkness and
translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son. Our knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ came not by the light of
nature, nor by reason, nor did it arise from the sparks which we
ourselves had kindled, nor did we receive it of men; but the mighty God
alone hath showed it to us. He made a day on purpose that he might shine
upon us like the sun, and he made our faces to shine in the light of
that day, according to the declaration of the twenty-fourth verse.
Therefore, unto him be all the honour of our enlightenment. Let us do
our best to magnify the great Father of lights from whom our present
blessedness has descended. "Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the
horns of the altar." Some think that by this we are taught that the king
offered so many sacrifices that the whole area of the court was filled,
and the sacrifices were bound even up to the altar; but we are inclined
to keep to our own version, and to believe that sometimes restive
bullocks were bound to the altar before they were slain, in which case
Mant's verse is correct: -

"He, Jehovah, is our Lord:

He, our God. on us hath shined:

Bind the sacrifice with cord,

To the horned altar bind."

The word rendered "cords" carries with it the idea of wreaths and
boughs, so that it was not a cord of hard, rough rope, but a decorated
band; even as in our case, though we are bound to the altar of God, it
is with the cords of love and the bands of a man, and not by a
compulsion which destroys the freedom of the will. The sacrifice which
we would present in honour of the victories of our Lord Jesus Christ is
the living sacrifice of our spirit, soul, and body. We bring ourselves
to his altar, and desire to offer him all that we have and are. There
remains a tendency in our nature to start aside from this; it is not
fond of the sacrificial knife. In the warmth of our love we come
willingly to the altar, but we need constraining power to keep us there
in the entirety of our being throughout the whole of life. Happily there
is a cord which, twisted around the atonement, or, better still, around
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our only Altar, can hold us,
and does hold us: "For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we
thus judge, that if one died for all, then all died; and that he died
for all, that they that live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him which died for them, and rose again." We are bound to the
doctrine of atonement; we are bound to Christ himself, who is both altar
and sacrifice; we desire to be more bound to him than ever, our soul
finds her liberty in being tethered fast to the altar of the Lord. The
American Board of Missions has for its seal an ox, with an altar on one
side and a plough on the other, and the motto "Ready for either," -
ready to live and labour, or ready to suffer and die. We would gladly
spend ourselves for the Lord actively, or be spent by him passively,
whichever may be his will; but since we know the rebellion of our
corrupt nature we earnestly pray that we may be kept in this consecrated
mind, and that we may never, under discouragements, or through the
temptations of the world, be permitted to leave the altar, to which it
is our intense desire to be for ever fastened. Such consecration as
this, and such desires for its perpetuity, well beseem that day of
gladness which the Lord hath made so bright by the glorious triumph of
his Son, our covenant head, our well-beloved.

[Psalms 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 118:28</span></span>

28 Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will
exalt thee.

29 O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth
for ever.

Now comes the closing song of the champion, and of each one of his
admirers.

[Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)

"Thou art my God, and I will praise thee," my mighty God who hath done
this mighty and marvellous thing. Thou shalt be mine, and all the praise
my soul is capable of shall be poured forth at thy feet. "Thou art my
God, I will exalt thee." Thou hast exalted me, and as far as my praises
can do it, I will exalt thy name. Jesus is magnified, and he magnifies
the Father according to his prayer, "Father, the hour is come; glorify
thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee." God hath given us grace
and promised us glory, and we are constrained to ascribe all grace to
him, and all the glory of it also. The repetition indicates a double
determination, and sets forth the firmness of the resolution, the
heartiness of the affection, the intensity of the gratitude. Our Lord
Jesus himself saith, "I will praise thee"; and well may each one of us,
humbly and with confidence in divine grace add, on his own account, the
same declaration, "I will praise thee." However others may blaspheme
thee, I will exalt thee' however dull and cold I may sometimes feel
myself, yet will I rouse up my nature, and determine that as long as I
have any being that being shall be spent to thy praise. For ever thou
art my God, and for ever I will give thee thanks.

[Psa 118:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029)

"O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for
ever." The Psalm concludes as it began, making a complete circle of
joyful adoration. We can well suppose that the notes at the close of the
loud hallelujah were more swift, more sweet, more loud than at the
beginning. To the sound of trumpet and harp, Israel, the house of Aaron,
and all that feared the Lord, forgetting their distinctions, joined in
one common hymn, testifying again to their deep gratitude to the Lord's
goodness, and to the mercy which is unto eternity. What better close
could there be to this right royal song? The Psalmist would have risen
to something higher, so as to end with the climax, but nothing loftier
remained. He had reached the height of his grandest argument, and there
he paused. The music ceased, the song was suspended, the great hallel
was all chanted, and the people went every one to his own home, quietly
and happily musing upon the goodness of the Lord, whose mercy fills
eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 119](psa119)

</div>
