<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa099)  [Next](psa101) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 100](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 100:0</span></span>

Title. - A Psalm of Praise; or rather of thanksgiving. This is the only
Psalm bearing this precise inscription. It is all ablaze with grateful
adoration, and has for this reason been a great favourite with the
people of God ever since it was written. "Let us sing the Old Hundredth"
is one of the everyday expressions of the Christian church, and will be
so while men exist whose hearts are loyal to the Great King. Nothing can
be more sublime this side heaven than the singing of this noble Psalm by
a vast congregation. Watts' paraphrase, beginning "Before Jehovah's
awful throne," and the Scotch "All people that on earth do dwell," are
both noble versions; and even Tare and Brady rise beyond themselves when
they sing -

"With one consent let all the earth

To God their cheerful voices raise."

In this divine lyric we sing with gladness the creating power and
goodness of the Lord, even as before with trembling we adored his
holiness.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. - This is a bunch of the grapes of Eshcol. It is a taste of
what is still the promised land. The Jewish church came to its
perfection in the reign of Solomon, but a greater than Solomon is here.
The perfection of the New Testament church is here anticipated. This
Psalm teaches,

I. That there will be a joyful state of the whole world (verse 1).

1\. To whom the address is given - to "all lands," and all in those
lands.

2\. The subject of the address - "Make a joyful noise." What a doleful
noise it has made!

3\. By whom the address is given, by him who secures what he commands.

II\. That this joyful state of the whole world will arise from the
enjoyment of the Divine Being (verse 2).

1\. Men have long tried to be happy without God.

2\. They will find at last that their happiness is in God. The
conversion of an individual in this respect is a type of the conversion
of the world.

III\. That this enjoyment of God will arise from a new relation to him
(verse 3).

1\. Of knowledge on our part: he will be known as the Triune God, as a
covenant God, as the God of salvation - as God.

2\. Of rightful claim on his part;

\(1\) by right of creation - "He hath made us;"

\(2\) By right of redemption - "Ye were not a people, but are now the
people of God," &c.; "I have redeemed thee; thou art mine"

\(3\) by right of preservation - "We are the sheep," &c.

IV\. That this new relation to God will endear to us the ordinances of
his house (verse 4).

1\. Of what the service will consist - "thanksgiving" and praise.

2\. To whom it will be rendered. Enter into his gates - his courts - be
thankful unto him - bless his name.

V. That this service will be perpetual; begun on earth, continued in
heaven. This fact is founded -

1\. Upon essential goodness. "For the Lord is good."

2\. Upon everlasting mercy. "His mercy," etc.

3\. Upon immutable truth. "His truth," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002). - "Serve the Lord with
gladness,"

I. For he is the best of beings.

II\. For his commandments are not grievous.

III\. For he is your Saviour, as well as Creator; your friend, as well
as Lord.

IV\. The angels, so much greater than yourself, know no reason why they
should not serve him with gladness.

V. In serving him you serve yourself.

VI\. You make religion, attractive.

VII\. You get fitness for heaven. - George Bowen.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002) (first clause). - A true
heart,

I. Is humble - serves.

II\. Is pious - "serve the Lord."

III\. Is active - serves.

IV\. Is consequently Joyful - "with gladness,"

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002) (first clause). - "Serving
the Lord with gladness." See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 769.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003). - "Know ye that the Lord
he is God." That you may be true amid superstition, hopeful in
contrition, persistent in supplication, unwearied in exertion, calm in
affliction, firm in temptation, bold in persecution, and happy in
dissolution. - W. J.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003). - "We are his people." We
have been twice born, as all his people are. We love the society of his
people. We are looking unto Jesus like his people. We are separated from
the world as his people. We experience the trials of his people. We
prefer the employment of his people. We enjoy the privileges of his
people. - W. J.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004). - A Discourse of
Thankfulness which is due to God for his benefits and blessings. - A
Sermon by Thomas Goodwin. Works, vol. ix., pp. 499-514. Nichol's
edition.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004). -

I. The privileges of access.

II\. The duty of thankfulness.

III\. The reasons for enjoying both.

[Psa 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005). -

I. The inexhaustible fount - the goodness of God.

II\. The ever-flowing stream - the mercy of God.

III\. The fathomless ocean - the truth of God. "O the depths!" - W.
Durban.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

This is the only Psalm in the whole collection entitled "A Psalm of
Praise." It is supposed to have received this appellation because
peculiarly adapted, if not designed to be sung, when the sacrifices of
thanksgiving were offered. See [Lev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012). The Greeks think it was written
by David, who here invites all the world to Join with the Israelites in
the service of God, whose divine sovereignty he here recognises. -
Samuel Burder.

Whole Psalm

If we are right in regarding Psalms 93-99 as forming one continuous
series, one great prophetic oratorio, whose title is "Jehovah is King,"
and through which there runs the same great idea, this Psalm may be
regarded as the doxology which doses the strain. We find lingering in it
notes of the same great harmony. It breathes the same gladness; it is
filled with the same hope, that all nations shall bow down before
Jehovah, and confess that he is God. - J. J. S. Perowne.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm contains a promise of Christianity, as winter at its dose
contains the promise of spring. The trees are ready to bud, the flowers
are just hidden by the light soil, the clouds are heavy with rain, the
sun shines in his strength; only a genial wind from the south is wanted
to give a new life to all things. - "The Speaker's Commentary," 1873.

Whole Psalm

Luther would have immortalized his name had he done no more than written
the majestic air and harmony to which we are accustomed to sing this
Psalm, and which, when the mind is in a truly worshipping frame, seems
to bring heaven down to earth, and to raise earth to heaven, giving us
anticipations of the pure and sublime delights of that noble and general
assembly in which saints and angels shall for ever celebrate the praises
of God. - Ingram Cobbin.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)

The first half of this verse is from [Psa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011), only that instead of "with
fear," there, where the Psalmist has to do with fierce rebels, there is
substituted here "gladness" or Joy. - F. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)

"Serve the Lord with gladness." It is a sign the oil of grace hath been
poured into the heart "when the oil of gladness" shines on the
countenance. Cheerfulness credits religion. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)

"Serve the Lord." It is our privilege to serve the Lord in all things.
It is ours to please the Lord in loosing the latchet of a shoe; and to
enjoy the expression of his favour therein. The servant of God is not
serving at the same time another master; he has not been hired for
occasional service; he abides in the service of his God, and cannot be
about anything but his Master's business; he eats, he drinks, he sleeps,
he walks, he discourses, he findeth recreation, all by the way of
serving God. "Serve the Lord with gladness." Can you bear to be waited
upon by a servant who goes moping and dejected to his every task? You
would rather have no servant at all, than one who evidently finds your
service cheerless and irksome. - George Bowen.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"Know ye that the Lord he is God," &c. From the reasons of this
exhortation, learn, that such is our natural atheism, that we have need
again and again to be instructed, that the Lord is God; of whom, and
through whom, and for whom are all things. - David Dickson.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"It is he that made us ... we are his." Now, the ground of God's
property in all things is his creating of all Accordingly, you may
observe in many scriptures, where the Lord's propriety is asserted,
this, as the ground of it, is annexed: [Psa
89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011), [Psa
89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012), the heavens, the earth, the
whole world, and all therein is thine. Why so? "Thou hast founded them."
And so are all the regions and quarters of the world, northern and
southern, western and eastern; for Tabor was on the west and Hermon on
the east; all are thine, for thou hast created them. So sea and land,
[Psa 95:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005). As all things measured by
time, so time itself, the measure of all, [Psa
74:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016), [Psa
74:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#017). "Thou hast made the light,"
i.e. the moon for the night and the sun for the day. He lays claim to
all the climes of the earth, and all the seasons of the year, on this
account; he made them. This will be more evident and unquestionable, if
we take notice of these particulars:

1\. He made all for himself. He was not employed by any to make it for
another, for in that case sometimes the maker is not the owner; but the
Lord did employ himself in that great work, and for himself did he
undertake and finish it. [Pro 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004),
[Col 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016).

2\. He made all things of nothing, either without any matter at all, or
without any but what himself had before made of nothing. A potter when
he makes an earthenware vessel, if the clay be not his own which he
makes it of, he is not the full owner of the vessel, though he formed
it: "the form is his, the matter is another's;" but since the Lord made
all of nothing, or of such matter as himself had made, all is wholly
his, matter and form, all entirely.

3\. He made all without the help or concurrence of any other. There was
none that assisted him, or did in the least co-operate with him in the
work of creation.... Those that assist and concur with another in the
making of a thing may claim a share in it; but here lies no such claim
in this case, where the Lord alone did all, alone made all. All is his
only.

4\. He upholds all things in the same manner as he created, continues
the being of all things in the same way as he gave it. He does it of
himself, without other support, without any assistant. All would fall
into nothing in a moment, if he did not every moment bear them up. So
that all things on this account have still their being from him every
moment, and their well-being too, and all the means which conduce to it;
and therefore all are his own. - David Clarkson.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"It is he that hath made us." The emperor Henry, while out hunting on
the Lord's day called Quinquagesima, his companions being scattered,
came unattended to the entrance of a certain wood; and seeing a church
hard by, he made for it, and feigning himself to be a soldier, simply
requested a mass of the priest. Now that priest was a man of notable
piety, but so deformed in person that he seemed a monster rather than a
man. When he had attentively considered him, the emperor began to wonder
exceedingly why God, from whom all beauty proceeds, should permit so
deformed a man to administer his sacraments. But presently, when mass
commenced, and they came to the passage, "Know ye that the Lord he is
God," which was chanted by a boy, the priest rebuked the boy for singing
negligently, and said with a loud voice, "It is he that hath made us,
and not we ourselves." Struck by these words, and believing the priest
to be a prophet, the emperor raised him, much against his will, to the
archbishopric of Cologne, which see he adorned by his devotion and
excellent virtues. - From "Roger of Wendover's ( - 1237) Flowers of
History."

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"It is he that hath made us ... we are his." Many a one has drawn
balsamic consolation from these words; as for instance Melancthon when
disconsolately sorrowful over the body of his son in Dresden on the 12th
July, 1559. But in "He made us and we are his," there is also a rich
mine of comfort and of admonition, for the Creator is also the Owner,
his heart clings to his creature, and the creature owes itself entirely
to him, without whom it would not have had a being, and would not
continue in being. - F. Delitzsch.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"He that made us," i.e. made us what we are, a people to himself; as in
[Psa 95:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005), [Sa1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006), and [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006). It was not we that made
ourselves his (compare [Eze 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)). "He
(and not we ourselves) made us his people, and the flock whom he feeds."
- Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"Not we" is added because any share, on the part of the church, in
effecting the salvation bestowed upon her, would weaken the testimony
which this bears to the exclusive Godhead of the Lord. - F. W.
Hengstenberg.

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003), [Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)

"Know ye" what God is in himself, and what he is to you. Knowledge is
the mother of devotion, and of all obedience; blind sacrifices will
never please a seeing God. "Know" it, i.e. consider and apply it, and
then you will be more close and constant, more inward and serious, in
the worship of him. Let us know, then, these seven things concerning the
Lord Jehovah, with whom we have to do in all the acts of religious
worship.

1\. "That the Lord he is God," the only living and true God; that he is
a being infinitely perfect, self-existent, and self-sufficient, and the
fountain of all being.

2\. That he is our Creator: "it is he that hath made us, and not we
ourselves." We do not, we could not make ourselves; it is God's
prerogative to be his own cause; our being is derived and depending.

3\. That therefore he is our rightful owner. The Masorites, by altering
one letter in the Hebrew, read it, "He made us, and his we are," or, "to
him we belong." Put both the readings together, and we learn, that
because God "made us, and not we ourselves," therefore we are not our
own, but his.

4\. That he is our sovereign Ruler. "We are his people," or subjects,
and he is our prince, our rector or governor, that gives laws to us as
moral agents, and will call us to an account for what we do.

5\. That he is our bountiful Benefactor; we are not only his sheep whom
he is entitled to, but "the sheep of his pasture," whom he takes care
of.

6\. That he is a God of infinite mercy and good ([Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)); "The Lord is good," and
therefore doth good; "his mercy is everlasting."

7\. That he is a God of inviolable truth and faithfulness; "His truth
endureth to all generations," and no word of his shall fall to the
ground as antiquated or revoked. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)

"Enter into his gates;" for to the most guilty are the gates of his
church open. - Francis Hill Tucker.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)

"With thanksgiving." On the word תורה \[the word used in [Lev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012) for sacrifices of
thanksgivings\], Rabbi Menachen remarks: All sacrifices will be
abolished; but the sacrifice of thanksgiving will remain. - George
Phillips.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)

The former part of this Psalm may have been chanted by the precentor
when the peace-offering was brought to the altar; and this last verse
may have been the response, sung by the whole company of singers, at the
moment when fire was applied to the offering. - Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)

"His mercy is everlasting." The everlasting unchangeable mercy of God,
is the first motive of our turning to him, and of our continuing
stedfast in his covenant, and it shall be the subject of unceasing
praise in eternity. As the Lord is good, and his mercy everlasting, so
the full perfection of these attributes in a perfect state will call
forth praise unwearied from hearts that never faint. - W. Wilson.

[Psalms 100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 100:1</span></span>

1 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.

2 Serve the Lord with gladness; come before his presence with singing.

3 Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us and not we
ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise; be thankful unto him, and bless his name.

5 For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth
to all generations.

[Psa 100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

"Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands." This is a repetition
of [Psa 98:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004). The original word
signifies a glad shout, such as loyal subjects give when their king
appears among them. Our happy God should be worshipped by a happy
people; a cheerful spirit is in keeping with his nature, his acts, and
the gratitude which we should cherish for his mercies in every land
Jehovah's goodness is seen, therefore in every land should he be
praised. Never will the world be in its proper condition till with one
unanimous shout it adores the only God. O ye nations, how long will ye
blindly reject him? Your golden age will never arrive till ye with all
your hearts revere him.

[Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)

"Serve the Lord with gladness." "Glad homage pay with awful mirth." He
is our Lord, and therefore he is to be served; he is our gracious Lord,
and therefore to be served with joy. The invitation to worship here
given is not a melancholy one, as though adoration were a funeral
solemnity, but a cheery, gladsome exhortation, as though we were bidden
to a marriage feast. "Come before his presence with singing." We ought
in worship to realise the presence of God, and by an effort of the mind
to approach him. This is an act which must to every rightly instructed
heart be one of great solemnity, but at the same time it must not be
performed in the servility of fear, and therefore we come before him,
not with weepings and wailings, but with Psalms and hymns. Singing, as
it is a joyful, and at the same time a devout, exercise, should be a
constant form of approach to God. The measured, harmonious, hearty
utterance of praise by a congregation of really devout persons is not
merely decorous but delightful, and is a fit anticipation of the worship
of heaven, where praise has absorbed prayer, and become the sole mode of
adoration. How a certain society of brethren can find it in their hearts
to forbid singing in public worship is a riddle which we cannot solve.
We feel inclined to say with Dr. Watts -

"Let those refuse to sing

Who never knew our God;

But favourites of the heavenly king

Must speak his praise abroad"

[Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

"Know that the Lord he is God." Our worship must be intelligent. We
ought to know whom we worship and why. "Man, know thyself," is a wise
aphorism, yet to know our God is truer wisdom; and it is very
questionable whether a man can know himself until he knows his God.
Jehovah is God in the fullest, most absolute, and most exclusive sense,
he is God alone; to know him in that character and prove our knowledge
by obedience, trust, submission, zeal, and love is an attainment which
only grace can bestow. Only those who practically recognise his Godhead
are at all likely to offer acceptable praise. "It is he that hath made
us, and not we ourselves." Shall not the creature reverence its Maker?
Some men live as if they made themselves; they call themselves
"self-made men," and they adore their supposed creators; but Christians
recognise the origin of their being and their well-being, and take no
honour to themselves either for being, or for being what they are.
Neither in our first or second creation dare we put so much as a finger
upon the glory, for it is the sole right and property of the Almighty.
To disclaim honour for ourselves is as necessary a part of true
reverence as to ascribe glory to the Lord. "Non nobis, domine!" will for
ever remain the true believer's confession. Of late philosophy has
laboured hard to prove that all things have been developed from atoms,
or have, in other words, made themselves: if this theory shall ever find
believers, there will certainly remain no reason for accusing the
superstitious of credulity, for the amount of credence necessary to
accept this dogma of scepticism is a thousandfold greater than that
which is required even by an absurd belief in winking Madonnas, and
smiling Bambinos. For our part, we find it far more easy to believe that
the Lord made us than that we were developed by a long chain of natural
selections from floating atoms which fashioned themselves. "We are his
people, and the sheep of his pasture." It is our honour to have been
chosen from all the world besides to be his own people, and our
privilege to be therefore guided by his wisdom, tended by his care, and
fed by his bounty. Sheep gather around their shepherd and look up to
him; in the same manner let us gather around the great Shepherd of
mankind. The avowal of our relation to God is in itself praise; when we
recount his goodness we are rendering to him the best adoration; our
songs require none of the inventions of fictions, the bare facts are
enough; the simple narration of the mercies of the Lord is more
astonishing than the productions of imagination. That we are the sheep
of his pasture is a plain truth, and at the same time the very essence
of poetry.

[Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)

"Enter into his gates with thanksgiving." To the occurrence of the word
thanksgiving in this place the Psalm probably owes its title. In all our
public service the rendering of thanks must abound; it is like the
incense of the temple, which filled the whole house with smoke.
Expiatory sacrifices are ended, but those of gratitude will never be out
of date. So long as we are receivers of mercy we must be givers of
thanks. Mercy permits us to enter his gates; let us praise that mercy.
What better subject for our thoughts in God's own house than the Lord of
the house. "And into his courts with praise." Into whatever court of the
Lord you may enter, let your admission be the subject of praise - thanks
be to God, the innermost court is now open to believers, and we enter
into that which is within the veil; it is incumbent upon us that we
acknowledge the high privilege by our songs. "Be thankful unto him." Let
the praise be in your heart as well as on your tongue, and let it all be
for him to whom it all belongs. "And bless his name." He blessed you,
bless him in return; bless his name, his character, his person. Whatever
he does, be sure that you bless him for it: bless him when he takes away
as well as when he gives; bless him as long as you live, under all
circumstances; bless him in all his attributes, from whatever point of
view you consider him.

[Psa 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)

"For the Lord is good." This sums up his character and contains a mass
of reasons for praise. He is good, gracious, kind, bountiful, loving;
yea, God is love. He who does not praise the good is not good himself.
The kind of praise inculcated in the Psalm, viz. that of joy and
gladness, is most fitly urged upon us by an argument from the goodness
of God. "His mercy is everlasting." God is not mere justice, stern and
cold; he has bowels of compassion, and wills not the sinner's death.
Towards his own people mercy is still more conspicuously displayed; it
has been theirs from all eternity, and shall be theirs world without
end. Everlasting mercy is a glorious theme for sacred song. "And his
truth endureth to all generations." No fickle being is he, promising and
forgetting. He has entered into covenant with his people, and he will
never revoke it, nor alter the thing that has gone out of his lips. As
our fathers found him faithful, so will our sons, and their seed for
ever. A changeable God would be a terror to the righteous, they would
have no sure anchorage, and amid a changing world they would be driven
to and fro in perpetual fear of shipwreck. It were well if the truth of
divine faithfulness were more fully remembered by some theologians; it
would overturn their belief in the final fall of believers, and teach
them a more consolatory system. Our heart leaps for Joy as we bow before
One who has never broken his word or changed his purpose.

"As well might he his being quit

As break his promise or forget."

Resting on his sure word, we feel that joy which is here commanded, and
in the strength of it we come into his presence even now, and speak good
of his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 101](psa101)

</div>
