<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa103)  [Next](psa105) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 104:0</span></span>

General Remarks. - Here we have one of the loftiest and longest
sustained flights of the inspired muse. The Psalm gives an
interpretation to the many voices of nature, and sings sweetly both of
creation and providence. The poem contains a complete cosmos: sea and
land, cloud and sunlight, plant and animal, light and darkness, life and
death, are all proved to be expressive of the presence of the Lord.
Traces of the six days' of creation are very evident, and though the
creation of man, which was the crowning work of the sixth day, is not
mentioned, this is accounted for from the fact that man is himself the
singer: some have even discerned marks of the divine rest upon the
seventh day in [Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031). It is a
poet's version of Genesis. Nor is it alone the present condition of the
earth which is here the subject of song; but a hint is given of those
holier times when we shall see "a new earth wherein dwelleth
righteousness," out of which the sinner shall be consumed, [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035). The spirit of ardent praise to
God runs through the whole, and with it a distinct realization of the
divine Being as a personal existence, loved and trusted as well as
adored.

We have no information as to the author, but the Septuagint assigns it
to David, and we see no reason for ascribing it to any one else. His
spirit, style, and manner of writing are very manifest therein, and if
the Psalm must be ascribed to another, it "must be to a mind remarkably
similar, and we could only suggest the wise son of David - Solomon, the
poet preacher, to whose notes upon natural history in the Proverbs some
of the verses bear a striking likeness. Whoever the human penman may
have been, the exceeding glory and perfection of the Holy Spirit's own
divine authorship are plain to every spiritual mind."

Division. - After ascribing blessedness to the Lord the devout Psalmist
sings of the light and the firmament, which were the work of the first
and second days ([Psa 104:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)). By an
easy transition he describes the separation of the waters from the dry
land, the formation of rain, brooks, and rivers, and the uprising of
green herbs, which were the produce of the third day ([Psa
104:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)). Then the appointment of the
sun and moon to be the guardians of day and night commands the poet's
admiration ([Psa 104:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)), and so he
sings the work of the fourth day. Having already alluded to many
varieties of living creatures, the Psalmist proceeds from [Psa
104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024) to [Psa
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030) to sing of the life with which
the Lord was pleased to fill the air, the sea, and the land; these forms
of existence were the peculiar produce of the fifth and sixth days. We
may regard the closing verses ([Psa
104:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)) as a Sabbath meditation,
hymn, and prayer. The whole lies before us as a panorama of the universe
viewed by the eye of devotion. O for grace to render due praise unto the
Lord while reading it.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001) (first clause). - An
exhortation to one's own heart.

I. To remember the Lord as the first cause of all good. Bless not man,
or fate, but the Lord.

II\. To do this in a loving, grateful, hearty, praiseful manner. Bless
the Lord.

III\. To do it truly and intensely. O my soul!.

IV\. To do it now - for various reasons and in all possible ways.

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001) (second clause). - He is
all this essentially, and in nature, providence, grace, and judgment.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002) (first clause). - The
clearest revelation of God is still a concealment; even light is but a
covering to him. God is clothed with light as we see him in his
omniscience, his revelation, his glory in heaven, and his grace on
earth.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003) (last clause). -

I. God is leisurely in his haste: "he walketh," etc.

II\. God is swift even in his slackness, "he walketh on the wings of the
wind."

III\. The practical conclusions are that there is time enough for the
divine purposes, but none for our trifling; and that we should both wait
with patience for the victory of his cause and hasten it by holy
activity.

[Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004). -

I. The Nature of Angels. Spirits.

II\. The Lord of Angels. "Who maketh," etc. What must his own
spirituality be who maketh spirits?

III\. The ministry of Angels.

1\. Their office: "ministers."

2\. Their activity or zeal: "a flaming fire."

3\. Their dependence: made ministers. - G. Rogers.

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007). - The power of the divine
word in nature shows its power in other spheres.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009). -

I. All things have their appointed bounds.

II\. To pass those bounds without special permission by God is
transgression. "Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass."

III\. Extraordinary cases should be followed by a return to ordinary
duties. "That they turn not again," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010). - The thoughtfulness of
God for those who, like the valleys, are lowly, hidden, and needy; the
abiding character of his supplies, and the joyous results of his care.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010), [Psa
104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011). - God's care for wild
creatures, reflections from it.

I. Shall he not much more care for his people?

II\. Will he not look after wild, wandering men?

III\. Ought we not also to care for all that live?

[Psa 104:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010). - From the fertility,
life and music which mark the course of a stream, illustrate the
beneficial influences of the Gospel. - C. A. Davis.

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014). - "In the Hayfield." (See
"Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 757.) "He causeth the grass to grow for the
cattle."

I. Grass is in itself instructive.

1\. As the symbol of our mortality: "All flesh is grass."

2\. As an emblem of the wicked.

3\. As a picture of the elect of God. [Isa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007); [Isa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004); [Psa
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006); [Psa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004). Grass is comparable to the food
wherewith the Lord supplies the necessities of his chosen ones. [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002); [Sol
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007).

II\. God is seen in the growing of the grass.

1\. As a worker: "He causeth," etc. See God in common things - in
solitary things.

2\. See God as a care-taker: "He causeth the grass to grow for the
cattle." God cares for the beasts - the helpless - dumb and speechless
things - providing suitable food for them: "grass." Let us) then, see
his hand in providence at all times.

III\. God's working in the grass for the cattle gives us illustrations
concerning grace.

1\. God "cares for oxen" and satisfies their wants: there must then be
something somewhere to satisfy the needs of the nobler creature man, and
his immortal soul.

2\. Though God provides the grass for the cattle, the cattle must eat it
themselves. The Lord Jesus Christ is provided as the food of the soul.
We must, by faith, receive and feed upon Christ.

3\. Preventing grace may here be seen in a symbol; before the cattle
were made, in this world there was grass. There were covenant supplies
for God's people before they were in the world.

4\. Here is an illustration of free grace; the cattle bring nothing to
purchase the food. Why is this?

\(1\) Because they belong to him, [Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001), 10.

\(2\) Because he has entered into a covenant with them to feed them,
[Gen 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009), [Gen
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#010).

In the text there is a mighty blow to free-will, "He causeth the grass
to grow." Grace does not grow in the heart without a divine cause. If
God cares to make grass grow he will also make us grow in grace. Again;
the grass does not grow without an object; it is "for the cattle" but
the cattle grow for man. What, then, does man grow for? Observe,
further, that the existence of the grass is necessary to complete the
chain of nature. So the meanest child of God is necessary to the family.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016). - "The Cedars of
Lebanon." (See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 529.)

I. The absence of all human culture. These trees are peculiarly the
Lord's trees, because,

1\. They owe their planting entirely to him, "He hath planted."

2\. They are not dependent upon man for their watering.

3\. No mortal might protects them.

4\. As to their inspection - they preserve a sublime indifference to
human gaze.

5\. Their exultation is all for God.

6\. There is not a cedar upon Lebanon which is not independent of man in
its expectations.

II\. The glorious display of divine care.

1\. In the abundance of their supply.

2\. They are always green.

3\. Observe the grandeur and size of these trees.

4\. Their fragrance.

5\. Their perpetuity.

6\. They are very venerable.

III\. The fulness of living principle, "The trees of the Lord are full
of sap."

1\. This is vitally necessary.

2\. It is essentially mysterious.

3\. It is radically secret.

4\. It is permanently active.

5\. It is externally operative.

6\. It is abundantly to be desired.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017), [Psa
104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018). - "Lessons from Nature" (See
"Spurgeon's Sermons," No. - 1,005.)

I. For each place God has prepared a suitable form of life, for "the fir
trees," "the stork"; for "the high hills,.... the wild goat," etc. So,
for all parts of the spiritual universe God has provided suitable forms
of divine life.

1\. Each age has its saints.

2\. In every rank they are to be found. The Christian religion is
equally well adapted for all conditions.

3\. In every church spiritual life is to be found.

4\. God's people are to be found in every city.

II\. Each creature has its appropriate place.

1\. Each man has by God a providential position appointed to him.

2\. This is also true of our spiritual experience.

3\. The same holds good as to individuality of character.

III\. Every creature that God has made is provided with shelter.

IV\. For each creature the shelter is appropriate.

V. Each creature uses its shelter.

[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019). -

I. The wisdom of God as displayed in the material heavens. In the
changes of the moon and the variety of the seasons.

II\. The goodness of God as there displayed. In the adaptation of these
changes to the wants and enjoyments of men.

III\. The faithfulness of God as there displayed. Inspiring confidence
in his creatures by their regularity.

"So like the sun may I fulfil

The appointed duties of the day,

With ready mind and active will

March on and keep my heavenly way."

[Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020). - Darkness and the beasts
that creep forth therein.

I. Ignorance of God, and unrestrained lusts. Rom. 1.

II\. Sins discovered. Beasts there before, but not noticed, now terrify
man.

III\. Spiritual despondency, dismay, despair, etc.

IV\. Church lethargy. All sorts of heresies, etc., begin to creep forth.

V. Papal influence. Monks, friars, priests, etc., creep about in this
dark age. - A. G. Brown.

[Psa 104:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020). -

I. Night work is for wild beasts, "Thou makest darkness," etc.

II\. Day work is for men, "Man goeth forth," etc. Good men do their work
by day; bad men by night: their work is in the dark. Ministers who creep
into their studies by night, and "roar after their prey," and "seek
their meat from God," are more like wild beasts than rational men. - G.
R.

[Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021). - Inarticulate prayers,
or how faulty the expression may be and yet how real the prayer in the
esteem of God.

[Psa 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022). - From the effect of
sunrise on the beasts of prey, exhibit the influence of Divine Grace on
our evil passions. - C. A. D.

[Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023). - "Early Closing." A
sermon preached on behalf of the "Early Closing Association." by James
Hamilton, D. D., 1850. In the "Pulpit," Vol. 57.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024). -

I. The language of wonder: "O Lord, how manifold," etc. Their number,
variety, co-operation, harmony.

II\. Of admiration: "In wisdom," etc. Everywhere the same wisdom
displayed. God, says Dr. Chalmers, is as great in minutiae as in
magnitude.

III\. Of gratitude: "The earth is full," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024). -

I. The works of the Lord are multitudinous and varied.

II\. They are so constructed as to show the most consummate wisdom in
their design, and in the end for which they are formed.

III\. They are all God's property, and should be used only in reference
to the end for which they were created. All abuse and waste of God's
creatures are spoil and robbery on the property of the Creator. - Adam
Clarke.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026). - "There go the ships."
(See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1,259.)

I. We see that the ships go.

1\. The ships are intended for going.

2\. The ships in going at last disappear from view.

3\. The ships as they go are going upon business.

4\. The ships sail upon a changeful sea.

II\. How go the ships?

1\. They must go according to the wind.

2\. But still the mariner does not go by the wind without exertion on
his own part.

3\. They have to be guided and steered by the helm.

4\. He who manages the helm seeks direction from charts and lights.

5\. They go according to their build.

III\. Let us signal them.

1\. Who is your owner?

2\. What is your cargo?

3\. Where are you going?

[Psa 104:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027). - Trace the analogy in
the spiritual world. The saints waiting, [Psa
104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027); their sustenance from the
opened hand, [Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028); their
trouble under the hidden face; their death if the Spirit were gone, [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029); their revival when the Spirit
returns, [Psa 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030).

[Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029), [Psa
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030). -

I. The commencement of life is from God: "Thou sendest forth thy
Spirit," etc.

II\. The continuance of life is from God: "Thou renewest," etc.

III\. The decline of life is from God: "Thou hidest thy face," etc.

IV\. The cessation of life is from God: "Thou takest away their breath,"
etc.

V. The resurrection of life is from God: "Thou renewest," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030). - The season of Spring
and its mortal analogies. See John Foster's "Lectures," 1844.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032). -

I. What there is in a look of God. "He looketh," etc.

1\. What in a look of anger.

2\. What in a look of love. He looked out of the fiery pillar upon the
Egyptians. "The Lord hath looked out from his pillar of glory," etc. He
gave another look from the same pillar to Israel.

II\. What there is in a Touch of God: "He toucheth," etc. A touch of his
may raise a soul to heaven, or sink a soul to hell. - G. R.

[Psa 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033). -

I. The singer - "I."

II\. The song - "praises."

III\. The audience - "The Lord," "My God."

IV\. The length of the song - "long as I live; while I have my being." -
A. G. B.

[Psa 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033). - Two "I wills."

I. Because he made me live.

II\. Because he has made me to live in him.

III\. Because he is Jehovah and "my God."

IV\. Because I shall live for ever, in the best sense.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034). -

I. David's contemplation.

II\. David's exultation. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035). -

I. They who praise not God are not fit to be on the earth: "Let the
sinners be consumed," etc.

II\. Much less are they fit to be in heaven.

III\. They who praise God are fit both for earth and heaven. Though
others do not praise him here, the saints will. "Bless thou the Lord,"
etc.

1\. In opposition to others, they praise him on earth.

2\. In harmony with others, they praise him in heaven, etc. Everywhere
it is with them, "Praise ye the Lord." - G. R.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is an inspired "Oratorio of Creation." - Christopher
Wordsworth.

Whole Psalm

The Psalm is delightful, sweet, and instructive, as teaching us the
soundest views of nature (la mas sana fisica), and the best method of
pursuing the study of it, viz., by admiring with one eye the works of
God, and with the other God himself, their Creator and Preserver. -
Sanchez, quoted by Perowne.

Whole Psalm

It might almost be said that this one Psalm represents the image of the
whole Cosmos. We are astonished to find in a lyrical poem of such a
limited compass, the whole universe - the heavens and the earth -
sketched with a few bold touches. The calm and toilsome labour of man,
from the rising of the sun to the setting of the same, when his daily
work is done, is here contrasted with the moving life of the elements of
nature. This contrast and generalisation in the conception of the mutual
action of natural phenomena, and this retrospection of an omnipresent
invisible power, which can renew the earth or crumble it to dust,
constitute a solemn and exalted rather than a glowing and gentle form of
poetic creation. - A. Von Humboldt's Cosmos.

Whole Psalm

Its touches are indeed few, rapid - but how comprehensive and sublime!
Is it God? - "He is clothed with light as with a garment," and when he
walks abroad, it is on "the wings of the wind." The winds or lightnings?
- They are his messengers or angels: "Stop us not," they seem to say;
"the King's business requireth haste." The waters? - The poet shows them
in flood, covering the face of the earth, and then as they now lie,
enclosed within their embankments, to break forth no more for ever. The
springs? - He traces them, by one inspired glance, as they run among the
hills, as they give drink to the wild and lonely creatures of the
wilderness, as they nourish the boughs, on which sing the birds, the
grass, on which feed the cattle, the herb, the corn, the olive-tree, the
vine, which fill man's mouth, cheer his heart, and make his face to
shine. Then he skims with bold wing all lofty objects - the trees of the
Lord on Lebanon, "full of sap," - the fir-trees, and the storks which
are upon them - the high hills, with their wild goats - and the rocks
with their conies. Then he soars up to the heavenly bodies - the sun and
the moon. Then he spreads abroad his wings in the darkness of the night,
which "hideth not from him," and hears the beasts of the forest creeping
abroad to seek their prey, and the roar of the lions to God for meat,
coming up upon the winds of midnight. Then as he sees the shades and the
wild beasts fleeing together, in emulous haste, from the presence of the
morning sun, and man, strong and calm in its light as in the smile of
God, hieing to his labour, he exclaims, "O Lord, how manifold are thy
works I in wisdom hast thou made them all!" He casts, next, one look at
the ocean - a look glancing at the ships which go there, at the
leviathan which plays there; and then piercing down to the innumerable
creatures, small and great, which are found below its unlifted veil of
waters. He sees, then, all the beings, peopling alike earth and sea,
waiting for life and food around the table of their Divine Master - nor
waiting in vain - till, lo! he hides his face, and they are troubled,
die, and disappear in chaos and night. A gleam, next, of the great
resurrection of nature and of man comes across his eye. "Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the face of the
earth." But a greater truth still succeeds, and forms the climax of the
Psalm - (a truth Humboldt, with all his admiration of it, notices not,
and which gives a Christian tone to the whole) - "The Lord shall rejoice
in his works." He contemplates a yet more perfect Cosmos. He is "to
consume sinners" and sin "out of" this fair universe: and then, when man
is wholly worthy of his dwelling, shall God say of both it and him, with
a yet deeper emphasis than when he said it at first, and smiling at the
same time a yet warmer and softer smile, "It is very good." And with an
ascription of blessing to the Lord does the poet close this almost
angelic descant upon the works of nature, the glory of God, and the
prospects of man. It is not merely the unity of the Cosmos that he had
displayed in it, but its progression, as connected with the parallel
progress of man - its thorough dependence on one Infinite Mind - the
"increasing purpose" which runs along it - and its final purification,
when it shall blossom into "the bright consummate flower" of the new
heavens and the new earth, "wherein dwelleth righteousness;" - this is
the real burden and the peculiar glory of the 104th Psalm. - George
Gilfillan, in "The Bards of the Bible."

Whole Psalm

It is a singular circumstance in the composition of this Psalm, that
each of the parts of the First Semichorus, after the first, begins with
a participle. And these participles are accusatives, agreeing with יהוה
the object of the verb בּרכי at the beginning of the whole Psalm. Bless
the Jehovah - putting on - extending - laying - constituting -
travelling - making - setting - sending - watering - making - making.
Thus, this transitive verb, in the opening of the Psalm, extending its
government through the successive parts of the same semichorus, except
the last, unites them all in one long period. - Samuel Horsley.

Whole Psalm

As to the details, - the sections intervening between [Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002) and [Psa
104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031), - they may be read as a
meditation upon creation and the first "ordering of the world," as
itself the counterpart and foreshadowing of the new and restored order
in the great Sabbath or Millenary period, or, it may be, they are
actually descriptive of this - beginning with the coming of the Lord in
the clouds of heaven ([Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003) with
[Psa 18:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)), attended with "the
angels of his power" ([Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004) with
[Th2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007), Gr.); followed by the
"establishing" of the earth, no more to be "moved" or "agitated" by the
convulsions and disturbances which sin has caused; after which Nature is
exhibited in the perfection of her beauty - all things answering the end
of their creation, all the orders of the animal world in harmony with
each other, and all at peace with man; all provided for by the varied
produce of the earth, no longer cursed, but blessed, and again made
fruitful by God, "on whom all wait who openeth his hand and fills them
with good"; and all his goodness meeting with its due acknowledgment
from his creatures, who join in chorus to praise him and say - "O Lord,
how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth
is full of thy riches. Hallelujah." - William De Burgh.

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

"Bless the Lord, O my soul." A good man's work lieth most within doors,
he is more taken up with his own soul, than with all the world besides;
neither can he ever be alone so long as he hath God and his own heart to
converse with. - John Trapp.

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

With what reverence and holy awe doth the Psalmist begin his meditation
with that acknowledgment! "O Lord, my God, thou art very great;" and it
is the joy of the saints that he who is their God is a great God; the
grandeur of the prince is the pride and pleasure of all his good
subjects. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

"Thou art clothed with honour and majesty." That is, as Jerome says,
Thou art arrayed and adorned with magnificence and splendour; Thou art
acknowledged to be glorious and illustrious by thy works, as a man by
his garment. Whence it is clear that the greatness celebrated here is
not the intrinsic but the exterior or revealed greatness of God. -
Lorinus.

[Psa 104:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

Each created, redeemed, regenerated soul is bound to praise the Lord,
the Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier; for that God the Son, who in the
beginning made the worlds, and whose grace is ever carrying on his work
to its perfect end by the operation of the Holy Ghost, has been revealed
before us in his exceeding glory. He, as the eternal High-priest, hath
put on the Urim and Thummim of majesty and honour, and hath clothed
himself with light, as a priest clothes himself with his holy vestments;
his brightness on the mount of transfiguration was but a passing glimpse
of what he is now, ever hath been, and ever shall be. He is the true
Light, therefore his angels are the angels of light, his children the
children of light, his doctrine the doctrine of light. The universe is
his tabernacle; the heavens visible and invisible are the curtains which
shroud his holy place. He hath laid the beams and foundations of his
holy of holies very high, even above the waters which are above the
firmament. The clouds and the winds of the lower heaven are his chariot,
upon which he stood when he ascended from Olivet, upon which he will sit
when he cometh again. - "Plain Commentary."

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment." In comparing the
light with which he represents God as arrayed to "a garment," he
intimates, that although God is invisible, yet his glory is conspicuous
enough. In respect of his essence, God 'undoubtedly dwells in light that
is inaccessible; but as he irradiates the whole world by his splendour,
this is the garment in which he, who is hidden in himself, appears in a
manner visible to us. The knowledge of this truth is of the greatest
importance. If men attempt to reach the infinite height to which God is
exalted although they fly above the clouds, they must fail in the midst
of their course. Those who seek to see him in his naked majesty are
certainly very foolish. That we may enjoy the sight of him, he must come
forth to view with his clothing; that is to say, we must cast our eyes
upon the very beautiful fabric of the world in which he wishes to be
seen by us, and not be too curious and rash in searching into his secret
essence. Now, since God presents himself to us clothed with light, those
who are seeking pretexts for their living without the knowledge of him,
cannot allege in excuse of their slothfulness, that he is hidden in
profound darkness. When it is said that the heavens are a curtain, it is
not meant that under them God hides himself, but that by them his
majesty and glory are displayed, being, as it were, his royal pavilion.
- John Calvin.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"With light." The first creation of God in the works of the days was the
light of sense; the last was the light of reason; and his Sabbath work
ever since is the illumination of the spirit. - Francis Bacon.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain." It is usual in the
East, in the summer season, and upon all occasions when a large company
is to be received, to have the court of the house sheltered from the
heat of the weather by an umbrella or veil, which being expanded upon
ropes from one side of the parapet wall to another may be folded or
unfolded at pleasure. The Psalmist seems to allude to some covering of
this kind in that beautiful expression of stretching out the heavens
like a curtain. - Kitto's Pictorial Bible.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"Like a curtain." With the same case, by his mere word, with which a man
spreads out a tent-curtain, [Isa 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002).
[Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022) is parallel, "that
stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a
tent to dwell in." [Isa 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003) continues
the description of the work of the second day. There lie at bottom, in
the first clause, the words of [Gen
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007) : "God made the vaulted sky and
divided between the waters which are under the vault and the waters
which are above the vault." The waters above are the materials with
which, or out of which, the structure is reared. To construct out of the
movable waters a firm palace, the cloudy heaven, "firm as a molten
glass" ([Job 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#018)), is a magnificent
work of divine omnipotence. - E. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"Like a curtain." Because the Hebrews conceived of heaven as a temple
and palace of God, that sacred azure was at once the floor of his, the
roof of our, abode. Yet methinks the dwellers in tents ever loved best
the figure of the heavenly tent. They represent God as daily spreading
it out, and fastening it at the extremity of the horizon to the pillars
of heaven, the mountains: it is to them a tent of safety, of rest, of a
fatherly hospitality in which God lives with his creatures. - Herder,
quoted by Perowne.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

The metaphorical representation of God, as laying the beams of his
chambers in the waters, seems somewhat difficult to understand; but it
was the design of the prophet, from a thing incomprehensible to us, to
ravish us with the greater admiration. Unless beams be substantial and
strong, they will not be able to sustain even the weight of an ordinary
house. When, therefore, God makes the waters the foundation of his
heavenly palace, who can fail to be astonished at a miracle so
wonderful? When we take into account our slowness of apprehension, such
hyperbolical expressions are by no means superfluous; for it is with
difficulty that they awaken and enable us to attain even a slight
knowledge of God. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

"Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters;" or, "who layeth
his upper chambers above the waters." His upper chamber (people in the
East used to retire to the upper chamber when they wished for solitude)
is reared up in bright aether on the slender foundation of rainy clouds.
- A. F. Tholuck.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

"Who layeth the beams," etc. "He flooreth his chambers with waters,"
i.e., the clouds make the flooring of his heavens. - Zachary Mudge.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

"Who walketh upon the wings of the wind;" see [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010); which is expressive of his
swiftness in coming to help and assist his people in time of need; who
helps, and that right early; and may very well be applied both to the
first and second coming of Christ, who came leaping upon the mountains,
and skipping upon the hills, when he first came; and, when he comes a
second time will be as a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of
spices, [Sol 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008), and [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014). The Targum is, "upon the swift
clouds, like the wings of an eagle"; hence, perhaps, it is the heathens
have a notion that Jupiter is being carried in a chariot through the air
when it thunders and lightens. - John Gill.

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

"Who walketh upon the wings of the wind." In these words there is an
unequalled elegance; not, he fleeth - he runneth, but - he walketh; and
that on the very wings of the wind; on the most impetuous element raised
into the utmost rage, and sweeping along with incredible rapidity. We
cannot have a more sublime idea of the Deity; serenely walking on an
element of inconceivable swiftness, and, as it seems to us,
uncontrollable impetuosity! - James Hervey, 1713-14-1758.

[Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

"Who maketh his angels spirits." Some render it, Who maketh his angels
as the winds, to which they may be compared for their invisibility, they
being not to be seen, no more than the wind, unless when they assume an
external form; and for their penetration through bodies in a very
surprising manner; see [Act 12:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006);
and for their great force and power, being mighty angels, and said to
excel in strength, [Psa 103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020); and
for their swiftness in obeying the divine commands; so the Targum, "He
maketh his messengers, or angels, swift as the wind." - John Gill.

[Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

"Who maketh his angels spirits." The words, "creating his angels
spirits," may either mean 'creating them spiritual beings, not material
beings,' or 'creating them winds' - i.e., like the winds, invisible,
rapid in their movements, and capable of producing great effects. The
last mode of interpretation seen is pointed out by the parallelism -
"and his ministers" - or, 'servants' - who are plainly the same as his
angels, - "a flame of fire," i.e., like the lightning. The statement
here made about the angels seems to be this: 'They are created beings,
who in their qualities bear a resemblance to the winds and the
lightning.'

The argument deduced by Paul, in [Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007), from this statement for the
inferiority of the angels is direct and powerful: - He is the Son; they
are the creatures of God. "Only begotten" in the description of his mode
of existence; made is the description of theirs. All their powers are
communicated powers; and however high they may stand in the scale of
creation, it is in that scale they stand, which places them infinitely
below him, who is so the Son of God as to be "God over all, blessed for
ever" - John Brown, in "An Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews."

[Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

"A flaming fire." Fire is expressive of irresistible power, immaculate
holiness and ardent emotion. It is remarkable that the seraphim, one
class at least of these ministers, have their name from a root
signifying to burn; and the altar, from which one of them took the live
coal, [Isa 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006), is the symbol of the
highest form of holy love. - James G. Murphy, in "A Commentary on the
Book of Psalms," 1875.

[Psa 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

"Not be removed for ever." The stability of the earth is of God, as much
as the being and existence of it. There have been many earthquakes or
movings of the earth in several parts of it, but the whole body of the
earth was never removed so much as one hair's breadth out of its place,
since the foundations thereof were laid. Archimedes, the great
mathematician, said, "If you will give me a place to set my engine on, I
will remove the earth." It was a great brag; but the Lord hath laid it
too fast for man's removing. Himself can make it quake and shake, he can
move it when he pleaseth; but he never hath nor will remove it. He hath
laid the foundations of the earth that it shall not be removed, nor can
it be at all moved, but at his pleasure; and when it moves at any time,
it is to mind the sons of men that they by their sins have moved him to
displeasure. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

The philosophical mode of stating this truth may be seen in Amede
Guillemin's work entitled "The Heavens" "How is it that though we are
carried along with a vast rapidity by the motion of the earth, we do not
ourselves perceive our movement? It is because the entire bulk of the
earth, atmosphere, and clouds, participate in the movement. This
constant velocity, with which all bodies situated on the surface of the
earth are animated, would be the cause of the most terrible and general
catastrophe that could be imagined, if, by any possibility, the rotation
of the earth were abruptly to cease. Such an event would be the
precursor of a most sweeping destruction of all organized beings. But
the constancy of the laws of nature permits us to contemplate such a
catastrophe without fear. It is demonstrated that the position of the
poles of rotation on the surface of the earth is invariable. It has also
been asked whether the velocity of the earth's rotation has changed, or,
which comes to the same thing, if the length of the sidereal day and
that of the solar day deduced from it have varied within the historical
period? Laplace has replied to this question, and his demonstration
shows that it has not varied the one hundredth of a second during the
last two thousand years."

[Psa 104:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

God of the earth and sea, Thou hast laid earth's foundations:

Because thy hand sustaineth,

It ever firm remaineth.

Once didst thou open its deep, hidden fountains,

And soon the rising waters stood above the mountains.

At thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder,

The flood thy mandate heeded,

And hastily receded:

The waters keep the place Thou hast assigned them,

And in the hills and vales a channel Thou dost find them.

A limit Thou hast set, which they may not pass over;

The deep within bound inclosing,

Strong barriers interposing,

That its proud waves no more bring desolation,

And sweep away from earth each human habitation.

\- John Barton, in "The Book of Psalms in English Verse: New Testament
Paraphrase," 1871.

[Psa 104:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)

"Stood," "fled,.... hasted away." The words of the Psalm put the
original wondrous process graphically before the eye. The change of
tense, too, from past to present, in [Psa
104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006), [Psa
104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007), [Psa
104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008), is expressive, and paints the
scene in its progress. In [Psa 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)
"stood" should be stand: in [Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)
"fled" should be and "hasted away" should be haste away, as in the P. B.
V. - "The Speaker's Commentary."

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

"At thy rebuke they fled." The famous description of Virgil comes to
mind, who introduces Neptune-as sternly rebuking the winds for daring
without his consent to embroil earth and heaven, and raise such huge
mountain-waves-then swifter than the word is spoken, he calms the
swollen seas, scatters the gathered clouds, and brings back the sun. -
Lorinus.

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

"At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away;" ran off with great
precipitance: just as a servant, when his master puts on a stern
countenance, and speaks to him in a thundering, menacing manner, hastes
away from him to do his will and work. This is an instance of the mighty
power of Christ; and by the same power he removed the waters of the
deluge, when they covered the earth, and the tops of the highest hills;
and rebuked the Red Sea, and it became dry land; and drove back the
waters of Jordan for the Israelites to pass through; and who also
rebuked the Sea of Galilee when his disciples were in distress; and with
equal ease can he and does he remove the depth of sin and darkness from
his people at conversion; rebukes Satan, and delivers out of his
temptations, when he comes in like a flood; and commands off the waters
of affliction when they threaten to overwhelm; who are his servants, and
come when he bids them come, and go when he bids them go. - John Gill.

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

"At the voice of thy thunder." It is very likely God employed the
electric fluid as an agent in this separation. - Ingram Cobbin.

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

"They hasted away."

God said,

Be gather'd now, ye waters under heaven

Into one place, and let dry land appear.

Immediately the mountains huge appear

Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave

Into the clouds; their tops ascend the sky:

So high as heav'd the tumid hills, so low

Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep,

Capacious bed of waters: Thither they

Hasted with glad precipitance, uproll'd

As drops on dust conglobing from the dry:

Part rise in crystal wall, or ridge direct,

For haste: such flight the great command impress'd

On the swift floods: As armies at the call

Of trumpet (for of armies thou hast heard)

troop to their standard; so the watery throng,

Wave rolling after wave, where way they found,

If steep, with torrent rapture, if through plain,

Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them rock or hill;

But they, or under ground, or circuit wide

With serpent errour wandering, found their way,

And on the washy ooze deep channels wore;

Easy, ere God had bid the ground be dry,

All but within those banks, where rivers now

Stream, and perpetual draw their tumid train.

The dry land, Earth; and the great receptacle

Of congregated waters, he called Seas:

And saw that it was good.

\- John Milton.

[Psa 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)

"They go up by the mountains," etc. The Targum is, "They ascend out of
the deep to the mountains"; that is, the waters, when they went off the
earth at the divine orders, steered their course up the mountains, and
then went down by the valleys to the place appointed for them; they went
over hills and dales, nothing could stop them or retard their course
till they came to their proper place; which is another instance of the
almighty power of the Son of God. - John Gill.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

"Thou hast set a bound," etc. The Baltic Sea, in our own time, inundated
large tracts of land, and did great damage to the Flemish people and
other neighbouring nations. By an instance of this kind we are warned
what would be the consequence, were the restraint imposed upon the sea,
by the hand of God, removed. How is it that we have not thereby been
swallowed up together, but because God has held in that outrageous
element by his word? In short, although the natural tendency of the
waters is to cover the earth, yet this will not happen, because God has
established, by his word, a counteracting law, and as his truth is
eternal, this law must remain stedfast. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

"Thou hast set a bound," etc. In these words the Psalmist gives us three
things clearly concerning the waters: First, that once (he means it not
of the deluge, but of the chaos), the waters did cover the whole earth,
till God by a word of command sent them into their proper channels, that
the dry land might appear. Secondly, that the waters have a natural
propension to return back and cover the earth again. Thirdly, that the
only reason why they do not return back and cover the whole earth is,
because God hath "set a bound, that they cannot pass." They would be
boundless and know no limits, did not God bound; and limit them. Wisdom
giveth us the like eulogium of the power of God in this, [Pro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#029), "He gave to the sea his decree,
that the waters should not pass his commandment." What cannot he
command, who sendeth his commandment to the sea and is obeyed? Some
great princes, heated with rage and drunken with pride, have cast
shackles into the sea, as threatening it with imprisonment and bondage
if it would not be quiet; but the sea would not be bound by them; they
have also awarded so many strokes to be given the sea as a punishment of
its contumacy and rebellion against either their commands or their
designs. How ridiculously ambitious have they been, who would needs
pretend to such a dominion! Many princes have had great power at and
upon the sea, but there was never any prince had any power over the sea;
that's a flower belonging to no crown but the crown of heaven. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

"Thou hast set a bound," etc. A few feet of increase in the ocean wave
that pursues its tidal circuit round the globe, would desolate cities
and provinces innumerable But with what immutable and safe control God
has marked its limits! You shall observe a shrub or a flower on a bank
of verdure that covers a sea cliff, or hangs down in some hollow; nay,
you shall mark a pebble on the beach, you shall lay a shred of gossamer
upon it; and this vast, ungovernable, unwieldy, tempestuous element
shall know how to draw a line of moisture by its beating spray at the
very edge, or on the very point of your demarcation, and then draw off
its forces, not having passed one inch or hand's breadth across the
appointed margin. And all this exact restraint and measurement in the
motion of the sea, by that mysterious power shot beyond unfathomable
depths of space, from orbs rolling in ether! a power itself how
prodigious, how irresistible, yet how invisible, how gentle, how with
minutest exactness measured and exerted. - George B. Cheever, in "Voices
of Nature to her Foster Child, the Soul of Man," 1852.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

"A bound that they may not pass over."

Now stretch your eye off shore, o'er waters made

To cleanse the air, and bear the world's great trade,

To rise and wet the mountains near the sun,

Then back into themselves in rivers run,

Fulfilling mighty uses, far and wide,

Through earth, in air, or here, as ocean-tide.

Ho! how the giant heaves himself, and strains

And flings to break his strong and viewless chains;

Foams in his wrath; and at his prison doors,

Hark! hear him! how he beats, and tugs, and roars,

As if he would break forth again, and sweep

Each living thing within his lowest deep.

\- Richard Henry Dana (1787-

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

"He sendeth the springs into the valleys," etc. Having spoken of the
salt waters, he treats afterwards of the sweet and potable, commending
the wisdom and providence of God, that from the lower places of the
earth and the hidden veins of the mountains, he should cause the
fountains of water to gush forth. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

"He sendeth the springs into the valleys." The more of humility the more
of grace; if in valleys some hollows are deeper than others the waters
collect in them. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

"He sendeth the springs into the valleys." Men cut places for rivers to
run in, but none but God can cut a channel to bring spiritual streams
into the soul. The Psalmist speaks of the sending forth of springs as
one great act of the providence of God. It is a secret mystery which
those that have searched deepest into nature cannot resolve us in, how
those springs are fed, how they are maintained and nourished, so as to
run without ceasing in such great streams as many of them make.
Philosophy cannot show the reason of it. The Psalmist doth it well, God
sends them into the valleys, his providence and power keeps them
continually running: he that would have his soul watered must go to God
in prayer. - Ralph Robinson.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

"Which run among the hills." That is, the streams or springs run. In
many a part of the world can be found a Sault, a dancing water, and a
Minne-ha-ha, a laughing water. The mountain streams walk, and run, and
leap, and praise the Lord. - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010), [Psa
104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013), [Psa
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"He." "He." "He."

All things are here of Him; from the black pines,

Which are his shade on high, and the loud roar

Of torrents, where he listeneth, to the vines

Which slope his green path downward to the shore,

Where the bow'd waters meet him, and adore.

Kissing his feet with murmurs.

\- Byron.

[Psa 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

"The wild asses quench their thirst." It is particularly remarked of the
asses, that though they are dull and stupid creatures, yet by Providence
they are taught the way to the waters, in the dry and sandy deserts, and
that there is no better guide for the thirsty travellers to follow, than
to observe the herds of them descending to the streams. - Thomas Fenton.

[Psa 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

"The wild asses quench their thirst." As evening approached we saw
congregated, near a small stream, what appeared to be a large company of
dismounted Arabs, their horses standing by them. As we were already near
them, and could not have escaped the watchful eye of the Bedouins, we
prepared for an encounter. We approached cautiously, and were surprised
to see that the horses still remained without their riders; we drew
still nearer, when they galloped off towards the desert. They were wild
asses. - Henry Austen Layard.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

"By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation." Never
shall I forget my first ride from Riha to Ain Sulta; our way lay right
across the oasis evoked by the waters. It may be that the contrast with
the arid desert of the previous day heightened the feelings of present
enjoyment, but certainly they echoed the words of Josephus, - a "Divine
region." At one time I was reminded of Epping Forest and then of a
neglected orchard with an undergrowth of luxuriant vegetation. Large
thorn bushes and forest shrubs dotted the plain on every side. In some
places the ground was carpeted with flowers, and every bush seemed vocal
with the cheerful twittering of birds. I use the word "twittering,"
because I do not think that I ever heard a decided warble during the
whole time I was in Syria. Coleridge speaks of the "merry nightingale,"

"That crowds, and hurries, and precipitates

With fast, quick warble, his delicious notes."

The song of my little Syrian friends seemed to consist of a series of
cheerful chirps. Other travellers have been more fortunate. Bonar speaks
of the note of the cuckoo; Dr. Robinson of the nightingale. Lord Lindsay
tells us of the delight of "an evening spent by the Jordan, the river
murmuring along, and the nightingale singing from the trees." Canon
Tristram, describing the scenery near Tell-el-Kady, says that "the
bulbul and nightingale vied in rival song in the branches above, audible
over the noise of the torrent below." In the face of these statements it
seems to me remarkable, considering the innumerable references to nature
in the Bible, that the singing of birds is only mentioned three times.
In the well-known passage which so exquisitely depicts a Syrian spring,
we read "the time of the singing of birds is come" ([Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012)). The Psalmist in speaking of the
mighty power and wondrous Providence of God, mentions the springs in
"the valleys, which run among the hills. They give drink to every beast
of the field; the wild asses quench their thirst. By them shall the
fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the
branches." Canon Tristram commenting on this passage, says, that it may
refer especially to the "bulbul and the nightingale, both of which
throng the trees that fringe the Jordan and abound in all the wooded
valleys, filling the air in early spring with the rich cadence of their
notes." - James Wareing Bardsley, in "Illustrative Texts," 1876.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

"By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation," etc. To
such birds may saints be compared; being, like them, weak, defenceless,
and timorous; liable to be taken in snares, and sometimes wonderfully
delivered; as well as given to wanderings and strayings; and to fowls of
the heaven, being heaven-born souls, and partakers of the heavenly
calling. These have their habitation by the fountain of Jacob, by the
river of divine love, beside the still waters of the sanctuary, where
they sing the songs of Zion, the songs of electing, redeeming, and
calling grace. - John Gill.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

"The fowls ... which sing among the branches." The music of birds was
the first song of thanksgiving which was offered from the earth, before
man was formed. - John Wesley.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

"The fowls of the heaven which sing among the branches." How do the
blackbird and thrassel \[thrush\], with their melodious voices, bid
welcome to the cheerful spring, and in their fixed months warble forth
such ditties as no art or instrument can reach to? But the nightingale,
another of my airy creatures, breathes such sweet loud music out of her
little instrumental throat, that it makes mankind to think miracles are
not ceased. He that at midnight, when the very labourer sleeps securely,
should hear, as I have very often, the clear airs, the sweet descants,
the natural rising and failing, the doubling and redoubling of her
voice, might well be lifted above earth, and say, "Lord, what music hast
thou provided for the saints in heaven, when thou affordest bad man such
music on earth?" - Izaak Walton.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

While o'er their heads the hazels hing,

The little birdies blithely sing,

Or lightly flit on wanton wing

In the birks of Aberfeldy.

'The braes ascend like lofty wa's,

The foaming stream deep-roaring fa's,

O'erhung wi' fragrant spreading shaws.

The birks of Aberfeldy.

\- Robert Burns, 1759-1796.

[Psa 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)

"The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works;" that is, with the
rain which is thy work, causing it to be showered down when thou
pleasest upon the earth; or, with the rain, which proceeds from the
clouds; or, with the fruits, which thou causeth the earth by this means
to bring forth. - Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"He causeth the grass to grow." Surely it should humble men to know that
all human power united cannot make anything, not even the grass to grow.
- William S. Plumer.

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"For the cattle," etc. To make us thankful, let us consider,

1\. That God not only provides for us, but for our servants; the cattle
that are of use to man, are particularly taken care of; grass is made to
grow in great abundance for them, when "the young lions," that are not
for the service of man, often "lack, and suffer hunger."

2\. That our food is nigh us, and ready to us: having our habitation on
the earth, there we have our storehouse, and depend not on "the merchant
ships that bring food from afar," [Pro
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#014).

3\. That we have even from the products of the earth, not only for
necessity, but for ornament and delight, so good a master do we serve.
Doth nature call for something to support it, and repair its daily
decays? Here is "bread which strengtheneth man's heart," and is
therefore called the staff of life; let none that have that complain of
want. Doth nature go further, and covet something pleasant? Here is
"wine that maketh glad the heart," refresheth the spirits, and
exhilarates them, when it is soberly and moderately used; that we may
not only go through our business, but go through it cheerfully; it is a
pity that that should be abused to overcharge the heart, and disfit men
for their duty, which was given to revive their heart, and quicken them
in their duty. Is nature yet more humoursome, and doth it crave
something for ornament too? Here is that also out of the earth; "oil to
make the face to shine," that the countenance may not only be cheerful,
but beautiful, and we may be the more acceptable to one another. -
Matthew Henry.

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"For the service of man." The common Version of these words can only
mean for his benefit or use, a sense not belonging to the Hebrew word,
which, as well as its verbal root, is applied to man's servitude or
bondage as a tiller of the ground ([Gen
3:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)), and has here the sense of
husbandry or cultivation, as in [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014), [Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039), it has that of compulsory or
servile labour, the infinitive in the last clause indicates the object
for which labour is imposed on man. - J. A. Alexander.

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"That he may bring forth food out of the earth." The Israelites at the
feast of the Passover and before the breaking of bread, were accustomed
to say, "Praise be to the Lord our God, thou King of the world, who hath
brought forth our bread from the earth": and at each returning harvest
we ought to be filled with gratitude, as often as we again receive the
valuable gift of bread. It is the most indispensable and necessary means
of nourishment of which we never tire, whilst other food, the sweeter it
is, the more easily it surfeits: everybody, the child and the old man,
the beggar and the king, like bread. We remember the unfortunate man,
who was cast on the desert isle, famishing with hunger, and who cried at
the sight of a handful of gold, "Ah, it is only gold!" He would
willingly have exchanged for a handful of bread, this to him, useless
material, which in the mind of most men is above all price. O let us
never sin against God, by lightly esteeming bread! Let us gratefully
accept the sheaves we gather, and thankfully visit the barns which
preserve them; that we may break bread to the hungry, and give to the
thirsty from the supplies God has given us. Let us never sit down to
table without asking God to bless the gifts we receive from his gracious
hand, and never eat bread without thinking of Christ our Lord, who calls
himself the living bread, who came down from heaven to give life unto
the world. And above all, may we never go to the table of the Lord
without enjoying, through the symbols of bread and wine, his body and
blood, whereby we receive strength to nourish our spiritual life! Yes,
Lord, thou satisfiest both body and soul, with bread from earth and
bread from heaven. Praise be to thy holy name, our hearts and mouths
shall be full of thy praises for time and eternity! - Frederick Arndt,
in "Lights of the Morning," 1861.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

When thou wert taken out of the womb, what a stately palace did he bring
thee into, the world, which thou roundest prepared and ready furnished
with all things for thy maintenance, as Canaan was to the children of
Israel; a stately house thou buildedst not, trees thou plantedst not, a
rich canopy spangled, spread as a curtain over thy head; he sets up a
taper for thee to work by, the sun, till thou art weary ([Psa
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)), and then it goes down without
thy bidding, for it knows its going down" ([Psa
104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)); then he draws a curtain over
half the world, that men may go to rest, "Thou causest darkness, and it
is night" ([Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)). As an house
this world is, so curiously contrived that to every room of it, even to
every poor village, springs do come as pipes to find thee water ([Psa
104:10, 19 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)). The pavement of
which house thou treadest on, and it brings forth thy food ([Psa
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)), "Bread for strength, wine to
cheer thy heart, oil to make thy face to shine" ([Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)). Which three are there
synecdochically put for all things needful to strength, ornament, and
delight. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"Wine that maketh glad the heart of man." The wine mentioned had the
quality of fermented liquors; it gladdened the heart. Thus, if taken to
excess, it would have led to intoxication. The Hebrew term is yayin,
answering to the Greek oinos, and including every form which the juice
of the grape might be made to assume as a beverage. It was this of which
Noah partook when he became drunken ([Gen
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021), [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024)). Melchizedek brought it forth to
Abraham ([Gen 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015)). Lot's daughters
gave it to their father and made him drunk ([Gen
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#035)). From this the Nazarite was to
separate himself (Num. 6:3-20). This is the highly intoxicating drink so
often mentioned by Isaiah ([Isa
5:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011), [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013), [Isa
28:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001), etc.); but just because of
this, it might become to man one of those mercies in connection with the
use of which he was to exercise constant self-control. Taken to excess
it was a curse; enjoyed as from God, it was something for which man was
called to be thankful. - John Duns.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"And oil to make his face to shine." Observe, after the mention of wine,
he speaks of oil or ointment, because at the banquets among the Jews and
other Eastern people, as afterwards among the Greeks and Romans, there
was a frequent use of ointments. The reasons why ointment was poured
upon the head were: To avoid intoxication: To improve the health: To
contribute to pleasure and delight. Homer often refers to this custom,
and there is an allusion to it by Solomon, [Ecc
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008), "Let thy garments be always
while; and let thy head lack no ointment." See also [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005). - Le Blanc.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

The ancients made much use of oil to beautify their persons. We read of
"oil to make man's face to shine." Ruth anointed herself for decoration
([Rut 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003)), and the woman of Tekoah
and the prophet Daniel omitted the use of oil for the contrary reason
([Sa2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#003); [Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)). The custom is also mentioned in
[Mat 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017); [Luk
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046). - Ambrose Serle in "Horse
Solitariae," 1815.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"Bread which strengtheneth man's heart." In hunger not only the strength
is prostrated, but the natural courage is also shared. Hunger has no
enterprise, emulation, nor courage. But when, in such circumstances, a
little bread is received into the stomach, even before concoction can
have time to prepare it for nutriment, the strength is restored, and the
spirits revived. This is a surprising effect; and it has not yet been
satisfactorily accounted for. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"Bread which strengtheneth man's heart." In Homer's Odyssey we meet with
the expression "Bread, the marrow of men."

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"Man's heart." It is not without reason that instead of the word הארם of
Adam, which was used in [Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014),
there is here employed the word אנושׁ, an infirm and feeble man, because
he mentions those nourishments of which there was no need before the
fall, and which are specially suitable to nourish and exhilarate feeble
man. - Venema.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

If the transitory earth is so full of the good things of God, what will
we have when we come to the land of the living? - Starke, in Lange's
Commentary.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

"The trees of the Lord." The transition which the prophet makes from men
to trees is as if he had said, It is not to be wondered at, if God so
bountifully nourishes men who are created after his own image, since he
does not grudge to extend his care even to trees. By "the trees of the
Lord," is meant those which are high and of surpassing beauty; for God's
blessing is more conspicuous in them. It seems scarcely possible for any
juice of the earth to reach so great a height, and yet they renew their
foliage every year. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

"The trees of the Lord" may be so named from their size and stature -
this name being used as a superlative in the Hebrew, or to denote aught
which is great and extraordinary. - Thomas Chalmers.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

"The trees of the Lord," etc. The cedars are indeed the trees of the
Lord. They are especially his planting. There is a sense in which, above
all other trees, they belong to him, and shadow forth in a higher degree
his glory. The peculiar expression of the text, however, must not be
limited to one particular species of cedar ... Encouraged by this
Scripture usage, I shall use the word in a somewhat wider sense than the
conventional one, to denote three remarkable examples which may be
selected from the coniferae to show the power and wisdom of God as
displayed in the trees of the forest. These are, the cedar of Lebanon,
the cedar of the Himalayas, and the cedar of the Sierra Nevada. The
epithet which the Psalmist applies to one, may most appropriately be
applied to all of them; and there are various reasons why the Lord may
be said to have a special interest and property in each of them, to a
few of which our attention may now be profitably directed.

1\. They are "trees of the Lord" on account of the peculiarities of
their structure. In common with all the pine tribe, they are exceptional
in their organization. They reveal a new idea of the creative mind.

2\. The cedars are "the trees of the Lord" on account of the antiquity
of their type. It was of this class of trees that the pre-Adamite
forests were principally composed.

3\. The cedars are the "trees of the Lord," on account of the majesty of
their appearance. It is the tree, par excellence, of the Bible - the
type of all forest vegetation. - Condensed from Hugh Macmillan's "Bible
Teachings in Nature," 1868.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

"Full of sap." The cedar has a store of resin. It flows from wounds made
in the bark, and from the scales of the cones, and is abundant in the
seeds. Both the resin and the wood were much valued by the ancients. The
Romans believed that the gum which exuded from the cedar had the power
of rendering whatever was steeped in it incorruptible; and we are told
that the books of Numa, the early king of Rome, which were found
uninjured in his tomb, five hundred years after his death, had been
steeped in oil of cedar. The Egyptians also used the oil in embalming
their dead. - Mary and Elizabeth Kirby, in "Chapters on Trees," 1873.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"Birds." The word rendered "birds" here is the word which in [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003) is translated sparrow, and which
is commonly used to denote small birds. Comp. [Lev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004) (margin), and [Lev
14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005), [Lev
14:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#049). It is used, however, to
denote birds of any kind. See [Gen
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#014); [Psa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008); [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001); [Psa
148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010). - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"The stork" is instanced as one of the largest of nest-building birds,
as the cedars of Lebanon were introduced in [Psa
104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016) as being the largest of
uncultivated trees. - A. C. Jennings and W. H. Lowe, in "The Psalms,
with Introductions and Critical Notes," 1875.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"The stork, the fir trees are her house." In many cases the stork breeds
among old ruins, and under such circumstances it is fond of building its
nest on the tops of pillars or towers, the summits of arches, and
similar localities. When it takes up its abode among mankind, it
generally selects the breeding-places which have been built for it by
those who know its taste, but it frequently chooses the top of a
chimney, or some such locality. When it is obliged to build in spots
where it can find neither rocks nor buildings, it builds on trees, and,
like the heron, is sociable in its nesting, a whole community residing
in a clump of trees. It is not very particular about the kind of tree,
provided that it be tolerably tall, and strong enough to bear the weight
of its enormous nest; and the reader will at once see that the fir trees
are peculiarly fitted to be the houses for the stork.

The particular species of fir tree to which the Psalmist alludes is
probably the Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis), which comes next to the
great cedars of Lebanon in point of size. It was this tree that
furnished the timber and planks for Solomon's temple and palace, a
timber which was evidently held in the greatest estimation. This tree
fulfils all the conditions which a stork would require in nest-building.
It is lofty, and its boughs are sufficiently horizontal to form a
platform for the nest, and strong enough to sustain it. On account of
its value and the reckless manner in which it has been cut down without
new plantations being formed, the Aleppo pine has vanished from many
parts of Palestine wherein it was formerly common, and would afford a
dwelling-place for the stork. There are, however, several other species
of fir which are common in various parts of the country, each species
flourishing In the soil best suited to it so that the stork would never
be at a loss to find a nesting-place in a country which, furnished so
many trees suitable to its purposes. - J. G. Wood, in Bible Animals.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"The stork, the fir trees are her house." Well-wooded districts are for
the most part the favourite resorts of the storks, as they constantly
select trees both for breeding purposes and as resting-places for the
night; some few species, however, prove exceptions to this rule, and
make their nests on roofs, chimneys, or other elevated situations in the
immediate vicinity of men. - From "Cassell's Book of Birds." From the
Text of Dr. Brehm. By T. R. Jones, F. R. S.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"The fir trees." The doors of the temple were made of the fir tree; even
of that tree which was a type of the humanity of Jesus Christ. Consider
[Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014). The fir tree is also the
house of the stork, that unclean bird, even as Christ is a harbour and
shelter for sinners. "As for the stork," saith the text, "the fir trees
are her house;" and Christ saith to the sinners that see their want of
shelter, "Come unto me, and I will give you rest." He is a refuge for
the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble. He is, as the doors of fir
of the temple, the inlet of God's house, to God's presence, and to a
partaking of his glory. Thus God did of old, by similitudes, teach his
people his way. - John Bunyan, in "Solomon's Temple Spiritualized."

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

The eagle and the stork

On cliffs and cedar-tops their eyries build.

\- John Milton.

[Psa 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

"The high hills are a refuge for the wild goals." There is scarcely any
doubt that the Azel of the Old Testament is the Arabian Ibex or Beden
(Capra Nubiana). This animal is very closely allied to the well-known
Ibex of the Alps, or Steinbock, but may be distinguished from it by one
or two slight differences, such as the black beard and the slighter make
of the horns, which moreover have three angles instead of four, as is
the case with the Alpine Ibex.... The colour of its coat resembles so
nearly that of the rocks, that an inexperienced eye would see nothing
but bare stones and sticks where a practised hunter would see numbers of
Beden, conspicuous by their beautifully curved horns.

The agility of the Beden is extraordinary. Living in the highest and
most craggy parts of the mountain ridge, it flings itself from spot to
spot with a recklessness that startles one who has not been accustomed
to the animal, and the wonderful certainty of its foot. It will, for
example, dash at the face of a perpendicular precipice that looks as
smooth as a brick wall, for the purpose of reaching a tiny ledge which
is hardly perceptible, and which is some fifteen feet or so above the
spot whence the animal sprang. Its eye, however, has marked certain
little cracks and projections on the face of the rock, and as the animal
makes its leap, it takes these little points of vantage in rapid
succession, just touching them as it passes upwards, and by the slight
stroke of its foot keeping up the original impulse of its leap.
Similarly the Ibex comes sliding and leaping down precipitous sides of
the mountains, sometimes halting with all the four feet drawn together,
on a little projection scarcely larger than a penny, and sometimes
springing boldly over a wild crevasse, and alighting with exact
precision upon a projecting piece of rock that seems scarcely large
enough to sustain a rat comfortably. - J. G. Wood.

[Psa 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

"Conies." When we were exploring the rocks in the neighbourhood of the
convent, I was delighted to point attention to a family or two of the
Wubar, engaged in their gambols on the heights above us. Mr. Smith and I
watched them narrowly, and were much amused with the liveliness of their
motions, and the quickness of their retreat within the clefts of the
rock when they apprehended danger. We were, we believe, the first
European travellers who actually noticed this animal, now universally
admitted to be the shaphan, or coney of Scripture, within the proper
bounds of the Holy Land; and we were not a little gratified by its
discovery ... The preparer of the skin mistook it for a rabbit, though
it is of a stronger build, and of a duskier colour, being of a dark
brown. It is destitute of a tail, and has some bristles at its mouth,
over its head, and down its back, along the course of which there are
traces of light and dark shade. In its short ears, small, black, and
naked feet, and pointed snout, it resembles the hedgehog. It does not,
however, belong to the insectivora, but, though somewhat anomalous, it
is allied to the pachydermsis, among which it is now classed by
naturalists. - John Wilson, in "The Lands of the Bible," 1847.

[Psa 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

"Conies." People used to think the conies of Solomon the same as our
rabbits, which are indeed "a feeble folk," but which do not "make their
houses in the rock." Now that the coney is ascertained to be the Damon
or Hyrax, - a shy defenceless creature, which lurks among the cliffs of
the mountains, and darts into its den at the least approach of danger,
the words of Agar acquire their full significance. - James Hamilton.

[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

"He appointed the moon for seasons." When it is said, that the moon was
appointed to distinguish seasons, interpreters agree that this is to be
understood of the ordinary and appointed feasts. The Hebrews having been
accustomed to compute their months by the moon, this served for
regulating their festival days and assemblies, both sacred and
political. The prophet, I have no doubt, by the figure synecdoche, puts
a part for the whole, intimating that the moon not only distinguishes
the days from the nights, but likewise marks out the festival days,
measures years and months, and, in fine, answers many useful purposes,
inasmuch as the distinction of times is taken from her course. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

"He appointed the moon for seasons." He made the moon to serve in her
season, for a declaration of times, and a sign to the world. From the
moon is the sign of feasts, a light that decreaseth in her perfection.
The month is called after her name, increasing wonderfully in her
changing, being an instrument of the armies above, shining in the
firmament of heaven; the beauty heaven, the glory of the stars, an
ornament giving light in the highest places of the Lord. -
Ecclesiasticas [Psa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007).

[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

"The sun knoweth his going down." The second clause is not to be
rendered in the common way, "The sun knoweth his going down," but
according to the usual idiom, He, i.e., God knoweth the going down of
the sun. Not to mention the unwonted and harsh form of the phrase, by
which the knowledge of his setting is attributed to the sun, there
appears no reason why it should be here used, since it is destitute of
force, or why he should turn from God as a cause, to the moving sun,
when both before and afterwards he speaks of God, saying, "He appointed
the moon," "Thou makest darkness." Far more fitly, therefore, is he to
be understood as speaking of God, as before and after, so in the middle,
of the directing cause of the appearances of the moon, the setting of
the sun, and the spread of darkness. God also is said more correctly to
know the going down of the sun, than the sun himself, since to know has
in effect the force of to care for, as is often the case in other
passages. - Venema.

[Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

"Thou makest darkness." Some observe with Augustine that in Genesis it
is said that light was made, but not that darkness was made, because
darkness is nothing, it is mere non-existence. But in this passage it is
also said that night was made; and the Lord calls himself the Maker of
light and the Creator of darkness. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

"Thou makest darkness," etc. It would be interesting to consider the
wonderful adaptation of the length of the day to the health of man, and
to the rigour and perhaps existence of 'the animal and vegetable tribes.
The rejoicing of life depends so much upon the grateful alternation of
day and night. For a full consideration of this subject I must refer the
reader to Dr. Whewell's Bridgewater Treatise. The subjoined extracts
may, however, aid reflection. "The terrestrial day, and consequently the
length of the cycle of light and darkness, being what it is, we find
various parts of the constitution both of animals and vegetables, which
have a periodical character in their functions, corresponding to the
diurnal succession of external conditions; and we find that the length
of the period, as it exists in their constitution, coincides with the
length of the natural day. The alternation of processes which takes
place in plants by day and by night is less obvious, and less obviously
essential to their well-being, than the annual series of changes. But
there are abundance of facts which serve to show that such an
alternation is part of the vegetable economy...."

"Animals also have a period in their functions and habits; as in the
habits of waking, sleeping, etc., and their well-being appears to depend
on the coincidence of this period with the length of the natural day. We
see that in the day, as it now is, all animals find seasons for taking
food and repose, which agree perfectly with their health and comfort.
Some animals feed during the day, as nearly all the ruminating animals
and land birds; others feed only in the twilight, as bats and owls, and
are called crepuscular; while many beasts of prey, aquatic birds, and
others, take their food during the night. These animals, which are
nocturnal feeders, are diurnal sleepers, while those which are
crepuscular sleep partly in the night and partly in the day; but in all,
the complete period of these functions is twenty-four hours. Man in like
manner, in all nations and ages, takes his principal rest once in
twenty-four hours; and the regularity of this practice seems most
suitable to his health, though the duration of time allotted to repose
is extremely different in different cases. So far as we can judge, this
period is of a length beneficial to the human frame, independently of
the effect of external agents. In the voyages recently made into high
northern latitudes, where the sun did not rise for three months, the
crews of the ships were made to adhere, with the utmost punctuality, to
the habit of retiring to rest at nine, and rising a quarter before six;
and they enjoyed, under circumstances apparently the most trying, a
state of salubrity quite remarkable. This shows, that according to the
common constitution of such men, the cycle of twenty-four hours is very
commodious, though not imposed on them by external circumstances." -
William Whewell (1795-1866).

[Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

"The young lions.... seek their meat from God." God feeds not only sheep
and lambs, but wolves and lions. It is a strange expression that young
lions when they roar after their prey, should be said to seek their meat
of God; implying that neither their own strength nor craft could feed
them without help from God. The strongest creatures left to themselves
cannot help themselves. As they who fear God are fed by a special
providence of God, so all creatures are fed and nourished by a general
providence. The lion, though he be strong and subtle, yet cannot get his
own prey; we think a lion might shift for himself; no, 'tis the Lord
that provides for him; the young lions seek their meat of God. Surely,
then, the mightiest of men cannot live upon themselves; as it is of God
that we receive life and breath, so all things needful for the
maintenance of this life. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

"The young lions roar." The roar of a lion, according to Burchell,
sometimes resembles the sound which is heard at the moment of an
earthquake; and is produced by his laying his head on the ground, and
uttering a half-stifled growl, by which means the noise is conveyed
along the earth. The instant it is heard by the animals reposing in the
plains, they start up in alarm, fly in all directions, and even rush
into the danger which they seek to avoid. - From Cassell's Popular
Natural History.

[Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

The roaring of the young lions, like the crying of the ravens, is
interpreted, asking their meat of God. Doth God put this construction
upon the language of mere nature, even in venomous creatures, and shall
he not much more interpret favourably the language of grace in his own
people, though it be weak and broken groanings which cannot be uttered?
- Matthew Henry.

[Psa 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022)

"The sun ariseth.... they lay them down in their dens." As wild beasts
since the fall of man may seem to be born to do us hurt, and to rend and
tear in pieces all whom they meet with, this savage cruelty must be kept
under check by the providence of God. And in order to keep them shut up
within their dens, the only means which he employs is to inspire them
with terror, simply by the light of the sun. This instance of divine
goodness, the prophet commends the more on account of its necessity; for
were it otherwise, men would have no liberty to go forth to engage in
the labours and business of life. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)

"Man goeth forth unto his work," etc. Man alone, among all creatures, in
distinction from the involuntary instruments of the Almighty, has a real
daily work. He has a definite part to play in life; and can recognise
it. - Carl Bernhard Moll, in Lange's Commentary.

[Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)

When the light of truth and righteousness shineth, error and iniquity
fly away before it, and the "roaring lion" himself departeth for a time.
Then the Christian goeth forth to the work of his salvation, and to his
labour of love, until the evening of old age warns him to prepare for
his last repose, in faith of a joyful resurrection. - George Horne.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

"O Lord, how manifold are thy works!" etc. If the number of the
creatures be so exceeding great, how great, nay, immense, must needs be
the power and wisdom of him who formed them all! For (that I may borrow
the words of a noble and excellent author) as it argues and manifests
more skill by far in an artificer, to be able to frame both clocks and
watches, and pumps and mills, and granadoes and rockets, than he could
display in making but one of those sorts of engines; so the Almighty
discovers more of his wisdom in forming such a vast multitude of
different sorts of creatures, and all with admirable and irreprovable
art, than if he had created but a few; for this declares the greatness
and unbounded capacity of his understanding. Again, the same superiority
of knowledge would be displayed by contriving engines of the same kind,
or for the same purposes, after different fashions, as the moving of
clocks by springs instead of weights: so the infinitely wise Creator
hath shown in many instances that he is not confined to one only
instrument for the working one effect, but can perform the same thing by
divers means. So, though feathers seem necessary for flying, yet hath he
enabled several creatures to fly without them, as two sorts of fishes,
one sort of lizard, and the bat, not to mention the numerous tribes of
flying insects. In like manner, though the air-bladder in fishes seems
necessary for swimming, yet some are so formed as to swim without it,
viz., First, the cartilaginous kind, which by what artifice they poise
themselves, ascend and descend at pleasure, and continue in what depth
of water they list, is as yet unknown to us. Secondly, the cetaceous
kind, or sea-beasts, differing in nothing almost but the want of feet.
The air which the respiration these receive into their lungs, may serve
to render their bodies equiponderant to the water; and the construction
or dilatation of it, by the help of the diaphragm and muscles of
respiration, may probably assist them to ascend or descend in the water,
by a light impulse thereof with their fins....

Again, the great use and convenience, the beauty and variety of so many
springs and fountains, so many brooks and rivers, so many lakes and
standing pools of water, and these so scattered and dispersed all the
earth over, that no great part of it is destitute of them, without which
it must, without a supply other ways, be desolate and void of
inhabitants, afford abundant arguments of wisdom and counsel: that
springs should break forth on the sides of mountains most remote from
the sea; that there should way be made for rivers through straits and
rocks, and subterraneous vaults, so that one would think that nature had
cut a way on purpose to derive the water, which else would overthrow and
drown whole countries. - John Ray (1678-1705), in "The Wisdom of God
manifested in the Works of the Creation."

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

"How manifold are thy works!" When we contemplate the wonderful works of
Nature, and walking about at leisure, gaze upon this ample theatre of
the world, considering the stately beauty, constant order, and sumptuous
furniture thereof; the glorious splendour and uniform motion of the
heavens; the pleasant fertility of the earth; the curious figure and
fragrant sweetness of plants; the exquisite frame of animals; and all
other amazing miracles of nature, wherein the glorious attributes of
God, especially his transcendant goodness, are more conspicuously
displayed: so that by them, not only large acknowledgments, but even
gratulatory hymns, as it were, of praise have been extorted from the
mouths of Aristotle, Pliny, Galen, and such like men, never suspected
guilty of an excessive devotion; then should our hearts be affected with
thankful sense, and our lips break forth in praise. - William Barrow,
1754-1836.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

He does not undertake to answer his own question, "How manifold?" for he
confesses God's works to be greater than his own power of expression;
whether these "works" belong to the creation of nature or to that of
grace. And observe how the concurrent operation of the Blessed Trinity
is set forth: "O Lord, how manifold are thy works," teaches of the
Father, the Source of all things; "in wisdom hast thou made them all,"
tells of the Son, the Eternal Word, "Christ the power of God and the
Wisdom of God, by whom were all things made, and without him was not
anything made that was made" ([Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024); [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)); "the earth is full of thy
riches," is spoken of the Holy Ghost, who filleth the world. -
Augustine, Hugo, and Cassiodorus, in Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

"In wisdom hast thou made them all." Not only one thing, as the heavens,
[Psa 136:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#005); but everything is wisely
contrived and made; there is a most glorious display of the wisdom of
God in the most minute thing his hands have made; he has made everything
beautiful in its season. A skilful artificer, when he has finished his
work and looks it over again, often finds some fault or another in it:
but when the Lord had finished his works of creation, and looked over
them, he saw that all was good; infinite wisdom itself could find no
blemish in them: what weak, foolish, stupid creatures must they be that
pretend to charge any of the works of God with folly or want of wisdom?
- John Gill.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

"The earth is full of thy riches," literally, thy possessions; these
thou keepest not to thyself, but blessest thy creatures with. - A. R.
Fausset.

[Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025)

"Things innumerable." The waters teem with more life than the land.
Beneath a surface less varied than that of the continents, the sea
enfolds in its bosom an exuberance of life, of which no other region of
the globe can afford the faintest idea. Its life extends from the poles
to the equator, from east to west. Everywhere the sea is peopled;
everywhere, down to its unfathomable depths, live and sport creatures
suited to the locality. In every spot of its vast expanse the naturalist
finds instruction, and the philosopher meditation, while the very
varieties of life tend to impress upon our souls a feeling of gratitude
to the Creator of the universe. Yes, the shores of the ocean and its
depths, its plains and its mountains, its valleys and its precipices,
even its debris, are enlivened and beautified by thousands of living
beings. There are the solitary or sociable plants, upright or pendant,
stretching in prairies, grouped in oases, or growing in immense forests.
These plants give a cover to and feed millions of animals which creep,
run, swim, fly, burrow in the soil, attach themselves to roots, lodge in
the crevices, or build for themselves shelters, which seek or fly from
one another, which pursue or fight each other, which caress each other
with affection or devour each other without pity. Charles Darwin truly
says that the terrestrial forests do not contain anything like the
number of animals as those of the sea. The ocean, which is for man the
element of death, is for myriads of animals a home of life and health.
There is joy in its waves, there is happiness upon its shores, and
heavenly blue everywhere. - Moquin Tandon, in "The World of the Sea,"
Translated and enlarged by H. Martin Hart, 1869.

[Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), [Psa
104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Both small and great beasts."

The sounds and seas, each creek and bay,

With fry innumerable swarm, and shoals

Of fish that with their fins and shining scales

Glide under the green wave, in shoals that oft

Bank the mid sea; part single, or with mate,

Graze the sea-weed their pasture, and through groves

Of coral stray; or, sporting with quick glance,

Show to the sun their wav'd coats drop't with gold;

Or, in their pearly shells at ease, attend

Moist nutriment; or under rocks their food

In jointed armour watch: on smooth the seal

And bended dolphins play: part huge of bulk

Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait,

Tempest the ocean: there leviathan,

Hugest of living creatures, on the deep

Stretch'd like a promontory sleeps or swims,

And seems a moving land; and at his gills

Draws in, and at his trunk spouts out, a sea.

\- John Milton.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Ships." The original of ships was doubtless Noah's ark, so that they
owe their first draught to God himself. - John Gill.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"There go the ships." Far from separating from each other the nations of
the earth (as the ancients, still inexperienced in navigation,
supposed), the sea is the great highway of the human race, and unites
all its various tribes into one common family by the beneficial bonds of
commerce. Countless fleets are constantly furrowing its bosom, to
enrich, by perpetual exchanges, all the countries of the globe with the
products of every zone, to convey the fruits of the tropical world to
the children of the chilly north, or to transport the manufactures of
colder climes to the inhabitants of the equatorial regions. With the
growth of commerce civilization also spreads athwart the wide causeway
of the ocean from shore to shore; it first dawned on the borders of the
sea, and its chief seats are still to be found along its confines. - G.
Hartwig, in "The Harmonies of Nature," 1866.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Leviathan." There is ground for thinking (though this is denied by
some) that in several passages the term leviathan is used generically,
much as we employ dragon; and that it denotes a great sea-monster. - E.
P. Barrows, in "Biblical Geography and Antiquities."

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"To play therein." Dreadful and tempestuous as the sea may appear, and
uncontrollable in its billows and surges, it is only the field of sport,
the play-ground, the bowling green, to those huge marine monsters. -
Adam Clarke.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Leviathan ... made to play therein." With such wonderful strength is
the tail of the whale endowed, that the largest of these animals,
measuring some eighty feet in length, are able by its aid to leap clear
out of the water, as if they were little fish leaping after flies. This
movement is technically termed "breaching," and the sound which is
produced by the huge carcase as it falls upon the water is so powerful
as to be heard for a distance of several miles. - J. G. Wood, in "The
Illustrated Natural History," 1861.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Leviathan ... made to play therein." Though these immense mammiferous
fish have no legs, they swim with great swiftness, and they gambol in
the mountains of water lashed up by the storms. - Moquin Tandon.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Leviathan ... made to play." He is made to "play in the sea"; he hath
nothing to do as man hath, that "goes forth to his work"; he hath
nothing to fear as the beasts have, that lie down in their dens; and
therefore he plays with the waters: it is a pity any of the children of
men, that have nobler powers, and were made for nobler purposes, should
live as if they were sent into the world like the leviathan into the
waters, to play therein, spending all their time in pastime. - Matthew
Henry.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"Therein." Fish, great and small, sport and play in the element, but as
soon as they are brought out of it, they languish and die. Mark, O soul!
what thy element is, if thou wouldest live joyful and blessed. - Starke,
in Lange's Commentary.

[Psa 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

There are five things to be observed in God's sustaining all animals.
His power, which alone suffices for all: "These wait all upon thee."
Wisdom, which selects a fitting time, "That thou mayest give them their
meat in due season." His majesty rising above all, "That thou givest
them they gather," like the crumbs falling from the table of their
supreme Lord. His liberality, which retains nothing in his open hand
that it does not give, "Thou openest thine hand." His original goodness
that flows down to all - "They are filled with good," that is, with the
good things that spring from thy goodness. - Le Blanc.

[Psa 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

"That thou mayest give them their meat in due season;" or, in his time;
every one in its own time which is natural to them, and they have been
used to, at which time the Lord gives it to them, and they take it; it
would be well if men would do so likewise, eat and drink in proper and
due time, [Ecc 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017). Christ speaks a
word in season to weary souls; his ministers give to every one his
portion of meat in due season; and a word spoken in due season, how good
and sweet is it? [Isa 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004); [Luk
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#012); [Pro
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#023). - John Gill.

[Psa 104:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

These, Lord, all wait on thee, that thou their food may'st give them;

Thou to their wants attendest;

They gather what thou sendest;

Thine hand thou openest, all their need supplying,

O'erlookest not the least, the greatest satisfying.

When thou dost hide thy face a sudden change comes o'er them

Their breath in myriads taken,

They die, no more t' awaken;

But myriads more thy Spirit soon createth,

And the whole face of nature quickly renovateth.

The glory of the Lord, changeless, endures for ever;

In all his works delighting,

Nor e'en the smallest slighting;

Yet, if he frown, earth shrinks with fear before him,

And, at his touch, the hills with kindling flames adore him.

\- John Burton.

[Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

"That thou givest them they gather." This sentence describes The
Commissariat of Creation. The problem is the feeding of "the creeping
things innumerable, both small and great beasts," which swarm the sea;
the armies of birds which fill the air, and the vast hordes of animals
which people the dry land; and in this sentence we have the problem
solved, "That thou givest them they gather." The work is stupendous, but
it is done with ease because the Worker is infinite: if he were not at
the head of it the task would never be accomplished. Blessed be God for
the great Thou of the text. It is every way our sweetest consolation
that the personal God is still at work in the world: leviathan in the
ocean, and the sparrow on the bough, may be alike glad of this; and we,
the children of the great Father, much more.

The general principle of the text is, God gives to his creatures, and
his creatures gather. That general principle we shall apply to our own
case as men and women; for it is as true of us as it is of the fish of
the sea, and the cattle on the hills: "That thou givest them they
gather."

I. We have only to gather, for God gives, In temporal things: God gives
us day by day our daily bread, and our business is simply to gather it.
As to spirituals, the principle is true, most emphatically, we have, in
the matter of grace, only to gather what God gives. The natural man
thinks that he has to earn divine favour; that he has to purchase the
blessing of heaven; but he is in grave error: the soul has only to
receive that which Jesus freely gives.

II\. We can only gather what God gives; however eager we may be, there
is the end of the matter. The diligent bird shall not be able to gather
more than the Lord has given it; neither shall the most avaricious and
covetous man. "It is vain for you to rise up early and to sit up late,
to eat the bread of carefulness; for so he giveth his beloved sleep."

III\. We must gather what God gives, or else we shall get no good by his
bountiful giving. God feeds the creeping things innumerable, but each
creature collects the provender for itself. The huge leviathan receives
his vast provision, but he must go ploughing through the boundless
meadows and gather up the myriads of minute objects which supply his
need. The fish must leap up to catch the fly, the swallow must hawk for
its food, the young lions must hunt for their prey.

IV\. The fourth turn of the text gives us the sweet thought that, we may
gather what he gives. We have divine permission to enjoy freely what the
Lord bestows.

V. The last thing is, God will always give us something to gather. It is
written, "The Lord will provide." Thus is it also in spiritual things.
If you are willing to gather, God will always give. - C. H. S.

[Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

"Gather." The verb rendered "gather" means to pick up or collect from
the ground. It is used in the history of the manna ([Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001), [Exo
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005), [Exo
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016)), to which there is obvious
allusion. The act of gathering from the ground seems to presuppose a
previous throwing down from heaven. - J. A. Alexander.

[Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

"Thou openest thine hand." The Greek expositors take the opening of the
hand to indicate facility. I am of opinion that it refers also to
abundance and liberality, as in [Psa
145:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#016) : - "Thou openest thine hand,
and satisfiest the desire of every living thing." Using this same
formula, God commands us not to close the hand, but to open it to the
poor. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)

"They are troubled." They are confounded; they are overwhelmed with
terror and amazement. The word "troubled" by no means Conveys the sense
of the original word - בּהל, bahal - which means properly to tremble; to
be in trepidation; to be filled with terror; to be amazed; to be
confounded. It is that kind of consternation which one has when all
support and protection are withdrawn, and when inevitable ruin stares
one in the face. So when God turns away, all their support is gone, all
their resources fail, and they must die. They are represented as
conscious of this; or this is what would occur if they were conscious. -
Albert Barnes.

[Psa 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)

"Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created." The Spirit of God
creates every day: what is it that continueth things in their created
being, but providence? That is a true axiom in divinity, Providence is
creation continued. Now the Spirit of God who created at first, creates
to this day: "Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created." The work
of creation was finished in the first six days of the world, but the
work of creation is renewed every day, and so continued to the end of
the world. Successive providential creation as well as original creation
is ascribed to the Spirit. "And thou renewest the face of the earth."
Thou makest a new world; and thus God makes a new world every year,
sending forth his Spirit, or quickening power, in the rain and sun to
renew the face of the earth. And as the Lord sends forth his power in
providential mercies, so in providential judgments. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

"The Lord shall rejoice in his works." Man alone amongst the creatures
grieves God, and brought tears from the eyes of Christ, who rejoiced in
Spirit, because the Father had deigned to reveal the mysteries to the
little ones. It repented God that he had made man, because as a wise son
maketh a glad father, so a foolish one is a vexation to him. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031) (last clause)

What the Psalmist adds, Let Jehovah rejoice in his works, is not
superfluous, for he desires that the order which God has established
from the beginning may be continued in the lawful use of his gifts. As
we read in [Gen 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006), that "it repented
the Lord that he had made man on the earth;" so when he sees that the
good things which he bestows are polluted by our corruptions, he ceases
to take delight in bestowing them. And certainly the confusion and
disorder which take place, when the elements cease to perform their
office, testify that God, displeased and wearied out, is provoked to
discontinue, and put a stop to the regular course of his beneficence;
although anger and impatience have strictly speaking no place in his
mind. What is here taught is, that he bears the character of the best of
fathers, who takes pleasure in tenderly cherishing his children, and in
bountifully nourishing them. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

"He looketh on the earth and it trembleth." As man can soon give a cast
with his eye, so soon can God shake the earth, that is, either the whole
mass of the earth, or the inferior sort of men on the earth when he
"looketh," or casteth an angry eye "upon the earth, it trembleth." "He
toucheth the hills" (that is, the powers and principalities of the
world), "and they smoke;" if he do but touch them they smoke, that is,
the dreadful effects of the power and Judgment of God are visible upon
them. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

No one save a photographer can sketch the desert around Sinai. Roberts'
views are noble, and to a certain extent true; but they do not represent
these desert cliffs and ravines. No artist can rightly do it. Only the
photographer can pourtray the million of minute details that go to make
up the bleakness, the wildness, the awfulness, and the dismal loneliness
of these unearthly wastes.

About noon I went out and walked upon the convent roof. The star-light
over the mountain-peaks was splendid, while-the gloom that hung round
these enormous precipices and impenetrable ravines was quite oppressive
to the spirit. This is the scene of which David spoke. "He looketh on
the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and they smoke."
This is the mountain "that was touched, and that burned with fire" ([Heb
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018)). Not the mount that "might be
touched," as our translators have rendered it, but the mount "that was
touched," ψηλα φωμενω, - the mount on which the finger of God rested.

We could imagine the black girdle of the thick darkness with which the
mountain was surrounded, and the lightnings giving forth their quick
fire through this covering, making its blackness blacker. We could
imagine, too, the supernatural blaze, kindled by no earthly hand, that
shot up out of the midst of this, like a living column Of fire,
ascending, amid the sound of angelic trumpets and superangelic thunders,
to the very heart of heaven. - Horatius Bonar, in "The Desert of Sinai,"
1858.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

The philosopher labours to investigate the natural cause of earthquakes
and volcanoes. Well, let him account as he will, still the immediate
power of Jehovah is the true and ultimate cause. God works in these
tremendous operations. "He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; he
toucheth the hills, and they smoke." This is the philosophy of
Scripture; this, then, shall be my philosophy. Never was a sentence
uttered by uninspired man so sublime as this sentence. The thought is
grand beyond conception; and the expression clothes the thought with
suitable external majesty. God needs no means by which to give effect to
his purpose by his power, 'yet, in general, he has established means
through which he acts. In conformity with this Divine plan, he created
by means, and he governs by means. But the means which he has employed
in creation, and the means which he employs in providence, are effectual
only by his almighty power. The sublimity of the expression in this
passage arises from the infinite disproportion between the means and the
end. An earthly sovereign looks with anger, and his courtiers tremble.
God looks on the earth, and it trembles to its foundation. He touches
the mountains, and the volcano smokes, vomiting forth torrents of lava.
Hills are said to melt at the presence of the Lord, "Tremble, thou
earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob." How chill and withering is the breath of that noxious
philosophy, that would detach our minds from viewing God in his works of
Providence! The Christian who lives in this atmosphere, or on the
borders of it, will be unhealthy and unfruitful in true works of
righteousness. This malaria destroys all spiritual life. - Alexander
Carson.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

"He toucheth the hills, and they smoke." It's therefore ill falling into
his hands, who can do such terrible things with his looks and touches. -
John Trapp.

[Psa 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

"I will sing unto the Lord." The Psalmist, exulting in the glorious
prospect of the renovation of all things, breaks out in triumphant
anticipation of the great event, and says, "I will sing unto the Lord,"
בּחוּי bechaiyai, "with my lives," the life that I now have, and the
life that I shall have hereafter.

"I will sing praise to my God," בּעורי beodi, "in my eternity;" my going
on, my endless progression. What astonishing ideas! But then, how shall
this great work be brought about? and how shall the new earth be
inhabited with righteous spirits only? The answer is ([Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)), "Let the sinners be consumed
out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more." - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 104:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

All having been admonished to glorify God, he discloses what he himself
is about to do; with his voice he will declare his praises, "I will sing
unto the Lord as long as I live:" with his hand he will write Psalms,
and set them to music, "I will sing Psalms to my God while I have my
being:" with his mind he will make sweet meditations, "My meditation of
him shall be sweet:" with will and affection he will seek after God
alone, "I will be glad in the Lord:" he predicts and desires the
destruction of all sinners who think not of praising God, but dishonour
him in their words and works, "Let the sinners be consumed out of the
earth, and let the wicked be no more" lastly, with his whole soul and
all his powers he will bless God, "Bless thou the Lord, O my soul." - Le
Blanc.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"My meditation of him shall be sweet." A Christian needs to study
nothing but Christ, there is enough in Christ to take up his study and
contemplation all his days; and the more we study Christ, the more we
may study him; there will be new wonders still appearing in him. - John
Row, 1680.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"My meditation of him shall be sweet." The last words ever written by
Henry Martyn, dying among Mohammedans in Persia, was: I sat in the
orchard and thought with sweet comfort and peace of my God, in solitude
my company, my Friend and Comforter.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"My meditation of him shall be sweet." I must meditate on Christ. Let
philosophers soar in their contemplations, and walk among the stars;
what are the stars to Christ, the Sun of righteousness, the brightness
of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person? God manifest
in the flesh is a theme which angels rejoice to contemplate. - Samuel
Lavington.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"My meditation of him shall be sweet." First. Take this as an assertion.
The meditation on God is sweet. And the sweetness of it should stir us
up to the putting of it in practice. Secondly. Take it as a resolution
that he would make it for his own practice; that is, that he would
comfort himself in such performances as these are; whilst others took
pleasure in other things he would please himself in communion with God,
this should be his solace and delight upon all occasions. David promises
himself a great deal of contentment in this exercise of divine
meditation which he undertook with much delight; and so likewise do
others of God's servants of the same nature and disposition with him in
the like undertakings. Thirdly. Take it as a prayer and petition. It
"shall be," that is, let it be, the future put for the imperative, as it
frequently uses to be; and so the word gnatam is to be translated, not,
of God, but to God. Let my meditation, or prayer, or converse, be sweet
unto him. Placeat illi meditatio mea, so some good authors interpret it.
The English translation, "Let my words be acceptable," and the other
before that, "Oh that my words might please him," which comes to one and
the same effect, all taking it in the notion of a prayer: this is that
which the servants of God have still thought to be most necessary for
them (as indeed it is); God's acceptance of the performances which have
been presented by them. - Condensed from Thomas Horton.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034) (first clause)

All the ancients join in understanding it thus, "My meditation shall be
sweet to him," or, as the Jewish Arab, ענדתwith him, according to that
of the Psalmist, [Psa 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014) : "Let the
meditation of my heart be always acceptable in thy sight." Thus the
Chaldee here, קרמוי, before him; the LXXII. ἡδυνθείη αὐτᾷ, "Let it be
sweet to him"; the Syriac to him, and so the others also. And so
עלsignifies to as well as on. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"I will be glad in the Lord." Compare this with [Psa
104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031), and observe the mutual and
reciprocal pleasure and delight between God who is praised and the soul
that praises him. God, who rejoices in his works, takes the highest
delight in man, the compendium of his other works, and in that work,
than which none more excellent can be pursued by man, the work of
praising God in which the blessed are employed. Thus in this very praise
of God which is so pleasing to him, David professes to be evermore
willing to take delight. My beloved is mine, sings the Spouse, and I am
his. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth," etc. - It fell to my lot
some years ago, to undertake a walk of some miles, on a summer morning,
along a sea-shore of surpassing beauty. It was the Lord's day, and the
language of the Hundred and fourth Psalm rose spontaneously in my mind
as one scene after another unfolded itself before the eye. About half
way to my destination the road lay through a dirty hamlet, and my
meditations were rudely interrupted by the brawling of some people, who
looked as if they had been spending the night in a drunken debauch.
Well, I thought, the Psalmist must have had some such unpleasant
experience. He must have fallen in with people, located in some scene of
natural beauty, who, instead of being a holy priesthood to give voice to
nature in praise of her Creator, instead of being, in the pure and holy
tenor of their lives, the heavenliest note of the general song, - filled
it with a harsh discord. His prayer is the vehement expression of a
desire that the earth may no longer be marred by the presence of wicked
men, - that they may be utterly consumed, and may give place to men
animated with the fear of God, just and holy men, men that shall be a
crown of beauty on the head of this fair creation. If this be the right
explanation of the Psalmist's prayer, it is not only justifiable, but
there is something wrong in our meditations on nature, if we are not
disposed to join in it. - William Binnie.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth." This imprecation depends
on the last clause of [Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031),
"Let Jehovah rejoice in his works." As the wicked infect the world with
their pollutions, the consequence is, that God has less delight in his
own workmanship, and is even almost displeased with it. It is
impossible, but that this uncleanness, which, being extended and
diffused through every part of the world, vitiates and corrupts such a
noble product of his hands, must be offensive to him. Since then the
wicked, by their perverse abuse of God's gifts, cause the world in a
manner to degenerate and fall away from its first original, the prophet
justly desires that they may be exterminated, until the race of them
entirely fails. Let us, then, take care so to weigh the providence of
God, as that being wholly devoted to obeying him, we may rightly and
purely use the benefits which he sanctifies for our enjoying them.
Further, let us be grieved, that such precious treasures are wickedly
squandered away, and let us regard it as monstrous and detestable, that
men not only forget their Maker, but also, as it were, purposely turn to
a perverse and an unworthy end, whatever good things he has bestowed
upon them. - John Calvin.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"The sinners."

All true, all faultless, all in tune,

Creation's wondrous choir,

Opened in mystic unison,

To last till time expire.

And still it lasts: by day and night,

With one consenting voice,

All hymn thy glory, Lord, aright,

All worship and rejoice.

Man only mars the sweet accord,

O'er powering with harsh din

The music of thy works and word,

Ill matched with grief and sin.

\- John Keble, in "The Christian Year."

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"Bless thou the Lord, O my soul." Rehearse the first words of the Psalm
which are the same as these. They are here repeated as if to hint that
the end of good men is like their beginning, and that he is not of the
number who begin in the spirit and seek to be made perfect in the flesh.
A worthy beginning of the Psalm, says Cassiodorus, and a worthy end,
ever to bless him who never at any time fails to be with the faithful.
The soul which blesses shall be made fat.... Reined in by this rein of
divine praise, he shall never perish. - Lorinus.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

This is the first place where Hallelujah ("Praise ye the Lord") occurs
in the Book of Psalms. It is produced by a retrospect of Creation, and
by the contemplation of God's goodness in the preservation of all the
creatures of his hand, and also by a prospective view of that future
Sabbath, when, by the removal of evil men from communion with the good,
God will be enabled to look on his works, as he did on the first
Sabbath, before the Tempter had marred them, and see "everything very
good." See [Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031); [Gen
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002), [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003). - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"Praise ye the Lord." This is the first time that we meet with
Hallelujah; and it comes in here upon occasion of the destruction of the
wicked; and the last time we meet with it, it is upon the like occasion,
when the New Testament Babylon is consumed, this is the burthen of the
song, "Hallelujah," [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001), [Rev
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003), [Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004), [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). - Matthew Henry.

[Psalms 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 104:1</span></span>

1 Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou
art clothed with honour and majesty.

2 Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment; who stretchest out
the heavens like a curtain:

3 Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the
clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

4 Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire.

5 Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed
for ever.

6 Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment; the waters stood
above the mountains.

[Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

"Bless the Lord, O my soul." This Psalm begins and ends like the Hundred
and Third, and it could not do better: when the model is perfect it
deserves to exist in duplicate. True praise begins at home. It is idle
to stir up others to praise if we are ungratefully silent ourselves. We
should call upon our inmost hearts to awake and bestir themselves, for
we are apt to be sluggish, and if we are so when called upon to bless
God, we shall have great cause to be ashamed. When we magnify the Lord,
let us do it heartily: our best is far beneath his worthiness, let us
not dishonour him by rendering to him half-hearted worship. "O Lord my
God, thou art very great." This ascription has in it a remarkable
blending of the boldness of faith, and the awe of holy fear: for the
Psalmist calls the infinite Jehovah "my God," and at the same time,
prostrate in amazement at the divine greatness, he cries out in utter
astonishment, "Thou art very great." God was great on Sinai, yet the
opening words of his law were, "I am the Lord thy God;" his greatness is
no reason why faith should not put in her claim, and call him all her
own. The declaration of Jehovah's greatness here given would have been
very much in place at the end of the Psalm, for it is a natural
inference and deduction from a survey of the universe: its position at
the very commencement of the poem is an indication that the whole Psalm
was well considered and digested in the mind before it was actually put
into words; only on this supposition can we account for the emotion
preceding the contemplation. Observe also, that the wonder expressed
does not refer to the creation and its greatness, but to Jehovah
himself. It is not "the universe is very great!" but "Thou art very
great." Many stay at the creature, and so become idolatrous in spirit;
to pass onward to the Creator himself is true wisdom. "Thou art clothed
with honour and majesty." Thou thyself art not to be seen, but thy
works, which may be called thy garments, are full of beauties and
marvels which redound to thine honour. Garments both conceal and reveal
a man, and so do the creatures of God. The Lord is seen in his works as
worthy of honour for his skill, his goodness, and his power, and as
claiming majesty, for he has fashioned all things in sovereignty, doing
as he wills, and asking no man's permit. He must be blind indeed who
does not see that nature is the work of a king. These are solemn strokes
of God's severer mind, terrible touches of his sterner attributes, broad
lines of inscrutable mystery, and deep shadings of overwhelming power,
and these make creation's picture a problem never to be solved, except
by admitting that he who drew it giveth no account of his matters, but
ruleth all things according to the good pleasure of his will. His
majesty is, however, always so displayed as to reflect honour upon his
whole character; he does as he wills, but he wills only that which is
thrice holy, like himself. The very robes of the unseen Spirit teach us
this, and it is ours to recognise it with humble adoration.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

"Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment:" wrapping the light
about him as a monarch puts on his robe. The conception is sublime - but
it makes us feel how altogether inconceivable the personal glory of the
Lord must be; if light itself is but his garment and veil, what must be
the blazing splendour of his own essential being! We are lost in
astonishment, and dare not pry into the mystery lest we be blinded by
its insufferable glory. "Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain"
within which he might dwell. Light was created on the first day and the
firmament upon the second, so that they fitly follow each other in this
verse. Oriental princes put on their glorious apparel and then sit in
state within curtains, and the Lord is spoken of under that image: but
how far above all comprehension the figure must be lifted, since the
robe is essential light, to which suns and moons owe their brightness,
and the curtain is the azure sky studded with stars for gems. This is a
substantial argument for the truth with which the Psalmist commenced his
song, "O Lord my God, thou art very great."

[Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

"Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters." His lofty halls
are framed with the waters which are above the firmament. The upper
rooms of God's great house, the secret stories far above our ken, the
palatial chambers wherein he resides, are based upon the floods which
form the upper ocean. To the unsubstantial he lends stability; he needs
no joists and rafters, for his palace is sustained by his own power. We
are not to interpret literally where the language is poetical, it would
be simple absurdity to do so. "Who maketh the clouds his chariot." When
he comes forth from his secret pavilion 'tis thus he makes his royal
progress. "His chariot of wrath deep thunder-clouds form," and his
chariot of mercy drops plenty as it traverses the celestial road. "Who
walketh \[or rather goes\] upon the wings of the wind." With the clouds
for a car, and the winds for winged steeds, the Great King hastens on
his movements whether for mercy or for judgment. Thus we have the idea
of a king still further elaborated - his lofty palace, his chariot, and
his coursers are before us; but what a palace must we imagine, whose
beams are of crystal, and whose base is consolidated vapour! What a
stately car is that which is fashioned out of the flying clouds, whose
gorgeous colours Solomon in all his glory could not rival; and what a
Godlike progress is that in which spirit wings and breath of winds beat
up the moving throne. "O Lord, my God, thou art very great!"

[Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

"Who maketh his angels spirits;" or winds, for the word means either.
Angels are pure spirits, though they are permitted to assume a visible
form when God desires us to see them. God is a spirit, and he is waited
upon by spirits in his royal courts. Angels are like winds for mystery,
force, and invisibility, and no doubt the winds themselves are often the
angels or messengers of God. God who makes his angels to be as winds,
can also make winds to be his angels, and they are constantly so in the
economy of nature. "His ministers a flaming fire." Here, too, we may
choose which we will of two meanings: God's ministers or servants he
makes to be as swift, potent, and terrible as fire, and on the other
hand he makes fire, that devouring element, to be his minister flaming
forth upon his errands. That the passage refers to angels is clear from
[Heb 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007); and it was most proper to
mention them here in connection with light and the heavens, and
immediately after the robes and palace of the Great King. Should not the
retinue of the Lord of Hosts be mentioned as well as his chariot? It
would halve been a flaw in the description of the universe had the
angels not been alluded to, and this is the most appropriate place for
their introduction. When we think of the extraordinary powers entrusted
to angelic beings, and the mysterious glory of the seraphim and the four
living creatures, we are led to reflect upon the glory of the Master
whom they serve, and again we cry out with the Psalmist, "O Lord, my
God, thou art very great."

[Psa 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

"Who laid the foundations of the earth." Thus the commencement of
creation is described, in almost the very words employed by the Lord
himself in [Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004). "Where wast thou
when I laid the foundations of the earth? Whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened, and who laid the corner stone thereof?" And the words
are found in the same connection too, for the Lord proceeds to say,
"When the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted
for joy." "That it should not be removed for ever." The language is, of
course, poetical, but the fact is none the less wonderful: the earth is
so placed in space that it remains as stable as if it were a fixture.
The several motions of our planet are carried on so noiselessly and
evenly that, as far as we are concerned, all things are as permanent and
peaceful as if the old notion of its resting upon pillars were literally
true. With what delicacy has the great Artificer poised our globe! What
power must there be in that hand which has caused so vast a body to know
its orbit, and to move so smoothly in it! What engineer can save every
part of his machinery from an occasional jar, jerk, or friction? yet to
our great world in its complicated motions no such thing has ever
occurred. "O Lord, my God, thou art very great."

[Psa 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)

"Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment." The new-born earth
was wrapt in aqueous swaddling bands. In the first ages, ere man
appeared, the proud waters ruled the whole earth, "the waters stood
above the mountains," no dry land was visible; vapour as from a steaming
cauldron covered all. Geologists inform us of this as a discovery, but
the Holy Spirit had revealed the fact long before. The passage before us
shows us the Creator commencing his work, and laying the foundation for
future order and beauty; to think of this reverently will fill us with
adoration; to conceive of it grossly and carnally would be highly
blasphemous.

[Psalms 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 104:7</span></span>

7 At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

8 They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto the
place which thou hast founded for them.

9 Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not
again to cover the earth.

10 He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.

11 They give drink to every beast of the field; the wild asses quench
their thirst.

12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which
sing among the branches.

13 He watereth the hills from his chambers; the earth is satisfied with
the fruit of thy works.

14 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service
of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;

15 And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face
to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.

16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which
he hath planted;

17 Where the birds make their nests; as for the stork, the fir trees are
her house.

18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the
conies.

[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

"At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away."
When the waters and vapours covered all, the Lord had but to speak and
they disappeared at once. As though they had been intelligent agents the
waves hurried to their appointed deeps and left the land to itself; then
the mountains lifted their heads, the high lands rose from the main, and
at length continents and islands, slopes and plains were left to form
the habitable earth. The voice of the Lord effected this great marvel.
Is not his word equal to every emergency? potent enough to work the
greatest miracle? By that same word shall the waterfloods of trouble be
restrained, and the raging billows of sin be rebuked the day cometh when
at the thunder of Jehovah's voice all the proud waters of evil shall
utterly haste away. "O Lord, my God, thou art very great."

[Psa 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)

The vanquished waters are henceforth obedient. "They go up by the
mountains," climbing in the form of clouds even to the summits of the
Alps. "They go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast
founded for them:" they are as willing to descend in rain, and brooks,
and torrents as they were eager to ascend in mists. The loyalty of the
mighty waters to the laws of their God is most notable; the fierce
flood, the boisterous rapid, the tremendous torrent, are only forms of
that gentle dew which trembles on the tiny blade of grass, and in those
ruder shapes they are equally obedient to the laws which their Maker has
impressed upon them.' Not so much as a solitary particle of spray ever
breaks rank, or violates the command of the Lord of sea and land,
neither do the awful cataracts and terrific floods revolt from his sway.
It is very beautiful among the mountains to see the divine system of
water supply - the rising of the fleecy vapours, the distillation of the
pure fluid, the glee with which the new-born element leaps adown the
crags to reach the rivers, and the strong eagerness with which the
rivers seek the ocean, their appointed place.

[Psa 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

"Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not
again to cover the earth." That bound has once been passed, but it shall
never be so again. The deluge was caused by the suspension of the divine
mandate which held the floods in check: they knew their old supremacy,
and hastened to reassert it, but now the covenant promise for ever
prevents a return of that carnival of waters, that revolt of the waves
ought we not rather to call it that impetuous rush of the indignant
floods to avenge the injured honour of their King, whom men had
offended? Jehovah's word bounds the ocean, using only a narrow belt of
sand to confine it to its own limits: that apparently feeble restraint
answers every purpose, for the sea is obedient as a little child to the
bidding of its Maker. Destruction lies asleep in the bed of the ocean,
and though our sins might well arouse it, yet are its bands made strong
by covenant mercy, so that it cannot break loose again upon the guilty
sons of men.

[Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

"He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills."
This is a beautiful part of the Lord's arrangement of the subject
waters' they find vents through which they leap into liberty where their
presence will be beneficial in the highest degree. Depressions exist in
the sides of the mountains, and adown these the waterbrooks are made to
flow, often taking their rise at bubbling fountains which issue from the
bowels of the earth. It is God who sends these springs even as a
gardener makes the water courses, and turns the current with his foot.
When the waters are confined in the abyss the Lord sets their bound, and
when they sport at liberty he sends them forth.

[Psa 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

"They give drink to every beast of the field." Who else would water them
if the Lord did not? They are his cattle, and therefore he leads them
forth to watering. Not one of them is forgotten of him. "The wild asses
quench their thirst." The good Lord gives them enough and to spare. They
know their Master's crib. Though bit or bridle of man they will not
brook, and man denounces them as un-teachable, they learn of the Lord,
and know better far than man where flows the cooling crystal of which
they must drink or die. They are only asses, and wild, yet our heavenly
Father careth for them. Will he not also care for us? We see here, also,
that nothing is made in vain; though no human lip is moistened by the
brooklet in the lone valley, yet are there other creatures which need
refreshment, and these slake their thirst at the stream. Is this
nothing? Must everything exist for man, or else be wasted? What but our
pride and selfishness could have suggested such a notion? It is not true
that flowers which blush unseen by human eye are wasting their
sweetness, for the bee finds them out, and other winged wanderers live
on their luscious juices. Man is but one creature of the many whom the
heavenly Father feedeth and watereth.

[Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

"By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches." How refreshing are these words! What happy memories
they arouse of plashing waterfalls and entangled boughs, where the merry
din of the falling and rushing water forms a sort of solid background of
music, and the sweet, tuneful notes of the birds are the brighter and
more flashing lights in the harmony. Pretty birdies, sing on! What
better can ye do, and who can do it better? When we too drink of the
river of God, and eat of the fruit of the tree of life, it well becomes
us to "sing among the branches." Where ye dwell ye sing; and shall not
we rejoice in the Lord, who has been our dwelling-place in all
generations. As ye fly from bough to bough, ye warble forth your notes,
and so will we as we flit through time into eternity. It is not meet
that birds of Paradise should be outdone by birds of earth.

[Psa 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)

"He watereth the hills from his chambers." As the mountains are too high
to be watered by rivers and brooks, the Lord himself refreshes them from
those waters above the firmament which the poet had in a former verse
described as the upper chambers of heaven. Clouds are detained among the
mountain crags, and deluge the hill sides with fertilizing rain. Where
man cannot reach the Lord can, whom none else can water with grace he
can, and where all stores of refreshment fail he can supply all that is
needed from his own halls. "The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy
works." The result of the divine working is fulness everywhere, the soil
is saturated with rain, the seed germinates, the beasts drink, and the
birds sing - nothing is left unsupplied. So, too, is it in the new
creation, he giveth more grace, he fills his people with good, and makes
them all confess, "of his fulness have all we received and grace for
grace."

[Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

"He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service
of man." Grass grows as well as herbs, for cattle must be fed as well as
men. God appoints to the lowliest creature its portion and takes care
that it has it. Divine power is as truly and as worthily put forth in
the feeding of beasts as in the nurturing of man; watch but a blade of
grass with a devout eye and you may see God at work within it. The herb
is for man, and he must till the soil, or it will not be produced, yet
it is God that causeth it to grow in the garden, even the same God who
made the grass to grow in the unenclosed pastures of the wilderness. Man
forgets this and talks of his produce, but in very truth without God he
would plough and sow in vain. The Lord causeth each green blade to
spring and each ear to ripen: do but watch with opened eye and you shall
see the Lord walking through the cornfields. "That he may bring forth
food out of the earth." Both grass for cattle and corn for man are food
brought forth out of the earth, and they are signs that it was God's
design that the very dust beneath our feet, which seems better adapted
to bury us than to sustain us, should actually be transformed into the
staff of life. The more we think of this the more wonderful it will
appear. How great is that God who from among the sepulchres finds the
support of life, and out of the ground which was cursed brings forth the
blessings of corn and wine and oil.

[Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

"And wine that maketh glad the heart of man." By the aid of genial
showers the earth produces not merely necessaries but luxuries, that
which furnishes a feast as well as that which makes a meal. O that man
were wise enough to know how to use this gladdening product of the vine;
but, alas, he full often turns it to ill account, and debases himself
therewith. Of this he must himself bear the blame; he deserves to be
miserable who turns even blessings into curses. "And oil to make his
face to shine." The easterns use oil more than we do, and probably are
wiser in this respect than we are: they delight in anointings with
perfumed oils, and regard the shining of the face as a choice emblem of
joy. God is to be praised for all the products of the soil, not one of
which could come to us were it not that he causeth it to grow. "And
bread which strengtheneth man's heart." Men have more courage after they
are fed: many a depressed spirit has been comforted by a good
substantial meal. We ought to bless God for strength of heart as well as
force of limb, since if we possess them they are both the bounties of
his kindness.

[Psa 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

The watering of the hills not only produces the grass and the cultivated
herbs, but also the nobler species of vegetation, which come not within
the range of human culture:

Their veins with genial moisture fed,

Jehovah's forests lift the head:

Nor other than his fostering hand

Thy cedars, Lebanon, demand."

"The trees of the Lord" - the greatest, noblest, and most royal of
trees, those too which are unowned of man, and untouched by his hand,
"Are full of sap," or are full, well supplied, richly watered, so that
they become, as the cedars, full of resin, flowing with life, and
verdant all the year round. "The cedars of Lebanon, which he hath
planted." They grow where none ever thought of planting them, where for
ages they were unobserved, and where at this moment they are too
gigantic for man to prune them. What would our Psalmist have said to
some of the trees in the Yosemite valley? Truly these are worthy to be
called the trees of the Lord, for towering stature and enormous girth.
Thus is the care of God seen to be effectual and all-sufficient. If
trees uncured for by man are yet so full of sap, we may rest assured
that the people of God who by faith live upon the Lord alone shall be
equally well sustained. Planted by grace, and owing all to our heavenly
Father's care, we may defy the hurricane, and laugh at the fear of
drought, for none that trust in him shall ever be left unwatered.

[Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

"Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are
her house." So far from being in need, these trees of God afford shelter
to others, birds small and great make their nests in the branches. Thus
what they receive from the great Lord they endeavour to return to his
weaker creatures. How one thing fits into another in this fair creation,
each link drawing on its fellow: the rains water the fir trees, and the
fir trees become the happy home of birds; thus do the thunder clouds
build the sparrow's house, and the descending rain sustains the basis of
the stork's nest. Observe, also, how everything has its use - the boughs
furnish a home for the birds; and every living thing has its
accommodation - the stork finds a house in the pines. Her nest is called
a house, because this bird exhibits domestic virtues and maternal love
which make her young to be comparable to a family. No doubt this ancient
writer has seen storks' nests in fir trees; they appear usually to build
on houses and ruins, but there is also evidence that where there are
forests they are content with pine trees. Has the reader ever walked
through a forest of great trees and felt the awe which strikes the heart
in nature's sublime cathedral? Then he will remember to have felt that
each bird was holy, since it dwelt amid such sacred solitude. Those who
cannot see or hear of God except in Gothic edifices, amid the swell of
organs, and the voices of a surpliced choir, will not be able to enter
into the feeling which makes the simple, unsophisticated soul hear "the
voice of the Lord God walking among the trees."

[Psa 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

"The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the
conies." All places teem with life. We call our cities populous, trot
are not the forests and the high hills more densely peopled with life?
We speak of uninhabitable places, but where are they? The chamois leaps
from crag to crag, and the rabbit burrows beneath the soil. For one
creature the loftiness of the hills, and for another the hollowness of
the rocks, serves as a protection: -

Far o'er the crags the wild goats roam,

The rocks supply the coney's home."

Thus all the earth is full of happy life, every place has its
appropriate inhabitant, nothing is empty and void and waste. See how
goats, and storks, and conies, and sparrows, each contribute a verse to
the Psalm of nature; have we not also our canticles to sing unto the
Lord? Little though we may be in the scale of importance, yet let us
fill our sphere, and so honour the Lord who made us with a purpose.

[Psalms 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 104:19</span></span>

19 He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.

20 Thou makest darkness, and it is night; wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth.

21 The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.

22 The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down
in their dens.

23 Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.

[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

The appointed rule of the great lights is now the theme for praise. The
moon is mentioned first, because in the Jewish day the night leads the
way. "He appointed the moon for seasons." By the waxing and waning of
the moon the year is divided into months, and weeks, and by this means
the exact dates of the holy days are arranged. Thus the lamp of night is
made to be of service to man, and in fixing the period of religious
assemblies (as it did among the Jews) it enters into connection with his
noblest being. Never let us regard the moon's motions as the inevitable
result of inanimate impersonal law, but as the appointment of our God.
"The sun knoweth his going down." In finely poetic imagery the sun is
represented as knowing when to retire from sight, and sink below the
horizon. He never loiters on his way, or pauses as if undecided when to
descend; his appointed hour for going down, although it is constantly
varying, he always keeps to a second. We need to be aroused in the
morning, but he arises punctually, and though some require to watch the
clock to know the hour of rest, he, without a timepiece to consult,
hides himself in the western sky the instant the set time has come. For
all this man should praise the Lord of the sun and moon, who has made
these great lights to be our chronometers, and thus keeps our world in
order, and suffers no confusion to distract us.

[Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

"Thou makest darkness, and it is night." Drawing down the blinds for us,
he prepares our bedchamber that we may sleep. Were there no darkness we
should sigh for it, since we should find repose so much more difficult
if the weary day were never calmed into night. Let us see God's hand in
the veiling of the sun, and never fear either natural or providential
darkness, since both are of the Lord's own making. "Wherein all the
beasts of the forest do creep forth." Then is the lion's day, his time
to hunt his food. Why should not the wild beast have his hour as well as
man? He has a service to perform, should he not also have his food?
Darkness is fitter for beasts than man; and those men are most brutish
who love darkness rather than light. When the darkness of ignorance
broods over a nation, then all sorts of superstitions, cruelties, and
vices abound; the gospel, like the sunrising, soon clears the world of
the open ravages of these monsters, and they seek more congenial abodes.
We see here the value of true light, for we may depend upon it where
there is night there will also be wild beasts to kill and to devour.

[Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

"The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God."
This is the poetic interpretation of a roar. To whom do the lions roar?
Certainly not to their prey, for the terrible sound tends to alarm their
victims, and drive them away. They after their own fashion express their
desires for food, and the expression of desire is a kind of prayer. Out
of this fact comes the devout thought of the wild beast's appealing to
its Maker for food. But neither with lions nor men will the seeking 6f
prayer suffice, there must be practical seeking too, and the lions are
well aware of it. What they have in their own language asked for they go
forth to seek; being in this thing far wiser than many men who offer
formal prayers not half so earnest as those of the young lions, and then
neglect the means in the use of which the object of their petitions
might be gained. The lions roar and seek; too many are liars before God,
and roar but never seek.

How comforting is the thought that the Spirit translates the voice of a
lion, and finds it to be a seeking of meat from God! May we not hope
that our poor broken cries and groans, which in our sorrow we have
called "the voice of our roaring" ([Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)), will be understood by him, and
interpreted in our favour. Evidently he considers the meaning rather
than the music of the utterance, and puts the best construction upon it.

[Psa 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022)

"The sun ariseth." Every evening has its morning to make the day. Were
it not that we have seen the sun rise so often we should think it the
greatest of miracles, and the most amazing of blessings. "They gather
themselves together, and lay them down in their dens." Thus they are out
of man's way, and he seldom encounters them unless he desires to do so.
The forest's warriors retire to their quarters when the morning's drum
is heard, finding in the recesses of their dens a darkness suitable for
their slumbers; there they lay them down and digest their food, for God
has allotted even to them their portion of rest and enjoyment. There was
one who in this respect was poorer than lions and foxes, for he had not
where to lay his head: all were provided for except their incarnate
Provider. Blessed Lord, thou hast stooped beneath the conditions of the
brutes to lift up worse than brutish men!

It is very striking how the Lord controls the fiercest of animals far
more readily than the shepherd manages his sheep. At nightfall they
separate and go forth each one upon the merciful errand of ending the
miseries of the sickly and decrepit among grass-eating animals. The
younger of these animals being swift of foot easily escape them and are
benefited by the exercise, and for the most part only those are
overtaken and killed to whom life would have been protracted agony. So
far lions are messengers of mercy, and are as much sent of God as the
sporting dog is sent by man on his errands. But these mighty hunters
must not always be abroad, they must be sent back to their lairs when
man comes upon the scene. Who shall gather these ferocious creatures and
shut them in? Who shall chain them down and make them harmless? The sun
suffices to do it. He is the true lion-tamer. They gather themselves
together as though they were so many sheep, and in their own retreats
they keep themselves prisoners till returning darkness gives them
another leave to range. By simply majestic means the divine purposes are
accomplished. In like manner even the devils are subject unto our Lord
Jesus, and by the simple spread of the light of the gospel these roaring
demons are chased out of the world. No need for miracles or displays of
physical power, the Sun of Righteousness arises, and the devil and the
false gods, and superstitions and errors of men, all seek their hiding
places in the dark places of the earth among the moles and the bats.

[Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)

"Man goeth forth." It is his turn now, and the sunrise has made things
ready for him. His warm couch he forsakes and the comforts of home, to
find his daily food; this work is good for him, both keeping him out of
mischief, and exercising his faculties. "Unto his work and to his labour
until the evening." He goes not forth to sport but to work, not to
loiter but to labour; at least, this is the lot of the best part of
mankind. We are made for work and ought to work, and should never
grumble that so it is appointed. The hours of labour, however, ought not
to be too long. If labour lasts out the average daylight it is certainly
all that any man ought to expect of another, and yet there are poor
creatures so badly paid that in twelve hours they cannot earn bread
enough to keep them from hunger. Shame on those who dare so impose upon
helpless women and children. Night work should also be avoided as much
as possible. There are twelve hours in which a man ought to work: the
night is meant for rest and sleep.

Night, then, as well as day has its voice of praise. It is more soft and
hushed, but it is none the less true. The moon lights up a solemn
silence of worship among the fir trees, through which the night wind
softly breathes its "songs without words." Every now and then a sound is
heard, which, however simple by day, sounds among the shadows startling
and weird-like, as if the presence of the unknown had filled the heart
with trembling, and made the influence of the Infinite to be realized.
Imagination awakens herself; unbelief finds the silence and the
solemnity uncongenial, faith looks up to the skies above her and sees
heavenly things all the more clearly in the absence of the sunlight, and
adoration bows itself before the Great Invisible! There are spirits that
keep the night watches, and the spell of their presence has been felt by
many a wanderer in the solitudes of nature: God also himself is abroad
all night long, and the glory which concealeth is often felt to be even
greater than that which reveals. Bless the Lord, O my soul.

[Psalms 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 104:24</span></span>

24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them
all: the earth is full of thy riches.

25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts.

26 There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to
play therein.

27 These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in
due season.

28 That thou givest them they gather; thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good.

29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou takest away their
breath, they die, and return to their dust.

30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest
the face of the earth.

[Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

"O Lord, how manifold are thy works!" They are not only many for number
but manifold for variety. Mineral, vegetable, animal - what a range of
works is suggested by these three names! No two even of the same class
are exactly alike, and the classes are more numerous than science can
number. Works in the heavens above and in the earth beneath, and in the
waters under the earth, works which abide the ages, works which come to
perfection and pass away in a year, works which with all their beauty do
not outlive a day, works within works, and works within these - who can
number one of a thousand? God is the great worker, and ordainer of
variety. It is ours to study his works, for they are great, and sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein. The kingdom of grace
contains as manifold and as great works as that of nature, but the
chosen of the Lord alone discern them. "In wisdom hast thou made them
all," or wrought them all. They are all his works, wrought by his own
power, and they all display his wisdom. It was wise to make them - none
could be spared; every link is essential to the chain of nature - wild
beasts as much as men, poisons as truly as odoriferous herbs. They are
wisely made - each one fits its place, fills it, and is happy in so
doing. As a whole, the "all" of creation is a wise achievement, and
however, it may be chequered with mysteries, and clouded with terrors,
it all works together for good, and as one complete harmonious piece of
workmanship it answers the great Worker's end. "The earth is full of thy
riches." It is not a poor-house, but a palace; not a hungry ruin, but a
well-filled store-house. The Creator has not set his creatures down in a
dwelling-place where the table is bare, and the buttery empty, he has
filled the earth with food; and not with bare necessaries only, but with
riches - dainties, luxuries, beauties, treasures. In the bowels of the
earth are hidden mines of wealth, and on her surface are teeming
harvests of plenty. All these riches are the Lord's; we ought to call
them not "the wealth of nations," but "thy riches" O Lord! Not in one
clime alone are these riches of God to be found, but in all lands - even
the Arctic ocean has its precious things which men endure much hardness
to win, and the burning sun of the equator ripens a produce which
flavours the food of all mankind. If his house below is so full of
riches what must his house above be, where

"The very streets are paved with gold

Exceeding clear and fine"?

[Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025)

"So is this great and wide sea." He gives an instance of the immense
number and variety of Jehovah's works by pointing to the sea. "Look,"
saith he, "at yonder ocean, stretching itself on both hands and
embracing so many lands, it too swarms with animal life, and in its
deeps lie treasures beyond all counting." The heathen made the sea a
different province from the land, and gave the command thereof to
Neptune, but we know of a surety that Jehovah rules the waves. "Wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts;" read
moving things and animals small and great, and you have the true sense.
The number of minute forms of animal life is indeed beyond all
reckoning; when a single phosphorescent wave may bear millions of
infusoira, and around a fragment of rock armies of microscopic beings
may gather, we renounce all idea of applying arithmetic to such a case.
The sea in many regions appears to be all alive, as if every drop were a
world. Nor are these tiny creatures the only tenants of the sea, for it
contains gigantic mammals which exceed in bulk those which range the
land, and a vast host of huge fishes which wander among the waves, and
hide in the caverns of the sea as the tiger lurks in the jungle, or the
lion roams the plain. Truly, O Lord, thou makest the sea to be as rich
in the works of thy hands as the land itself.

[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

"There go the ships." So that ocean is not altogether deserted of
mankind. It is the highway of nations, and unites, rather than divides,
distant lands. "There is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play
therein." The huge whale turns the sea into his recreation ground, and
disports himself as God designed that he should do. The thought of this
amazing creature caused the Psalmist to adore the mighty Creator who
created him, formed him for his place and made him happy in it. Our
ancient maps generally depict a ship and whale upon the sea, and so show
that it is most natural, as well as poetical, to connect them both with
the mention of the ocean.

[Psa 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

"These wait all upon thee." They come around thee as fowls around the
farmer's door at the time for feeding, and look up with expectation. Men
or marmots, eagles or emmets, whales or minnows, they alike rely upon
thy care. "That thou mayest give them their meat in due season;" that is
to say, when they need it and when it is ready for them. God has a
timing for all things, and does not feed his creatures by fits and
starts; he gives them daily bread, and a quantity proportioned to their
needs. This is all that any of us should expect; if even the brute
creatures are content with a sufficiency we ought not to be more greedy
than they.

[Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

"That thou givest them they gather." God gives it, but they must gather
it, and they are glad that he does so, for otherwise their gathering
would be in vain. We often forget that animals and birds in their free
life have to work to obtain food even as we do; and yet it is true with
them as with us that our heavenly Father feeds all. When we see the
chickens picking up the corn which the housewife scatters from her lap
we have an apt illustration of the manner in which the Lord supplies the
needs of all living things - he gives and they gather. "Thou openest
thine hand, they are filled with good." Here is divine liberality with
its open hand filling needy creatures till they want no more, and here
is divine omnipotence feeding a world by simply opening its hand. What
should we do if that hand were closed? there would be no need to strike
a blow, the mere closing of it would produce death by famine. Let us
praise the open-handed Lord, whose providence and grace satisfy our
mouths with good things.

[Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)

"Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled." So dependent are all living
things upon God's smile, that a frown fills them with terror, as though
convulsed with anguish. This is so in the natural world, and certainly
not less so in the spiritual: saints when the Lord hides his face are in
terrible perplexity. "Thou takest away their breath, they die, and
return to their dust." The breath appears to be a trifling matter, and
the air an impalpable substance of but small importance, yet, once
withdrawn, the body loses all vitality, and crumbles back to the earth
from which it was originally taken. All animals come under this law, and
even the dwellers in the sea are not exempt from it. Thus dependent is
all nature upon the will of the Eternal. Note here that death is caused
by the act of God, "thou takest away their breath"; we are immortal till
he bids us die, and so are even the little sparrows, who fall not to the
ground without our Father.

[Psa 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)

"Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the
face of the earth." The loss of their breath destroys them, and by
Jehovah's breath a new race is created. The works of the Lord are
majestically simple, and are performed with royal ease-a breath creates,
and its withdrawal destroys. If we read the word spirit as we have it in
our version, it is also instructive, for we see the Divine Spirit going
forth to create life in nature even as we see him in the realms of
grace. At the flood the world was stripped of almost all life, yet how
soon the power of God refilled the desolate places! In winter the earth
falls into a sleep which makes her appear worn and old, but how readily
does the Lord awaken her with the voice of spring, and make her put on
anew the beauty of her youth. Thou, Lord, doest all things, and let
glory be unto thy name.

[Psalms 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 104:31</span></span>

31 The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice
in his works.

32 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and
they smoke.

33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live; I will sing praise to my
God while I have my being.

34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.

35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be
no more. Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord.

[Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

"The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever." His works may pass away,
but not his glory. Were it only for what he has already done, the Lord
deserves to be praised without ceasing. His personal being and character
ensure that he would be glorious even were all the creatures dead. "The
Lord shall rejoice in his works." He did so at the first, when he rested
on the seventh day, and saw that everything was very good; he does so
still in a measure where beauty and purity in nature still survive the
Fall, and he will do so yet more fully when the earth is renovated, and
the trail of the serpent is cleansed from the globe. This verse is
written in the most glowing manner. The poet finds his heart gladdened
by beholding the works of the Lord, and he feels that the Creator
himself must have felt unspeakable delight in exercising so much wisdom,
goodness, and power.

[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

"He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth." The Lord who has graciously
displayed his power in acts and works of goodness might, if he had seen
fit, have overwhelmed us with the terrors of destruction, for even at a
glance of his eye the solid earth rocks with fear. "He toucheth the
hills, and they smoke." Sinai was altogether on a smoke when the Lord
descended upon it. It was but a touch, but it sufficed to make the
mountain dissolve in flame. Even our God is a consuming fire. Woe unto
those who shall provoke him to frown upon them, they shall perish at the
touch of his hand. If sinners were not altogether insensible a glance of
the Lord's eye would make them tremble, and the touches of his hand in
affliction would set their hearts on fire with repentance. "Of reason
all things show some sign," except man's unfeeling heart.

[Psa 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

"I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live," or, literally, in my
lives. Here and hereafter the Psalmist would continue to praise the
Lord, for the theme is an endless one, and remains for ever fresh and
new. The birds sang God's praises before men were created, but redeemed
men will sing his glories when the birds are no more. Jehovah, who ever
lives and makes us to live shall be for ever exalted, and extolled in
the songs of redeemed men. "I will sing praise to my God while I have my
being." A resolve both happy for himself and glorifying to the Lord.
Note the sweet title - my God. We never sing so well as when we know
that we have an interest in the good things of which we sing, and a
relationship to the God whom we praise.

[Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

"My meditation of him shall be sweet." Sweet both to him and to me. I
shall be delighted thus to survey his works and think of his person, and
he will graciously accept my notes of praise. Meditation is the soul of
religion. It is the tree of life in the midst of the garden of piety,
and very refreshing is its fruit to the soul which feeds thereon. And as
it is good towards man, so is it towards God. As the fat of the
sacrifice was the Lord's portion, so are our best meditations due to the
Most High and are most acceptable to him. We ought, therefore, both for
our own good and for the Lord's honour to be much occupied with
meditation, and that meditation should chiefly dwell upon the Lord
himself: it should be "meditation of him." For want of it much communion
is lost and much happiness is missed. "I will be glad in, the Lord." To
the meditative mind every thought of God is full of joy. Each one of the
divine attributes is a well-spring of delight now that in Christ Jesus
we are reconciled unto God.

[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

"Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more." They are the only blot upon creation.

"Every prospect pleases,

And only man is vile."

In holy indignation the Psalmist would fain rid the world of beings so
base as not to love their gracious Creator, so blind as to rebel against
their Benefactor. He does but ask for that which just men look forward
to as the end of history; for the day is eminently to be desired when in
all God's kingdom there shall not remain a single traitor or rebel. The
Christian way of putting it will be to ask that grace may turn sinners
into saints, and win the wicked to the ways of truth. "Bless thou the
Lord, O my soul." Here is the end of the matter - whatever sinners may
do, do thou, my soul, stand to thy colours, and be true to thy calling.
Their silence must not silence thee, but rather provoke thee to
redoubled praise to make up for their failures. Nor canst thou alone
accomplish the work; others must come to thy help. O ye saints, Praise
ye the Lord. Let your hearts cry Hallelujah for that is the word in the
Hebrew. Heavenly word! Let it close the Psalm: for what more remains to
be said or written? Hallelujah. Praise ye the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 105](psa105)

</div>
