<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa132)  [Next](psa134) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 133](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 133:0</span></span>

Title. - A Song of Degrees of David. We see no reason for depriving
David of the authorship of this sparkling sonnet. He knew by experience
the bitterness occasioned by divisions in families, and was well
prepared to celebrate in choicest psalmody the blessing of unity for
which he sighed, Among the "songs of degrees," this hymn has certainly
attained unto a good degree, and even in common literature it is
frequently quoted for its perfume and dew. In this Psalm there is no wry
word, all is "sweetness and light," - a notable ascent from [Psa
120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001) with which the pilgrims set
out. That is full of war and lamentation, but this sings of peace and
pleasantness. The visitors to Zion were about to return, and this may
have been their hymn of joy because they had seen such union among the
tribes who had gathered at the common altar. The previous Psalm, which
sings of the covenant, had also revealed the centre of Israel's unity in
the Lord's anointed and the promises made to him. No wonder that
brethren dwell in unity when God dwells among them, and finds his rest
in them. Our translators have given to this Psalm an admirable
explanatory heading, "The benefit of the communion of saints." These
good men often hit off the meaning of a passage in a few words.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001). - Christian unity.

I. Its admirable excellences.

II\. The signs of its existence.

III\. The causes of its decay.

IV\. The means of its renewal.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001). - The saints are here
contemplated,

I. In their brotherhood.

II\. In their concord.

III\. In their felicity. - W. J.

[Psa 133:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001). - Six blessings which
dwell with unity.

I. Goodness.

II\. Pleasure.

III\. Anointing.

IV\. Dew.

V. God's blessing.

VI\. Eternal life.

[Psa 133:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001). -

I. The contemplation: brethren dwelling together in unity.

1\. In a family.

2\. In a Christian church.

3\. Brethren of the same denomination.

4\. Of different denominations.

II\. Its commendation.

1\. Literally: "good and pleasant."

2\. Figuratively: fragrant as the priestly anointing; fruitful as the
dew on Hermon.

3\. Spiritually, it has a blessing from God, that gives life, and
continues for evermore! - G. R.

[Psa 133:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001). - On Christians dwelling
together in unity as a church.

I. Its propriety, on account of fraternal relationship: "For brethren."
The Christian brotherhood is so unique, sacred and lasting, that a lack
of unity is a disgrace. They are brethren,

1\. Because born of God, who is "the God of peace." Their claim to the
brotherhood is dependent upon likeness to Him, [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009).

2\. Because united to Christ, who as elder brother desires unity, [Joh
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020), [Joh
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021). Not to seek it is virtually to
disown Him.

3\. Because "by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body" ([Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013)), wherein unity must be kept:
[Eph 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003).

4\. Because destined to "dwell together in unity," for ever in heaven;
therefore we should aim at it here

II\. Its peculiar excellency: both "good and pleasant."

1\. Good, in respect of church work and influence; of mutual edification
and growth in grace ([Co2 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011)); of
the success of prayer ([Mat 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019)); of
recommending the gospel to others.

2\. Pleasant, as productive of happiness: as pleasing to God.

III\. Its promotion and maintenance.

1\. Seeking the glory of God unites; in opposition to self-honour which
divides.

2\. Love to Christ as a constraining power unites each to the other as
it binds all closely to Christ.

3\. Activity in ministering to others, rather than desiring to be
ministered unto, binds heart to heart. - J. F.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002). - There must have been
special reasons why a priestly anointing should be selected for the
comparison, and why that of Aaron, rather than of any other of the high
priests. They are these -

I. The ointment was "holy," prepared in accordance with the Divine
prescription: [Exo 30:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023). Church
union is sacred. It must spring from the love commanded by God; be based
on the principles laid down by God; and exist for the ends appointed of
God.

II\. The anointing was from God through Moses, who acted on behalf of
God in the matter. Church unity is of the Holy Spirit ([Co1
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)), through Jesus as Mediator.
Therefore it should be prayed for, and thankfully acknowledged.

III\. By the anointing, Aaron became consecrated, and officially
qualified to act as priest. By unity the Church, as a whole, lives its
life of consecration, and effectively ministers in the priesthood
assigned it.

IV\. The oil was diffusive; it rested not on Aaron's head, but flowed
down to the skirts of his garments. Unity will, in time, make its way
from a few to the whole, especially from the leaders in a church to the
rest of its members. Hence, it is a personal matter. Each should realize
it, and by love and wise conduct diffuse it. - J. F.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). - Christian love scatters
blessing by the way of down-coming: "ran down," "went down, descended."

I. God to his saints.

II\. Saint to saint.

III\. Saint to sinner.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). - The chosen place for
blessing. A church; a church united, a church bedewed of the Spirit.
What a blessing for the world that there is a commanded place of
blessing!

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003) (first clause). - This
should be rendered, "As the dew of Hermon, that cometh down on the
mountains of Zion." From the snows upon the lofty Hermon, the moisture
raised by the sun is carried in the form of vapour, by the wind towards
the lesser elevations of Zion, upon which it falls as a copious dew.
Thus, Christian concord in church-fellowship -

I. Despises not the little ones, i.e. the mean, poor, and less gifted.
It,

1\. Recognises that God is the Father, and Christ is the Redeemer of all
believers alike.

2\. Acknowledges oneness of faith as the true basis of fellowship; not
wealth, social position or talent.

3\. Believes that the least member is essential to the completeness of
Christ's body.

4\. Realises that everything which renders one in any way superior to
another is the gift of God.

II\. Distributes of its abundance to the needy - [Act
4:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032).

1\. The wealthy to the poor, [Jo1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017).

2\. The learned to the ignorant.

3\. The joyful to the sorrowing.

4\. The steadfast to the erring, [Jam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019).

III\. Displays its value more by loving generosity, than by a
conspicuous appearance before the world. As Hermon was more valuable to
Zion for its dew than for its adornment of the landscape.

1\. A generous activity exhibits and requires more real grace than showy
architecture or ornate worship does.

2\. Through it, godliness flourishes more than by a vaunted
respectability. Zion was fertilized by the dew, not by the grandeur of
Hermon.

3\. By it the heart of Christ is touched and his reward secured, [Mar
9:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#040), [Mar
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042). - J. F.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). - Commanded Mercy.
Elsewhere goodness is bestowed, but in Zion it is commanded.

I. Commanded mercy implies that it must necessarily be given.

II\. Commanded mercy attends commanded unity.

III\. Commanded mercy secures life more abundantly, "life for evermore."
- W. B. H.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is an effusion of holy joy occasioned by the sight of the
gathering of Israel as one great household at the yearly feasts....
There might likewise be an allusion to the previous jealousies and
alienations in the family of Israel, which seemed to be exchanged for
mutual concord and affection, on David's accession to the throne of the
whole nation. - Joseph Addison Alexander.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Behold how good and how pleasant it is," etc. There are three things
wherein it is very pleasant to behold the people of God joining in one.

I. When they join or are one in opinion and judgment, when they all
think the same thing, and are of one mind in the truth.

II\. When they join together and are one in affection, when they are all
of one heart, though possibly they are not all of one mind; or, when
they meet in affection, though not in opinion. When David had spoken
admiringly of this goodly sight, he spoke declaratively concerning the
goodness of it ([Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)): "It is
like the precious ointment upon the head." 'Tis so, first, for the
sweetness of it; 'tis so, secondly, for the diffusiveness of it (as
followeth), "that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went
down to the skirts of his garments."

III\. It is a blessed thing to see them joining together in duty, either
as duty is considered - First, in doing that which is good; or, when, as
the apostle's word is ([Co2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)), they
are, among themselves, "workers together" in any good work: we say (to
fill up the text), "workers together with God." That's a blessed sight
indeed, when we join with God, and God joineth with us in his work. It
is also a blessed sight when all the ministers of Jesus Christ, and many
as members of Jesus Christ, join in any good work, in this especially,
to beseech all we have to do with "that they receive not the grace of
God in vain." Secondly, in turning from evil, and putting iniquity far
from them; in praying for the pardon of sin, and making their peace with
God. 'Tis a good work to turn away from evil, especially when all who
are concerned in it join in it As to join in sin, and to be brethren in
iniquity, is the worst of unions, indeed, a combination against God; so
to join as brethren in mourning for sin and repenting of our iniquities
is a blessed union, and highly pleasing to God. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"How good and how pleasant it is," etc. The terms of this praise and
commendation, or the particulars whereof it consists, is taken from a
twofold qualification.

I. Brotherly concord and the improvement of it in all occasional
expressions is a very great good. This is, and will appear to be so in
sundry considerations.

1\. As, First, in regard of the Author and owner of it, which is God
Himself, who lays special claim hereunto. Therefore in Scripture we find
him to be from hence denominated and intitled [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033). "God is not the author of
confusion (or of unquietness), but the author of peace." [Co2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011). "The God of peace and love."
Peace is called "the peace of God:" [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007). And God is called the "God of
peace;" each of which expressions does refer it and reduce it to him,
and does thereby advance it. Look, then, how far forth God himself is
said to be good, so far forth is this dwelling in unity good also, as it
is commanded and owned by him, as it appears thus to be.

2\. Secondly. It is good in the nature of it; it is good, as any grace
is good. It is good morally. Love is a fruit of the Spirit: [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022). And so to dwell in love and
unity one with another is a goodness reducible thereunto. It is good
spiritually; it is not only such a good as is taught by moral
philosophy, and practised by the students thereof, but it is taught by
the Holy Ghost himself, and is a part of the work of regeneration and of
the new creature in us, especially if we take it in the full latitude
and extent of it, as it becomes us to do.

3\. Thirdly. It is good in the effects and consequences and concomitants
of it: it has much good. It is bonum utile. A great deal of advantage
comes by brethren's dwelling together in unity, especially spiritual
advantage, and for the doing and receiving of good.

II\. The second qualification is, the sweetness of it, because it is
"pleasant:" it is not only bonum utile, and bonum honestum, but it is
also bonum jucundum; it has a great deal of pleasure in it. Pleasure is
such a kind of goodness, especially to some kind of persons, as that
they care not almost what they do or part with to obtain it, and all
other good besides is nothing to them, if it be devoid of this.
Therefore for the further commendation of this fraternal unity to us,
there is this also to be considered, that it is "pleasant." Thus it is
with respect to all sorts of persons whatsoever, that are made sensible
of it.

1\. First. It is pleasant to God, it is such as is very acceptable to
him; it is that which he much delights in, wheresoever he observes it;
being himself a God of peace, he does therefore so much the more delight
in peaceable Christians, and such as do relate to himself. How much do
natural parents rejoice in the agreement of their children, to see them
loving and friendly and kind and courteous to one another, oh, it
pleases them and joys them at their very heart! and so it is likewise
with God to those who are truly his.

2\. Secondly. This brotherly unity is also pleasant to ourselves, who
accordingly shall have so much the greater pleasure in it and from it.

3\. Thirdly. It is also pleasing to others, indeed to all men else
besides, that are standers-by and spectators of it. "Behold, how
pleasant it is," etc. It is pleasant to all beholders: "He that in these
things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men," says
the apostle: [Rom 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018). - Thomas
Horton, -1673.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Pleasant." It is a pleasant thing for the saints and people of God to
agree together; for the same word which is used here for "pleasant," is
used also in the Hebrew for a harmony of music, such as when they rise
to the highest strains of the viol, when the strings are all put in
order to make up a harmony; so pleasant is it, such pleasantness is
there in the saints' agreement. The same word is used also in the Hebrew
for the pleasantness of a corn field. When a field is clothed with corn,
though it be cut down, yet it is very pleasant, oh, how pleasant is it;
and such is the saints' agreement. The same word in the Psalmist is used
also for the sweetness of honey, and of sweet things in opposition to
bitter things. And thus you see the pleasantness of it, by its being
compared to the harmony of music, to the corn field, to the sweetness of
honey, to the precious ointment that ran down Aaron's beard, and to the
dew that fell upon Hermon and the hills of Zion: and all this to
discover the pleasantness, profitableness, and sweetness of the saints'
agreement. It is a pleasant thing to behold the sun, but it is much more
pleasant to behold the saints' agreement and unity among themselves. -
William Bridge.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Brethren." Abraham made this name, "brethren," a mediator to keep peace
between Lot and him: "Are we not brethren?" saith Abraham. As if he
should say, Shall brethren fall out for trifles, like infidels? This was
enough to pacify Lot, for Abraham to put him in mind that they were
brethren; when he heard the name of brethren, straight his heart
yielded, and the strife was ended. So this should be the lawyer to end
quarrels between Christians, to call to mind that they are brethren. And
they which have spent all at law have wished that they had taken this
lawyer, to think, with Lot, whether it were meet for brethren to strive
like enemies. - Henry Smith.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Brethren." Some critics observe that the Hebrew word for a brother is
of near brotherhood or alliance with two other words, whereof the first
signifies one, and the other alike or together, to show that "brethren"
ought to be as one, and alike, or together; which latter is by an
elegant paranomasia joined with it: "Behold, how good and how pleasant
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity," or, as we put it in the
margin, "to dwell even together." So then, the very word whereby
"brethren" are expressed notes that there ought to be a nearness, a
similitude, yea, a oneness (if I may so speak) between them in their
affections and actions. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

To dwell is a word of residence, and abode, and continuation. There is
also pertaining to the love and concord of brethren a perseverance and
persistency in it; not only to be together, or to come together, or to
meet together for some certain time; but to dwell together in unity,
this is which is here so extolled and commended unto us. It seems to be
no such great matter, nor to carry any such great difficulty in it, for
men to command themselves to some expressions of peace and friendship
for some short space of time (though there are many now and then who are
hardly able to do that); but to hold out in it, and to continue so long,
this endurance is almost impossible to them. Yet this is that which is
required of them as Christians and as "brethren" one to another, even to
"dwell together in unity;" to follow peace, and love, and concord, and
mutual agreement, not only upon some occasional meetings, but all along
the whole course of their lives, whilst they converse and live together.
- Thomas Horton.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Together in unity." If there be but one God, as God is one, so let them
that serve him be one. This is what Christ prayed so heartily for. "That
they may be one" [Joh 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021).
Christians should be one,

I. In judgment. The apostle exhorts to be all of one mind. [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010). How sad is it to see religion
wearing a coat of divers colours; to see Christians of so many opinions,
and going so many different ways! It is Satan that has sown these tares
of division. [Mat 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039). He first
divided men from God, and then one man from another.

II\. One in affection. They should have one heart. "The multitude of
them that believed were of one heart and of one soul", [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032). As in music, though there be
several strings of a viol, yet all make one sweet harmony; so, though
there are several Christians, yet there should be one sweet harmony of
affection among them. There is but one God, and they that serve him
should be one. There is nothing that would render the true religion more
lovely, or make more proselytes to it, than to see the professors of it
tied together with the heart-strings of love. If God be one, let all
that profess him be of one mind, and one heart, and thus fulfil Christ's
prayer, "that they all may be one." - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"Precious ointment upon the head." Though every priest was anointed, yet
only the high priest was anointed on the head, and there is a tradition
that this rite was omitted after the Captivity, so that there is a
special stress on the name of Aaron. - Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"The precious ointment ... that ran down upon the beard ... that went
down to the skirts of his garments." Magnificence, misnamed by churls
extravagance and waste, is the invariable attribute of all true love.
David recognised this truth when he selected the profuse anointing of
Aaron with the oil of consecration at his installation into the office
of High Priest as a fit emblem of brotherly love. There was waste in
that anointing, too, as well as in the one which took place at Bethany.
For the oil was not sprinkled on the head of Aaron, though that might
have been sufficient for the purpose of a mere ceremony. The vessel was
emptied on the High Priest's person, so that its contents flowed down
from the head upon the beard, and even to the skirts of the sacerdotal
robes. In that very waste lay the point of the resemblance for David. It
was a feature that was very likely to strike his mind, for he, too, was
a wasteful man in his way. He had loved God in a manner which exposed
him to the charge of extravagance. He had danced before the Lord, for
example, when the ark was brought up from the house of Obed-edom to
Jerusalem, forgetful of his dignity, exceeding the bounds of decorum,
and, as it might seem, without excuse, as a much less hearty
demonstration would have served the purpose of a religious solemnity. -
Alexander Balmain Bruce, in "The Training of the Twelve," 1877.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"The precious ointment ... that ran down." Of the Hebrew perfumes an
immense quantity was annually manufactured and consumed, of which we
have a very significant indication in the fact that the holy anointing
oil of the tabernacle and temple was never made in smaller quantities
than 750 ounces-of solids compounded with five quarts of oil, and was so
profusely employed that when applied to Aaron's head it flowed down over
his beard and breast, to the very skirts of his garments. - Hugh
Macmillan, in "The Ministry of Nature," 1871.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"That ran down that went down," etc. Christ's grace is so diffusive of
itself, that it conveys holiness to us, "running down from the head to
the skirts," to all his members. He was not only anointed himself, but
he is our anointer. Therefore it is called "the oil of gladness,"
because it rejoiceth our hearts, by giving us spiritual gladness, and
peace of conscience. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"Down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts
of his garments." Not the extremity of them, as our version inclines to;
for not so great a quantity of oil was poured upon him; nor would it
have been decent to have his clothes thus greased from top to bottom;
but the upper part of his garment, the top of his coat, on which the
beard lay, as Zarchi; the neck or collar of it, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech; the hole in which the head went through when it was put on,
about which there was a band, that it might not be rent: [Exo
28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032), and [Exo
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#023); where the Septuagint use the
same word as here. - John Gill.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

In this prayer and song of the unity of the church, it is noteworthy
how, commencing with the fundamental idea of "brethren," we rise to the
realization of the Elder Brother, who is our common anointed High
Priest. It is the bond of his priesthood which joins us together as
brethren. It is the common anointing which flows down even to the skirts
of the garment of our High Priest which marks our being brethren.
Whether we dwell north or south, meeting in Zion, and sharing in the
blessings of that eternal Priesthood of Christ, we form in reality, and
before our Father, but one family - "the whole family in earth and
heaven." Our real bond of union consists in the "flowing down," the
"running down," or "descending" of the common blessing, which marks the
steps in this Psalm of Degrees ([Psa
133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)). And if "the dew of Hermon" has
descended upon "the mountains of Zion," long after the sun has risen
shall gladsome fruit appear - in some twenty, in some thirty, and in
some a hundredfold. - Alfred Edersheim.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"As the dew of Hermon," etc. "What we read in [Psa
133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001) of the dew of Hermon descending
upon the mountains of Zion," says Van de Velde in his "Travels" (Bd. i.
S. 97), "is now become quite clear to me. Here as I sat at the foot of
Hermon, I understood how the water-drops which rose from its
forest-mantled heights, and out of the highest ravines, which are filled
the whole year round with snow, after the sun's rays have attenuated
them and moistened the atmosphere with them, descend at evening-time as
a heavy dew upon the lower mountains which lie round about as its spurs.
One sought to have seen Hermon with its white-golden crown glistening
aloft in the blue sky, in order to be able rightly to understand the
figure. Nowhere in the whole country is so heavy a dew perceptible as in
the districts near to Hermon." To this dew the poet likens brotherly
love. This is "as the dew of Hermon": of such pristine freshness and
thus refreshing, possessing such pristine power and thus quickening,
thus born from above ([Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)), and
in fact like the dew of Hermon which comes down upon the mountains of
Zion - a feature in the picture which is taken from the natural reality;
for an abundant dew, when warm days have preceded, might very well be
diverted to Jerusalem by the operation of the cold current of air
sweeping down from the north over Hermon. We know, indeed, from our own
experience how far off a cold air coming from the Alps is perceptible,
and produces its effects. The figure of the poet is therefore as true to
nature as it is beautiful. When brethren bound together in love also
meet together in one place, and, in fact, when brethren of the north
unite with brethren in the south in Jerusalem, the city which is the
mother of all, at the great Feasts, it is as when the dew of Mount
Hermon, which is covered with deep, almost eternal snow, descends upon
the bare, unfruitful - and therefore longing for such quickening -
mountains round about Zion. In Jerusalem must love and all that is good
meet. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"As the dew of Hermon," etc. As touching this similitude, I think the
prophet useth the common manner of speaking. For whereas the mountains
oftentimes seem to those that behold them afar off, to reach up even
unto heaven, the dew which cometh from heaven seemeth to fall from the
high mountains unto the hills which are under them. Therefore he saith
that the dew descendeth from Hermon unto the mount Sion, because it so
seemeth unto those that do behold it afar off. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"As the dew of Hermon." The dews of the mists that rose from the watery
ravines, or of the clouds that rested on the summit of Hermon, were
perpetual witnesses of freshness and coolness - the sources, as it
seemed, of all the moisture, which was to the land of Palestine what the
fragrant oil was to the garments of the High Priest; what the influence
of brotherly love was to the whole community. - Arthur Penrhyn Stanley
(1815-1881), in "Sinai and Palestine."

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"Dew of Hermon." We had sensibly proof at Rasheiya of the copiousness of
the "dew of Hermon," spoken of in [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003), where "Zion" is only another
name for the same mountain. Unlike most other mountains which gradually
rise from lofty table-lands and often at a distance from the sea, Hermon
starts at once to the height of nearly ten thousand feet, from a
platform scarcely above the sea level. This platform, too - the upper
Jordan valley, and marshes of Merom - is for the most part an
impenetrable swamp of unknown depth, whence the seething vapour, under
the rays of an almost tropical sun, is constantly ascending into the
upper atmosphere during the day. The vapour, coming in contact with the
snowy sides of the mountain, is rapidly congealed, and is precipitated
in the evening in the form of a dew, the most copious we ever
experienced. It penetrated everywhere, and saturated everything. The
floor of our tent was soaked, our bed was covered with it, our guns were
dripping, and dewdrops hung about everywhere. No wonder that the foot of
Hermon is clad with orchards and gardens of such marvellous fertility in
this land of droughts. - Henry Baker Tristram, 1867.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"As the dew of Hermon that descended upon the mountain of Zion." -

So the dews on Hermon's hill

Which the summer clouds distil,

Floating southward in the night,

Pearly gems on Zion light.

William Digby Seymour.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"There the Lord commanded the blessing." God commands his blessing where
peace is cultivated; by which is meant, that he testifies how much he is
pleased with concord amongst men, by showering down blessings upon them.
The same sentiment is expressed by Paul in other words, ([Co2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011); [Phi
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)) "Live in peace, and the God of
peace shall be with you." - John Calvin.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"The Lord commanded the blessing." By a bare word of command he
blesseth: "there he commands the blessing," that blessing of blessings,
"even life for evermore"; like as it is said, "he commanded, and they
were created": [Psa 148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005). So he
commands and we are blessed." - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"The Lord commanded the blessing." It is an allusion possibly to great
persons, to a general, or an emperor: "Where the word of a king is,
there is power." The centurion said, "I say to one soldier, Go, and he
goeth; to another, Come, and he cometh; to a third, Do this, and he doth
it." So God commandeth one ordinance, "Go and build up such a saint,"
and it goeth; he saith to another ordinance, "Come, and call home such a
sinner," and it doth it; God's words and work go together. Men cannot
enable others, or give them power to obey them; they may bid a lame man
walk, or a blind man see; but they cannot enable them to walk or see:
God with his word giveth strength to do the thing commanded; as in the
old, so in the new creation, "He spake, and it was done; he commanded,
and it stood fast:" [Psa 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009). But
there the Lord commands his blessing, "even life for evermore." The
stream of regeneration, or a spiritual life, which shall never cease,
but still go forward and increase, till it swell to, and be swallowed up
in the ocean of eternal life, "even life for evermore." - George
Swinnock.

[Psalms 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 133:1</span></span>

1 Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity!

2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments;

3 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains
of Zion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore.

[Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

"Behold." It is a wonder seldom seen, therefore behold it! It may be
seen, for it is the characteristic of real saints, - therefore fail not
to inspect it! It is well worthy of admiration; pause and gaze upon it!
It will charm you into imitation, therefore note it well! God looks on
with approval, therefore consider it with attention. "How good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" No one can tell
the exceeding excellence of such a condition; and so the Psalmist uses
the word "how" twice; - Behold how good! and how pleasant! He does not
attempt to measure either the good or the pleasure, but invites us to
behold for ourselves. The combination of the two adjectives "good" and
"pleasant," is more remarkable than the conjunction of two stars of the
first magnitude: for a thing to be "good" is good, but for it also to be
pleasant is better. All men love pleasant things, and yet it frequently
happens that the pleasure is evil; but here the condition is as good as
it is pleasant, as pleasant as it is good, for the same "how" is set
before each qualifying word.

For brethren according to the flesh to dwell together is not always
wise; for experience teaches that they are better a little apart, and it
is shameful for them to dwell together in disunion. They had much better
part in peace like Abraham and Lot, than dwell together in envy like
Joseph's brothers. When brethren can and do dwell together in unity,
then is their communion worthy to be gazed upon and sung of in holy
psalmody. Such sights ought often to be seen among those who are near of
kin, for they are brethren, and therefore should be united in heart and
aim; they dwell together, and it is for their mutual comfort that there
should be no strife; and yet how many families are rent by fierce feuds,
and exhibit a spectacle which is neither good nor pleasant!

As to brethren inspirit, they ought to dwell together in church
fellowship, and in that fellowship one essential matter is unity. We can
dispense with uniformity if we possess unity: oneness of life, truth,
and way; oneness in Christ Jesus; oneness of object and spirit - these
we must have, or our assemblies will be synagogues of contention rather
than churches of Christ. The closer the unity the better; for the more
of the good and the pleasant there will be. Since we are imperfect
beings, somewhat of the evil and the unpleasant is sure to intrude; but
this will readily be neutralized and easily ejected by the true love of
the saints, if it really exists. Christian unity is good in itself, good
for ourselves, good for the brethren, good for our converts, good for
the outside world; and for certain it is pleasant: for a loving heart
must have pleasure and give pleasure in associating with others of like
nature. A church united for years in earnest service of the Lord is a
well of goodness and joy to all those who dwell round about it.

[Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)

"It is like the precious ointment upon the head." In order that we may
the better behold brotherly unity David gives us a resemblance, so that
as in a glass we may perceive its blessedness. It has a sweet perfume
about it, comparable to that precious ointment with which the first High
Priest was anointed at his ordination. It is a holy thing, and so again
is like the oil of consecration which was to be used only in the Lord's
service. What a sacred thing must brotherly love be when it can be
likened to an oil which must never be poured on any man but on the
Lord's high-priest alone! It is a diffusive thing: being poured on his
head the fragrant oil flowed down upon Aaron's head, and thence dropped
upon his garments till the utmost hem was anointed therewith; and even
so doth brotherly love extend its benign power and bless all who are
beneath its influence. Hearty concord brings a benediction upon all
concerned; its goodness and pleasure are shared in by the lowliest
members of the household; even the servants are the better and the
happier because of the lovely unity among the members of the family. It
has a special use about it; for as by the anointing oil Aaron was set
apart for the special service of Jehovah, even so those who dwell in
love are the better fitted to glorify God in his church. The Lord is not
likely to use for his glory those who are devoid of love; they lack the
anointing needful to make them priests unto the Lord. "That ran down
upon the beard, even Aaron's beard." This is a chief point of
comparison, that as the oil did not remain confined to the place where
it first fell, but flowed down the High Priest's hair and bedewed his
beard, even so brotherly love descending from the head distils and
descends, anointing as it runs, and perfuming all it lights upon. "That
went down to the skirts of his garments." Once set in motion it would
not cease from flowing. It might seem as if it were better not to smear
his garments with oil, but the sacred unguent could not be restrained,
it flowed over his holy robes; even thus does brotherly love not only
flow over the hearts upon which it was first poured out, and descend to
those who are an inferior part of the mystical body of Christ, but it
runs where it is not sought for, asking neither leave nor license to
make its way. Christian affection knows no limits of parish, nation,
sect or age. Is the man a believer in Christ? Then he is in the one
body, and I must yield him an abiding love. Is he one of the poorest,
one of the least spiritual, one of the least lovable? Then he is as the
skirts of the garment, and my heart's love must fall even upon him.
Brotherly love comes from the head, but falls to the feet. Its way is
downward. It "ran down," and it "went down": love for the brethren
condescends to men of low estate, it is not puffed up, but is lowly and
meek. This is no small part of its excellence, oil would not anoint if
it did not flow down, neither would brotherly love diffuse its blessing
if it did not descend.

[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)

"As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains
of Zion." From the loftier mountains the moisture appears to be wafted
to the lesser hills: the dews of Hermon fall on Zion. The Alpine Lebanon
ministers to the minor elevation of the city of David; and so does
brotherly love descend from higher to the lower, refreshing and
enlivening in its course. Holy concord is as dew, mysteriously blessed,
full of life and growth for all plants of grace. It brings with it so
much benediction that it is as no common dew, but as that of Hermon
which is specially copious, and far-reaching. The proper rendering is,
"As the dew of Hermon that descended upon the mountains of Zion," and
this tallies with the figure which has been already used; and sets forth
by a second simile the sweet descending diffusiveness of brotherly
unity. "For there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore." That is, in Zion, or better still, in the place where
brotherly love abounds. Where love reigns God reigns. Where love wishes
blessing, there God commands the blessing. God has but to command, and
it is done. He is so pleased to see his dear children happy in one
another that he fails not to make them happy in himself. He gives
especially his best blessing of eternal life, for love is life; dwelling
together in love we have begun the enjoyments of eternity, and these
shall not be taken from us. Let us love for evermore, and we shall live
for evermore. This makes Christian brotherhood so good and pleasant; it
has Jehovah's blessing resting upon it, and it cannot be otherwise than
sacred like "the precious ointment," and heavenly like "the dew of
Hermon."

O for more of this rare virtue! Not the love which comes and goes, but
that which dwells; not that spirit which separates and secludes, but
that which dwells together; not that mind which is all for debate and
difference, but that which dwells together in unity. Never shall we know
the full power of the anointing till we are of one heart and of one
spirit; never will the sacred dew of the spirit descend in all its
fulness till we are perfectly joined together in the same mind; never
will the covenanted and commanded blessing come forth from the Lord our
God till once again we shall have "one Lord, one faith, one baptism."
Lord, lead us into this most precious spiritual unity, for thy Son's
sake. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 134](psa134)

</div>
