[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph08)  [Next](rph10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

Although one finds in the Kabbalah a complete system on things of a
moral and spiritual order, yet it can not be considered either as a
philosophy or as a religion; I mean to say, it rests, apparently at
least, neither upon reason nor upon inspiration or authority. Like most
of the systems of the Middle Ages, it is the fruit of the union of these
two intellectual powers. Essentially different from religious belief,
under the power, and one can say, under the protection of which, it was
born, it introduced itself, thanks to peculiar forms and processes,
unnoticed into the minds. These forms and these processes would weaken
the interest of which it is worthy, and would not always permit
conviction of the importance which we believe to be justified in
attributing to it, if, before making it known in its different elements
and before attempting the solution of questions incident thereto, we do
not indicate, with some precision, the place it occupies among the works
of thought, the rank it should hold among religious beliefs and
philosophic systems, and, finally, the requirements or laws which could
explain the peculiar means of its development. It is this we shall
attempt to accomplish with all possible brevity.

It is a fact, proven by the history of entire humanity, that moral
truth, the knowledge which we can acquire about our nature, our destiny
and the principle of the universe, were, at first, not accepted on the
strength of reason or conscience, but by the effect of a power which was
more active upon the minds of the people, and which has the general
attribute of presenting

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

to us ideas under a nearly material form, sometimes under the form of a
word descended from heaven to human ears, sometimes in the form of a
person who develops them in examples and actions. This power,
universally known as Religion or Revelation, has its revolutions and its
laws; notwithstanding the unity that rules at the bottom of its nature,
it changes its aspect, like philosophy, poetry and arts, with the
centuries and countries. But, at what time and at what place this power
may come to establish itself, it can not off-hand tell man all that
which he needs to know, not even in the sphere of duties and beliefs
which it imposes upon him, nor even when he has no other ambition but to
understand it in so far as is necessary for his obeisance to it.

In fact, there are in all religions, dogmas which need to be explained,
principles the consequences of which remain to be developed, laws
without possible application, as well as questions totally forgotten
which, surely, touch upon the most important interests of humanity. The
work of answering to all those needs calls for great mental activity;
and the intellect, therefore, is impelled to the use of its own powers
by the very desire to believe and obey. But this impulse does not
produce everywhere the same results and does not act upon all intellects
in the same manner.

Some intellects will not yield any place to individual independence;
they drive the principle of authority to its last consequences, and set
up, side by side with written revelation where nothing but .dogmas,
principles and general laws are found, an oral revelation, a tradition
or perhaps a permanent power infallible in its decisions, a sort of
living tradition which furnishes explanations, forms and details of
religious life; and which produces, if not in faith, in cult and symbols
at least, an imposing unity. Of such are the orthodox of all beliefs.
Other intellects trust no one but themselves, that is to say, their
power of reasoning to fill these gaps and to solve the problems in the
revealed word. All authority other than that of the holy texts appears
to them as an usurpation; or, if they do follow it, it is

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

only when it is in accord with their personal feelings. But. little by
little, their mental forces, their reflection and judgment gain in
firmness and development, and, instead of exerting themselves on the
religious dogmas, they rise above these and seek in their own reason,
their own conscience, or in the conscience and reason of their
fellow-men--in a word--in the works of human wisdom, the beliefs which
they were once obliged to let descend bodily from heaven.

Finally, there is in this sphere a third class of thinkers--those who do
not admit tradition or, at least, whom tradition and authority can not
satisfy, and who certainly can not or dare not use reasoning. On the one
hand they are too high-minded to admit the revealed word in a natural
and historic sense which accords with the letter and spirit of the
masses; on the other hand, they can not believe that man can dispense
entirely with revelation, or that truth reaches him in any other way
than by the effect of divine teaching. It is because of this that they
see nothing but symbols and images in the greater number of dogmas,
precepts and religious tales; that they search everywhere for a
mysterious, profound meaning in accord with their thoughts and feelings,
but which, because preconceived, can not be found in or interpreted into
the sacred texts except by more or less arbitrary means.

It is principally by this method and by this tendency that the mystics
are recognized. I do not say that mysticism did not show itself
sometimes in a bolder form. At a time when philosophical habits had
already held sway, mysticism finds in this very consciousness the divine
action, the immediate revelation which it claims to be indispensable to
man. It recognizes it either in the feelings or in the intuitions of
reason. Thus it is, to cite an example, how mysticism was conceived in
the fifteenth century by Gerson. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) But
when mystical ideas require the support

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

of external sanction, that support can be produced only in the form of a
symbolical interpretation of what people call their Holy Scriptures.

These three tendencies of the mind, these three ways of conceiving
revelation and of continuing its work, are found in the history of all
the religions that have struck roots in the human soul. I shall cite
only those religions which are nearest to us and which, therefore, we
can know with more certainty.

In the bosom of Christianity, the Roman Church represents tradition and
authority in their highest degree of splendor. We find reason applied to
faith not only in the majority of Protestant communions, among the
defenders of the so-called rational exegesis, but also among the
scholastic philosophers who were the first to subject religious dogmas
to the laws of syllogism and who showed the same respect for the words
of Aristotle that they showed for the words of the Apostles. Who does
not see symbolical mysticism with its arbitrary method and exaggerated
spirituality in all the agnostic sects, in Origen, in Jacob Boehm, and
in all who follow in their steps? But no one carried the system as far,
nobody formulated it as frankly and as boldly as Origen whose name we
shall yet meet in this book. If we glance at Mohammed's religion, if
among the many sects it brought to light, we stop at those which show a
decided character, we are immediately struck by the same spectacle. The
Sunnis and the Chiits, whose separation came from the rivalry of
individuals rather than from a marked difference of opinion, equally
defend the cause of unity and orthodoxy; but, the first, in order to
attain their purpose, admit in addition to the Koran a collection of
traditions--the Sunnat--from which they derive their name; the others,
the Chiits, reject the tradition, but replace it by a living authority,
a sort of continued revelation, in as much as one of the most essential
articles of their belief is that after the prophet,

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

his apostle Ali and the Imams of his race are the representatives of God
on earth. <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60)

Islamism had also its scholastic philosophers, known by the name of
Motecallemin, <span id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_61) and it had also a
large number of heresies which seem to have joined the doctrine of
Pelagius to the rational method of modern Protestantism. This is how a
celebrated orientalist defined the latter: "All sects of the Mutazilahs
agree generally in that they deny the existence of attributes in God,
and they endeavor particularly to avoid everything that could injure the
dogma of the unity of God; and then, in order to maintain the justice of
God and ward off any idea of injustice from Him, they accord to man full
liberty of his own actions and deny God all interference with them;
finally, they agree in teaching that all the knowledge necessary to
salvation is within the province of reason, and that it can be acquired
solely by means of the light of reason before, as well as after,
revelation." <span id="fr_62"></span>[4](#fn_62)

The Karmates, whose existence dates from the year 264 of the Hegira,
embraced the system of allegorical interpretations and all the opinions
serving as bases for mysticism. If we are to believe the author already
quoted--who does nothing more than translate the words of an Arabian
historian--"they called their doctrine the science of the inner
faculties, and which consists in turning the precepts of Islamism into
allegories and in substituting things founded on imagination for
external observance, as well as allegorizing verses of the Koran and
giving them forced interpretations." There is more than one point of
resemblance between this doctrine and the doctrine which we aim to make
acquaintance with. <span id="fr_63"></span>[5](#fn_63)

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

Finally we come to Judaism, from whose breast, nourished by its spirit
and its essence, sprang the two rival creeds already cited. We have
intentionally reserved the last place for Judaism, because it leads us
naturally to our subject. Besides the Bible, orthodox Jews recognize
traditions which receive from them the same respect as the precepts of
the Pentateuch. At first transmitted from mouth to mouth and scattered
everywhere, then collected and edited by Judah the Holy <span
id="fr_64"></span>[6](#fn_64) under the name of Mishnah; and, finally,
prodigiously augmented and developed by the authors of the Talmud, they
now leave not the smallest part to reason and liberty. Not only do they
deny in principle the existence of these two moral forces, but they
strike them with paralysis by usurping their places everywhere.

They cover all actions from the expression of exalted moral and
religious feeling to the vilest functions of animal life. They have
counted, regulated and weighed everything in advance. It is despotism of
every day and of every instant against which one is inevitably compelled
to fight with trickery if he does not want to substitute a higher
authority in its place. The Karaites, who must not be confounded with
the Saducees whose existence does not reach beyond the destruction of
the second temple <span id="fr_65"></span>[7](#fn_65)--the Karaites are,
in a way, the Protestants of Judaism; they reject, apparently, the
tradition and pretend to recognize nothing but the Bible, I mean the Old
Testament, for the explanation of which reason seems to them to be
sufficient. But others, without ceasing to be believers and admitting
the principle of revelation, and who certainly form no religious sect,
have succeeded in giving Reason a much greater and a much finer place in
the domain

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

of Faith. These are they who would justify the chief articles of their
belief by the very principles of Reason; who would reconcile the
legislation of Moses with the philosophy of their times, that is that of
Aristotle, and who have founded a science entirely similar in its name
and in its objects to the Arabian and Christian scholastics.

The first, and beyond a question the boldest of them, is the celebrated
Rabbi Saadia, who at the beginning of the tenth century was at the head
of the academy of Sura in Persia; and whose name is cited with respect
by Mussulman authors, as well as by his coreligionists. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[8](#fn_66) After Saadia came Abraham Ibn-Ezra, Rabbi
Bachye, Arabic author of an excellent moral and theological
treatise; <span id="fr_67"></span>[9](#fn_68) and Moses Maimonides,
whose stupendous reputation was detrimental to the many, who, coming
after him, defended the same cause. Those among the Jews who saw in the
law only a gross exterior under which was hidden a mysterious meaning,
much higher than the historical, literal meaning, divided themselves

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

into two classes, the distinction of which is of great importance to the
aim we have set.

To one class, the inner, spiritual meaning of the Scriptures was a
philosophical system somewhat favorable, it is true, to mystic
exaltation, but drawn from a source entirely foreign; it was, in short,
Plato's doctrine a little exaggerated, as it was later on in the school
of Plotinus, and mingled with ideas of Oriental origin. This is the
character of Philo and all those who are customarily called "Hellenizing
Jews," because, mixed among the Greeks of Alexandria, they borrowed from
the latter their language, their civilization, and such of their
philosophic systems as could best reconcile with the monotheism and
religious legislation of Moses. <span id="fr_69"></span>[10](#fn_69)

The others obeyed the impulse of their intelligence only. The ideas they
introduced into the sacred books, in order to make it appear that they
had found them there, and then to pass them on in the shadow of mystery,
it is true, and under the protection of revelation, these ideas are
entirely their own, and constitute a system truly original and truly
grand which resembles any other system, whether philosophical or
religious only in that it comes from the same source, in that it was
called forth by the same causes, in that it responds to the same needs,
in short, in that it rests upon the general laws of the human mind.
These are the Kabbalists <span id="fr_70"></span>[11](#fn_70) whose
opinions must be drawn from original

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

sources to be known and justly appreciated; because, later, cultured
minds supposed that they honored them by mixing them with the ideas of
the Greeks and Arabians. Those, who through superstition remained
strangers to the civilization of their times, gradually abandoned the
deep speculations of which they were the result, and conserved only the
very gross means originally designed to disguise their boldness and
depth.

First of all we shall try to determine near what time we find the
Kabbalah fully formed, in what books it was preserved for us, how these
books were formed and transmitted to us, and, finally, what foundation
we can lay upon its authenticity.

We shall make an attempt to give of it a faithful and full account, to
which we shall, as much as possible, make the authors themselves of this
doctrine contribute; passing their language into ours with as much
exactitude as our feeble means may permit. At last, we shall occupy
ourselves with the origin and influence of the Kabbalah, and ask whether
it was born in Palestine, solely under the influence of Judaism, or,
whether the Jews borrowed it from a foreign religion or a foreign
philosophy. We shall compare it successively with all previous and
contemporaneous systems which will offer us any resemblance to it; and
we shall finally follow it to its most recent destinies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[liv:1](rph09.htm#fr_59) "Considerationes de
Theologia Mystica." From the very beginning this proposition confronts
us: Quod si dicatur omnis scientia procedens ex experientiis, mystica
theologia vere erit philosophia. <span id="page_lv">p. lv</span> Consid.
2d, He goes even so far as to define the nature of this experience.
Experientiis habitis ad intra, in cordibus animarum devotarum. (Gerson.)

<span id="fn_60"></span>[lvi:2](rph09.htm#fr_60) Maracci, Prodromus in
ref. Alcor., B, IV. De Sacy, Exposé de la religion des Druzes,
introduction.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[lvi:3](rph09.htm#fr_61) The rabbis converted
the name to ‏מדברים‎ which means speakers or dialecticians.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[lvi:4](rph09.htm#fr_62) De Sacy, Introduction à
l’exposé de la religion des Druzes, p. 37.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[lvi:5](rph09.htm#fr_63) I shall cite but one of
those points. The Karmathians hold that man's body, when standing,
represents an *Alef*; that when kneeling, it represents a *Lam*, and
that when prostrate, it represents a *He*. So the <span
id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span> body of man is like a book wherein one
reads the name of *Allah*. (See De Sacy's Introduction à l’exposé de la
religion des Druzes. p. 86, 87.) According to the Kabbalists, the head
of a man forms an *Yod* (‏י‎); his two arms hanging on either side of
his breast, form a *He* (‏ה‎); his bust forms a *Vav* (‏ו‎); and his two
legs, surmounted by a basin, form another *He* (‏ה‎). So that his entire
body represents the thrice-holy name, Jehovah. (Zohar, 2nd part, fol.
42, published in Mantua.)

<span id="fn_64"></span>[lvii:6](rph09.htm#fr_64) Better known as Judah
ha-Nassi (the Prince).--Transl.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[lvii:7](rph09.htm#fr_65) Peter Beer. History of
the religious sects of Judaism. 1st part. p. 149.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[lviii:8](rph09.htm#fr_66) The commentary which
he wrote in Arabic on the Sefer Yetzirah, one of the most ancient
monuments of the Kabbalah, is of wholly philosophical meaning, and it is
wrong that he is counted by Reuchlin and other historians of the
Kabbalah among the defenders of that system. His book, "Beliefs and
Opinions" (‏האמונות והדעות‎), translated from the Arabic into Hebrew by
Rabbi Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon, very probably served as model for the
famous book of Maimonides entitled "Guide for the Perplexed" (‏מורה
נבוכים‎--Moreh Nvuchim). From the first lines of the preface Saadia
frankly places himself between two opposing parties; "those," he said,
"who, because of incomplete researches and ill-directed meditations,
have fallen into an abyss of doubt; and those who regard the use of
reason as dangerous to Faith."

He admits four kinds of knowledge: 1st, that which comes through the
senses; 2nd, that which comes through the mind or through the
conscience--as when we say that falsehood is a vice and truth a virtue;
3rd, the knowledge which furnishes us intuition and reasoning--as when
we admit the existence of the soul because of its operations; 4th, the
authentic tradition (‏ההנדה הנאמנה‎) which should take the place of
science with people who are not in a condition to exercise their
intelligence. <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_67))

<span id="fn_67"></span>[lviii:\*](rph09.htm#fr_68)) The Hebrew
commentary attributed to Saadia is forged. Comp. Rapaport, Biography of
R. Saadia. Note 30, Munk, Notice sur Rabbi Saadiah Gaon. p.
14-15.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_68"></span>[lviii:9](rph09.htm#fr_67) This work is called
‏חובות הלבבות‎--"The Duties of the Heart." The author lived around 5921
(1161).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[lix:10](rph09.htm#fr_69) They are mentioned in
this passage of Eusebius:

Τὸ πᾶν Ἰουδαίων ἴθνος, εἰς δύο τμήματα διήσηται. Καὶ τήν μὲν πληθὺν ταῖς
τῶν νόμων κατὰ τήν σητήν διανοίαν παρηλλελμέναις ὑποθήκαις ὑπῆγε, τὸ
δἕτερον τῶν ἐν ἕξει τάγηα, ταὺτης μὲν ἠφίει, θειστέρᾳ δὲ τίνι καὶ τοῖς
πολλοῖς ἐπαναβεβηκείᾳ φιλοσοφίᾳ προσίχειν ἠξίον θεορίᾳ τε τῶν ἐν τοῖς
μότοις κατὰ διανοίαν σημαινομένον. (Euseb. 1.8.c. 10.)

The author puts these words in the mouth of Aristobulus, who could not
have known the Kabbalah.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[lix:11](rph09.htm#fr_70) Although we shall
later on find opportunity to speak at length of Philo, it is necessary
to point out here his distinction from the Kabbalists with whom several
historians confounded him. First, it is almost certain that Philo was
ignorant of Hebrew, a knowledge of which, as we shall soon see, is
indispensable to the Kabbalistic method. Then again, Philo and the
Kabbalists differ no less in depth of their ideas. The latter admit
<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span> but one principle, the immanent cause of
all that exists; the Alexandrian philosopher recognizes two, one active,
the other passive. The attributes of God, according to Philo, are
Plato's ideas which have no resemblance whatever to the Sefiroth of the
Kabbalah. "Ἔστιν ἐν τοῖς οὖσιν, τὸ μὲν εἷναι δραστήριον αἴτιον, τὸ δὲ
παθητὸν καὶ ὅτι τὸ μὲν δραστήριον ὁ τῶν ὅλων νοῦς ἐστιν εἰλικρινέστατος
κρείττωντε ἥ ἀρετή καὶ κρείττων ἤ ἐπιστήμη καὶ κρείττων ἤ αὐτὸ τὸ ἀγαθὸν
καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ καλὸν τὸ δὲ παθητὸν ἄψυχον καὶ ἀκίνητον ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ, κινηθὲν
δέ, σχηματισθὲν καὶ ψυχωθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ νοῦ'', etc. Philo, de Mund. opific.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Antiquity of the Kabbalah](rph10)
