[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph05)  [Next](rph07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

### PREFACE TO THE GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE FIRST FRENCH EDITION

*By*

ADOLPH JELLINEK

None of the gnostic systems has so often been compelled, under the hands
of the critics, to change its birthplace as the so-called Kabbalah; no
monument of Oriental Philosophy <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) has
called forth such conflicting hypotheses as to the time and place of its
composition, as the universal code of the Kabbalists, the Zohar;
finally, no writer of the history of philosophy has until now undertaken
to translate the picturesque, metaphorical language of Jewish gnosis
into the reasoning mode of expression of abstract thinking.

I shall leave out of consideration the great array of Jewish and
Christian disciples of the Kabbalistic system; it is too strongly
dominated by the essential mysticism that prevails in all parts of the
Kabbalistic system, to be able to reach the necessary sobermindedness.
The opinion of a Pico de la Mirandola, of a Reuchlin, has as much
critical value as that of an ordinary

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zoharist or of a
Hassid; the presumptive higher illumination does not permit the
intellect to come to its senses.

Those critics who stand outside the sanctum of the Kabbalah have,
indeed, brought to light wonderful conjectures bearing on the age and
the origin of the same. Some (Buddeus, Kleuker, Osiander) set the
Kabbalah in the age of the patriarchs, and let it march, side by side
with the Mosaic teachings, on the road of oral tradition as an esoteric
teaching, a Secret Doctrine. The Talmudic tradition (‏תורת שבעל פה‎)
claims no less, indeed, for itself; it is maintained that this, too, is
an oral part of the divine revelation descended from Moses (compare
Maimonides, Introduction into the Mishnah). Yet, *this* tradition which
bears only on the material, sensual side of the *Law*, could never have
paved its way to the people, were it not sanctioned by descent and
religious national custom.

Others, (Basnage, Brucker) believed they had found the cradle of the
Kabbalah in Egypt. This opinion is, as it were, a continuation of the
one which holds that the Mosaic Law and Mosaic Doctrine is a property
pilfered from the Egyptian priesthood. Richard Simon and Berger let the
founders of the Jewish gnosis, in company with the Greek creators of the
doctrine of Numbers and Ideas, be schooled by the Chaldeans; Wachter,
Joachim Lang and Wolf (author of Bibliotheca Hebraea) looked for the
source of the Kabbalah in Pagan philosophy. Yet, these opinions lack a
definite historic foundation, and have justly been rejected by the
author of this work. (Compare Tholuck, "de Ortu Cabbalae," p. 3-4.)

In company with another author of a French work (Matter, "Histoire
Critique du Gnosticisme") Franck defends the view that the Kabbalistic
science evolved from the theology of the Parsees. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Against this opinion Gieseler (in the review
of Matter's

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

work, theologic studies and criticisms, year 1830, I, 381-383) made some
objections referred to also by Baur (p. 70). "Although," says Gieseler,
"we fully recognize the proven influence of Parseeism upon Judaism, yet
we would not explain it by any syncretic inclination of the latter, in
so far as syncretism refers to an external union of materials innerly
strange to one another. Never, indeed, were the Israelite people further
away from mixing strange opinions with their religious belief, nor of
recognizing any relationship to any other religion, like the Persian for
instance, as just since the exile. The influence of the Persian system
upon the Jews consisted in that it induced them to a development of
analogous seeds resting in their doctrine by representing itself to them
as a complete system in some points; at which the Persian doctrine
development, unknown to them, surely helped to influence as a pattern.
It is always the more developed doctrinal system which acts upon the
less developed one, even when the latter places itself to the former in
the most decided contrast. . . . We first take side with Massuet against
Buddeus by denying the pre-Christian origin of the Kabbalistic
philosophy. The exegetic quibblings which developed later into the
so-called Kabbalah Symbolica are older, it is true; but we are obliged
to doubt that the philosophic system of the Kabbalists originated from
such early times, because neither Josephus nor Philo mention it, because
the system of Philo relates to the Kabbalistic system evidently as the
earlier to the later, and because the historical traces of the Kabbalah
are so very young. Accordingly, we can not consider the Kabbalah (which,
by the way, does not seem to us of such close relationship to the
Zoroastrian system) as a source of the Christian gnosis."

It is indisputable that the Jews resisted the invasion of strange
opinions into their religious belief, especially since the

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

exile; yet, it can be proven to the contrary, that they looked for and
found in the Bible every wisdom otherwise unknown to them or not
indicated therein by *clear words*. Philo endeavored to prove in the
Scriptures the wisdom of all peoples; the Talmudists (R. Gamaliel, R.
Joshua ben Hananiah, R. Johanan in the name of R. Simeon ben Yohai, R.
Meir, R. Joshua son of Levi, R. Chiya son of Aba in the name of R.
Johanan, Mar Sutra, Rabbina, R. Ashi.--See Babyl. Talmud, Tract.
Sanhedrin, last chap.) demonstrated the resurrection from the Bible; the
entire line of Jewish religious philosophers, from Saadia the Fayumite
to Dr. Hirsch of Luxembourg, have piled upon the Bible strange elements
in the endeavor to view it in the light of the prevailing philosophy of
the times.

The influence of the Persian system upon the Jews must appear further on
more powerful than any other. With the first cessation of political
independence of the Jewish state, with the first exile, the Jewish
spirit awakened; doubts arose, problems were created, the solution was
attempted. The most important questions of the "when" and "how" of the
genesis of beings, of the destiny of the universe were not
satisfactorily answered by the simplicity of the Mosaic records; on the
other hand, though, they clung still closer to the old belief. A new
change of ideas took place in Babylon; every conflict with previous
conceptions could be avoided by the use of the Kabbalah Symbolica. And
what doctrine could better be brought in accord with the Mosaic
tradition than the Persian? Johannsen (the Cosmogenic Views of the
Hindoos and Hebrews, Altona, 1833) was really in earnest when he
represented the Mosaic cosmogony as a system of emanation! The Hindoo
designation of God before the creation of the world by *svajambhu* and
*tad*, as given by Johannsen, p. 10, is, in fact, found with the
Kabbalists in the explanation of the ‏אהיה אשר אהיה‎--I Am that I Am.

The Kabbalist--to retain this term--had to shrink from the new and
dangerous ideas easily exposed to misinterpretation, and

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

which underwent considerable modifications at his hands and under the
influence of Judaism; and it is only natural that the Kabbalistic
doctrine, just because it is so similar to the Persian, should have
become a *secret* instruction, did not press itself forward, and was
known to only a few during its first stage. It originated gradually,
however, and stayed free of the Greek elements that influenced Philo.
With reference to the not very clear relationship of the Kabbalah to
Parseeism, this counts as a merit of the Kabbalistic system; the
Kabbalah is not a copy of Zoroastrism--as Mr. Matter maintains--but
rather an evolution of the latter connected with various modifications.

The question of the origin and age of the Kabbalah is most closely
connected with the inquiry as to the time and place of the composition
of the Zohar. This question does not seem to us to have been
sufficiently answered. The Zohar, in its entire range, contains no less
than an uniform system; <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) repetitions
are often found there; passages are met with which have been borrowed
from the Talmud and Midrash; the language is of various coloring; <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) and because the system developed gradually,
there must of necessity be found therein graduations. From the Zohar,
then, we are to be shown what doctrines formed its original elements;
how it developed under the hands of various teachers; what elements of
other writings are found therein; in short, a criticism of the entire
Zohar according to its individual passages would have to be given. This
we shall attempt in a future work: "The Composition of the Zohar."
(Unpublished--Transl.)

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

I have now to say something about this work, my translation, correction
and addition.

The source from which the historical writers of philosophy have until
now drawn their knowledge of the Kabbalistic system, is Knorr v.
Rosenroth's "Kabbala Denudata;" "from this rich and voluminous work,
though"--as Molitor (The Philosophy of History, II, 9) judges--"the
reader will get only a hazy inkling but not a clear and distinct
conception of the Kabbalah." The real philosophic value of the Kabbalah
is, on the whole, neglected in Rosenroth's work. Moliter's erudite work,
"Philosophy of History or on the Tradition," does not contain, as yet,
in the three volumes which have appeared at this writing, an objective
representation of the Kabbalistic system. The author himself says (II,
12) that "for the present the whole *should be considered merely as a
free philosophic attempt*," and promises to develop the Kabbalah with
the Kabbalists' own words in the fifth volume.

Besides, an impartial representation is hardly to be expected from
Moliter, who "studio disciplinae Judaeorum arcanae ipse prorsus factus
est Judaeus Cabbalisticus--himself became a Jewish Kabbalist through the
study of the ancient doctrine of the Jews" (Tholuck, p. 4), and who had
great faith in the younger Kabbalistic works and commentaries. The work
of Mr. Franck, where the Kabbalah is developed impartially and
commensurate with our times, from the oldest fragments of the Zohar,
must be welcome to the writer of the history of philosophy and to all
those who want to know the *philosophy* of the Kabbalah. The
investigation on the age of the Kabbalah, the authenticity of the
Kabbalistic main works, as well as the investigation on the relationship
of the Kabbalistic system to other systems of philosophy and religion,
is also given here for the first time in detail and complete.

In the translation of the French original I have endeavored to render
its contents faithfully. The translated passages from the Sefer
Yetzirah, the Zohar and the Talmud and the new-hebraic

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

works I have always compared with the originals. The Spanish quotations
from Jacob Abendana's translation of the Cuzari by Judah-ha-Levi, as
well as the appendix, have been omitted; the first ones are of no use to
the German reader, the latter contains only a translation of Solomon
Maimon's report on the sect of the Hassidim (see Maimon's biography,
part I, ch. 19) and Peter Baer's representation of the Zoharites (Peter
Baer, History, Doctrines and Opinions of all past and present religious
sects of the Jews and of the Secret Doctrine or Kabbalah II, 309 ff.).

The correction referred to, I would rather call an outward one. The
quotations from the Kabbalistic works were so corrupt, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) the reference to page numbers full of
mistakes (at times absent altogether), the annotations were so often
misplaced, <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) that I was compelled to
spend much time upon correction. Believe me, it is only necessary to
look at the folio volume of the Zohar, edition Sulzbach, to see that it
is no small trouble and loss of time to look there for a given passage.

Yet, in carefully comparing the translation with the original, other
corrections will be found which I have not expressly indicated by a
footnote. Thus, for example, there is nothing more contrary to the
spirit of Kabbalism than to translate ‏אוריתא‎ with "Law" (loi). To the
allegoric method of the Kabbalah even the Law is so familiar as to lose
its inherent rigidity.

The annotations and the appendix make up the addition. For the
completion of the "Biographic Notes on the Zohar" I have made use,
besides the Kabbalah Denudata, also of "Die Gottesdienstliche Vorträge
der Juden" (Devotional Sermons of the Jews) by Zunz, the book ‏ראביה‎ by
Milsahagi, and the seventh volume of the new-Hebrew annual ‏כרם חמד‎.
The representation of the so-called Kabbalistic tree was also added
first to the translation.

AD. JELLINEK.

May 20th, 1844.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xv:1](rph06.htm#fr_0) This term introduced by
Mosheim is still to be put forward in the investigations of gnosticism,
"for"--as Baur (the Christian Gnosis, p. 4) justly remarks--"the very
name is to express at once the demand to place oneself in an entirely
new and peculiar atmosphere, and to make use of an entirely different
gauge than the usual one of our critical reason and phantasy for the
speculations that present themselves here." This viewpoint of
orientalism should generally be adhered to in religious philosophy.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvi:2](rph06.htm#fr_1) Though Mr. Franck agrees
with Matter in the turning point of the investigation--in the
pre-Christian, Zoroastrian origin of the Kabbalistic philosophy--yet
there prevails the great difference between them in that, while the
latter considers the relation of the Kabbalah <span id="page_xvii">p.
xvii</span> to the Zoroastrian system as that of a copy to the original
(la Kabballe se montre auprès du Zoroastrisme comme la copie auprès de
l’original), the first one proves the great advance of the Kabbalah on
Zoroastrism. Besides, the mode of investigation of our author is quite a
different one.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xix:3](rph06.htm#fr_2) Thus we find on the very
first page of the Zohar--according to the Sulzbach edition and generally
all those bearing the name of ‏זהר גדול‎--traces of the Hindoo cosmogony
which, though, have been modified by the author through the influence of
Judaism. In explaining the creation, it speaks there of the "seed"
(‏אפיק אינון תולרין מההוא זרעא ראזדרע ביה‎) which is immediately
modified by transmutation in the "letters." .(‏מאן ההוא זרעז אינון אתוון
וכו׳‎)

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xix:4](rph06.htm#fr_3) It is noteworthy that in
the old passages the Jerusalemean ‏שרנא‎ appears for the Babylonian
Kane,. Comp. Nedarim, 66b; Fuerst, "Lehrgebaeude der aramaeischen
Idiome," p. 17.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxi:5](rph06.htm#fr_4) Compare only for example
p. 155, note 1, of the French original.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxi:6](rph06.htm#fr_5) P. 142, note \*\* is to
be struck and part of note 3 must refer to p. 143.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Foreword to the Second French Edition](rph07)
