[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph15)  [Next](rph17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### CONTINUATION OF THE ANALYSIS OF THE ZOHAR

#### THE KABBALISTS' VIEW OF THE WORLD

What we know of the opinion of the Kabbalists concerning the divine
nature, exempts us from dwelling upon their method of conception
concerning the creation and the origin of the world; for, at bottom,
these two things are huddled in their minds. If God unites in Him in
their infinite totality, thought as well as existence, it is quite
certain that nothing can exist and nothing can be conceived outside
(extra) of Him. All, then, that we know, whether through reason or
through experience, is a development or a particular aspect of the
Absolute; a substance, eternal, inert and distinct from God is a
chimera, and the creation, as ordinarily conceived, is an impossibility.

The last deduction is clearly admitted in the following words: "The
indivisible point (the absolute) that had no limits and that could not
be conceived because of its intensity and purity, spread outward and
formed a tent which served as a cover to this indivisible point. This
tent, although of a light less pure than the indivisible point, was
still too brilliant to be looked at; it spread, in its turn, outward,
and this expansion was its garment. Thus, everything comes into
existence by an ever-descending motion; thus, finally, it was that the
universe took shape ‏וכלא איהו תקונא דעלמא.‎." <span
id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_342) We remember also that the Absolute

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Being and the
visible nature have but one name, the meaning of which is "God." Another
passage teaches us that the voice which departs from the spirit, and
which is identical with it in the supreme thought, is really water, air
and fire; the north, the south, the east, the west and all the forces of
nature. <span id="fr_343"></span>[2](#fn_343) But all these elements and
all these forces are united into one single thing--the voice which comes
from the spirit. Matter, finally, considered from the most general point
of view, is the lowest part of the mysterious lamp just described.

With such a viewpoint, the Kabbalists claim to remain true to the
popular belief that by the power of the divine word alone the world came
forth from nothing. But we know already that the last word "nothing" had
quite another meaning for them. This point in their doctrine is very
clearly shown by one of the commentators of the Sefer Yetzirah. "When it
is [maintained](errata.htm#17) that all things were called forth from
nothingness, it is not meant nothingness in its proper sense, for
something can never come from nothing. But what is meant here is the
no-thing that can not be conceived either through its cause or through
its essence; in short, it is the Cause of Causes. It is what we call the
primitive no-thing, ‏אין קדמון‎--Ayn Kadmon, because it antecedes the
universe; and by this we mean not alone material objects, but also the
wisdom on which the world was founded. If we now inquire for the essence
of wisdom and how it stays in the no-thing or in the Supreme Crown, no
one will be able to answer this question, for in the no-thing there is
no distinction and no manner of existence. Nor do we understand any
better how wisdom is united with life." <span
id="fr_344"></span>[3](#fn_344) All Kabbalists, ancient and modern, thus
explain the dogma of the creation. But, consistent with themselves,

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

they also admit the second part of the adage: ex nihilo nihil. <span
id="fr_345"></span>[4](#fn_345) They believe just as little in absolute
annihilation, as in a creation commonly understood. "Nothing," says the
Zohar, "is lost in the world, not even the vapor that comes from our
mouths; like everything else it has its place and its destination, and
the Holy One, blessed be He, makes it co-operative with His. works,
Nothing falls into a void, not even the words and voice of man, for all
things have their place and their destination." <span
id="fr_346"></span>[5](#fn_346)

These words were spoken by an unknown old man, in the presence of
several disciples of Yohai, and the latter must have recognized in them
one of the most important articles of their faith, for they hastened to
interrupt by the following words: "Oh, what have you done, old man?
Would it not have been better to keep silent? For now, there you are,
carried away on an immense sea without sail or mast! Do you want to
rise? You can not do it. And if you would descend, there is a bottomless
abyss to meet you." <span id="fr_347"></span>[6](#fn_347) They cited to
him the example of their master who, being at all times reserved in his
expressions, never ventured upon the sea without providing for a safe
return; in other words, he hid his thoughts under the veil of allegory.

However, later on the same principle is stated quite frankly: "All
things of which this world consists, the spirit as well as the body,
will return to the principle and to the root from which they came. <span
id="fr_348"></span>[7](#fn_348) He is the beginning and the end of all
the degrees of the creation; all these degrees are marked with His seal,
and He can be designated by unity only. He is one despite the
innumerable forms that clothe Him." <span
id="fr_349"></span>[8](#fn_349)

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

If God is at once the cause and the substance, or, as Spinoza would
express himself, the "immanent cause of the universe," it necessarily
follows that the latter is the masterpiece of supreme perfection, wisdom
and goodness. To convey this idea the Kabbalists made use of a very
original expression which several of the modern mystics, Boehm and Saint
Martin among them, frequently used in their works. They called Nature a
"blessing," and they considered as a very significant fact that the
letter by which Moses began the story of the creation ‏בראשית‎
(Breshith), <span id="fr_350"></span>[9](#fn_350) is also the first
letter in the word blessing, ‏ברכה‎ (Brakah). <span
id="fr_351"></span>[10](#fn_351) Nothing is absolutely bad, nothing is
accursed forever, not even the archangel of evil or the "venomous beast"
‏הוייא בישא‎ (Havya Besha), as he is sometimes called, is accursed
definitely. There will come a time when he will recover his name and his
angelic nature. <span id="fr_352"></span>[11](#fn_353)

Besides, here on earth, wisdom is no less visible than goodness, since
the universe was created by the divine word, and because the universe in
itself is nothing else but this word. Now, in the mystical language of
the Zohar it means, as we have already been taught, that the articular
expression of the divine thought is the

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

ensemble of all the individual beings that exist in the bud in the
eternal forms of supreme wisdom.

But none of the passages already cited, or those we may cite in support
of the principle in question, is of greater interest than the following:
"The Holy One, blessed be He, had already created and destroyed several
worlds before He decided upon the creation of the world we live in; and
when that last work was about to be accomplished, all the creatures of
the universe and everything that was to be in the world--in whatever
period they were to exist--were present before God in their real form
before they became a part of the universe. In this sense the following
words of Ecclesiastes are to be taken: 'Whatever was in times past shall
be in the future also, and all that is to be has been already.' <span
id="fr_354"></span>[12](#fn_354),  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[13](#fn_355) The entire lower world was made in the
likeness of the higher world. All that exists in the higher world
appears like an image in this lower world; yet all this is but
One." <span id="fr_356"></span>[14](#fn_356)

From this exalted and grand belief which we meet more or less diffused
through all the great systems of metaphysics, the Kabbalists have drawn
an inference which brings them over entirely to mysticism. They imagined
that everything which strikes our senses has a symbolic meaning; that
the phenomena and the most material form can teach us what passes either
in the divine thought or in the human intelligence. According to

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

them all that emanates from the mind must manifest itself and become
visible outside of it. <span id="fr_357"></span>[15](#fn_357) From this
conception comes also the belief in a celestial alphabet and in
physiognomics. They speak of the celestial alphabet in the following
manner: "Throughout the entire extent of the heavens whose circumference
surrounds the world, there are figures and signs by means of which we
may discover the most profound secrets and mysteries. These figures are
formed by the constellations and the stars which are observed and
investigated by the wise. <span id="fr_358"></span>[16](#fn_358) He who
is obliged to travel in the morning shall rise at daybreak and look
attentively toward the East. He will see something like letters graven
on the heavens, and placed one above the other. Those brilliant forms
are the letters with which God created the heaven and the earth; they
form His mysterious and holy name." <span
id="fr_359"></span>[17](#fn_359)

Such ideas, if not taken in a very lofty sense, may seem unworthy of a
place in a serious work, but we would miss the only aim we have placed
before us, and we would be false to historic truth, were we to show the
most brilliant and best-founded thoughts of the system contained in the
Zohar, and were we to eliminate carefully all that may offend our
intellectual habits. We have seen more than once that similar reveries
were caused by the same principle and that such reveries were not always
the work of the weakest minds. Plato and Pythagoras came close to them;
and on the other hand, all the great representatives of mysticism, all
those who saw in external nature a living allegory only, adopted the
theory of numbers and ideas, each one according to his intellectual
capacity.

That the Kabbalists admitted also physiognomy, the name of which was
already known in the time of Socrates, is also a consequence of their
general system of metaphysics, or, if we may

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

make use of modern philosophical language, it was by virtue of an a
priori judgment. "According to the teachings of the Masters of esoteric
science, ‏מארי דהכמתא פנימאה‎, physiognomy does not consist in outwardly
manifested features, but in features mysteriously traced in the depth of
our inner self. The external features vary according to the form
imprinted on the inner face of the spirit. The spirit alone produces all
the physiognomies known to the sages, and it is through the spirit that
the physiognomies have a meaning. When souls and spirits come out of
Eden (as Supreme Wisdom is often called) they all have definite forms
which are later on reflected in the face." (Zohar, part II, fol. 73b.)

A large number of detailed observations, some of which are still
credited generally at the present time, follow these general
considerations. For instance: a broad, convex forehead is the sign of a
profound and active mind and of a choice intelligence; a broad but flat
forehead denotes insanity and stupidity; a flat forehead terminating in
a point and compressed at the sides, is an unfailing indication of a
very limited mind, often combined with unbounded vanity. (Ib. supr.,
fol. 73-75a.) <span id="fr_360"></span>[18](#fn_360) All human faces may
be traced, finally, to four primary types, to which they either draw
near or from which they recede according to the rank held by the souls
in their intellectual and moral order. Those types are the four figures
which occupy the mysterious chariot of Ezekiel, that is to say the
figures of man, of the lion, of the ox and of the eagle. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[19](#fn_361)

It seems to us that the demonology adopted by the Kabbalists is but a
reflected personification of the different degrees of life and
intelligence which they perceived throughout nature. <span
id="fr_362"></span>[20](#fn_362) The belief in demons and in angels had
long since taken root in the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

mind of the people, like a jesting mythology, as it were, alongside the
severe dogma of the divine unity. Why then should they not just as well
have made use of it to veil their ideas on the relations of God to the
world, as they made use of the dogma of the creation to teach the
contrary, or as they made use of the words of the text of the Scriptures
to place themselves above the divine word and religious authority?

We have not found any text entirely free from doubt in support of this
opinion, but here are some reasons which make this opinion very
probable, at least. First of all in the three principal fragments of the
Zohar, in the two Idras and in the Book of Mystery, there is never any
mention made, in any form, of this celestial or infernal hierarchy which
seems to have been only a memento of the Babylonian captivity. Then,
when angels are spoken of in the other parts of the Zohar, they are
represented as much inferior beings than man, as forces of unchanging
blind impulses. We shall offer an example of it in the following words:
"God vivified every part of the firmament with a particular spirit;
immediately all the celestial hosts were formed and found themselves
before Him. This is the meaning of what is said (Psalms, XXXIII, 6):
'With the breath of His mouth He created all their hosts . . .' The holy
spirits who are the messengers of the Lord, descend from one degree
only; but in the souls of the just there are two degrees united in one.
For that reason the souls of the just rise higher, and for that same
reason their rank is higher." <span id="fr_363"></span>[21](#fn_363)

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Even the talmudists, despite their adherence to the letter, subscribe to
the same principle: <span id="fr_365"></span>[22](#fn_365) "The just,"
they say, "are greater than the angels." <span
id="fr_366"></span>[23](#fn_366) We shall understand even better what
was meant by the spirits which animate all the celestial bodies and all
the elements of the earth, if we pay attention to the names and the
functions attributed to them. First of all we must remove the purely
poetical personifications, the character of which is closely set forth;
and of such are all the angels that bear the name representing a moral
quality or a metaphysical abstraction; as, for instance, the good and
the bad desire (‏וצר טוב‎--Yotzar Tov, ‏יצר הרע‎--Yotzar ha-Rah) which
are always represented to us as real personages, the angel of purity
(Tahariel), the angel of mercy (Rahmiel), the angel of justice
(Tzadkiel), the angel of deliverance (Pada-el) and the famous Raziel,
the angel of secrets who watches with a jealous eye over the mysteries
of the Kabbalistic wisdom. <span id="fr_367"></span>[24](#fn_367)
Moreover, it is a principle recognized by all the Kabbalists, and
connected with the general system of beings, that the angelic hierarchy
begins only in the third world, the World of Formation, ‏עולם יצירה‎
(Olam Yetzirah), the place occupied by the planets and celestial bodies.

Now, as previously said, the chief of the invisible militia is the angel
Metatron, so called because his place is immediately below the throne of
God (‏כורסייא‎--Kursa-yah), and who alone constitutes the World of
Creation, or the world of pure spirits, ‏עולם בריאה‎ (Olam B’ree-oh).
His task is to maintain unity, harmony, and the movement of the spheres;
this is exactly the task of that blind and infinite force which, at
times, has been

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

substituted for God under the name of "Nature." The myriads of
subordinates under Metatron's command have been divided into ten
categories, undoubtedly in honor of the ten Sefiroth. These subaltern
angels are to the different divisions of nature, to every sphere and to
every element in particular, what their chief is to the entire universe.
Thus, one presides over the movements of the earth, another over the
movements of the moon, and so on over all other celestial bodies. <span
id="fr_368"></span>[25](#fn_368) One is called the angel of fire
(Nuriel), another is called the angel of light (Uriel), a third presides
over the distribution of the seasons, a fourth over vegetation. In
short, all the productions, all the forces and all the phenomena of
nature are represented in the same manner.

The purpose of this allegory becomes quite evident when the infernal
spirits are under consideration. We have already called attention to the
general name given to all the forces of this order. The demons,
according to the Kabbalists, are the grossest and most imperfect forms,
the "shells" of existence; in short, everything that denotes absence of
life, of intelligence and of order. Like the angels, they form ten
Sefiroth, ten degrees where darkness and impurity thicken more and more,
as in the circles of the Florentine poet.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[26](#fn_369),  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[27](#fn_370)

The first, or rather the first two degrees, are nothing else but the
state in which Genesis represents to us the earth before the work of the
six days; that is to say, absence of all visible form and of all
organization. <span id="fr_371"></span>[28](#fn_371) The third is the
seat of darkness, the same darkness which in the beginning covered the
face

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

of the abyss. <span id="fr_372"></span>[29](#fn_372) Then follow what
are called the seven tabernacles, (‏שבע היכלות‎--Shebah Hekoles), or
so-called hell, which shows us in a systematic outline all the disorders
of the moral world and all the torments consequent to them. There we see
every passion of the human heart, every vice and every weakness
personified in a demon who becomes the tormentor of those who have been
led astray by these faults. Here--lust and seduction (‏פתות‎)
there--anger and violence (‏אף וחמה‎), further on gross impurity, the
demon of solitary debauches, elsewhere--crime (‏חיבה‎), envy (‏איבה‎)
idolatry and pride.

The seven infernal tabernacles are divided and subdivided ad infinitum;
for every kind of perversity there is something like a special kingdom
and thus the abyss unfolds itself gradually in all its depth and
immensity. <span id="fr_373"></span>[30](#fn_373) The supreme chief of
that world of darkness who bears the Scriptural name of "Satan," is
called in the Kabbalah "Samael" (‏סמאל‎), that is to say the angel of
poison or of death; and the Zohar states positively that the angel of
death, evil desire, satan and the serpent which seduced our first
mother, are one and the same thing. <span
id="fr_374"></span>[31](#fn_374) Samael is also given a wife who is the
personification of vice and sensuality, for she calls herself the chief
prostitute or the mistress of debauches ‏אשת זנונים‎. <span
id="fr_375"></span>[32](#fn_375) But ordinarily they are united into one
single symbol called simply the beast (‏חיוא‎).

If we wish to reduce this demonology and angelology to the simplest and
most general form, we find that the Kabbalists recognized in each object
of nature, and consequently in all nature, two very distinct elements;
one, an inner incorruptible which reveals itself to the intelligence
exclusively, and which is the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

spirit, the life or the form. The other, a purely external and material
element that has been made the symbol of forfeiture, of curse and of
death. They may have said, as a modern philosopher, and a descendant of
their race said: Omnia, quamvis diversis gradibus, animata tamen sunt.
(All, no matter how different a grade, is still animated.--Spinoza,
Ethics.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_342"></span>[177:1](rph16.htm#fr_342) ‏מנקותה קדמאה ולהלאה
אתפשט דא ברא ואתלבש דא ברא עד דאשתכח דא לבושא לדא . . . דא לתקונא
רעלמא.‎--Zohar, part I, fol. 20a. 177

<span id="fn_343"></span>[178:2](rph16.htm#fr_343) ‏האי רוחא אתפשט ואפיק
קלא כליל מאשא ומיא ורוחא דאינון צפון וררום ומזרח והאי קלא כללא דכל שאר
הילין.‎--Zohar, part I, fol. 2466, sect. ‏ויחי‎ (Va-Y’chi).

<span id="fn_344"></span>[178:3](rph16.htm#fr_344) Commentary of Abraham
Dior, ‏ראב״ד‎, on the Sefer Yetzirah. Rittangel ed., p. 65.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[179:4](rph16.htm#fr_345) Ex nihilo nihil
fit--from nothing nothing is made.--Transl.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[179:5](rph16.htm#fr_346) Zohar, part II, fol.
100b, sect. ‏משפטים‎ (Mishpatim).

<span id="fn_347"></span>[179:6](rph16.htm#fr_347) Zohar, ibid.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[179:7](rph16.htm#fr_348) ‏כל מלין דעלמא אהדרו
כלהו לעקרא ויסודא ושרשא דנפקו מנית נופא לסמריה ונפשא לסמרא.‎--Part II,
fol. 218b.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[179:8](rph16.htm#fr_349) ‏רישא וסופא לכל דרנין
רשימו דאתרשים ביה דרגין כלהו ולא אקרי אלא אחד לאחואה דאע״ג דאית ביה
דיוקנין סניאין לאו איהו אלא אחד.‎--Part I, fol. 21a.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[180:9](rph16.htm#fr_350) The letter ‏ב‎ (Beth)
of the Hebrew alphabet.--Transl.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[180:10](rph16.htm#fr_351) ‏בנין דבית איהו סימן
ברסה אשתכלל בבית עלמא וביה אתבדי.‎ Part I, fol. 205b, sect. ‏ויגש‎
(Va-yigash). See also Otiot de-Rabbi Akiba. <span
id="fr_353"></span>[a](#fn_352)

<span id="fn_352"></span>[180:a](rph16.htm#fr_353) Otiot de Rabbi Akiba,
also called Midrash Otiot de Rabbi Akiba, or Haggadah de Rabbi Akiba, is
the title of a Midrash on the names of the letters of the Hebrew
alphabet, claimed to have come down from the great master (Tanna) Akiba
ben Joseph, of the second century.--Transl.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[180:11](rph16.htm#fr_352) The mystic name is
‏סמאל‎ (Sama-ayl). In the days to come the first half ‏סם‎ (Sam), which
signifies poison, will be omitted; the second portion ‏איל‎ (Ayl) is the
name common to all the angels. The same idea is expressed also in
another form. Having demonstrated by a Kabbalistic process
(‏גימטריא‎--Gematreeya) that the name of God comprises all the sides of
the universe, with the exception of the North which is reserved as a
place of expiation for the wicked, they add that at the end of the days,
the north will, like all the other sides, enter the ineffable name. Hell
will disappear; there will be neither chastisement nor trials, nor
culprits. Life will be an eternal feast, a Sabbath without end.
Cordovero, Pardes Ribonim, fol. 10b, and in Targum Jonathan ben Uziel to
Genesis III, 15, it is said to the contrary that the serpent alone will
remain unrecovered.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[181:12](rph16.htm#fr_354) ‏עד לא ברא הקב׳ה האי
עלמא הוי בארי עלמין וחריב לון . . . . וכל מה דאשתכח בהאי עלמא הא הוי
קמיה ואתתקן קמיה כל אינון דאי עלמא דאשתכחו בכל דרא ודרא עד לא ייתון
לעלמא הא הון קיימי קמיה בריוקניהון.‎ part III, fol. 61, a, b.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[181:13](rph16.htm#fr_355) Incorrectly quoted
and passed unnoticed by Dr. Jellinek. The Hebrew text (Eccl. III, 15)
reads: ‏מה שהיה כבר הוא, ואשר להיות ברד היה. . . .‎

Leeser's translation according to Rashi's and Ramban's interpretation is
as follows: "That which hath been hath long since appeared, and what is
to be has already been. . ." The Zohar also interprets in this sense;
for after quoting this passage it continues: ‏מה שהיה כבר היינו‎--What
was already has already been. Of interest is the free translation of
Moses Mendelson; it reads: "As destined as the past has been, so
destined is the future, as though it had already been." A clear
statement of the theory of pre-destination.--Transl.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[181:14](rph16.htm#fr_356) ‏ועשה העולם הזה בננד
העולם של מעלה ובל מה שיש למעלה בדונמתו למטה והכל אהד.‎--Zohar, part II,
fol. 20a.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[182:15](rph16.htm#fr_357) ‏סל מה דאיהו מסטרא
דרוחא בלט בלר ואתחוי‎--Zohar, part II, fol. 74a; part II, fol. 20a.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[182:16](rph16.htm#fr_358) Part II, 74a, sect.
‏ויתרו‎--Vayithro.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[182:17](rph16.htm#fr_359) ‏מהאי רקיע דלעילא
דמסכךּ על כלא אתרשימו ביה דשימין דאקכיען ביה סלין ורזין סתימין דככביא
נמזלי. . . . לעיינא בהו הבימי לבא ולאמתכלא בהו.‎--Part II, fol. 76a.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[183:18](rph16.htm#fr_360) The interpretation
of the forehead is found really before the general considerations, on
page 71b.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_361"></span>[183:19](rph16.htm#fr_361) ‏עיורא דאימא פני אדש
פני אריה פני שוד פני נשר‎--Part II, fol. 73b, ff.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[183:20](rph16.htm#fr_362) Compare L. Dukes.
History of the Neo-Hebrew religious poetry, pgs. 107-110.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_363"></span>[184:21](rph16.htm#fr_363) ‏כל רוהין קדישין
דעבדין שלהיתא כלהו אתיין מאתר הד נשמתהון דעדקייא מתרי כלולין בחד ובנין
כך סלקין יתיד ודרגיהון יתיר‎--Zohar, part III, fol. 68a, b. <span
id="fr_364"></span>[a](#fn_364)

<span id="fn_364"></span>[184:a](rph16.htm#fr_364) As the author quotes
only the last part of the original text, I shall give the first part,
and also venture some correction in the translation which may give a
better understanding of the text. The first part reads: ‏בשעתא דנשב
קורשא בריך היא היילין תעבידו וקיימי חדא היא דכתיב (תהלים ל״ג) ובריח פין
כל עבאם . . . . ‎

My correction refers to the last half of the quotation. The author omits
the word ‏דלעילא‎ after‏כל דיחין קרישין‎, and the word ‏דרנין‎ after
‏מתרי‎, also the letter ‏ד‎ in the word ‏דנשמתהון‎. He translates the
word <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> ‏מאתר‎ wrongly with "degree,"
while the meaning of ‏אתר‎ is "place." So corrected, the translation of
this part would read: "All the higher, holy spirits, who perform the
errands, issue from one place, the souls of the just (issue) from two
degrees which unite into one, and therefore rise higher and their
degrees are higher."--Transl.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[185:22](rph16.htm#fr_365) Compare Ibn Ezra to
Genesis I, 1. Yalkut to Joel, par. 524.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_366"></span>[185:23](rph16.htm#fr_366) ‏גדולים צדיקים יותר
ממלאכי השרות‎--Babyl. Talmud, Sanhedrin, ch. XI, and Hulin, ch. VI.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[185:24](rph16.htm#fr_367) Zohar, part I, fol.
40, 41. Ib., fol. 55a. Ib., fol. 146a.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[186:25](rph16.htm#fr_368) They even go so far
as to give them the names of the heavenly bodies themselves. One is
called Venus (‏נגה‎--Nogah), another, Mars (‏מאדים‎--Mo-ahdim), another
is called the substance of the heavens (‏עצם השמים‎--Etzem ha-shomayim).
Zohar, part I, fol. 42 ff.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[186:26](rph16.htm#fr_369) Tikunim, Tikun 15,
fol. 36.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[186:27](rph16.htm#fr_370) Referring to the
great Italian poet Dante and his immortal "Inferno."--Transl.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[186:28](rph16.htm#fr_371) ‏תהו ובהו‎ (Tohu
Ubohu) which the Septuagint translates by the two words ἀόρατος καὶ
ἀκατασκεύαστος.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[187:29](rph16.htm#fr_372) ‏תלת קליפין כנדלי
בצלים דא על דא. והארץ היתה תהו--דא קליפא קדמאה. ובהו דא קליפא תנינא.
וחושד קליפה תליתאה.‎--Ib. supr.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[187:30](rph16.htm#fr_373) For all the details
see Zohar, part II, fol. 255-259, sect. ‏פקודי‎ and the commentary or
rather the Hebrew translation of that passage in Pardes Rimonim. ‏שער
ההיכלות‎

<span id="fn_374"></span>[187:31](rph16.htm#fr_374) ‏והנחש דא יצר הרע דא
מלאך המית דא שמן וכלא חד.‎--Part I, fol. 35 b.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[187:32](rph16.htm#fr_375) It is supposed that
the wife of Samael is Lilith (a power of the night), which is often
spoken of in the Talmud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Analysis of the Zohar. View of the Kabbalists on the
Human Soul](rph17)
