[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph20)  [Next](rph22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### RELATION OF THE KABBALAH TO CHRISTIANITY

Since the Kabbalah is indebted neither to philosophy nor to Greece, nor
to the capital of the Ptolomeans, it necessarily must have its cradle in
Asia. Judaism must have brought it forth through its own efforts; or it
must have sprung from some other religion born in the Orient, and so
near to Judaism as to exert an unquestionable influence upon it. Is it
possible that Christianity is that religion?

Notwithstanding the extreme interest aroused at first by this question,
the solution of which is to be found in what has been previously said,
we can not pause to consider it for any length of time. It is evident to
us that all the great metaphysical and religious principles underlying
the Kabbalah antedate the Christian dogmas. It is not, however, within
the scope of our work to. compare these.

But no matter what meaning we may ascribe to these principles, their
form alone explains to us a fact which, we believe, is of very great
social and religious interest. A great many Kabbalists converted
themselves to Christianity; we mention among others, Paul Ricci, Conrad
Otton, <span id="fr_620"></span>[1](#fn_620) Rittangel, editor of the
Sefer Yetzirah. In more recent times, towards the end of the eighteenth
century, we see another Kabbalist, the Polish Jew Jacob Frank, pass into
the bosom of Catholicism with several

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

thousand of his adherents, after founding the sect of the
Zoharites. <span id="fr_621"></span>[2](#fn_621) The rabbis have long
since noticed this danger, and many among them have openly shown their
hostility to the study of the Kabbalah; <span
id="fr_622"></span>[3](#fn_622) while others protect it even today as
the holy ark, as the entrance to the Holy of Holies, to keep the profane
from it. Leon de Modena, who wrote a book against the authenticity of
the Zohar, <span id="fr_623"></span>[4](#fn_623) doubts very much the
salvation of those who gave to the press the principal Kabbalistic
works. <span id="fr_624"></span>[5](#fn_624) Christians, like Knorr of
Rosenroth, Reuchlin and Rittangel after his conversion, on the other
hand, saw therein the most potent means of lowering the barrier that
separates synagogue and church. In the hope of bringing about some day
this fervently desired result, they collected in their works all the
passages of the Zohar and of the New Testament which present some
similarity to one another.

We are far from any religious polemics, and instead of following these
footsteps and thus becoming their echo, we shall rather investigate
whether there is anything in common between the Kabbalah and the most
ancient organs of gnosticism. We shall thus be able to ascertain whether
the principles, whose influence and origin we endeavor to know, were not
spread outside of Judea; whether they did not exert their influence also
upon other people who were entire strangers to the Greek civilization;
and whether, accordingly, we are not justified in regarding the Kabbalah
as a precious remnant of a religious philosophy of the Orient which,
transplanted to Alexandria, mingled with the doctrines of Plato, and
under the usurped name of Dionysius the Areopagite <span
id="fr_625"></span>[6](#fn_625) was able to penetrate even into the
mysticism of the Middle Ages.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

Without departing from Palestine, we first meet at Samaria, in the days
of the apostles, and probably in an advanced age, a very singular
person--Simon the Magician (Magus). Who was this man who enjoyed such
incontestable power (Acts. VIII, 10.) and such boundless admiration
among his fellow citizens? <span id="fr_626"></span>[7](#fn_626) He may
have had a base view of the motive which prompts us to divide the
highest gifts with others, but he surely was not an impostor, for he
looked up to the apostles and endeavored to obtain from them for money
the power to impart the holy spirit (Acts, VIII, 18, 19). I go still
further and maintain that his authority would have been in vain were it
not supported by a well known and long accredited idea in the minds of
the people. We find this idea very clearly expressed in the supernatural
role attributed to Simon. The entire people, say the Acts, from the
highest to the lowest, considered him the personification of the great
power of God: Hic est virtus Dei quae vocatur magna (This man is the
great power of God). (Ibid, 10.)

Now St. Jerome tells us that our Samaritan prophet understood by it
nothing else but the Word of God (Sermo Dei). <span
id="fr_627"></span>[8](#fn_627) In this quality he must have necessarily
united in him all the other attributes; for according to the religious
metaphysics of the Hebrews the Word or Wisdom includes implicitly the
lower Sefiroth. St. Jerome also gives us as authentic the following
words which Simon <span id="fr_628"></span>[9](#fn_628) applied to
himself: "I am the divine word, I possess the real beauty, I am the
comforter, I am the

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Almighty, I am all
that is in God." <span id="fr_629"></span>[10](#fn_629) Every one of
these expressions corresponds to one of the Sefiroth of the Kabbalah,
the influence of which we find again in the following fact reported by
another church-father: <span id="fr_630"></span>[11](#fn_630) "Simon,
the Magician, who considered himself the visible manifestation of the
Word, wanted to personify also its correlating female principle, its
spouse--the Divine Thought--in a woman of bad repute."

This strange conception, which finds no support either in the Platonic
philosophy or in the Alexandrian school--if the latter existed already
at that time--agrees wonderfully, although at the same time disfiguring
it, with the Kabbalistic system where 'Wisdom, that is the Word,
represented as the male principle, has, like all other principles of the
same order, its half, its spouse which in this case is the Sefiroh that
bears the name of "Intelligence" (‏בינה‎--Beenah), <span
id="fr_631"></span>[12](#fn_631) and which has been taken by several
gnostics for the Holy Spirit, being always represented by them in the
form of a woman. Among these gnostics is the Jew Elxai who has many
traits resembling the prophet of Samaria. His name even--which he surely
chose himself--suggests the role he had taken upon himself. <span
id="fr_632"></span>[13](#fn_632) This heresiarch not only

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

conceives the Holy Spirit as a female principle, as just remarked, but
he looks upon Christ as a divine power only which clothes itself at
times in a material form and whose colossal proportions he describes in
minute details. <span id="fr_634"></span>[14](#fn_634)

We remember having found in the Zohar a similar description of the
"White Head," and that another work, very famous among the Kabbalists,
the pseudonymous "Alphabet of Rabbi Akkiba," <span
id="fr_635"></span>[15](#fn_635)

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

speaks of God in nearly the same terms. Along with this manner of
conceiving the Word, the Holy Spirit, and in general the divine pairs of
which the Pleroma <span id="fr_636"></span>[16](#fn_636) is composed, we
find also in the monuments left by the Syrian Bardasanes the principle
of the Kabbalistic cosmogony. The unknown father who lives in the centre
of the light has a son; this is Christ, or the heavenly man. Christ
again, by uniting with his companion, his spouse, which is the Holy
Ghost (τὸ πλεῦμα), produces successively the four elements, air and
water, fire and earth. These elements and the external world in general
are thus here, as in the Sefer Yetzirah, a simple emanation or the voice
of the spirit. (Ephrem, hymn 55, p. 755.)

But we need not persist in painfully gathering some scattered memories
in the Acts of the Apostles or in the Hymns of St. Ephrem. There is a
monument of great value from which we may draw quite liberally. We refer
to the Codex Nazareus, <span id="fr_637"></span>[17](#fn_637) that bible
of purely oriental gnosticism. We know that St. Jerome and St.
Epipahnius date back the sect of the Nazarenes to the time of the birth
of Christ. <span id="fr_638"></span>[18](#fn_638) Now then, the
similarity of a great many of their dogmas with the most essential
elements of the Kabbalistic system is so great, that when reading them
in the work just mentioned, we believe we have found some stray
fragments of the Zohar. Thus, God is always called the king and the
master of the light; He is Himself the purest splendor and the infinite
and eternal light. He is also beauty, life, justice

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

and mercy. <span id="fr_639"></span>[19](#fn_639) All forms that we
perceive in this world emanate from Him; He is the creator and the
architect, but no one knows His own wisdom and His own essence. <span
id="fr_640"></span>[20](#fn_640) All creatures ask one another for His
name, and they are compelled to answer that He has no name. As the king
of the light, the infinite light, He has no name that can be invoked,
nor is He of a nature that can be known; we can reach Him only through a
pure heart, an upright spirit and a faith full of love. <span
id="fr_641"></span>[21](#fn_641) The steps by which the Nazarene
doctrine descends from the highest being to the furthest limits of the
creation are the same used in a passage of the Zohar which has been
quoted several times in this work: "All genii, kings and creatures
praise vyingly, with prayers and hymns, the supreme king of light who
emanates five rays of marvelous brilliancy. The first is the light that
illumines all the beings; the second is the mild breath that animates
them; the third is the melodious voice that expresses their
cheerfulness; the fourth is the word which instructs them and elevates
them to bear witness to their faith; the fifth is the type of all forms
under which they develop, like fruit which nourishes by the action of
the sun." <span id="fr_642"></span>[22](#fn_642)

We can not fail to recognize in these lines--to the translation of which
we confined ourselves--the different degrees of existence

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

which the Kabbalists represent by the thought, breath or spirit, voice
and word. Here are other pictures, just as familiar, which express the
same idea: Before any creature existed at all, life was hidden within
itself, eternal and incomprehensible, without light and without form
(ferhi). From its bosom developed the luminous atmosphere (aver
zeevo--‏אויר זיוא‎) which is also called the "Word," the "Garment"
(L’vushah--‏לבושא‎, M’malelo--‏ממללא‎), or the symbolical river that
represents wisdom. From this river flow the living waters, or the great
waters which, to the Nazarenes as well as to the Kabbalists, typify the
third manifestation of God, the Intelligence or the Spirit. This again
produces a second life which, however, is far removed from the first
one. <span id="fr_643"></span>[23](#fn_643) This second life is called
"Yushamin" (‏יש מון‎--Yesh Moon, or ‏יש מין‎--Min, the place of the
forms, of the ideas); "in its bosom the idea of the creation was first
conceived, and it is the loftiest and purest type of the creation."

The second life gave birth to a third which is called the "excellent
father" (abatur, ‏אב יתר,‎--Av Yathar), <span
id="fr_644"></span>[24](#fn_644) the "unknown old one" and "the ancient
of the world" (senem sui obtegentem et grandaevum mundi). (Ib., vol. II,
p. 88.) When the excellent Father looked into the abyss, the darkness of
the black waters, he left his image there, which under the name of
"Fetahil" became the Demiurge or the architect of the universe. <span
id="fr_645"></span>[25](#fn_645) From then on begins an interminable
series of Eons, an infernal and a celestial hierarchy which does not
interest us any more. It is enough for us to know that these three
lives, these three degrees in the Pleroma hold the same rank as the
three Kabbalistic faces,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

whose very names (Parsufo--‏פרצופה‎) are often met with in the mouth of
these sectarians; <span id="fr_646"></span>[26](#fn_646) and we may
place so much the more confidence in this interpretation, as we find
also among them the ten Sefiroth divided, as in the Zohar, in three
superior and seven inferior attributes. <span
id="fr_647"></span>[27](#fn_647)

What concerns the singular accident which brought forth the Demiurge,
and as to the more and more imperfect generation of the subordinated
genii, these are mythologic expressions of the principle that darkness
and evil are but the gradual weakening of the divine light (caligo ubi
extiterat etiam extitisse decrementum et detrimentum), which is also
very clearly formulated in the Nazarene code. (Ib., vol. I, p. 145.)
Hence the name "body" or "matter" (‏גיו‎--lea or guf--‏ביף‎) is given to
the prince of darkness. (Ib., III, Onomasticon.) This name does not
differ from the one carried by the same principle in the Kabbalistic
system (‏קליפות‎--Klipoth, shells, matter).

The Nazarenes also recognized two Adams, one a
[celestial](errata.htm#30), and the other earthly, the father of
humanity. Because of his body, the latter is the work of the
subordinated genii, the stellar spirits; but the soul is the emanation
of the divine life. <span id="fr_648"></span>[28](#fn_648) This soul,
which was to return to its father in the heavenly regions, was detained
in this world because it was seduced by evil powers. The message, then,
entrusted by the Kabbalists to the angel Raziel is given for execution
by our heretics to Gabriel, who plays quite an important role in their
belief. It was the angel Gabriel who brought to our first parents, in
order to raise them from their fall and to open to them the way to the
bosom of their father, the true law, the word of life mysteriously
spread by tradition until the advent of John the Baptist, the true
prophet according to the Nazarenes, who promulgated it aloud on the
shores of the

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jordan. (Vol. II,
p. 25-26-117.) We could cite other traditions which could be taken to
have been borrowed from the Midrashim and the Zohar; <span
id="fr_649"></span>[29](#fn_649) but we are content with having pointed
out that which has the best claim for the attention of the philosopher.

Were we now to meet with the same principles in Egyptian Gnosticism, in
the doctrine of Basilides and Valentin, it would be unjust to attribute
them to the Greek philosophy, or even to Alexandrian Neoplatonism. And,
in fact, it would be very easy for us to demonstrate in what we have
still left from the two celebrated heresiarchs just mentioned the most
characteristic elements of the Kabbalah, as the unity of
substance, <span id="fr_650"></span>[30](#fn_650) the formation of
things, first by concentration, then by gradual expansion of the divine
light, <span id="fr_651"></span>[31](#fn_651) the theory of pairs and of
the four worlds, <span id="fr_652"></span>[32](#fn_652) the two Adams,
the three souls, <span id="fr_653"></span>[33](#fn_653) and even the
symbolic language of the numbers and the letters of the alphabet. <span
id="fr_654"></span>[34](#fn_654) But we have nothing to gain from
demonstrating this similarity; for we believe we have reached the aim we
have set for ourselves in the last part of our work. After having
previously established that the metaphysical ideas which make up the
foundation of the Kabbalah were not borrowed from Greek philosophy;
that, instead of being born either in a Pagan school or in the Jewish
school of Alexandria, they were brought thither from Palestine, we

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

have finally proven that its cradle is not as yet to be found in
Palestine, or at least, in the so-called Judea.

For in spite of impenetrable mystery with which the teachers of the
synagogue surround them, we find them in a less abstract and not so pure
form, it is true, in the infidel capital of the Samarians and with the
heretics of Syria. It matters little that here they were taught to the
people as the foundation of the religion, and assumed thereby the
character of mythological personification, <span
id="fr_655"></span>[35](#fn_655) while there, having become the property
of the elite intelligences, they made up rather an extensive and
profound metaphysical system. The basis of these ideas remains the same;
their interrelation, whether in the formulas with which they are
clothed, or in the more or less phantastical traditions that accompany
them, remain unchanged. We still have to investigate, therefore, from
what part and from what religion of the Orient they may have come to
penetrate directly into Judaism, and from there into the different
systems we have mentioned. It is this last step we still have to make in
order to fully accomplish our task.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_620"></span>[271:1](rph21.htm#fr_620) Author of "Gali
Razia" (Unveiled Secrets). Nurenberg, 1605. The aim of this work, which
is composed entirely of Hebrew quotations translated into Latin and
German, is to prove the Christian dogma by different passages from the
Talmud and Zohar.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[272:2](rph21.htm#fr_621) Peter Beer, History
of Jewish Religious Sects, vol. II.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[272:3](rph21.htm#fr_622) See Ari Noham of Leon
de Modena, pgs. 7, 79 and 80.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[272:4](rph21.htm#fr_623) Ari Noham (the
Roaring Lion), published by Julius Fuerst, Leipzig, 1840.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[272:5](rph21.htm#fr_624) Ib. supr., p. 7. ‏ולא
ידעתי אם ימחול ה׳ לאשד הדפיסם אותם הספרים‎ "I do not know whether God
will forgive those who published these books".

<span id="fn_625"></span>[272:6](rph21.htm#fr_625) One of St. Paul's
converts at Athens. Transl.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[273:7](rph21.htm#fr_626) It is the prevailing
opinion that Simon came from Githoi, a small Samaritan town. The
historian Josephus is the only one who mentions a Jew, originally from
Cyprus, who pretended to be a magician.--Antiquities, Book XX ch. VII.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[273:8](rph21.htm#fr_627) St. Jerome Commentar.
in Matthaei ch. XXIV, in vol. VII of his work according to the Venetian
edition.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[273:9](rph21.htm#fr_628) On Simon Magus and
his wife Helen compare Irenaeus I, 23: "Simon--Helenam quandam--secum
circumducebat, disens, hanc esse primam mentis ejus conceptionem, matrem
omnium, per quam initio mente concepit, angelos facere et archangelos. .
. Transmigrantem autem de corpore in corpus, ex eo et semper contumeliam
sustinentem in novissimis edam in fornice prostitisse."--Jellinek

<span id="fn_629"></span>[274:10](rph21.htm#fr_629) "Ego sum sermo Dei,
ego sum speciosus, ego paracletus, ego omnipotens, ego omnia Dei."--Ib.
supr.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[274:11](rph21.htm#fr_630) Clement.,
Recognitiones, liv. II. Iren., liv. 4, ch. XX.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[274:12](rph21.htm#fr_631) See second part of
this work following note 42.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[274:13](rph21.htm#fr_632) ‏אל כסי‎, perhaps
also ‏חיל כסי‎, <span id="fr_633"></span>[\*](#fn_633) the mysterious
power.--Epiphanius, 19th heresy.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[274:\*](rph21.htm#fr_633) Instead of refuting
this unfortunate construction of the name Elxai, we shall quote the
following words of Delitsch ("Orient," 1841, col. 297-298): "Many
conjectures, some conflicting apparently with the custom of Jewish
nomenclature, some with the Greek phonetic rules in the
[transcription](errata.htm#29) of Hebrew names, have been put forward
about the name Elxai, on the orthography of which the ancients differed
wonderfully (see variants of Coteler, Monum. I, p. 775), Little note has
been taken of Rhenferd's conjecture (De fictis Judaeorum haeresib., p.
98) which doubts the personality of Elxai and which explains the name as
merely that of some sect by ‏אלכאשין‎ or ‏אלכסאי‎ (the deniers); but the
first is un-Arabic and the second is un-Hebraic. Besides, the
construction which, according to Epiph. (Haeres. XIX, 2), the sect
itself puts upon the name, forbids accepting the Ελ (Ηλ) in the
beginning of the word as an Arabic form of the article. The followers of
Elxai pretend that his name means vim abstrusam (hidden power), and the
<span id="page_275">p. 275</span> Judeo-Christian Epiphanius adds:
'because Ελ means power and ξαι means hidden.' There is no doubt that
this construction is only a Midrash of the same name, as is often met
with in old Jewish writings. It was not at all intended to prove the
grammatical root, but to support mnemonically or even to establish
ostensibly any accepted passage (like the one here of the high
personality of Elxai). We must, therefore, inquire first into the proper
Hebrew form of the name and then attempt to prove the possibility of
putting a double meaning upon it. For, the transcription ‏חיל קסא‎
(Goerik, K. G. I, p. 143), which has no other meaning than: 'strength
which has covered,' is, in any case, miscarried. The heresy of the
Elxaites shaped itself in the trans-Jordanic region. There, in Galilee
(Hier. ad Nahum I, 1), εἰς Βηγαβὰρ ἐκ φυλῆς Ζυμεὼν (Epiph. de Vitis
Proph. 18), was a small hamlet Elcesi (Ἐλκεσεί), well known to the Jews
at the time of St. Jerome, to whom the ruins of old houses were pointed
out by his companion. Possibly the prophet Nahum was born here, and also
the spurious prophet Elxai (Ἐλκεσαῖος, Ἐλκεσαῖς). The surname ‏האלקשי‎
added to Nahum, which is rendered in the Greek translation by Ἐλκεσαῖος,
is identical with that of Elxai, which can be better established
phonetically and historically if space would permit. All the Greek
variants go back to ‏אלקשאי‎ or ‏אלקשאה‎. The Greek letter Η used in
writing the name enjoins thinking of the Hebrew ‏אל‎, just as the ξ and
χ (Ἐλχασαῖος with Methodius) point to the emphatic 'Qoph' of the Hebrew
alphabet. It is to this name that the followers of Elxai attached their
symbolic interpretation, and they could well afford to do it, because
the modus operandi of the original operation perhaps did not escape from
the language consciousness (according to the Masoretic commentary of
Minchat Sha the spelling is found in two words ‏האל-קשי‎). They
translated (power of difficulty i.e., a power difficult to understand.
secret power), or, what is not strange, with the Galileans (who,
according to the Gemara Erubin pronounced the guttural ‏ק‎ like ‏ח‎),
‏אל כסוי‎ (covered, hidden power)."--Jellinek

<span id="fn_634"></span>[275:14](rph21.htm#fr_634) Ib. supr.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[275:15](rph21.htm#fr_635) ‏אותיות דר׳ עקיבה‎
(Otiot d’Rabbi Akiba). Here is a translation of a passage from this
book: "The body of the divine presence (‏גופו של שכינה‎--Goofo shel
Shekinah) has an extension of 236 times 10,000 parasangs (Persian road
measure), to wit: 118 times 10,000 from the loins down, and just as much
from the loins up. But these parasangs are different than ours. Each
divine parasang has 1,000 times 1,000 cubits (‏אמות‎); each divine cubit
has four zereth (spans) and one palm; each zereth <span id="page_276">p.
276</span> represents the length between the two opposite extremities of
the universe."--Letter ‏ח‎, p. 151, Krakau ed., 1579.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[276:16](rph21.htm#fr_636) In Gnosticism it
signifies the spiritual divine nature with all the eons emanating from
it.--Transl.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[276:17](rph21.htm#fr_637) Codex Nazareus, 3
vol. in 4to, 1815. Pub. and trans. by Matthew Norberg.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[276:18](rph21.htm#fr_638) This opinion,
accepted by most of the theologians, is to be preferred to that of
Mosheim. To better refute Toland's objections to the unity of the
Christian faith, Mosheim places the origin of the sect of the Nazarenes
in the fourth century. See Mosheim, Indiciae antiquae christianorum
disciplinae, I, 5.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[277:19](rph21.htm#fr_639) "Rex summjs lucis,
splendor purus, lux magna. Non est mensura, numerus et terminus ejus
splendori, luci est majestati. Totus est splendor, totus lux, totus
pulchritudo, totus vita, totus justitia, totus misericordia," etc.--Cod.
Naz. vol. I, p. 5.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[277:20](rph21.htm#fr_640) "Creator omnium
formarum, pulchrarumque artifex, retinens vero suae sapientiae, suique
obtegens, nec sui manifestus.--Ib., p. 7.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[277:21](rph21.htm#fr_641) "Creaturae omnes tui
nominis nesciae. Dicunt reges lucis, se invicem interrogantes: nomenne
sit magnae luci? iidimque respondent: nomine caret. Quia autem nomine
caret, nec fuerit qui illius nomen invocet, noscendaeque illius naturae
insistat, beati pacifici qui te agnoverunt corde puro, mentionem tui
fecerunt mente justa, fidem tibi integro affectu habuerunt." Cod. Naz.,
vol. I, p. 11.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[277:22](rph21.htm#fr_642) "Omnes genii, reges
et creaturae, precationi et hymno insistentes, celebrant regem summum
lucis, a quo exeunt quinque radii magnifici et insignes: primus, lux
quae illis orta: secundus, flatus suavis qui eis adspirat: tertius,
dulcedo vocis qua excellant: quartus, verbum oris quod erigit et ad
confessionem pietatis instituit: quintus, species formae cujusque, qua
adolescunt, sicut sole fructus."--Ib. supr., p. 9.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[278:23](rph21.htm#fr_643) "Antequam creaturae
omnes existere, Ferho dominus existit per quem Jordanus existit.
Jordanus dominus vicissime existit aqua viva, quae aqua maxima et laeta.
Ex aqua vero viva, nos vita existimus."--Ib., vol. I, p. 145.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[278:24](rph21.htm#fr_644) Perhaps the "Avatar"
of Hindoo mythology.--Transl.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[278:25](rph21.htm#fr_645) "Surrexit Abatur et,
porta aperta, in aquam nigram prospexit, Fictus autem extemplo filius,
sui imago, in aqua ista nigra, et Fetahil conformatus fuit."--Ib., vol.
I, p. 308.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[279:26](rph21.htm#fr_646) Ib., vol. III, p.
126. Onomasticon.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[279:27](rph21.htm#fr_647) "Ad portam domus
vitae thronos domino splendoris apte positus. Et ibidem tria habitacula.
Parique modo septem vitae procreatae fuerunt, quae a Jukabar Zivac (‏כבר
זין‎ the great splendor) eaque clarae sua specie et splendore superne
veniente lucentes."--Ib., vol. III, p. 61.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[279:28](rph21.htm#fr_648) Ib., vol. I, p.
190-200. Ib., p. 121 and 123.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[280:29](rph21.htm#fr_649) We shall cite among
others how the Nazarenes explain the formation of the foetus and the
part attributed by them to both parents.--Vol. II, p. 41, of the Codex
Nazareus.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[280:30](rph21.htm#fr_650) "Continere omnia
petrem omnium et extra pleroma esse nihil, et id quod extra et id quod
intra secundum agnitionem et ignorantiam." Iren., II, 4.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[280:31](rph21.htm#fr_651) At the head of
things is the "Bythos" or Ineffable, from whose bosom spring in pairs
all the Eons that constitute the Pleroma. But all these emanations would
lose themselves in the limitless infinite, if there were not a vessel
(ὅρος) which gives them solidity and consistency.--Iren., ib. supr.
Neander, Genetic History of Gnosticism, article Valentin.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[280:32](rph21.htm#fr_652) Matter is the lowest
world. Immediately above it are the Demiurge and the human soul (Olam
Yetzirah). One step higher we meet the spiritual things, πνευματικοὶ
(Olam Bree-ah), and finally the Pleroma (Atziluth).--Ib. supr.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[280:33](rph21.htm#fr_653) See Neander, work
cited, p. 219.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[280:34](rph21.htm#fr_654) Neander, p. 176,
Doctrine of Marcus.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[281:35](rph21.htm#fr_655) Plotinus with his
usual profoundness had already noticed that Gnosticism generally
compares the intelligible things to sensual and material nature: Naturam
intelligibilem in similitudinem deducunt sensibilis deteriorisque
naturae.--Enneade, liv. IX, ch. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Relation of the Kabbalah to the Religion of the
Chaldeans and Persians](rph22)
