[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod08)  [Next](eod10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LIBATIONS.

The central idea of this lecture was suggested by Mr. Aylward M.
Blackman's important discovery of the actual meaning of incense and
libations to the Egyptians themselves. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) The earliest body of literature preserved
from any of the peoples of antiquity is comprised in the texts inscribed
in the subterranean chambers of the Sakkara Pyramids of the Fifth and
Sixth Dynasties. These documents, written forty-five centuries ago, were
first brought to light in modern times in 1880-81; and since the late
Sir Gaston Maspero published the first translation of them, many
scholars have helped in the task of elucidating their meaning. But it
remained for Blackman to discover the explanation they give of the
origin and significance of the act of pouring out libations. "The
general meaning of these passages is quite clear. The corpse of the
deceased is dry and shrivelled. To revivify it the vital fluids that
have exuded from it \[in the process of mummification\] must be
restored, for not till then will life return and the heart beat again.
This, so the texts show us, was believed to be accomplished by offering
libations to the accompaniment of incantations" (*op. cit.* p. 70).

In the first three passages quoted by Blackman from the Pyramid Texts
"the libations are said to be the actual fluids that have issued from
the corpse". In the next four quotations "a different notion is
introduced. It is not the deceased's own exudations that are to revive
his shrunken frame but those of a divine body, the \[god's fluid\] <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) that

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

came from the corpse of Osiris himself, the juices that dissolved from
his decaying flesh, which are communicated to the dead sacrament-wise
under the form of these libations."

This dragging-in of Osiris is especially significant. For the analogy of
the life-giving power of water that is specially associated with Osiris
played a dominant part in suggesting the ritual of libations. Just as
water, when applied to the apparently dead seed, makes it germinate and
come to life, so libations can reanimate the corpse. These general
biological theories of the potency of water were current at the time,
and, as I shall explain later (see [p. 28](eod10.htm#page_28)), had
possibly received specific application to man long before the idea of
libations developed. For, in the development of the cult of Osiris <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) the general fertilizing power

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of water when applied to the soil found specific exemplification in the
potency of the seminal fluid to fertilize human beings. Malinowski

has pointed out that certain Papuan people, who are ignorant of the fact
that women are fertilized by sexual connexion, believe that they can be
rendered pregnant by rain falling upon them (*op. cit. infra*). The
study of folk-lore and early beliefs makes it abundantly clear that in
the distant past which I am now discussing no clear distinction was made
between fertilization and vitalization, between bringing new life into
being and reanimating the body which had once been alive. The process of
fertilization of the female and animating a corpse or a statue were
regarded as belonging to the same category of biological processes. The
sculptor who carved the portrait-statues for the Egyptian's tomb was
called *sa’nkh*, "he who causes to live," and "the word 'to fashion'
(*ms*) a statue is to all appearances identical with ms, 'to give
birth'". <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)

Thus the Egyptians themselves expressed in words the ideas which an
independent study of the ethnological evidence showed many other peoples
to entertain, both in ancient and modern times. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44)

The interpretation of ancient texts and the study of the beliefs of less
cultured modern peoples indicate that our expressions: "to give birth,"
"to give life," "to maintain life," "to ward off death," "to insure good
luck," "to prolong life," "to give life to the dead," "to animate a
corpse or a representation of the dead," "to give fertility," "to
impregnate," "to create," represent a series of specializations of
meaning which were not clearly differentiated the one from the other in
early times or among relatively primitive modern people.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

The evidence brought together in Jackson's work clearly suggests that at
a very early period in human history, long before the ideas that found
expression in the Osiris story had materialized, men entertained in all
its literal crudity the belief that the external organ of reproduction
from which the child emerged at birth was the actual creator of the
child, not merely the giver of birth but also the source of life.

The widespread tendency of the human mind to identify similar objects
and attribute to them the powers of the things they mimic led primitive
men to assign to the cowry-shell all these life-giving and birth-giving
virtues. It became an amulet to give fertility, to assist at birth, to
maintain life, to ward off danger, to ensure the life hereafter, to
bring luck of any sort. Now, as the giver of birth, the cowry-shell also
came to be identified with, or regarded as, the mother and creator of
the human family; and in course of time, as this belief became
rationalized, the shell's maternity received visible expression and it
became personified as an actual woman, the Great Mother, at first
nameless and with ill-defined features. But at a later period, when the
dead king Osiris gradually acquired his attributes of divinity, and a
god emerged with the form of a man, the vagueness of the Great Mother
who had been merely the personified cowry-shell soon disappeared and the
amulet assumed, as Hathor, the form of a real woman, or, for reasons to
be explained later, a cow.

The influence of these developments reacted upon the nascent conception
of the water-controlling god, Osiris; and his powers of fertility were
enlarged to include many of the life-giving attributes of Hathor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[23:1](eod09.htm#fr_40) "The Significance of
Incense and Libations in Funerary and Temple Ritual," *Zeitschrift für
Ägyptische Sprache and Altertumskunde*, Bd. 50, 1912, p. 69.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[23:2](eod09.htm#fr_41) Mr. Blackman here quotes
the actual word in hieroglyphics and adds the translation "god's fluid"
and the following explanation in a footnote: "The Nile was supposed to
be the fluid which issued from Osiris. The expression in the Pyramid
texts may refer to this belief—the dead" \[in the Pyramid Age it would
have been more accurate if he had said the dead <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> king, in whose Pyramid the inscriptions were found\] "being
usually identified with Osiris—since the water used in the libations was
Nile water."

<span id="fn_42"></span>[24:1](eod09.htm#fr_42) The voluminous
literature relating to Osiris will be found summarized in the latest
edition of "The Golden Bough" by Sir James Frazer. But in referring the
reader to this remarkable compilation of evidence it is necessary to
call particular attention to the fact that Sir James Frazer's
interpretation is permeated with speculations based upon the modern
ethnological dogma of independent evolution of similar customs and
beliefs without cultural contact between the different localities where
such similarities make their appearance.

The complexities of the motives that inspire and direct human activities
are entirely fatal to such speculations, as I have attempted to indicate
(see above, [p. 195](eod40.htm#page_195)). But apart from this general
warning, there are other objections to Sir James Frazer's theories. In
his illuminating article upon Osiris and Horus, Dr. Alan Gardiner (in a
criticism of Sir James Frazer's "The Golden Bough: Adonis, Attis,
Osiris; Studies in the History of Oriental Religion," *Journal of
Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. II, 1915, p. 122) insists upon the crucial
fact that Osiris was primarily a king, and that "it is always as a dead
king," "the rôle of the living king being invariably played by Horus,
his son and heir".

He states further: "What Egyptologists wish to know about Osiris beyond
anything else is how and by what means he became associated with the
processes of vegetable life". An examination of the literature relating
to Osiris and the large series of homologous deities in other countries
(which exhibit prima facie evidence of a common origin) suggests the
idea that the king who first introduced the practice of systematic
irrigation thereby laid the foundation of his reputation as a beneficent
reformer. When, for reasons which I shall discuss later on (see [p.
220](eod43.htm#page_220)), the dead king became deified, his fame as the
controller of water and the fertilization of the earth became
apotheosized also. I venture to put forward this suggestion only because
none of the alternative hypotheses that have been propounded <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> seem to be in [accordance](errata.htm#0) with,
or to offer an adequate explanation of, the body of known facts
concerning Osiris.

It is a remarkable fact that in his lectures on "The Development of
Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt," which are based upon his own
studies of the Pyramid Texts, and are an invaluable storehouse of
information, Professor J. H. Breasted should have accepted Sir James
Frazer's views. These seem to me to be altogether at variance with the
renderings of the actual Egyptian texts and to confuse the exposition.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[25:1](eod09.htm#fr_43) Dr. Alan Gardiner,
quoted in my "Migrations of Early Culture," p. 42: see also the same
scholar's remarks in Davies and Gardiner, "The Tomb of Arnenemhēt,"
1915, p. 57, and "A new Masterpiece of Egyptian Sculpture," The *Journal
of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. IV, Part I, Jan., 1917.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[25:2](eod09.htm#fr_44) See J. Wilfrid Jackson,
"Shells as Evidence of the Migrations of Early Culture," 1917,
Manchester University Press.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Early Biological Theories](eod10)
