[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod05)  [Next](eod07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE BEGINNING OF STONE-WORKING.

During the last few years I have repeatedly had occasion to point out
the fundamental fallacy underlying much of the modern speculation in
ethnology, and I have no intention of repeating these strictures
here. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) But it is a significant fact
that, when one leaves the writings of professed ethnologists and turns
to the histories of their special subjects written by scholars in
kindred fields of investigation, views such

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

as I have been setting forth will often be found to be accepted without
question or comment as the obvious truth.

There is an excellent little book entitled "Architecture," written by
Professor W. R. Lethaby for the Home University Library, that affords an
admirable illustration of this interesting fact. I refer to this
particular work because it gives lucid expression to some of the ideas
that I wish to submit for consideration. "Two arts have changed the
surface of the world, Agriculture and Architecture" (p. 1). "To a large
degree architecture" \[which he defines as "the matrix of
civilization"\] "is an Egyptian art" (p. 66): for in Egypt "we shall
best find the origins of architecture as a whole" (p. 21).

Nevertheless Professor Lethaby bows the knee to current tradition when
he makes the wholly unwarranted assumption that Egypt probably learnt
its art from Babylonia. He puts forward this remarkable claim in spite
of his frank confession that "little or nothing is known of a primitive
age in Mesopotamia. At a remote time the art of Babylonia was that of a
civilized people. As has been said, there is a great similarity between
this art and that of dynastic times in Egypt. Yet it appears that Egypt
borrowed of Asia, rather than the reverse." \[He gives no reasons for
this opinion, for which there is no evidence, except possibly the
invention of bricks for building.\] "If the origins of art in Babylonia
were as fully known as those in Egypt, the story of architecture might
have to begin in Asia instead of Egypt" (p. 67).

But later on he speaks in a more convincing manner of the known facts
when he says (p. 82):—

<span class="small">When Greece entered on her period of high-strung
life the time of first invention in the arts was over—the heroes of
Craft, like Tubal Cain and Daedalus, necessarily belong to the infancy
of culture. The phenomenon of Egypt could not occur again; the mission
of Greece was rather to settle down to a task of gathering,
interpreting, and bringing to perfection Egypt's gifts. The arts of
civilization were never developed in watertight compartments, as is
shown by the uniformity of custom over the modern world. Further, if any
new nation enters into the circle of culture it seems that, like Japan,
it must 'borrow the capital'. The art of Greece could hardly have been
more self-originated than is the science of Japan. Ideas of the temple
and of the fortified town must have spread from the East, the
square-roomed house, columnar orders, fine masonry, were all
Egyptian.</span>

Elsewhere <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) I have pointed out that it
was the importance which

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

the Egyptian came to attach to the preservation of the dead and to the
making of adequate provision for the deceased's welfare that gradually
led to the aggrandisement of the tomb. In course of time this impelled
him to cut into the rock, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) and, later
still, suggested the substitution of stone for brick in erecting the
chapel of offerings above ground. The Egyptian burial customs were thus
intimately related to the conceptions that grew up with the invention of
embalming. The evidence in confirmation of this is so precise that every
one who conscientiously examines it must be forced to the conclusion
that man did not instinctively select stone as a suitable material with
which to erect temples and houses, and forthwith begin to quarry and
shape it for such purposes.

There was an intimate connexion between the first use of stone for
building and the practice of mummification. It was probably for this
reason, and not from any abstract sense of "wonder at the magic of art,"
as Professor Lethaby claims, that "ideas of sacredness, of ritual
rightness, of magic stability and correspondence with the universe, and
of perfection of form and proportion" came to be associated with stone
buildings.

At first stone was used only for such sacred purposes, and the pharaoh
alone was entitled to use it for his palaces, in virtue of the fact that
he was divine, the son and incarnation on earth of the sun-god. It was
only when these Egyptian practices were transplanted to other countries,
where these restrictions did not obtain, that the rigid wall of
convention was broken down.

Even in Rome until well into the Christian era "the largest domestic and
civil buildings were of plastered brick". "Wrought masonry seems to have
been demanded only for the great monuments, triumphal arches, theatres,
temples and above all for the Coliseum." (Lethaby, *op. cit.* p. 120).

Nevertheless Rome was mainly responsible for breaking down the hieratic
tradition which forbade the use of stone for civil purposes. "In Roman
architecture the engineering element became paramount. It was this which
broke the moulds of tradition and recast construction into modern form,
and made it free once more" (p. 130).

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

But Egypt was not only responsible for inaugurating the use of stone for
building. For another forty centuries she continued to be the inventor
of new devices in architecture. From time to time methods of building
which developed in Egypt were adopted by her neighbours and spread far
and wide. The shaft-tombs and *mastabas* of the Egyptian Pyramid Age
were adopted in various localities in the region of the Eastern
Mediterranean, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) with certain
modifications in each place, and in turn became the models which were
roughly copied in later ages by the wandering dolmen-builders. The round
tombs of Crete and Mycenae were clearly only local modifications of
their square prototypes, the Egyptian Pyramids of the Middle Kingdom.
"While this Ægean art gathered from, and perhaps gave to, Egypt, it
passed on its ideals to the north and west of Europe, where the
productions of the Bronze Age clearly show its influence" (Lethaby, p.
78) in the chambered mounds of the Iberian peninsula and Brittany, of
New Grange in Ireland and of Maes Howe in the Orkneys. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20) In the East the influence of these Ægean
modifications may possibly be seen in the Indian *stupas* and the
*dagabas* of Ceylon, just as the stone stepped pyramids there reveal the
effects of contact with the civilizations of Babylonia and Egypt.

Professor Lethaby sees the influence of Egypt in the orientation of
Christian churches (p. 133), as well as in many of their structural
details (p. 142); in the domed roofs, the iconography, the symbolism,
and the decoration of Byzantine architecture (p. 138); and in Mohammedan
buildings wherever they are found.

For it was not only the architecture of Greece, Rome, and Christendom
that received its inspiration from Egypt, but that of Islâm also. These
buildings were not, like the religion itself, in the main Arabic in
origin. "Primitive Arabian art itself is quite negligible. When the new
strength of the followers of the Prophet was consolidated

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

with great rapidity into a rich and powerful empire, it took over the
arts and artists of the conquered lands, extending from North Africa to
Persia" (p. 158); and it is known how this influence spread as far west
as Spain and as far east as Indonesia. "The Pharos at Alexandria, the
great lighthouse built about 280 B.C., almost appears to have been the
parent of all high and isolated towers. … Even on the coast of Britain,
at Dover, we had a Pharos which was in some degree an imitation of the
Alexandrian one." The Pharos at Boulogne, the round towers of Ravenna,
and the imitations of it elsewhere in Europe, even as far as Ireland,
are other examples of its influence. But in addition the Alexandrian
Pharos had "as great an effect as the prototype of Eastern minarets as
it had for Western towers" (p. 115).

I have quoted so extensively from Professor Lethaby's brilliant little
book to give this independent testimony of the vastness of the influence
exerted by Egypt during a span of nearly forty centuries in creating and
developing the "matrix of civilization". Most of this wider dispersal
abroad was effected by alien peoples, who transformed their gifts from
Egypt before they handed on the composite product to some more distant
peoples. But the fact remains that the great centre of original
inspiration in architecture was Egypt.

The original incentive to the invention of this essentially Egyptian art
was the desire to protect and secure the welfare of the dead. The
importance attached to this aim was intimately associated with the
development of the practice of mummification.

With this tangible and persistent evidence of the general scheme of
spread of the arts of building I can now turn to the consideration of
some of the other, more vital, manifestations of human thought and
aspirations, which also, like the "matrix of civilization" itself, grew
up in intimate association with the practice of embalming the dead.

I have already mentioned Professor Lethaby's reference to architecture
and agriculture as the two arts that have changed the surface of the
world. It is interesting to note that the influence of these two
ingredients of civilization was diffused abroad throughout the world in
intimate association the one with the other. In most parts of the world
the use of stone for building and Egyptian methods of architecture made
their first appearance along with the peculiarly distinctive form

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of agriculture and irrigation so intimately associated with early
Baby-Ionia and Egypt. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

But agriculture also exerted a most profound influence in shaping the
early Egyptian body of beliefs.

I shall now call attention to certain features of the earliest mummies,
and then discuss how the ideas suggested by the practice of the art of
embalming the dead were affected by the early theories of agriculture
and the mutual influence they exerted one upon the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[10:2](eod06.htm#fr_16) See, however, *op. cit.
supra*; also "The Origin of the Pre-Columbian Civilization of America,"
*Science*, N.S., Vol. XLV, No. 1158, pp. 241-246, 9 March, 1917.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[11:1](eod06.htm#fr_17) *Op. cit. supra*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[12:1](eod06.htm#fr_18) For the earliest
evidence of the cutting of stone for architectural purposes, see my
statement in the *Report of the British Association for* 1914, p. 212.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[13:1](eod06.htm#fr_19) Especially in Crete,
Palestine, Syria, Asia Minor, Southern Russia, and the North African
Littoral.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[13:2](eod06.htm#fr_20) For an account of the
evidence relating to these monuments, with full bibliographical
references, see Déchelette, "Manuel d’Archéologie préhistorique Celtique
et Gallo-Romaine," T. 1, 1912, pp. 390 *et seq*.; also Sophus Müller,
"Urgeschichte Europas," 1905, pp. 74 and 75; and Louis Siret, "Les
Cassitérides et l’Empire Colonial des Phéniciens," *L’Anthropologie*, T.
20, 1909, p. 313.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[15:1](eod06.htm#fr_21) W. J. Perry, "The
Geographical Distribution of Terraced Cultivation and Irrigation,"
*Memoirs and Proc. Manch. Lit. and Phil. Soc.*, Vol. 60, 1916.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of Embalming](eod07)
