[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod07)  [Next](eod09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### EARLY MUMMIES.

In the earliest known (Second Dynasty) examples of Egyptian attempts at
mummification <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) the corpse was swathed
in a large series of bandages, which were moulded into shape to
represent the form of the body. In a later (probably Fifth Dynasty)
mummy, found in 1892 by Professor Flinders Petrie at Medlin, the
superficial bandages had been impregnated with a resinous paste, which
while still plastic was moulded into the form of the body, special care
being bestowed upon the modelling of the face <span
id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25) and the organs of reproduction, so as to
leave no room for doubt as to the identity and the sex. Professor Junker
has described <span id="fr_26"></span>[4](#fn_26) an interesting series
of variations of these practices. In two graves the bodies were covered
with a layer of stucco plaster. First the corpse was covered with a fine
linen cloth: then the plaster was put on, and modelled into the form of
the body (p. 252). But in two other cases it was not the whole body that
was

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
2.WATER-COLOUR SKETCH BY MRS. CECIL FIRTH, REPRESENTING A RESTORATION
OF THE EARLY MUMMY FOUND AT MEDÛM BY PROF. FLINDERS PETRIE, NOW IN THE
MUSEUM OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS IN LONDON](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg)  
FIG. 2.—WATER-COLOUR SKETCH BY MRS. CECIL FIRTH, REPRESENTING A
RESTORATION OF THE EARLY MUMMY FOUND AT MEDÛM BY PROF. FLINDERS PETRIE,
NOW IN THE MUSEUM OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS IN LONDON  
</span>

<span id="img_fig03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 3.A MOULD
TAKEN FROM A LIFE-MASK FOUND IN THE PYRAMID OF TETA BY MR.
QUIBELL](tn/fig03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig03.jpg)  
FIG. 3.—A MOULD TAKEN FROM A LIFE-MASK FOUND IN THE PYRAMID OF TETA BY
MR. QUIBELL  
</span>

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

covered with this layer of stucco, but only the head. Professor Junker
claims that this was done "apparently because the head was regarded as
the most important part, as the organs of taste, sight, smell, and
hearing were contained in it". But surely there was the additional and
more obtrusive reason that the face affords the means of identifying the
individual! For this modelling of the features was intended primarily as
a restoration of the form of the body which had been altered, if not
actually destroyed. In other cases, where no attempt was made to restore
the features in such durable materials as resin or stucco, the
linen-enveloped head was modelled, and a representation of the eyes
painted upon it so as to enhance the life-like appearance of the face.

These facts prove quite conclusively that the earliest attempts to
reproduce the features of the deceased and so preserve his likeness,
were made upon the wrapped mummy itself. Thus the mummy was intended to
be the portrait as well as the actual bodily remains of the dead. In
view of certain differences of opinion as to the original significance
of the funerary ritual, which I shall have occasion to discuss later on
(see [p. 20](#page_20)), it is important to keep these facts clearly in
mind.

A discovery made by Mr. J. E. Quibell in the course of his excavations
at Sakkara <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) suggests that, as an
outcome of these practices a new procedure may have been devised in the
Pyramid Age—the making of a death-mask. For he discovered what may be
the mask taken directly from the face of the Pharaoh Teta ([Fig.
3](#img_fig03)).

About this time also the practice originated of making a life-size
portrait statue of the dead man's head and placing it along with the
actual body in the burial chamber. These "reserve heads," as they have
been called, were usually made of fine limestone, but Junker found one
made of Nile mud. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28)

Junker believes that there was an intimate relationship between the
plaster-covered heads and the reserve-heads. They were both expressions
of the same idea, to preserve a simulacrum of the deceased when his
actual body had lost all recognizable likeness to him as he

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

was when alive. The one method aimed at combining in the same object the
actual body and the likeness; the other at making a more life-like
portrait apart from the corpse, which could take the place of the latter
when it decayed.

Junker states further that "it is no chance that the substitute-heads …
entirely, or at any rate chiefly, are found in the tombs that have no
statue-chamber and probably possessed no statues. The statues \[of the
whole body\] certainly were made, at any rate partly, with the intention
that they should take the place of the decaying body, although later the
idea was modified. The placing of the substitute-head in \[the burial
chamber of\] the mastaba therefore became unnecessary at the moment when
the complete figure of the dead \[placed in a special hidden chamber,
now commonly called the *serdab*\] was introduced." The ancient
Egyptians themselves called the *serdab* the *pr-twt* or "statue-house,"
and the group of chambers, forming the tomb-chapel in the mastaba, was
known to them as the "*ka*-house". <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)

It is important to remember that, even when the custom of making a
statue of the deceased became fully established, the original idea of
restoring the form of the mummy itself or its wrappings was never
abandoned. The attempts made in the XVIII, and XXI and XXII Dynasties to
pack the body of the mummy itself and by artificial means give it a
life-like appearance afford evidence of this. In the New Empire and in
Roman times the wrapped mummy was sometimes modelled into the form of a
statue. But throughout Egyptian history it was a not uncommon practice
to provide a painted mask for the wrapped mummy, or in early Christian
times simply a portrait of the deceased.

With this custom there also persisted a remembrance of its original
significance. Professor Garstang records the fact that in the XII
Dynasty, <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30) when a painted mask was
placed upon the wrapped mummy, no statue or statuette was found in the
tomb. The undertakers

<span id="img_fig04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 4.PORTRAIT
STATUE OF AN EGYPTIAN LADY OF THE PYRAMID AGE](tn/fig04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig04.jpg)  
FIG. 4.—PORTRAIT STATUE OF AN EGYPTIAN LADY OF THE PYRAMID AGE  
</span>

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

apparently realized that the mummy <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)
which was provided with the life-like mask was therefore fulfilling the
purposes for which statues

were devised. So also in the New Empire the packing and modelling of the
actual mummy so as to restore its life-like appearance were regarded as
obviating the need for a statue.

I must now return to the further consideration of the Old Kingdom
statues. All these varied experiments were inspired by the same desire,
to preserve the likeness of the deceased. But when the sculptors
attained their object, and created those marvellous life-like portraits,
which must ever remain marvels of technical skill and artistic feeling
([Fig. 4](#img_fig04)), the old ideas that surged through the minds of
the Pre-dynastic Egyptians, as they contemplated the desiccated remains
of the dead, were strongly reinforced. The earlier people's thoughts
were turned more specifically than heretofore to the contemplation of
the nature of life and death by seeing the bodies of their dead
preserved whole and incorruptible; and, if their actions can be regarded
as an expression of their ideas, they began to wonder what was lacking
in these physically complete bodies to prevent them from feeling and
acting like living beings. Such must have been the results of their
puzzled contemplation of the great problems of life and death. Otherwise
the impulse to make more certain the preservation of the body by the
invention of mummification and to retain a life-like representation of
the deceased by means of a sculptured statue remains inexplicable. But
when the corpse had been rendered incorruptible and the deceased's
portrait had been fashioned with realistic perfection the old ideas
would recur with renewed strength. The belief then took more definite
shape that if the missing elements of vitality could be restored to the
statue, it might become animated and the dead man would live again in
his vitalized statue. This prompted a more intense and searching
investigation of the problems concerning the nature of the elements of
vitality of which the corpse was deprived at the time of death. Out of
these inquiries in course of time a highly complex system of philosophy
developed. <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

But in the earlier times with which I am now concerned it found
practical expression in certain ritual procedures, invented to convey to
the statue the breath of life, the vitalising fluids, and the odour and
sweat of the living body. The seat of knowledge and of feeling was
believed to be retained in the body when the heart was left *in situ:*
so that the only thing needed to awaken consciousness, and make it
possible for the dead man to take heed of his friends and to act
voluntarily, was to present offerings of blood to stimulate the
physiological functions of the heart. But the element of vitality which
left the body at death had to be restored to the statue, which
represented the deceased in the *ka*-house. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

In my earlier attempts <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) to interpret
these problems, I adopted the view that the making of portrait statues
was the direct outcome of the practice of mummification. But Dr. Alan
Gardiner, whose intimate knowledge of the early literature enables him
to look at such problems from the Egyptian's own point of view, has
suggested a modification of this interpretation. Instead of regarding
the custom of making statues as an outcome of the practice of
mummification, he thinks that the two customs developed simultaneously,
in response to the twofold desire to preserve both the actual body and a
representation of the features of the dead. But I think this suggestion
does not give adequate recognition to the fact that the earliest
attempts at funerary portraiture were made upon the wrappings of the
actual mummies. <span id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35) This fact and the
evidence which I have already

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

quoted from Junker make it quite clear that from the beginning the
embalmer's aim was to preserve the body and to convert the mummy itself
into a simulacrum of the deceased. When he realized that his technical
skill was not adequate to enable him to accomplish this double aim, he
fell back upon the device of making a more perfect and realistic
portrait statue apart from the mummy. But, as I have already pointed
out, he never completely renounced his ambition of transforming the
mummy itself; and in the time of the New Empire he actually attained the
result which he had kept in view for nearly twenty centuries.

In these remarks I have been referring only to funerary portrait
statues. Centuries before the attempt was made to fashion them modellers
had been making of clay and stone representations of cattle and human
beings, which have been found not only in Predynastic graves in Egypt
but also in so-called "Upper Palæolithic" deposits in Europe.

But the fashioning of realistic and life-size human portrait-statues for
funerary purposes was a new art, which gradually developed in the way I
have tried to depict. No doubt the modellers made use of the skill they
had acquired in the practice of the older art of rough impressionism.

Once the statue was made a stone-house (the *serdab*) was provided for
it above ground. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) As the dolmen is a
crude copy of the *serdab* <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37) it can be
claimed as one of the ultimate results of the practice

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of mummification. It is clear that the conception of the possibility of
a life beyond the grave assumed a more concrete form when it was
realized that the body itself could be rendered incorruptible and its
distinctive traits could be kept alive by means of a portrait statue.
There are reasons for supposing that primitive man did not realize or
contemplate the possibility of his own existence coming to an end. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) Even when he witnessed the death of his
fellows he does not appear to have appreciated the fact that it was
really the end of life and not merely a kind of sleep from which the
dead might awake. But if the corpse were destroyed or underwent a
process of natural disintegration the fact was brought home to him that
death had occurred. If these considerations, which early Egyptian
literature seems to suggest, be borne in mind, the view that the
preservation of the body from corruption implied a continuation of
existence becomes intelligible. At first the subterranean chambers in
which the actual body was housed were developed into a many-roomed house
for the deceased, complete in every detail. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) But when the statue took over the function
of representing the deceased, a dwelling was provided for it above
ground. This developed into the temple where the relatives and friends
of the dead came and made the offerings of food which were regarded as
essential for the maintenance of existence.

The evolution of the temple was thus the direct outcome of the ideas
that grew up in connexion with the preservation of the dead. For at
first it was nothing more than the dwelling place of the reanimated
dead. But when, for reasons which I shall explain later (see [p.
30](eod10.htm#page_30)), the dead king became deified, his temple of
offerings became the building where food and drink were presented to the
god, not merely to maintain his existence, but also to restore his
consciousness, and so afford an opportunity for his successor, the
actual king, to consult him and obtain his advice and help. The
presentation of offerings and the ritual procedures for animating and
restoring consciousness to the dead king were at first directed solely
to these ends. But in course of time, as their original purpose became
obscured, these services in the temple altered in character, and their
meaning became

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

rationalized into acts of homage and worship, and of prayer and
supplication, and in much later times, acquired an ethical and moral
significance that was wholly absent from the original conception of the
temple services. The earliest idea of the temple as a place of offering
has not been lost sight of. Even in our times the offertory still finds
a place in temple services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[16:2](eod08.htm#fr_24) G. Elliot Smith, "The
Earliest Evidence of Attempts at Mummification in Egypt," *Report
British Association*, 1912, p. 612: compare also J. Garstang, "Burial
Customs of Ancient Egypt," London, 1907, pp. 29 and 30. Professor
Garstang did not recognize that mummification had been attempted.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[16:3](eod08.htm#fr_25) G. Elliot Smith, "The
History of Mummification in Egypt," *Proc. Royal Philosophical Society
of Glasgow*, 1910: also "Egyptian Mummies," *Journal of Egyptian
Archæology*, Vol. I, Part III, July, 1914, Plate XXXI.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[16:4](eod08.htm#fr_26) "Excavations of the
Vienna Imperial Academy of Sciences at the Pyramids of Gizah, 1914,"
*Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. I, Oct. 1914, p. 250.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[17:1](eod08.htm#fr_27)" Excavations at
Saqqara," 1907-8, p. 113.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[17:2](eod08.htm#fr_28) The great variety of
experiments that were being made at the beginning of the Pyramid Age
bears ample testimony to the fact that the original inventors of these
devices were actually at work in Lower Egypt. at that time.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[18:1](eod08.htm#fr_29) Aylward M. Blackman,
"The Ka-House and the Serdab," *Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol.
Ill, Part IV, Oct., 1916, p. 250. The word *serdab* is merely the Arabic
word used by the native workmen, which has been adopted and converted
into a technical term by European archaeologists.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[18:2](eod08.htm#fr_30) *Op. cit.* p. 171.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[19:1](eod08.htm#fr_31) It is a remarkable fact
that Professor Garstang, who brought to light perhaps the best, and
certainly the best-preserved, collection of Middle Kingdom mummies ever
discovered, failed to recognize the fact that they had really been
embalmed (*op. cit.* p. 171).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[19:2](eod08.htm#fr_32) The reader who wishes
for fuller information as to the reality of these beliefs and how
seriously they were held will find them still in active <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> operation in China. An admirable account of
Chinese philosophy will be found in De Groot's "Religious System of
China," especially Vol. IV, Book II. It represents the fully developed
(New Empire) system of Egyptian belief modified in various ways by
Babylonian, Indian and Central Asiatic influences, as well as by
accretions developed locally in China.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[20:1](eod08.htm#fr_33) A. M. Blackman, "The
Ka-House and the Serdab," The *Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol.
III, Part IV, Oct., 1916, p. 250.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[20:2](eod08.htm#fr_34) "Migrations of Early
Culture," p. 37.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:3](eod08.htm#fr_35) Dr. Alan Gardiner
(Davies and Gardiner, "The Tomb of Amenemhēt," 1915, p. 83, footnote)
has, I think, overlooked certain statements in my writings and
underestimated the antiquity of the embalmer's art; for he attributes to
me the opinion that "mummification was a custom of relatively late
growth".

The presence in China of the characteristically Egyptian beliefs
concerning the animation of statues (de Groot, *op. cit.* pp. 339-356),
whereas the practice of mummification, though not wholly absent, is not
obtrusive, might perhaps be interpreted by some scholars as evidence in
favour of the <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> development of the custom
of making statues independently of mummification. But such an inference
is untenable. Not only is it the fact that in most parts of the world
the practices of making statues and mummifying the dead are found in
association the one with the other, but also in China the essential
beliefs concerning the dead are based upon the supposition that the body
is fully preserved (*see* de Groot, chap. xv.). It is quite evident that
the Chinese customs have been derived directly or indirectly from some
people who mummified their dead as a regular practice. There can be no
doubt that the ultimate source of their inspiration to do these things
was Egypt.

I need mention only one of many identical peculiarities that makes this
quite certain. De Groot says it is "strange to see Chinese fancy depict
the souls of the viscera as distinct individuals with animal forms" (p.
71). The same custom prevailed in Egypt, where the "souls" or protective
deities were first given animal forms in the Nineteenth Dynasty
(Reisner).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[21:1](eod08.htm#fr_36) The Arabic word conveys
the idea of being "hidden underground," because the house is exposed by
excavation.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[21:2](eod08.htm#fr_37) *Op. cit. supra*,
Ridgeway Essays; also *Man*, 1913, p. 193.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[22:1](eod08.htm#fr_38) See Alan H. Gardiner,
"Life and Death (Egyptian)," Hastings’ *Encyclopædia of Religion and
Ethics*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[22:2](eod08.htm#fr_39) See the quotation from
Mr. Quibell's account in my statement in the *Report of the British
Association for* 1914, p. 215.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Significance of Libations](eod09)
