[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod12)  [Next](eod14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POWER OF THE EYE.

In attempting to understand the peculiar functions attributed to the eye
it is essential that the inquirer should endeavour to look at the
problem from the early Egyptian's point of view. After moulding into
shape the wrappings of the mummy so as to restore as far as possible the
form of the deceased the embalmer then painted eyes upon the face. So
also when the sculptor had learned to make finished models in stone or
wood, and by the addition of paint had enhanced the life-like
appearance, the statue was still merely a dead thing. What were needed
above all to enliven it, literally and actually, in other words, to
animate it, were the eyes; and the Egyptian artist set to work and with
truly marvellous skill reproduced the appearance of living eyes ([Fig.
5](#img_fig05)), How ample was the justification for this belief will be
appreciated by anyone who glances at the remarkable photographs recently
published by Dr. Alan H. Gardiner. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90)
The wonderful eyes will be seen to make the statue sparkle and live. To
the concrete mind of the Egyptian this triumph of art was regarded

<span id="img_fig05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 5.STATUE OF
AN EGYPTIAN NOBLE OF THE PYRAMID AGE TO SHOW THE TECHNICAL SKILL IN THE
REPRESENTATION OF LIFE-LIKE EYES](tn/fig05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig05.jpg)  
FIG. 5.—STATUE OF AN EGYPTIAN NOBLE OF THE PYRAMID AGE TO SHOW THE
TECHNICAL SKILL IN THE REPRESENTATION OF LIFE-LIKE EYES  
</span>

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

not as a mere technical success or æsthetic achievement. The artist was
considered to have made the statue really live; in fact, literally and
actually converted it into a "living image". The eyes themselves were
regarded as one of the chief sources of the vitality which had been
conferred upon the statue.

This is the explanation of all the elaborate care and skill bestowed
upon the making of artificial eyes. No doubt also it was largely
responsible for giving definition to the remarkable belief in the
animating power of the eye. But so many other factors of most diverse
kinds played a part in building up the complex theory of the eye's
fertilizing potency that all the stages in the process of
rationalization cannot yet be arranged in orderly sequence.

I refer to the question here and suggest certain aspects of it that seem
worthy of investigation merely for the purpose of stimulating some
student of early Egyptian literature to look into the matter
further. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

As death was regarded as a kind of sleep and the closing of the eyes was
the distinctive sign of the latter condition the open eyes were not
unnaturally regarded as clear evidence of wakefulness and life. In fact,
to a matter-of-fact people the restoration of the eyes to the mummy or
statue was equivalent to an awakening to life.

At a time when a reflection in a mirror or in a sheet of water was
supposed to afford quite positive evidence of the reality of each
individual's "double," and when the "soul," or more concretely, "life,"
was imagined to be a minute image or homunculus, it is quite likely that
the reflection in the eye may have been interpreted as the "soul"
dwelling within it. The eye was certainly regarded as peculiarly rich in
"soul substance". It was not until Osiris received from Horus the eye
which had been wrenched out in the latter's combat with Set that he
"became a soul". <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92)

It is a remarkable fact that this belief in the animating power of the
eye spread as far east as Polynesia and America, and as far west as the
British Islands.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Of course the obvious physiological functions of the eyes as means of
communication between their possessor and the world around him; the
powerful influence of the eyes for expressing feeling and emotion
without speech; the analogy between the closing and opening of the eyes
and the changes of day and night, are all hinted at in Egyptian
literature.

But there were certain specific factors that seem to have helped to give
definiteness to these general ideas of the physiology of the eyes. The
tears, like all the body moisture, came to share the life-giving
attributes of water in general. And when it is recalled that at funeral
ceremonies emotion found natural expression in the shedding of tears, it
is not unlikely that this came to be assimilated with all the other
water-symbolism of the funerary ritual. The early literature of Egypt,
in fact, refers to the part played by Isis and Nephthys in the
reanimation of Osiris, when the tears they shed as mourners brought life
back to the god. But the fertilizing tears of Isis were life-giving in
the wider sense. They were said to cause the inundation which fertilized
the soil of Egypt, meaning presumably that the "Eye of Re" sent the
rain.

There is the further possibility that the beliefs associated with the
cowry may have played some part, if not in originating, at any rate in
emphasizing the conception of the fertilizing powers of the eye. I have
already mentioned the outstanding features of the symbolism of the
cowry. In many places in Africa and elsewhere the similarity of this
shell to the half-closed eyelids led to its use as an artificial "eye"
in mummies. The use of the same objects to symbolize the female
reproductive organs and the eyes may have played some part in
transferring to the latter the fertility of the former. The gods were
born of the eyes of Ptah. Might not the confusion of the eye with the
genitalia have given a meaning to this statement? There is evidence of
this double symbolism of these shells. Cowry shells have also been
employed, both in the Persian Gulf and the Pacific, to decorate the bows
of boats, probably for the dual purpose of representing eyes and
conferring vitality upon the vessel. These facts suggest that the belief
in the fertilizing power of the eyes may to some extent be due to this
cowry-association. Even if it be admitted that all the known cases of
the use of cowries as eyes of mummies are relatively late, and that it
is not known to have been employed for such a purpose in Egypt, the mere
fact that the likeness to the eyelids

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

so readily suggests itself may have linked together the attributes of
the cowry and the eye even in Predynastic times, when cowries were
placed with the dead in the grave.

Hathor's identification with the "Eye of Re" may possibly have been an
expression of the same idea. But the rôle of the "Eye of Re" was due
primarily to her association with the moon (*vide infra*, [p.
56](eod14.htm#page_56)).

The apparently hopeless tangle of contradictions involved in these
conceptions of Hathor will have to be unravelled. For "no eye is to be
feared more than thine (Re's) when it attacketh in the form of Hathor"
(Maspero, *op. cit*. p. 165). If it was the beneficent life-giving
aspect of the eye which led to its identification with Hathor, in course
of time, when the reason for this connexion was lost sight of, it became
associated with the malevolent, death-dealing *avatar* of the goddess,
and became the expression of the god's anger and hatred toward his
enemies. It is not unlikely that such a confusion may have been
responsible for giving concrete expression to the general psychological
fact that the eyes are obviously among the chief means for expressing
hatred for and intimidating and "brow-beating" one's fellows. \[In my
lecture on "The Birth of Aphrodite" I shall explain the explicit
circumstances that gave rise to these contradictions.\]

It is significant that, in addition to the widespread belief in the
"evil eye"—which in itself embodies the same confusion, the expression
of admiration that works evil—in a multitude of legends it is the eye
that produces petrifaction. The "stony stare" causes death and the dead
become transformed into statues, which, however, usually lack their
original attribute of animation. These stories have been collected by
Mr. E. S. Hartland in his "Legend of Perseus".

There is another possible link in the chain of associations between the
eye and the idea of fertility. I have already referred to the
development of the belief that incense, which plays so prominent a part
in the ritual for conferring vitality upon the dead, is itself replete
with animating properties. "Glaser has already shown the *anti* incense
of the Egyptian Punt Reliefs to be an Arabian word, *a-a-nete*,
'tree-eyes' (*Punt und die Südarabischen Reiche*, p. 7), and to refer to
the large lumps … as distinguished from the small round drops, which are
supposed to be tree-tears or the tree-blood." <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[52:1](eod13.htm#fr_90) "A New Masterpiece of
Egyptian Sculpture," The *Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. IV, Part
I, Jan., 1917.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[53:1](eod13.htm#fr_91) In all probability the
main factor that was responsible for conferring such definite
life-giving powers upon the eye was the identification of the moon with
the Great Mother. The moon was the Eye of Re, the sky-god.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[53:2](eod13.htm#fr_92) Breasted, "Religion and
Thought in Ancient Egypt," p. 59. The meaning of the phrase rendered "a
soul" here would be more accurately given by the word "reanimated".

<span id="fn_93"></span>[55:1](eod13.htm#fr_93) Wilfred H. Schoff, "The
Periplus of the Erythræan Sea," 1912, p. 164.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Moon and the Sky-World](eod14)
