[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod15)  [Next](eod17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

#### THE DIFFUSION OF CULTURE.

In these pages I have made no attempt to deal with the far-reaching and
intricate problems of the diffusion abroad of the practices and beliefs
which I have been discussing. But the thoughts and the aspirations of
every cultured people are permeated through and through with their
influence.

It is important to remember that in almost every stage of the
development of these complex customs and ideas not merely the "finished
product" but also the ingredients out of which it was built up were
being scattered abroad.

 

I shall briefly refer to certain evidence from Asia and America in
illustration of this fact and in substantiation of the reality of the
diffusion to the East of some of the beliefs I have been discussing.

The unity of Egyptian and Babylonian ideas is nowhere more strikingly
demonstrated than in the essential identity of the attributes of Osiris
and Ea. It affords the most positive proof of the derivation of the
beliefs from some common source, and reveals the fact that Egyptian and
Sumerian civilizations must have been in intimate cultural contact at
the beginning of their developmental history. "In Babylonia, as in
Egypt, there were differences of opinion regarding the origin of life
and the particular natural element which represented the vital
principle." "One section of the people, who were represented by the
worshippers of Ea, appear to have believed that the essence of life was
contained in water. The god of Eridu was the source of the 'water of
life'." <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106)

"Offerings of water and food were made to the dead," not primarily so
that they might be "prevented from troubling the living," <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) but to supply them with the means of
sustenance and to

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

reanimate them to help the suppliants. It is a common belief that these
and other procedures were inspired by fear of the dead. But such a
statement does not accurately represent the attitude of mind of the
people who devised these funerary ceremonies. For it is not the enemies
of the dead or those against whom he had a grudge that run a risk at
funerals, but rather his friends; and the more deeply he was attached to
a particular person the greater the danger for the latter. For among
many people the belief obtains that when a man dies he will endeavour to
steal the "soul-substance" of those who are dearest to him so that they
may accompany him to the other world. But as stealing the
"soul-substance" <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) means death, it
is easy to misunderstand such a display of affection. Hence most people
who long for life and hate death do their utmost to evade such
embarrassing tokens of love; and most ethnologists, misjudging such
actions, write about "appeasing the dead". It was those whom the gods
*loved* who died young.

Ea was not only the god of the deep, but also "lord of life," king of
the river and god of creation. Like Osiris "he fertilized parched and
sunburnt wastes through rivers and irrigating canals, and conferred upon
man the sustaining 'food of life'. … The goddess of the dead commanded
her servant to 'sprinkle the Lady Ishtar with the water of life'" (*op.
cit.* p. 44).

In Chapter III. of Mr. Mackenzie's book, from which I have just

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

quoted, there is an interesting collection of quotations clearly showing
that the conception of the vitalizing properties of the body moisture of
gods is not restricted to Egypt, but is found also in Babylonia and
India, in Western Asia and Greece, and also in Western Europe.

It has been suggested that the name Ishtar has been derived from.
Semitic roots implying "she who waters," "she who makes fruitful". <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109)

Barton claims that: "The beginnings of Semitic religion as they were
conceived by the Semites themselves go back to sexual relations … the
Semitic conception of deity … embodies the truth—grossly indeed, but
nevertheless embodies it—that 'God is love'" (*op. cit.* p. 107). \[This
statement, however, is very misleading—see Appendix C, [p.
75](eod19.htm#page_75).\]

Throughout the countries where Semitic <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) influence spread the primitive
Mother-Goddesses or some of their specialized variants are found. But in
every case the goddess is associated with many distinctive traits which
reveal her identity with her homologues in Cyprus, Babylonia, and Egypt.

Among the Sumerians "life comes on earth through the introduction of
water and irrigation". <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) "Man also
results from a union between the water-gods."

The Akkadians held views which were almost the direct antithesis of
these. To them "the watery deep is disorder, and the cosmos, the order
of the world, is due to the victory of a god of light and spring over
the monster of winter and water; man is directly made by the
gods". <span id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112)

"The Sumerian account of Beginnings centres around the production by the
gods of water, Enki and his consort Nin-ella (or Dangal), of a great
number of canals bringing rain to the desolate fields of a dry
continent. Life both of vegetables and animals follows the profusion of
the vivifying waters. … In the process of life's production besides
Enki, the personality of his consort is very conspicuous. She is called

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Nin-Ella*, 'the
pure Lady,' *Damgal-Nunna*, the 'great Lady of the Waters,' *Nin-Tu*,
'the Lady of Birth'" (p. 301). The child of Enki and Nin-ella was the
ancestor of mankind. <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113)

"In later traditions, the personality of that Great Lady seems to have
been overshadowed by that of Ishtar, who absorbed several of her
functions" (p. 301).

Professor Carnoy fully demonstrates the derivation of certain early
so-called "Aryan" beliefs from Chaldea. In the Iranian account of the
creation "the great spring Ardvī Sūra Anāhita is the life-increasing,
the herd-increasing, the fold-increasing who makes prosperity for all
countries (Yt. 5, 1) … that precious spring is worshipped as a goddess …
and is personified as a handsome and stately woman. She is a fair maid,
most strong, tall of form, high-girded. Her arms are white and thick as
a horse's shoulder or still thicker. She is full of gracefulness" (Yt.
5, 7, 64, 78). "Professor Cumont thinks that Anāhita is Ishtar … she is
a goddess of fecundation and birth. Moreover in Achæmenian inscriptions
Anāhita is associated with Ahura Mazdāh and Mithra, a triad
corresponding to the Chaldean triad: Sin-Shamash-Ishtar. Ἀνάιτις in
Strabo and other Greek writers is treated as Ἀφροδίτη" (p. 302).

But in Mesopotamia also the same views were entertained as in Egypt of
the functions of statues.

"The statues hidden in the recesses of the temples or erected on the
summits of the 'Ziggurats' became imbued, by virtue of their
consecration, with the actual body of the god whom they represented."
Thus Marduk is said to "inhabit his image" (Maspero, *op. cit.* p. 64).

This is precisely the idea which the Egyptians had. Even at the present
day it survives among the Dravidian peoples of India. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114) They make images of their village
deities, which may be permanent or only temporary, but in any case they
are regarded not as actual deities but as the "bodies" so to speak into
which these deities can enter. They are sacred only when they are so
animated by the goddess. The

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

ritual of animation is essentially identical with that found in Ancient
Egypt. Libations are poured out; incense is burnt; the bleeding right
fore-leg of a buffalo constitutes the blood-offering. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115) When the deity is reanimated by these
procedures and its consciousness restored by the blood-offering it can
hear appeals and speak.

The same attitude towards their idols was adopted by the Polynesians.
"The priest usually addressed the image, into which it was imagined the
god entered when anyone came to inquire his will." <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116)

But there are certain other aspects of these Indian customs that are of
peculiar interest. In my Ridgeway essay (*op. cit. supra*) I referred to
the means by which in Nubia the degradation of the oblong Egyptian
*mastaba* gave rise to the simple stone circle. This type spread to the
west along the North African littoral, and also to the Eastern desert
and Palestine. At some subsequent time mariners from the Red Sea
introduced this practice into India.

\[It is important to bear in mind that two other classes of stone
circles were invented. One of them was derived, not from the *mastaba*
itself, but from the enclosing wall surrounding it (see my Ridgeway
essay, Fig. 13, p. 531, and compare with Figs. 3 and 4, p. 510, for
illustrations of the transformed *mastaba*-type). This type of circle
(enclosing a dolmen) is found both in the Caucasus-Caspian area as well
as in India. A highly developed form of this encircling type of
structure is seen in the famous rails surrounding the Buddhist *stupas*
and *dagabas*. A third and later form of circle, of which Stonehenge is
an example, was developed out of the much later New Empire Egyptian
conception of a temple.\]

But at the same time, as in Nubia, and possibly in Libya, the *mastaba*
was being degraded into the first of the three main varieties of stone
circle, other, though less drastic, forms of simplification of the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

*mastaba* were taking place, possibly in Egypt itself, but certainly
upon the neighbouring Mediterranean coasts. In some respects the least
altered copies of the *mastaba* are found in the so-called "giant's
graves" of Sardinia and the "horned cairns" of the British Isles. But
the real features of the Egyptian *serdab*, which was the essential
part, the nucleus so to speak, of the *mastaba*, are best preserved in
the so-called "holed dolmens" of the Levant, the Caucasus, and India.
\[They also occur sporadically in the West, as in France and Britain.\]

Such dolmens and more simplified forms are scattered in Palestine, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117) but are seen to best advantage upon the
Eastern Littoral of the Black Sea, the Caucasus, and the neighbourhood
of the Caspian. They are found only in scattered localities between the
Black and Caspian Seas. As de Morgan has pointed out, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_118) their distribution is explained by their
association with ancient gold and copper mines. They were the tombs of
immigrant mining colonies who had settled in these definite localities
to exploit these minerals.

Now the same types of dolmens, also associated with ancient mines, <span
id="fr_119"></span>[3](#fn_119) are found in India. There is some
evidence to suggest that these degraded types of Egyptian *mastabas*
were introduced into India at some time after the adoption of the other,
the Nubian modification of the *mastaba* which is represented by the
first variety of stone circle. <span id="fr_120"></span>[4](#fn_120)

I have referred to these Indian dolmens for the specific purpose of
illustrating the complexities of the processes of diffusion of culture.
For not only have several variously specialized degradation-products of
the same original type of Egyptian *mastaba* reached India, possibly by
different routes and at different times, but also many of the ideas

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

that developed out of the funerary ritual in Egypt--of which the mastaba
was merely one of the manifestations—made their way to India at various
times and became secondarily blended with other expressions of the same
or associated ideas there. I have already referred to the essential
elements of the Egyptian funerary ritual—the statues, incense,
libations, and the rest—as still persisting among the Dravidian peoples.

But in the Madras Presidency dolmens are found converted into Siva
temples. <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121) Now in the inner chamber
of the shrine—which represents the homologue of the *serdab*—in place of
the statue or bas-relief of the deceased or of the deity, which is found
in some of them (see Plate 1), there is the stone *linga-yoni* emblem in
the position corresponding to that in which, in the later temple in the
same locality (Kambaduru), there is an image of Parvati, the consort of
Siva.

The earliest deities in Egypt, both Osiris and Hathor, were really
expressions of the creative principle. In the case of Hathor, the
goddess was, in fact, the personification of the female organs of
reproduction. <span id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122) In these early Siva
temples in India these principles of creation were given their literal
interpretation, and represented frankly as the organs of reproduction of
the two sexes. The gods of creation were symbolized by models in stone
of the creating organs. Further illustrations of the same principle are
witnessed in the Indonesian megalithic monuments which Perry calls
"dissoliths". <span id="fr_123"></span>[3](#fn_123)

The later Indian temples, both Buddhist and Hindu, were developed from
these early dolmens, as Mr. Longhurst's reports so clearly demonstrate.
But from time to time there was an influx of new ideas from the West
which found expression in a series of modifications of the architecture.
Thus India provides an admirable illustration of this principle of
culture contact. A series of waves of megalithic culture introduced
purely Western ideas. These were developed by the local people in their
own way, constantly intermingling a variety of cultural influences to
weave them into a distinctive

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

fabric, which was compounded partly of imported, partly of local
threads, woven locally into a truly Indian pattern. In this process of
development one can detect the effects of Mycenean accretions (see for
example Longhurst's Plate XIII), probably modified during its indirect
transmission by Phœnician and later influences; and also the more
intimate part played by Babylonian, Egyptian, and, later, Greek and
Persian art and architecture in directing the course of development of
Indian culture.

Incidentally, in the course of the discussions in the foregoing pages, I
have referred to the profound influence of Egyptian, Babylonian and
Indian ideas in Eastern Asia. Perry's important book (*op. cit. supra*)
reveals their efforts in Indonesia. Thence they spread across the
Pacific to America.

In the "Migrations of Early Culture" (p. 114) I called attention to the
fact that among the Aztecs water was poured upon the head of the mummy.
This ritual procedure was inspired by the Egyptian idea of libations,
for, according to Brasseur de Bourbourg, the pouring out of the water
was accompanied by the remark "C’est cette eau que to as reçue en venant
au monde".

But incense-burning and blood-offering were also practised in America.
In an interesting memoir <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) on the
practice of blood-letting by piercing the ears and tongue, Mrs. Zelia
Nuttall reproduces a remarkable picture from a "partly unpublished MS.
of Sahagun's work preserved in Florence". "The image of the sun is held
up by a man whose body is partly hidden, and two men, seated opposite to
each other in the foreground, are in the act of piercing the helices or
external borders of their ears." But in addition to these
blood-offerings to the sun, two priests are burning incense in
remarkably Egyptian-like censers, and another pair are blowing
conch-shell trumpets.

But it was not merely the use of incense and libations and the
identities in the wholly arbitrary attributes of the American pantheon
that reveal the sources of their derivation in the Old World. When the
Spaniards first visited Yucatan they found traces of a Maya baptismal
rite which the natives called *zihil*, signifying "to be born again". At
the ceremony also incense was burnt. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125)

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

The forehead, the face, the fingers and toes were moistened. "After they
had been thus sprinkled with water, the priest arose and removed the
cloths from the heads of the children, and then cut off with a stone
knife a certain bead that was attached to the head from
childhood." <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126)

\[The custom of wearing such a bead during childhood is found in Egypt
at the present day.\]

In the case of the girls, their mothers "divested them of a cord which
was worn during their childhood, fastened round the loins, having a
small shell that hung in front ('una conchuela asida que les venia a dar
encima de la parte honesta'—Landa). The removal of this signified that
they could marry." <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127)

This use of shells is found in the Soudan and East Africa at the present
day. <span id="fr_128"></span>[3](#fn_128) The girdle upon which the
shells were hung is the prototype of the cestus of Hathor, Ishtar,
Aphrodite, Kali and all the goddesses of fertility in the Old World. It
is an admirable illustration of the fact that not only were the finished
products, the goddesses and their fantastic repertory of attributes,
transmitted to the New World, but also the earliest and most primitive
ingredients out of which the complexities of their traits were
compounded.

In Chapter III ("The Birth of Aphrodite") I shall explain what an
important part the invention of this girdle played in the development of
the material side of civilization and the even vaster influence it
exerted upon beliefs and ethics. It represents the first stage in the
evolution of clothing; and it was responsible for originating the belief
in love-philtres and in the possibility of foretelling the future.

It would lead me too far from my main purpose in this book to discuss
the widespread geographical distribution and historical associations of
the customs of baptism and pouring libations among different peoples. I
may, however, refer the reader to an article by Mr. Elsdon Best,
entitled "Ceremonial Performances Pertaining to Birth, as Performed by
the Maori of New Zealand in Past Times" (*Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute*, Vol. XLIV, 1914, p. 127), which sheds a
clear light upon the general problem.

The whole subject of baptismal ceremonies is well worth detailed study
as a remarkable demonstration of the spread of culture in early times.

<span id="img_fig06"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
6.REPRESENTATION OF THE ANCIENT MEXICAN WORSHIP OF THE SUN&lt;br&gt;
The image of the sun is held up by a man in front of his face; two men
blow conch-shell trumpets; another pair burn incense; and a third pair
make blood-offerings by piercing their earsafter Zelia
Nuttall.](tn/fig06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig06.jpg)  
FIG. 6.—REPRESENTATION OF THE ANCIENT MEXICAN WORSHIP OF THE SUN  
The image of the sun is held up by a man in front of his face; two men
blow conch-shell trumpets; another pair burn incense; and a third pair
make blood-offerings by piercing their ears—after Zelia Nuttall.  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[62:1](eod16.htm#fr_106) Donald A. Mackenzie,
"Myths of Babylonia and Assyria," p. 44 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[62:2](eod16.htm#fr_107) Dr. Alan Gardiner has
protested against the assertions of "some Egyptologists, influenced more
by anthropological theorists than by the unambiguous evidence of the
Egyptian texts," to the effect that "the funerary rites and practices of
the Egyptians were in the main precautionary measures serving to protect
the living against the dead" (Article "Life and Death (Egyptian),"
Hastings’ *Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics*). I should like to
emphasize the fact that the "anthropological theorists," who so
frequently put forward these claims have little more justification for
them than "some <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> Egyptologists". Careful
study of the best evidence from Babylonia, India, Indonesia, and Japan,
reveals the fact that anthropologists who make such claims have in many
cases misinterpreted the facts. In an article on "Ancestor Worship" by
Professor Nobushige Hozumi in A. Stead's "Japan by the Japanese" (1904)
the true point of view is put very clearly: "The origin of
ancestor-worship is ascribed by many eminent writers to the *dread of
ghosts* and the sacrifices made to the souls of ancestors for the
purpose of *propitiating* them. It appears to me more correct to
attribute the origin of ancestor-worship to a contrary cause. It was the
love of ancestors, not the *dread* of them" \[Here he quotes the Chinese
philosophers Shiu-ki and Confucius in corroboration\] that impelled men
to worship. "We celebrate the anniversary of our ancestors, pay visits
to their graves, offer flowers, food and drink, burn incense and bow
before their tombs, entirely from a feeling of love and respect for
their memory, and no question of 'dread' enters our minds in doing so"
(pp. 281 and 282). \[See, however, Appendix B, [p.
74](eod18.htm#page_74).\]

<span id="fn_108"></span>[63:1](eod16.htm#fr_108) For, as I have already
explained, the idea so commonly and mistakenly conveyed by the term
"soul-substance" by writers on Indonesian and Chinese beliefs would be
much more accurately rendered simply by the word "life," so that the
stealing of it necessarily means death.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[64:1](eod16.htm#fr_109) Barton, *op. cit.* p.
105.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[64:2](eod16.htm#fr_110) The evidence set forth
in these pages makes it clear that such ideas are not restricted to the
Semites: nor is there any reason to suppose that they originated amongst
them.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[64:3](eod16.htm#fr_111) Albert J. Carnoy,
"Iranian Views of Origins in Connexion with Similar Babylonian Beliefs,"
*Journal of the American Oriental Society*, Vol. XXXVI, 1916, pp.
300-20.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[64:4](eod16.htm#fr_112) This is Professor
Carnoy's summary of Professor Jastrow's views as expressed in his
article "Sumerian and Akkadian Views of Beginnings".

<span id="fn_113"></span>[65:1](eod16.htm#fr_113) Jastrow's
interpretation of a recently-discovered tablet published by Langdon
under the title *The Sumerian Epic of Paradise, the Flood and the Fall
of Man*.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[65:2](eod16.htm#fr_114) I have already ([p.
43](eod12.htm#page_43)) mentioned the fact that it is still preserved in
China also.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[66:1](eod16.htm#fr_115) Henry Whitehead
(Bishop of Madras), "The Village Deities of Southern India," Madras
Government Museum, Bull., Vol. V, No. 3, 1907; Wilber Theodore Elmore,
"Dravidian Gods in Modern Hinduism: A Study of the Local and Village
Deities of Southern India," University Studies: University of Nebraska,
Vol. XV, No. 1, Jan., 1915. Compare the sacrifice of the fore-leg of a
living calf in Egypt—A. E. P. B. Weigall, "An Ancient Egyptian Funeral
Ceremony," *Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. II, 1915, p. 10. Early
literary references from Babylonia suggest that a similar method of
offering blood was practised there.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[66:2](eod16.htm#fr_116) William Ellis,
"Polynesian Researches," 2nd edition, 1832, Vol. I, p. 373.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[67:1](eod16.htm#fr_117) See H. Vincent,
"Canaan d’après l’exploration récente," Paris, 1907, p. 395.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[67:2](eod16.htm#fr_118) "Les Premières
Civilizations," Paris, 1909, p. 404: Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse,
Tame VIII, archéol.; and Mission Scientifique au Caucase, Tome I.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[67:3](eod16.htm#fr_119) W. J. Perry, "The
Relationship between the Geographical Distribution of Megalithic
Monuments and Ancient Mines," *Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester
Literary and Philosophical Society*, Vol. 60, Part I, 24th Nov., 1915.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[67:4](eod16.htm#fr_120) The evidence for this
is being prepared for publication by Captain Leonard Munn, R.E., who has
personally collected the data in Hyderabad.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[68:1](eod16.htm#fr_121) Annual Report of the
Archæological Department, Southern Circle, Madras, for the year
1915-1916. See for example Mr. A. H. Longhurst's photographs and plans
(Plates I-IV) and especially that of the old Siva temple at Kambaduru,
Plate IV (*b*).

<span id="fn_122"></span>[68:2](eod16.htm#fr_122) As I shall show in
"The Birth of Aphrodite" (Chapter III).

<span id="fn_123"></span>[68:3](eod16.htm#fr_123) W. J. Perry, "The
Megalithic Culture of Indonesia".

<span id="fn_124"></span>[69:1](eod16.htm#fr_124) "A Penitential Rite of
the Ancient Mexicans," Archæological and Ethnological *Papers of the
Peabody Museum*, Harvard University, Vol. I, No. 7, 1904.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[69:2](eod16.htm#fr_125) Bancroft, *op. cit.*
Vol. II, pp. 682 and 683.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[70:1](eod16.htm#fr_126) *Op. cit.* p. 684.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[70:2](eod16.htm#fr_127) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[70:3](eod16.htm#fr_128) See J. Wilfrid
Jackson, *op. cit. supra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary](eod17)
