[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod09)  [Next](eod11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### EARLY BIOLOGICAL THEORIES.

Before the full significance of these procedures can be appreciated it
is essential to try to get at the back of the Proto-Egyptian's mind and
to understand his general trend of thought. I specially want to make it
clear that the ritual use of water for animating the corpse or the
statue was merely a specific application of the general principles of
biology which were then current. It was no mere childish make-believe or
priestly subterfuge to regard the pouring out of water as a means of
animating a block of stone. It was a conviction for which the
Proto-Egyptians considered there was a substantial scientific basis; and
their faith in the efficacy of water to animate the dead is to be

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

regarded in the same light as any scientific inference which is made at
the present time to give a specific application of some general theory
considered to be well founded. The Proto-Egyptians clearly believed in
the validity of the general biological theory of the life-giving
properties of water. Many facts, no doubt quite convincing to them,
testified to the soundness of their theory. They accepted the principle
with the same confidence that modern people have adopted Newton's Law of
Gravitation, and Darwin's theory of the Origin of Species, and applied
it to explain many phenomena or to justify certain procedures, which in
the light of fuller knowledge seem to modern people puerile and
ludicrous. But the early people obviously took these procedures
seriously and regarded their actions as rational. The fact that their
early biological theory was inadequate ought not to mislead modern
scholars and encourage them to fall into the error of supposing that the
ritual of libations was not based upon a serious inference. Modern
scientists do not accept the whole of Darwin's teaching, or possibly
even Newton's "Law," but this does not mean that in the past innumerable
inferences have been honestly and confidently made in specific
application of these general principles.

It is important, then, that I should examine more closely the
Proto-Egyptian body of doctrine to elucidate the mutual influence of it
and the ideas suggested by the practice of mummification. It is not
known where agriculture was first practised or the circumstances which
led men to appreciate the fact that plants could be cultivated. In many
parts of the world agriculture can be carried on without artificial
irrigation, and even without any adequate appreciation on the part of
the farmer of the importance of water. But when it came to be practised
under such conditions as prevail in Egypt and Mesopotamia, the
cultivator would soon be forced to realize that water was essential for
the growth of plants, and that it was imperative to devise artificial
means by which the soil might be irrigated. It is not known where or by
whom this cardinal fact first came to be appreciated, whether by the
Sumerians or the Egyptians or by some other people. But it is known that
in the earliest records both of Egypt and Sumer the most significant
manifestations of a ruler's wisdom were the making of irrigation canals
and the controlling of water. Important as these facts are from their
bearing upon the material prospects of the people, they had an
infinitely more profound and far-reaching effect upon the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

beliefs of mankind. Groping after some explanation of the natural
phenomenon that the earth became fertile when water was applied to it,
and that seed burst into life under the same influence, the early
biologist formulated the natural and not wholly illogical idea that
water was the repository of life-giving powers. Water was equally
necessary for the production of life and for the maintenance of life.

At an early stage in the development of this biological theory man and
other animals were brought within the scope of the generalization. For
the drinking of water was a condition of existence in animals. The idea
that water played a part in reproduction was co-related with this fact.

Even at the present time many aboriginal peoples in Australia, New
Guinea, and elsewhere, are not aware of the fact that in the process of
animal reproduction the male exercises the physiological rile of
fertilization. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

There are widespread indications throughout the world that the
appreciation of this elementary physiological knowledge was acquired at
a relatively recent period in the history of mankind. It is difficult to
believe that the fundamental facts of the physiology of fertilization in
animals could long have remained unknown when men became breeders of
cattle. The Egyptian hieroglyphs leave no doubt that the knowledge was
fully appreciated at the period when the earliest picture-symbols were
devised, for the verb "to beget" is represented by the male organs of
generation. But, as the domestication of animals may have been earlier
than the invention of agriculture, it is possible that the appreciation
of the fertilizing powers of the male animal may have been definitely
more ancient than the earliest biological theory of the fertilizing
power of water.

I have discussed this question to suggest that the knowledge that
animals could be fertilized by the seminal fluid was certainly brought
within the scope of the wider generalization that water itself was
endowed with fertilizing properties. Just as water fertilized the earth,
so the semen fertilized the female. Water was

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

necessary for the maintenance of life in plants and was also essential
in the form of drink for animals. As both the earth and women could be
fertilized by water they were homologized one with the other. The earth
came to be regarded as a woman, the Great Mother. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) When the fertilizing water came to be
personified in the person of Osiris his consort Isis was identified with
the earth which was fertilized by water. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47)

One of the earliest pictures of an Egyptian king represents him using
the hoe to inaugurate the making of an irrigation-canal. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48) This was the typical act of benevolence on
the part of a wise ruler. It is not unlikely that the earliest
organization of a community under a definite leader may have been due to
the need for some systematized control of irrigation. In any case the
earliest rulers of Egypt and Sumer were essentially the controllers and
regulators of the water supply and as such the givers of fertility and
prosperity.

Once men first consciously formulated the belief that death was not the
end of all things, <span id="fr_49"></span>[4](#fn_49) that the body
could be re-animated and

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

consciousness and the will restored, it was natural that a wise ruler
who, when alive, had rendered conspicuous services should after death

continue to be consulted. The fame of such a man would grow with age;
his good deeds and his powers would become apotheosized; he would become
an oracle whose advice might be sought and whose help be obtained in
grave crises. In other words the dead king would be "deified," or at any
rate credited with the ability to confer even greater boons than he was
able to do when alive.

It is no mere coincidence that the first "god" should have been a dead
king, Osiris, nor that he controlled the waters of irrigation and was
specially interested in agriculture. Nor, for the reasons that I have
already suggested, is it surprising that he should have had phallic
attributes, and in himself have personified the virile powers of
fertilization. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

In attempting to explain the origin of the ritual procedures of burning
incense and offering libations it is essential to realize that the
creation of the first deities was not primarily an expression of
religious belief, but rather an application of science to national
affairs. It was the logical interpretation of the dominant scientific
theory of the time for the practical benefit of the living; or in other
words, the means devised for securing the advice and the active help of
wise rulers after their death. It was essentially a matter of practical
politics and applied science. It became "religion" only when the
advancement of knowledge superseded these primitive scientific theories
and left them as soothing traditions for the thoughts and aspirations of
mankind to cherish. For by the time the adequacy of these theories of
knowledge began to be questioned they had made an insistent appeal, and
had come to be regarded as an essential prop to lend support to man's
conviction of the reality of a life beyond the grave. A web of moral
precept and the allurement of hope had been so woven around them that no
force was able to strip away this body of consolatory

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

beliefs; and they have persisted for all time, although the reasoning by
which they were originally built up has been demolished and forgotten
several millennia ago.

It is not known where Osiris was born. In other countries there are
homologous deities, such as Ea, Tammuz, Adonis, and Attis, which are
certainly manifestations of the same idea and sprung from the same
source. Certain recent writers assume that the germ of the
Osiris-conception was introduced into Egypt from abroad. But if so,
nothing is known for certain of its place of origin. In any case there
can be no doubt that the distinctive features of Osiris, his real
personality and character, were developed in Egypt.

For reasons which I have suggested already it is probable that the
significance of water in cultivation was not realized until cereals were
cultivated in some such place as Babylonia or Egypt. But there are very
definite legends of the Babylonian Ea coming from abroad by way of the
Persian Gulf. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) The early history of
Tammuz is veiled in obscurity. Somewhere in South Western Asia or North
Eastern Africa, probably within a few years of the development of the
art of agriculture, some scientific theorist, interpreting the body of
empirical knowledge acquired by cultivating cereals, propounded the view
that water was the great life-giving element. This view eventually found
expression in the Osiris-group of legends.

This theory found specific application in the invention of libations and
incense. These practices in turn reacted upon the general body of
doctrine and gave it a more sharply defined form. The dead king also
became more real when he was represented by an actual embalmed body and
a life-like statue, sitting in state upon his throne and holding in his
hands the emblems of his high office.

Thus while, in the present state of knowledge, it would be unjustifiable
to claim that the Osiris-group of deities was invented in Egypt, and
certainly erroneous to attribute the general theory of the fertilizing
properties of water to the practice of embalming, it is true that the
latter was responsible for giving Osiris a much more concrete

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

and clearly-defined shape, of "making a god in the image of man," and
for giving to the water-theory a much richer and fuller significance
than it had before.

The symbolism so created has had a most profound influence upon the
thoughts and aspirations of the human race. For Osiris was the prototype
of all the gods; his ritual was the basis of all religious ceremonial;
his priests who conducted the animating ceremonies were the pioneers of
a long series of ministers who for more than fifty centuries, in spite
of the endless variety of details of their ritual and the character of
their temples, have continued to perform ceremonies that have undergone
remarkably little essential change, Though the chief functions of the
priest as the animator of the god and the restorer of his consciousness
have now fallen into the background in most religions, the ritual acts
(the incense and libations, the offerings of food and blood and the
rest) still persist in many countries: the priest still appeals by
prayer and supplication for those benefits, which the Proto-Egyptian
aimed at securing when he created Osiris as a god to give advice and
help. The prayer for rain is one of the earliest forms of religious
appeal, but the request for a plentiful inundation was earlier still.

I have already said that in using the terms "god" and "religion" with
reference to the earliest form of Osiris and the beliefs that grew up
with reference to him a potent element of confusion is introduced.

During the last fifty centuries the meanings of those two words have
become so complexly enriched with the glamour of a mystic symbolism that
the Proto-Egyptian's conception of Osiris and the Osirian beliefs must
have been vastly different from those implied in the words "god" and
"religion" at the present time. Osiris was regarded as an actual king
who had died and been reanimated. In other words he was a *man* who
could bestow upon his former subjects the benefits of his advice and
help, but could also display such human weaknesses as malice, envy, and
all uncharitableness. Much modern discussion completely misses the mark
by the failure to recognize that these so-called "gods" were really men,
equally capable of acts of beneficence and of outbursts of hatred, and
as one or the other aspect became accentuated the same deity could
become a Vedic *deva* or an Avestan *dæva*, a *deus* or a devil, a god
of kindness or a demon of wickedness.

The acts which the earliest "gods" were supposed to perform

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

were not at first regarded as supernatural. They were merely the boons
which the mortal ruler was supposed to be able to confer, by controlling
the waters of irrigation and rendering the land fertile. It was only
when his powers became apotheosized with a halo of accumulated glory
(and the growth of knowledge revealed the insecurity of the scientific
basis upon which his fame was built up) that a priesthood, reluctant to
abandon any of the attributes which had captured the popular
imagination, made it an obligation of belief to accept these
supernatural powers of the gods for which the student of natural
phenomena refused any longer to be a sponsor. This was the parting of
the ways between science and religion; and thenceforth the attributes of
the "gods" became definitely and admittedly superhuman.

As I have already stated ([p. 23](eod08.htm#page_23)) the original
object of the offering of libations was thus clearly for the purpose of
animating the statue of the deceased and so enabling him to continue the
existence which had merely been interrupted by the incident of death. In
course of time, however, as definite gods gradually materialized and
came to be represented by statues, they also had to be vitalized by
offerings of water from time to time. Thus the pouring out of libations
came to be an act of worship of the deity; and in this form it has
persisted until our own times in many civilized countries.

But not only was water regarded as a means of animating the dead, or
statues representing the dead, and an appropriate act of worship, in
that it vitalized an idol and the god dwelling in it was thus able to
hear and answer supplications. Water also became an essential part of
any act of ritual rebirth. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) As a
baptism it also symbolized the giving of life. The initiate was re-born
into a new communion of faith. In scores of other ways the same
conception of the life-giving properties of water was responsible for as
many applications of the use of libations in inaugurating new
enterprises, such as "baptising" ships and blessing buildings. It is
important to remember that, according to early Egyptian beliefs, the
continued existence of the dead was wholly dependent upon the attentions
of the living. Unless this animating ceremony was performed not merely
at the time of the funeral, but also at stated periods afterwards, and
unless the friends of the deceased

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

periodically supplied food and drink, such a continuation of existence
was impossible.

The development of these beliefs had far-reaching effects in other
directions. The idea that a stone statue could be animated ultimately
became extended to mean that the dead man could enter into and dwell in
a block of stone, which he could leave or return to at will. From this
arose the beliefs, which spread far and wide, that the dead, ancestors,
kings, or deified kings, dwelt in stones; and that they could be
consulted as oracles, who gave advice and counsel. The acceptance of
this idea that the dead could be reanimated in a stone statue no doubt
prepared the minds of the people to credit the further belief, which
other circumstances were responsible for creating, that men could be
turned into stone. In the next chapter I shall explain how these
petrifaction stories developed. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

All the rich crop of myths concerning men and animals dwelling in stones
which are to be found encircling the globe from Ireland to America, can
be referred back to these early Egyptian attempts to solve the mysteries
of death, and to acquire the means of circumventing fate.

These beliefs at first may have concerned human beings only. But in
course of time, as the duty of revictualling an increasingly large
number of tombs and temples tended to tax the resources of the people,
the practice developed of substituting for the real things models, or
even pictures, of food-animals, vegetables, and other requisites of the
dead. And these objects and pictures were restored to life or reality by
means of a ritual which was essentially identical with that used for
animating the statue or the mummy of the deceased himself. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54)

It is well worth considering whether this may not be one of the basal
factors in explanation of the phenomena which the late Sir Edward Tylor
labelled "animism".

So far from being a phase of culture through which many, if not all,
peoples have passed in the course of their evolution, may it not have
been merely an artificial conception of certain things, which was

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

given so definite a form in Egypt, for the specific reasons at which I
have just hinted, and from there spread far and wide?

Against this view may be urged the fact that our own children talk in an
animistic fashion. But is not this due in some measure to the
unconscious influence of their elders? Or at most is it not a vague and
ill-defined attitude of anthropomorphism necessarily involved in all
spoken languages, which is vastly different from what the ethnologist
understands by "animism" <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)?

But whether this be so or not, there can be no doubt that the "animism"
of the early Egyptians assumed its precise and clear-cut distinctive
features as the result of the growth of ideas suggested by the attempts
to make mummies and statues of the dead and symbolic offerings of food
and other funerary requisites.

Thus incidentally there grew up the belief in a power of magic by means
of which these make-believe offerings could be transformed into
realities. But it is important to emphasize the fact that originally the
conviction of the genuineness of this transubstantiation was a logical
and not unnatural inference based upon the attempt to interpret natural
phenomena, and then to influence them by imitating what were regarded as
the determining factors. <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56)

In China these ideas still retain much of their primitive influence and
directness of expression. Referring to the Chinese "belief in the
identity of pictures or images with the beings they represent" de Groot
states that the *kwan shuh* or "magic art" is a "main branch of Chinese
witchcraft". It consists essentially of "the infusion of a soul, life,
and activity into likenesses of beings, to thus render them fit to work
in some direction desired … this infusion is effected by blowing or
breathing, or spurting water over the likeness: indeed breath or *khi*,
or water from the mouth imbued with breath, is identical with *yang*
substance or life." <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[28:1](eod10.htm#fr_45) Baldwin Spencer and
Gillen, "The Northern Tribes of Central Australia"; "Across Australia";
and Spencer's "Native Tribes of the Northern Territory of Australia".
For a very important study of the whole problem with special reference
to New Guinea, see B. Malinowski, "Baloma: the Spirits of the Dead,"
etc., *Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute*, 1916, p. 415.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[29:1](eod10.htm#fr_46) The idea of the earth's
maternal function spread throughout the greater part of the world.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[29:2](eod10.htm#fr_47) With reference to the
assimilation of the conceptions of human fertilization and watering the
soil and the widespread idea among the ancients of regarding the male as
"he who irrigates," Canon van Hoonacker gave M. Louis Siret the
following note:—

"In Assyrian the cuneiform sign for water is also used, *inter alia*, to
express the idea of begetting (*banû*). Compare with this the references
from Hebrew and Arabic writings. In Isaiah xlviii. 1, we read 'Hear ye
this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are
come forth out of the waters of Judah'; and in Numbers xxiv. 7, 'Water
shall flow from his buckets and his seed shall be in many waters'.

"The Hebrew verb (*shangal*) which denotes sexual intercourse has, in
Arabic (*sadjala*), the meaning 'to spill water'. In the Koran, Sur. 36,
v. 6, the word *mâ’un* (water) is used to designate semen" (L. Siret,
"Questions de Chronologie et d’Ethnographie Ibériques," Tome I, 1913, p.
250).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[29:3](eod10.htm#fr_48) Quibell, "Hieraconpolis,
Vol. I, 260, 4.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[29:4](eod10.htm#fr_49) In using this phrase I
want to make a clear distinction between the phase of culture in which
it had never occurred to man that, in his individual case, life would
come to an end, and the more enlightened stage, in which he fully
realized that death would inevitably be his fate, but that in spite of
it his real existence would continue.

It is clear that at quite an early stage in his history man appreciated
the fact that he could kill an animal or his fellow-man. But for a long
time he failed to realize that he himself, if he could avoid the process
of mechanical <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> destruction by which he
could kill an animal or a fellow-man, would not continue to exist. The
dead are supposed by many people to be still in existence so long as the
body is preserved. Once the body begins to disintegrate even the most
unimaginative of men can entirely repress the idea of death. But to
primitive people the preservation of the body is equally a token that
existence has not come to an end. The corpse is merely sleeping.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[30:1](eod10.htm#fr_50) Breasted, *op. cit.*, p.
28.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[31:1](eod10.htm#fr_51) The possibility, or even
the probability, must be borne in mind that the legend of Ea arising
from the waters may be merely another way of expressing his primary
attribute as the personification of the fertilizing powers of water.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[33:1](eod10.htm#fr_52) This occurred at a later
epoch when the attributes of the water-controlling deity of fertility
became confused with those of the birth-giving mother goddess (*vide
infra*, [p. 40](eod11.htm#page_40)).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[34:1](eod10.htm#fr_53) For a large series of
these stories see E. Sidney Hartland's "Legend of Perseus". But even
more instructive, as revealing the intimate connexion of such ideas with
the beliefs regarding the preservation of the body, see J. J. M. de
Groot, "The Religious System of China," Vol. IV, Book II, 1901.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[34:2](eod10.htm#fr_54) In this connexion see de
Groot, *op. cit.* pp. 356 and 415.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[35:1](eod10.htm#fr_55) The child certainly
resembles primitive man in the readiness with which it attributes to
even the crudest models of animals or human beings the feelings of
living creatures.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[35:2](eod10.htm#fr_56) It became "magical" in
our sense of the term only when the growth of knowledge revealed the
fact that the measures taken were inadequate to attain the desired end;
while the "magician" continued to make the pretence that he could attain
that end by ultra-physical means.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[35:3](eod10.htm#fr_57) De Groot, *op. cit.* p.
356.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Incense](eod11)
