[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod10)  [Next](eod12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

#### INCENSE.

So far I have referred in detail only to the offering of libations. But
this was only one of several procedures for animating statues, mummies,
and food-offerings. I have still to consider the ritual procedures of
incense-burning and "opening the mouth".

From Mr. Blackman's translations of the Egyptian texts it is clear that
the burning of incense was intended to restore to the statue (or the
mummy) the odour of the living body, and that this was part of the
procedure considered necessary to animate the statue. He says "the
belief about incense \[which is explained by a later document, the
*Ritual of Amon*\] apparently does not occur in the Old Kingdom
religious texts that are preserved to us, yet it may quite well be as
ancient as that period. That is certainly Erman's view" (*op. cit*. p.
75).

He gives the following translation of the relevant passage in the
*Ritual of Amon* (XII, 11): "The god comes with body adorned which he
has fumigated with the eye of his body, the incense of the god which has
issued from his flesh, the sweat of the god which has fallen to the
ground, which he has given to all the gods. … It is the Horus eye. If it
lives, the people live, thy flesh lives, thy members are vigorous" (*op.
cit.* p. 72). In his comments upon this passage Mr. Blackman states: "In
the light of the Pyramid libation-formulæ the expressions in this text
are quite comprehensible. Like the libations. the grains of incense are
the exudations of a divinity, <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) 'the
fluid which issued from his flesh,' the god's sweat descending to the
ground. … Here incense is not merely the 'Odour of the god,' but the
grains of resin are said to be the god's sweat" (*op. cit.* p. 72).
"Both rites, the pouring of libations and the burning of incense, are
performed for the same purpose—to revivify the body \[or the statue\] of
god and man by restoring to it its lost moisture" (p. 75).

In attempting to reconstitute the circumstances which led to the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

invention of incense-burning as a ritual act, the nature of the problem
to be solved must be recalled. Among the most obtrusive evidences of
death were the coldness of the skin, the lack of perspiration and of the
odour of the living. It is important to realize what the phrase "odour
of the living" would convey to the Proto-Egyptian. From the earliest
Predynastic times in Egypt it had been the custom to make extensive use
of resinous material as an essential ingredient (what a pharmacist would
call the adhesive "vehicle") of cosmetics. One of the results of this
practice in a hot climate must have been the association of a strong
aroma of resin or balsam with a living person. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) Whether or not it was the practice to burn
incense to give pleasure to the living is not known. The fact that such
a procedure was customary among their successors may mean that it was
really archaic; or on the other hand the possibility must not be
overlooked that it may be merely the later vulgarization of a practice
which originally was devised for purely ritual purposes. The burning of
incense before a corpse or statue was intended to convey to it the
warmth, the sweat, and the odour of life.

When the belief became well established that the burning of incense was
potent as an animating force, and especially a giver of life to the
dead, it naturally came to be regarded as a divine substance in the
sense that it had the power of resurrection. As the grains of incense
consisted of the exudation of trees, or, as the ancient texts express
it, "their sweat," the divine power of animation in course of time
became transferred to the trees. They were no longer merely the source
of the life-giving incense, but were themselves animated by the deity
whose drops of sweat were the means of conveying life to the mummy.

The reason why the deity which dwelt in these trees was usually
identified with the Mother-Goddess will become clear in the course of
the subsequent discussion ([p. 38](#page_38)). It is probable that this
was due mainly to the geographical circumstance that the chief source of
incense was Southern Arabia, which was also the home of the primitive
goddesses of fertility. For they were originally nothing more than
personifications of the life-giving cowry amulets from the Red Sea.

Thus Robertson Smith's statement that "the value of the gum of the
acacia as an amulet is connected with the idea that it is a clot of

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

menstruous blood, *i.e.*, that the tree is a woman" <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) is probably an inversion of cause and
effect. It was the value attached to the gum that conferred animation
upon the tree. The rest of the legend is merely a rationalization based
upon the idea that the tree was identified with the mother-goddess. The
same criticism applies to his further contention (p. 427) with reference
to "the religious value of incense," which he claims to be due to the
fact that "like the gum of the *samora* (acacia) tree, … it was an
animate or divine plant".

Many factors played a part in the development of tree-worship, but it is
probable the origin of the sacredness of trees must be assigned to the
fact that it was acquired from the incense and the aromatic woods which
were credited with the power of animating the dead. But at a very early
epoch many other considerations helped to confirm and extend the
conception of deification. When Osiris was buried, a sacred sycamore
grew up as "the visible symbol of the imperishable life of
Osiris". <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61) But the sap of trees was
brought into relationship with life-giving water and thus constituted
another link with Osiris. The sap was also regarded as the blood of
trees and the incense that exuded as the sweat. Just as the water of
libation was regarded as the fluid of the body of Osiris, so also, by
this process of rationalization, the incense came to possess a similar
significance.

For reasons precisely analogous to those already explained in the case
of libations, the custom of burning incense, from being originally a
ritual act for animating the funerary statue, ultimately developed into
an act of homage to the deity.

But it also acquired a special significance when the cult of sky-gods
developed, <span id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62) for the smoke of the
burning incense then came to be regarded as the vehicle which wafted the
deceased's soul to the sky or conveyed there the requests of the
dwellers upon earth. <span id="fr_63"></span>[4](#fn_63)

"The soul of a human being is generally conceived \[by the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chinese\] as
possessing the shape and characteristics of a human being, and
occasionally those of an animal; … the spirit of an animal is the shape
of this animal or of some being with human attributes and speech. But
plant spirits are never conceived as plant-shaped, nor to have
plant-characters … whenever forms are given them, they are mostly
represented as a man, a woman, or a child, and often also as an animal,
dwelling in or near the plant, and emerging from it at times to do harm,
or to dispense blessings. … Whether conceptions on the animation of
plants have never developed in Chinese thought and worship before ideas
about human ghosts … had become predominant in mind and custom, we
cannot say: but the matter seems probable (De Groot, *op. cit*. pp. 272,
273). Tales of trees that shed blood and that cry out when hurt are
common in Chinese literature (p. 274) \[as also in Southern Arabia\];
also of trees that lodge or can change into maidens of transcendant
beauty (p. 276).

It is further significant that amongst the stories of souls of men
taking up their residence in and animating trees and plants, the human
being is usually a woman, accompanied by "a fox, a dog, an old raven or
the like" (p. 276).

Thus in China are found all the elements out of which Dr. Rendel Harris
believes the Aphrodite cult was compounded in Cyprus, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) the animation of the anthropoid plant, its
human cry, its association with a beautiful maiden and a dog. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65)

The immemorial custom of planting trees on graves in China is supposed
by De Groot (p. 277) to be due to "the desire to strengthen the soul of
the buried person, thus to save his body from corruption, for which
reason trees such as pines and cypresses, deemed to be bearers of great
vitality for being possessed of more *shen* than other trees, were used
preferably for such purposes". But may not such beliefs also be an
expression of the idea that a tree growing upon a grave is developed
from and becomes the personification of the deceased? The significance
of the selection of pines and cypresses may be compared to that
associated with the so-called "cedars" in Babylonia, Egypt, and
Phœnicia, and the myrrh- and frankincense- producing trees in Arabia and
East Africa. They have come to be

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

accredited with "soul-substance," since their use in mummification, and
as incense and for making coffins, has made them the means for attaining
a future existence. Hence in course of time they came to be regarded as
charged with the spirit of vitality, the Shen or "soul-substance".

In China also it was because the woods of the pine or fir and the
[cypress](errata.htm#1) were used for making coffins and grave-vaults
and that pine-resin was regarded as a means of attaining immortality (De
Groot, *op. cit.* pp. 296 and 297) that such veneration was bestowed
upon these trees. "At an early date, Taoist seekers after immortality
transplanted that animation \[of the hardy long-lived fir and
cypress <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)\] into themselves by
consuming the resin of those trees, which, apparently, they looked upon
as coagulated soul-substance, the counterpart of the blood in men and
animals" (p. 296).

In India the *amrita*, the god's food of immortality, was sometimes
regarded as the sap exuded from the sacred trees of paradise.

Elsewhere in these pages it is explained how the vaguely defined Mother
"Goddess" and the more distinctly anthropoid Water "God," which
originally developed quite independently the one of the other,
ultimately came to exert a profound and mutual influence, so that many
of the attributes which originally belonged to one of them came to be
shared with the other. Many factors played a part in this process of
blending and confusion of sex. As I shall explain later, when the moon
came to be regarded as the dwelling or the impersonation of Hathor, the
supposed influence of the moon over water led to a further assimilation
of her attributes with those of Osiris as the controller of water, which
received definite expression in a lunar form of Osiris.

But the link that is most intimately related to the subject of this
address is provided by the personification of the Mother-Goddess in
incense-trees. For incense thus became the sweat or the tears of the
Great Mother just as the water of libation was regarded as the fluid of
Osiris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[36:1](eod11.htm#fr_58) As I shall explain later
(see page [38](#page_38)), the idea of the divinity of the incense-tree
was a result of, and not the reason for, the practice of
incense-burning. As one of the means by which the resurrection was
attained incense became a giver of divinity; and by a simple process of
rationalization the tree which produced this divine substance became a
god.

The reference to the "eye of the body" (see [p. 55](eod13.htm#page_55))
means the life-giving god or goddess who is the "eye" of the sky, *i.e.*
the god with whom the dead king is identified.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[37:1](eod11.htm#fr_59) It would lead me too far
afield to enter into a discussion of the use of scents and unguents,
which is closely related to this question.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[38:1](eod11.htm#fr_60) "The Religion of the
Semites," p. 133.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[38:2](eod11.htm#fr_61) Breasted, p. 28.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[38:3](eod11.htm#fr_62) For reasons explained on
a subsequent page ([56](eod14.htm#page_56)).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[38:4](eod11.htm#fr_63) It is also worth
considering whether the extension of this idea may not have been
responsible for originating the practice of cremation—as a device for
transferring, not merely the animating incense and the supplications of
the living, but also the body of the deceased to the sky-world. This, of
course, did not happen in Egypt, but in some other country which adopted
the Egyptian practice of incense-burning, but was not hampered by the
religious conservatism that guarded the sacredness of the corpse.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[39:1](eod11.htm#fr_64) "The Ascent of Olympus,"
1917.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[39:2](eod11.htm#fr_65) For a collection of
stories relating to human beings, generally women, dwelling in trees,
see Hartland's "Legend of Perseus".

<span id="fn_66"></span>[40:1](eod11.htm#fr_66) The fact that the fir
and cypress are "hardy and long-lived" is not the reason for their being
accredited with these life-prolonging qualities. But once the latter
virtues had become attributed to them the fact that the trees were
"hardy and long-lived" may have been used to bolster up the belief by a
process of rationalization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Breath of Life](eod12)
