[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod25)  [Next](eod27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE DEER.

One of the most surprising features of the dragon in China, Japan and
America, is the equipment of deer's horns.

In Babylonia both Ea and Marduk are intimately associated with the
antelope or gazelle, and the combination of the head of the antelope (or
in other cases the goat) with the body of a fish is the most
characteristic manifestation of either god. In Egypt both Osiris and
Horus are at times brought into relationship with the gazelle or
antelope, but more often it represents their enemy Set. Hence, in some
parts of Africa, especially in the west, the antelope plays the part of
the dragon in Asiatic stories. <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) The
cow <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_224) of Hathor (Tiamat) may
represent the dragon also. In East Africa the antelope assumes the rôle
of the hero, <span id="fr_225"></span>[3](#fn_225) and is the
representative of Horus. In the Ægean area, Asia Minor

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

and Europe the antelope, gazelle or the deer, may be associated with the
Great Mother. <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226)

In India the god Soma's chariot is drawn by an antelope. I have already
suggested that Soma is only a specialized form of the Babylonian Ea,
whole evil *avatar* is the dragon: there is thus suggested another link
between the antelope and the latter. The Ea-element explains the
fish-scales and the antelope provides the horns. I shall return to the
discussion of this point later.

Vayu or Pavana, the Indian god of the winds, who afterwards became
merged with Indra, rides upon an antelope like the Egyptian Horus.
Soma's attributes also were in large measure taken over by Indra. Hence
in this complex tissue of contradictions we once more find the
dragon-slayer acquiring the insignia, in this case the antelope, of his
mortal enemy.

I have already referred to the fact that the early Babylonian deities
could also be demons. Tiamat, the dragon whom Marduk fought, was merely
the malevolent *avatar* of the Great Mother. The dragon acquired his
covering of fish-scales from an evil form of Ea.

In his Hibbert Lectures Professor Sayce claimed that the name of Ea was
expressed by an ideograph which signifies literally "the antelope" (p.
280). "Ea was called 'the antelope of the deep,' 'the antelope the
creator,' 'the lusty antelope'. We should have expected the animal of Ea
to have been the fish: the fact that it is not so points to the
conclusion that the culture-god of Southern Babylonia was an
amalgamation of two earlier deities, one the divine antelope and the
other the divine fish." Ea was "originally the god of the river and was
also associated with the snake". Nina was also both the fish-goddess and
the divinity whose name is interchanged with that of the deep. Professor
Sayce then refers to "the curious process of development which
transformed the old serpent-goddess, 'the lady Nina,' into the
embodiment of all that was hostile to the powers of heaven; but after
all, Nina had sprung from the fish-god of the deep \[who also was

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

both antelope and serpent as well, see p. 282\], and Tiamat is herself
'the deep' in Semitic dress" (p. 283).

"At times Ea was regarded as a gazelle rather than as an antelope." The
position of the name in the list of animals shows what species of animal
must be meant. *Lulim*, "a stag," seems to be a re-duplicated form of
the same word. Both *lulim* and *èlim* are said to be equivalent to
*sarru*, king (p. 284).

Certain Assyriologists, from whom I asked for enlightenment upon these
philological matters, express some doubt as to the antiquity or to the
reality of the association of the names of Ea and the word for an
antelope, gazelle or stag. But whatever the value of the linguistic
evidence, the archæological, at any rate as early as the time of
Nebuchadnezzar I, brings both Ea and Marduk into close association with
a strange creature equipped with the horns of an antelope or gazelle.
The association with the antelope of the homologous deities in India and
Egypt leaves the reality of the connexion in no doubt. I had hoped that
Professor Sayce's evidence would have provided some explanation of the
strange association of the antelope. But whether or not the philological
data justify the inferences which Professor Sayce drew from them, there
can be no doubt concerning the correctness of his statement that Ea was
represented both by fish and antelope, for in the course of his
excavations at Susa M. J. de Morgan brought to light representations of
Ea's animal consisting of an antelope's head on the body of a
fish. <span id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227) He also makes the statement
that the ideogram of Ea, *turahu-apsu*, means "antelope of the sea". I
have already ([p. 88](eod22.htm#page_88)) referred to the fact that this
"antelope of the sea," the so-called "goat-fish," is identical with the
prototype of the dragon.

If his claim that the names of Ea meant both a "fish" and an "antelope"
were well founded, the pun would have solved this problem, as it has
done in the case of many other puzzles in the history of early
civilization. But if this is not the case, the question is still. open
for solution. As Set was held to be personified in all the desert
animals, the gazelle was identified with the demon of evil for this
reason. In her important treatise on "The Asiatic Dionysos" Miss Gladys
Davis tells us that "in his aspect of Moon 'the lord of stars'

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soma has in this
character the antelope as his symbol. In fact, one of the names given to
the moon by the early Indians was 'mṛiga-piplu or marked like an
antelope" (p. 202). Further she adds: "The Sanskrit name for the lunar
mansion over which Soma presides is 'mṛiga-śiras' or the deer-headed."
If it be admitted that Soma is merely the Aryan specialization of Ea and
Osiris, as I have claimed, Sayce's association of Ea with the antelope
is corroborated, even if it is not explained.

In China the dragon was sometimes called "the celestial stag" (de Groot,
*op. cit.*, p. 1143). In Mexico the deer has the same intimate celestial
relations as it has in the Old World (see Seler, *Zeit. f. Ethnologie*,
Bd. 41, p. 414). I have already referred to the remarkable Maya
deer-crocodile *makara* in the Liverpool Museum (p. 103).

The systematic zoology of the ancients was lacking in the precision of
modern times; and there are reasons for supposing that the antelope and
gazelle could exchange places the one with the other in their divine
rôles; the deer and the rabbit were also their surrogates. In India a
spotted rabbit can take the place of the antelope in playing the part of
what we call "the man in the moon". This interpretation is common, not
only in India, but also in China, and is repeatedly found in the ancient
Mexican codices (Seler, *op. cit.*). In the spread of the ideas we have
just been considering from Babylonia towards the north we find that the
deer takes the place of the antelope.

In view of the close resemblance between the Indian god Soma and the
Phrygian Dionysus, which has been demonstrated by Miss Gladys Davis, it
is of interest to note that in the service of the Greek god a man was
disguised as a stag, slain and eaten. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228)

Artemis also, one of the many *avatars* of the Great Mother, who was
also related to the moon, was closely associated with the deer.

I have already referred to the fact that in Africa the dragon role of
the female antelope may be assumed by the cow or buffalo. In the case of
the gods Soma and Dionysus their association with the antelope or deer
may be extended to the bull. Miss Davis (*op. cit.*) states that in the
Homa Yasht the deer-headed lunar mansion over which the god presides is
spoken of as "leading the Paurvas," *i.e.* Pleiades: "Mazda brought to
thee (Homa) the star-studded spirit-fashioned girdle (the belt of Orion)
leading the Paurvas. Now the Bull-Dionysus

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

was especially associated with the Pleiades on ancient gems and in
classical mythology which form part of the sign Taurus." The bull is a
sign of Haoma (Homa) or Soma. The belt of the thunder-god Thor
corroborates the fact of the diffusion of these Babylonian ideas as far
as Northern Europe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[130:1](eod26.htm#fr_223) Frobenius, "The Voice
of Africa," vol. ii., p. 467 *inter alia*.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[130:2](eod26.htm#fr_224) *Op. cit.*, p. 468.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[130:3](eod26.htm#fr_225) J. F. Campbell, "The
Celtic Dragon Myth," with the "Geste of Fraoch and the Dragon,"
translated with Introduction by George Henderson, Edinburgh, 1911, p.
136.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[131:1](eod26.htm#fr_226) For example the red
deer occupies the place usually taken by the goddess's lions upon a
Cretan gem (Evans, "Mycenæan Tree and Pillar Cult," Fig. 32, p. 56): on
the bronze plate from Heddemheim (A. B. Cook, "Zeus," vol. i., pl.
xxxiv., and p. 620) Isis is represented standing on a hind: Artemis,
another *avatar* of the same Great Mother, was intimately associated
with deer.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[132:1](eod26.htm#fr_227) J. de Morgan, article
on "Koudourrous," *Mem. Del. en Perse*, t. 7, 1905. Figures on p. 143
and p. 148: see also an earlier article on the same subject in tome i.
of the same series.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[133:1](eod26.htm#fr_228) A. B. Cook, "Zeus,"
vol. i., p. 674.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ram, The Pig](eod27)
