[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod21)  [Next](eod23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE DRAGON IN AMERICA AND EASTERN ASIA.

In the early centuries of the Christian era, and probably also even for
two or three hundred years earlier still, the leaven of the ancient
civilizations of the Old World was at work in Mexico, Central America
and Peru. The most obtrusive influences that were brought to bear,
especially in the area from Yucatan to Mexico, were inspired by the
Cambodian and Indonesian modifications of Indian beliefs and practices.
The god who was most often depicted upon the ancient Maya and Aztec
codices was the Indian rain-god Indra, who in America was provided with
the head of the Indian elephant <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136)
(*i.e.* seems to have been confused with the Indian Ganesa) and given
other attributes more suggestive of the Dravidian Nâga than his enemy,
the Aryan deity. In other words the character of the American god, known
as Chac by the Maya people and as *Tlaloc* by the Aztecs, is an
interesting illustration of the effects of such a mixture of cultures as
Dr. Rivers has studied in Melanesia. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137) Not only does the elephant-headed god in
America represent a blend of the two great Indian rain-gods which in the
Old World are mortal enemies, the one of the other (partly for

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the political reason that the Dravidians and Aryans were rival and
hostile peoples), but all the traits of each deity, even those depicting
the old Aryan conception of their deadly combat, are reproduced in
America under circumstances which reveal an ignorance on the part of the
artists of the significance of the paradoxical contradictions they are
representing. But even many incidents in the early history of the Vedic
gods, which were due to arbitrary circumstances in the growth of the
legends, reappear in America. To cite one instance (out of scores which
might be quoted), in the Vedic story Indra assumed many of the
attributes of the god Soma. In America the name of the god of rain and
thunder, the Mexican Indra, is *Tlaloc*, which is generally translated
"pulque of the earth," from *tlal*\[*l*\]*i*, "earth," and
*oc*\[*tli*\], "pulque, a fermented drink (like the Indian drink *soma*)
made from the juice of the agave". <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138)

The so-called "long-nosed god" (the elephant-headed rain-god) has been
given the non-committal designation "god B," by Schellhas. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139)

I reproduce here a remarkable drawing ([Fig. 11](#img_fig11)) from the
Codex Troano, in which this god, whom the Maya people called *Chac*, is
shown pouring the rain out of a water-jar (just as the deities of
Babylonia and India are often represented), and putting his foot upon
the head of a serpent, who is preventing the rain from reaching the
earth. Here we find depicted with childlike simplicity and directness
the Vedic conception of Indra overcoming the demon Vritra. Stempell
describes this scene as "the elephant-headed god B standing upon the
head of a serpent"; <span id="fr_140"></span>[3](#fn_140) while Seler,
who claims that god B is a tortoise, explains it as the serpent forming
a footstool for the rain-god. <span id="fr_141"></span>[4](#fn_141) In
the

<span id="img_fig11"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
11.REPRODUCTION OF A PICTURE IN THE MAYA CODEX TROANO REPRESENTING THE
RAIN-GOD &lt;i&gt;CHAC&lt;/i&gt; TREADING UPON THE SERPENT'S HEAD, WHICH
IS INTERPOSED BETWEEN THE EARTH AND THE RAIN THE GOD IS POURING OUT OF A
BOWL. A RAIN-GODDESS STANDS UPON THE SERPENT'S TAIL.](tn/fig11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig11.jpg)  
FIG. 11.—REPRODUCTION OF A PICTURE IN THE MAYA CODEX TROANO REPRESENTING
THE RAIN-GOD *CHAC* TREADING UPON THE SERPENT'S HEAD, WHICH IS
INTERPOSED BETWEEN THE EARTH AND THE RAIN THE GOD IS POURING OUT OF A
BOWL. A RAIN-GODDESS STANDS UPON THE SERPENT'S TAIL.  
</span>

<span id="img_fig12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 12.ANOTHER
REPRESENTATION OF THE ELEPHANT-HEADED RAIN-GOD. HE IS HOLDING
THUNDERBOLTS, CONVENTIONALISED IN A HAND-LIKE FORM. THE SERPENT IS
CONVERTED INTO A SAC, HOLDING UP THE RAIN-WATERS.](tn/fig12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig12.jpg)  
FIG. 12.—ANOTHER REPRESENTATION OF THE ELEPHANT-HEADED RAIN-GOD. HE IS
HOLDING THUNDERBOLTS, CONVENTIONALISED IN A HAND-LIKE FORM. THE SERPENT
IS CONVERTED INTO A SAC, HOLDING UP THE RAIN-WATERS.  
</span>

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Codex Cortes the
same theme is depicted in another way, which is truer to the Indian
conception of Vritra, as "the restrainer" <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) ([Fig. 12](#img_fig12)).

The serpent (the American rattlesnake) restrains the water by coiling
itself into a sac to hold up the rain and so prevent it from reaching
the earth. In the various American codices this episode is depicted in
as great a variety of forms as the Vedic poets of India described when
they sang of the exploits of Indra. The Maya Chac is, in fact, Indra
transferred to the other side of the Pacific and there only thinly
disguised by a veneer of American stylistic design.

But the Aztec god Tlaloc is merely the Chac of the Maya people
transferred to Mexico. Schellhas declares that the "god B," the "most
common figure in the codices," is a "universal deity to whom the most
varied elements, natural phenomena, and activities are subject". "Many
authorities consider God B to represent Kukulkan, the Feathered Serpent,
whose Aztec equivalent is Quetzalcoatl. Others identify him with
Itzamna, the Serpent God of the East, or with Chac, the Rain God of the
four quarters and the equivalent of Tlaloc of the Mexicans." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143)

From the point of view of its Indian analogies these confusions are
peculiarly significant, for the same phenomena are found in India. The
snake and the dragon can be either the rain-god of the East or the enemy
of the rain-god; either the dragon-slayer or the evil dragon who has to
be slain. The Indian word Nâga, which is applied to the beneficent god
or king identified with the cobra, can also mean "elephant," and this
double significance probably played a part in the confusion of the
deities in America.

In the Dresden Codex the elephant-headed god is represented in one place
grasping a serpent, in another issuing from a serpent's mouth, and again
as an actual serpent ([Fig. 13](#img_fig13)). Turning next to the
attributes of these American gods we find that they reproduce with
amazing precision those of Indra. Not only were they the divinities who
controlled rain, thunder, lightning, and vegetation, but they also
carried axes and thunderbolts ([Fig. 13](#img_fig13)) like their
homologues in the Old World. Like Indra, Tlaloc was intimately
associated with the East and with the tops of mountains, where he had a
special heaven, reserved for

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

warriors who fell in battle and women who died in childbirth. As a
water-god also he presided over the souls of the drowned and those who
in life suffered from dropsical affections. Indra also specialized in
the same branch of medicine.

In fact, if one compares the account of Tlaloc's attributes and
achievements, such as is given in Mr. Joyce's "Mexican Archæology" or
Professor Seler's monograph on the "Codex Vaticanus," with Professor
Hopkins's summary of Indra's character ("Religions of India") the
identity is so exact, even in the most arbitrary traits and confusions
with other deities’ peculiarities, that it becomes impossible for any
serious investigator to refuse to admit that Tlaloc and Chac are merely
American forms of Indra. Even so fantastic a practice as the
representation of the American rain-god's face as composed of contorted
snakes <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) finds its analogy in Siam,
where in relatively recent times this curious device was still being
used by artists. <span id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145)

"As the god of fertility maize belonged to him \[Tlaloc\], though not
altogether by right, for according to one legend he stole it after it
had been discovered by other gods concealed in the heart of a
mountain." <span id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_146) Indra also obtained
soma from the mountain by similar means. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[4](#fn_147)

In the ancient civilization of America one of the most prominent deities
was called the "Feathered Serpent," in the Maya language, Kukulkan,
Quiche Gukumatz, Aztec Quetzalcoatl, the Pueblo "Mother of Waters".
Throughout a very extensive part of America the snake, like the Indian
Nâga, is the emblem of rain, clouds, thunder and lightning. But it is
essentially and pre-eminently the symbol of rain; and the god who
controls the rain, Chac of the Mayas, Tlaloc of the Aztecs, carried the
axe and the thunderbolt like his homologues and prototypes in the Old
World. In America also we find reproduced in full, not only the legends
of the antagonism between the

<span class="small">Fig. 13. A photographic reproduction of the 36th
page of the Dresden Maya Codex.</span>

Of the three pictures in the top row one represents the elephant-headed
god *Chac* with a snake's body. He is pouring out rain. The central
picture represents the lightning animal carrying fire down from heaven
to earth. On the right *Chac* is shown in human guise carrying
thunderweapons in the form of burning torches.

In the second row a goddess sits in the rain: her head is prolonged into
that of a bird, holding a fish in its beak. The central picture shows
Chac in his boat ferrying a woman across the water from the East. The
third illustration depicts the familiar conflict between the vulture and
serpent.

In the third row *Chac* is seen with his axe: in the central picture he
is standing in the water looking up towards a rain-cloud; and on the
right he is shown sitting in a hut resting from his labours.

<span id="img_fig13"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 13.A PAGE
(THE 36TH) OF THE DRESDEN MAYA CODEX](tn/fig13.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig13.jpg)  
FIG. 13.—A PAGE (THE 36TH) OF THE DRESDEN MAYA CODEX  
</span>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

thunder-bird and the serpent, but also the identification of these two
rivals in one composite monster, which, as I have already mentioned, is
seen in the winged disks, both in the Old World and the New. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) Hardly any incident in the history of
the Egyptian falcon or the thunder-birds of Babylonia, Greece or India,
fails to reappear in America and find pictorial expression in the Maya
and Aztec codices.

What makes America such a rich storehouse of historical data is the fact
that it is stretched across the world almost from pole to pole; and for
many centuries the jetsam and flotsam swept on to this vast strand has
made it a museum of the cultural history of the Old World, much of which
would have been lost for ever if America had not saved it. But a record
preserved in this manner is necessarily in a highly confused state. For
essentially the same materials reached America in manifold forms. The
original immigrants into America brought from North-Eastern Asia such
cultural equipment as had reached the area east of the Yenesei at the
time when Europe was in the Neolithic phase of culture. Then when
ancient mariners began to coast along the Eastern Asiatic littoral and
make their way to America by the Aleutian route there was a further
infiltration of new ideas. But when more venturesome sailors began to
navigate the open seas and exploit Polynesia, for centuries <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149) there was a more or less constant influx
of customs and beliefs, which were drawn from Egypt and Babylonia, from
the Mediterranean and East Africa, from India and Indonesia, China and
Japan, Cambodia and Oceania. One and the same fundamental idea, such as
the attributes of the serpent as a water-god, reached America in an
infinite variety of guises, Egyptian, Babylonian, Indian, Indonesian,
Chinese and Japanese, and from this amazing jumble of confusion the
local priesthood of Central America built up a system of beliefs which
is distinctively American, though most of the ingredients and the
principles of synthetic composition were borrowed from the Old World.

Every possible phase of the early history of the dragon-story and all
the ingredients which in the Old World went to the making

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

of it have been preserved in American pictures and legends in a
bewildering variety of forms and with an amazing luxuriance of
complicated symbolism and picturesque ingenuity. In America, as in India
and Eastern Asia, the power controlling water was identified both with a
serpent (which in the New World, as in the Old, was often equipped with
such inappropriate and arbitrary appendages, as wings, horns and crests)
and a god, who was either associated or confused with an elephant. Now
many of the attributes of these gods, as personifications of the
life-giving powers of water, are identical with those of the Babylonian
god Ea and the Egyptian Osiris, and their reputations as warriors with
the respective sons and representatives, Marduk and Horus. The composite
animal of Ea-Marduk, the "sea-goat" (the Capricornus of the Zodiac), was
also the vehicle of Varuna in India, whose relationship to Indra was in
some respects analogous to that of Ea to Marduk in Babylonia. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) The Indian "sea-goat" or *Makara* was in
fact intimately associated both with Varuna and with Indra. This monster
assumed a great variety of forms, such as the crocodile, the dolphin,
the sea-serpent or dragon, or combinations of the heads of different
animals with a fish's body ([Fig. 14](#img_fig14)). Amongst these we
find an elephant-headed form of the *makara*, which was adopted as far
east as Indonesia and as far west as Scotland.

I have already called attention <span id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) to
the part played by the *makara* in determining the development of the
form of the elephant-headed god in America. Another form of the *makara*
is described in the following American legend, which is interesting also
as a mutilated version of the original dragon-story of the Old World.

In 1912 Hernández translated and published a Maya manuscript <span
id="fr_152"></span>[3](#fn_152) which had been written out in Spanish
characters in the early days

Fig. 14.

A. The so-called "sea-goat" of Babylonia, a creature compounded of the
antelope and fish of Ea.

B. The "sea-goat" as the vehicle of Ea or Marduk.

C to K—a series of varieties of the *makara* from the Buddhist Rails at
Buddha Gaya and Mathura, circa 70 B.C.–70 A.D., after Cunningham
("Archæological Survey of India," Vol. III, 1873, Plates IX and XXIX).

L. The *makara* as the vehicle of Varuna, after Sir George Birdwood. It
is not difficult to understand how, in the course of the easterly
diffusion of culture, such a picture should develop into the Chinese
Dragon or the American Elephant-headed God.

<span id="img_fig14"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
14](tn/fig14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig14.jpg)  
FIG. 14  
</span>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

of the conquest of the Americas, but had been overlooked until six years
ago. It is an account of the creation, and includes the following
passages: "All at once came the water \[? rain\] after the dragon was
carried away. The heaven was broken up; it fell upon the earth; and they
say that *Cantul-ti-ku* (four gods), the four Baccab, were those who
destroyed it. … 'The whole world,' said *Ah-uuc-chek-nale* (he who seven
times makes fruitful), 'proceeded from the seven bosoms of the earth.'
And he descended to make fruitful *Itzam-kab-ain* (the female whale with
alligator-feet), when he came down from the central angle of the
heavenly region" (p. 171).

Hernandez adds that "the old fishermen of Yucatan still call the whale
*Itzam:* this explains the name of *Itzaes*, by which the Mayas were
known before the founding of Mayapan".

The close analogy to the Indra-story is suggested by the phrase
describing the coming of the water "after the dragon was carried away".
Moreover, the Indian sea-elephant *makara*, which was confused in the
Old World with the dolphin of Aphrodite, and was sometimes also regarded
as a crocodile, naturally suggests that the "female whale with the
alligator-feet" was only an American version of the old Indian legend.

All this serves, not only to corroborate the inferences drawn from the
other sources of information which I have already indicated, but also to
suggest that, in addition to borrowing the chief divinities of their
pantheon from India, the Maya people's original name was derived from
the same mythology. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153)

It is of considerable interest and importance to note that in the
earliest dated example of Maya workmanship (from Tuxtla, in the Vera
Cruz State of Mexico), for which Spinden assigns a tentative date of 235
B.C., an unmistakable elephant figures among the four hieroglyphs which
Spinden reproduces (*op. cit.*, p. 171). A similar hieroglyphic sign is
found in the Chinese records of the Early Chow Dynasty (John Ross, "The
Origin of the Chinese People," 1916, p. 152).

The use of the numerals four and seven in the narrative translated

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

by Hernandez, as in so many other American documents, is itself, as Mrs.
Zelia Nuttall has so conclusively demonstrated, <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154) a most striking and conclusive
demonstration of the link with the Old World.

Indra was not the only Indian god who was transferred to America, for
all the associated deities, with the characteristic stories of their
exploits, <span id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155) are also found depicted
with childlike directness of incident, but amazingly luxuriant artistic
phantasy, in the Maya and Aztec codices.

We find scattered throughout the islands of the Pacific the familiar
stories of the dragon. One mentioned by the Bishop of Wellington refers
to a New Zealand dragon with jaws like a crocodile's, which spouted
water like a whale. It lived in a fresh-water lake. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[3](#fn_156) In the same number of the same *Journal*
Sir George Grey gives extracts from a Maori legend of the dragon, which
he compares with corresponding passages from Spenser's "Faery Queen".
"Their strict verbal and poetical conformity with the New Zealand
legends are such as at first to lead to the impression either that
Spenser must have stolen his images and language from the New Zealand
poets, or that they must have acted unfairly by the English bard" (p.
362). The Maori legend describes the dragon as "in size large as a
monstrous whale, in shape like a hideous lizard; for in its huge head,
its limbs, its tail, its scales, its tough skin, its sharp spines, yes,
in all these it resembled a lizard" (p. 364).

Now the attributes of the Chinese and Japanese dragon as the controller
of rain, thunder and lightning are identical with those of the American
elephant-headed god. It also is associated with the East and with the
tops of mountains. It is identified with the Indian Nâga, but the
conflict involved in this identification is less obtrusive than it is
either in America or in India. In Dravidian India the rulers and the
gods are identified with the serpent: but among the Aryans, who were
hostile to the Dravidians, the rain-god is the enemy of the Nâga. In
America the confusion becomes more pronounced because Tlaloc (Chac)
represents both Indra and his enemy the serpent. The representation in
the codices of his conflict with the serpent is merely a tradition

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

which the Maya and Aztec scribes followed, apparently without
understanding its meaning.

In China and Japan the Indra-episode plays a much less prominent part,
for the dragon is, like the Indian Nâga, a beneficent creature, which
approximates more nearly to the Babylonian Ea or the Egyptian Osiris. It
is not only the controller of water, but the impersonation of water and
its life-giving powers: it is identified with the emperor, with his
standard, with the sky, and with all the powers that give, maintain, and
prolong life and guard against all kinds of danger to life. In other
words, it is the bringer of good luck, the rejuvenator of mankind, the
giver of immortality.

But if the physiological functions of the dragon of the Far East can
thus be assimilated to those of the Indian Nâga and the Babylonian and
Egyptian Water God, who is also the king, anatomically he is usually
represented in a form which can only be regarded as the Babylonian
composite monster, as a rule stripped of his wings, though not of his
avian feet.

In America we find preserved in the legends of the Indians an accurate
and unmistakable description of the Japanese dragon (which is mainly
Chinese in origin). Even Spinden, who "does not care to dignify by
refutation the numerous empty theories of ethnic connections between
Central America" \[and in fact America as a whole\] "and the Old World,"
makes the following statement (in the course of a discussion of the
myths relating to horned snakes in California): "a similar monster,
possessing antlers, and sometimes wings, is also very common in Algonkin
and Iroquois legends, although rare in art. As a rule the horned serpent
is a water spirit and an enemy of the thunder bird. Among the Pueblo
Indians the horned snake seems to have considerable prestige in
religious belief. … It lives in the water or in the sky and is connected
with rain or lightning." <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157)

Thus we find stories of a dragon equipped with those distinctive tokens
of Chinese origin, the deer's antlers; and along with it a snake with
less specialized horns suggesting the Cerastes of Egypt and Babylonia. A
horned viper distantly akin to the Cerastes of the Old World does occur
in California; but its "horns" are so insignificant as to make it highly
improbable that they could have been in any way responsible for the
obtrusive role played by horns in these widespread

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> American stories.
But the proof of the foreign origin of these stories is established by
the horned serpent's achievements.

It "lives in the water or the sky" like its homologue in the Old World,
and it is "a water spirit". Now neither the Cobra nor the Cerastes is
actually a water serpent. Their achievements in the myths therefore have
no possible relationship with the natural habits of the real snakes.
They are purely arbitrary attributes which they have acquired as the
result of a peculiar and fortuitous series of historical incidents.

It is therefore utterly inconceivable and in the highest degree
improbable that this long chain of chance circumstances should have
happened a second time in America, and have been responsible for the
creation of the same bizarre story in reference to one of the rarer
American snakes of a localized distribution, whose horns are mere
vestiges, which no one but a trained morphologist is likely to have
noticed or recognized as such.

But the American horned serpent, like its Babylonian and Indian
homologues, is also the enemy of the thunder bird. Here is a further
corroboration of the transmission to America of ideas which were the
chance result of certain historical events in the Old World, which I
have mentioned in this lecture.

In the figure on page [94](#img_09400) I reproduce a remarkable drawing
of an American dragon. If the Algonkin Indians had not preserved legends
of a winged serpent equipped with deer's antlers, no value could be
assigned to this sketch: but as we know that this particular tribe
retains the legend of just such a wonder-beast, we are justified in
treating this drawing as something more than a jest.

"Petroglyphs are reported by Mr. John Criley as occurring near Ava,
Jackson County, Illinois. The outlines of the characters observed by him
were drawn from memory and submitted to Mr. Charles S. Mason, of Toledo,
Ohio, through whom they were furnished to the Bureau of Ethnology.
Little reliance can be placed upon the accuracy of such drawing, but
from the general appearance of the sketches the originals of which they
are copies were probably made by one of the middle Algonquin tribes of
Indians. <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158)

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

"The 'Piasa' rock, as it is generally designated, was referred to by the
missionary explorer Marquette in 1675. Its situation was immediately
above the city of Alton, Illinois."

Marquette's remarks are translated by Dr. Francis Parkman as follows:—

"On the flat face of a high rock were painted, in red, black, and green,
a pair of monsters, each 'as large as a calf, with horns like a deer,
red eyes, a beard like a tiger, and a frightful expression of
countenance. The face is something like that of a man, the body covered
with scales; and the tail so long that it passes entirely round the
body, over the head, and between the legs, ending like that of a fish.'"

Another version, by Davidson and Struve, of the discovery of the
petroglyph is as follows:—

"Again they (Joliet and Marquette) were floating on the broad bosom of
the unknown stream. Passing the mouth of the Illinois, they soon fell
into the shadow of a tall promontory, and with great astonishment beheld
the representation of two monsters painted on its lofty limestone front.
According to Marquette, each of these frightful figures had the face of
a man, the horns of a deer, the beard of a tiger, and the tail of a fish
so long that it passed around the body, over the head, and between the
legs. It was an object of Indian worship and greatly impressed the mind
of the pious missionary with the necessity of substituting for this
monstrous idolatry the worship of the true God."

A footnote connected with the foregoing quotation gives the following
description of the same rock:—

"Near the mouth of the Piasa creek, on the bluff, there is a smooth rock
in a cavernous cleft, under an overhanging cliff, on whose face 50 feet
from the base, are painted some ancient pictures or hieroglyphics, of
great interest to the curious. They are placed in a horizontal line from
east to west, representing men, plants and animals. The paintings,
though protected from dampness and storms, are in great part destroyed,
marred by portions of the rock becoming detached and falling down."

Mr. McAdams, of Alton, Illinois, says, "The name Piasa is Indian and
signifies, in the Illini, the bird which devours men". He furnishes a
spirited pen-and-ink sketch, 12 by 15 inches in size and purporting to
represent the ancient painting described by Marquette.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On the picture is
inscribed the following in ink: "Made by Wm. Dennis, April 3rd, 1825".
The date is in both letters and figures. On the top of the picture in
large letters are the two words, "FLYING DRAGON". This picture, which
has been kept in the old Gilham family of Madison county and bears the
evidence of its age, is reproduced as [Fig. 3](#img_09400).

He also publishes another representation with the following remarks:—

"One of the most satisfactory pictures of the Piasa we have ever seen is
in an old German publication entitled 'The Valley of the Mississippi
Illustrated. Eighty illustrations from Nature, by H. Lewis, from the
Falls of St. Anthony to the Gulf of Mexico,' published about the year
1839 by Arenz & Co., Dusseldorf, Germany. One of the

<span id="img_09400"></span> ![FIG. 3.WM. DENNIS'S DRAWING OF THE
FLYING DRAGON DEPICTED ON THE ROCKS AT PIASA,
ILLINOIS.](img/09400.jpg)  
FIG. 3.—WM. DENNIS'S DRAWING OF THE “FLYING DRAGON” DEPICTED ON THE
ROCKS AT PIASA, ILLINOIS.

large full-page plates in this work gives a fine view of the bluff at
Alton, with the figure of the Piasa on the face of the rock. It is
represented to have been taken on the spot by artists from Germany. … In
the German picture there is shown just behind the rather dim outlines of
the second face a ragged crevice, as though of a fracture. Part of the
bluff's face might have fallen and thus nearly destroyed one of the
monsters, for in later years writers speak of but one figure. The whole
face of the bluff was quarried away in 1846-47."

The close agreement of this account with that of the Chinese and
Japanese dragon at once arrests attention. The anatomical peculiarities
are so extraordinary that if Père Marquette's account is trustworthy
there is no longer any room for doubt of the Chinese or Japanese
derivation of this composite creature. If the account is not accepted we
will be driven, not only to attribute to the pious seventeenth-century
missionary serious dishonesty or culpable gullibility, but also to
credit him with

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

a remarkably precise knowledge of Mongolian archæology. When Algonkin
legends are recalled, however, I think we are bound to accept the
missionary's account as substantially accurate.

Minns claims that representations of the dragon are unknown in China
before the Han dynasty. But the legend of the dragon is much more
ancient. The evidence has been given in full by de Visser. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159)

He tells us that the earliest reference is found in the *Yih King*, and
shows that the dragon was "a water animal akin to the snake, which
\[used\] to sleep in pools during winter and arises in the spring". "It
is the god of thunder, who brings good crops when he appears in the rice
fields (as rain) or in the sky (as dark and yellow clouds), in other
words when he makes the rain fertilize the ground" (p. 38).

In the *Shu King* there is a reference to the dragon as one of the
symbolic figures painted on the upper garment of the emperor Hwang Ti
(who according to the Chinese legends, which of course are not above
reproach, reigned in the twenty-seventh century B.C.). In this ancient
literature there are numerous references to the dragon, and not merely
to the legends, *but also to representations* of the benign monster on
garments, banners and metal tablets. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[2](#fn_160) "The ancient texts ... are short, but
sufficient to give us the main conceptions of Old China with regard to
the dragon. In those early days \[just as at present\] he was the god of
water, thunder, clouds, and rain, the harbinger of blessings, and the
symbol of holy men. As the emperors are the holy beings on earth, the
idea of the dragon being the symbol of Imperial power is based upon this
ancient conception" (*op. cit.*, p. 42).

In the fifth appendix to the *Yih King*, which has been ascribed to
Confucius (*i.e.* three centuries earlier than the Han dynasty mentioned
by Mr. Minns), it is stated that "*K’ien* (Heaven) is a horse, *Kw’un*
(Earth) is a cow, *Chen* (*Thunder*) *is a dragon*" (*op. cit.*, p.
37). <span id="fr_161"></span>[3](#fn_161)

The philosopher Hwai Nan Tsze (who died 122 B.C.) declared that the
dragon is the origin of all creatures, winged, hairy, scaly, and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

mailed; and he propounded a scheme of evolution (de Visser, p. 65). He
seems to have tried to explain away the fact that he had never actually
witnessed the dragon performing some of the remarkable feats attributed
to it: "Mankind cannot see the dragons rise: wind and rain assist them
to ascend to a great height" (*op. cit.*, p. 65). Confucius also is
credited with the frankness of a similar confession: "As to the dragon,
we cannot understand his riding on the wind and clouds and his ascending
to the sky. To-day I saw Lao Tsze; is he not like the dragon?" (p. 65).

This does not necessarily mean that these learned men were sceptical of
the beliefs which tradition had forged in their minds, but that the
dragon had the power of hiding itself in a cloak of invisibility, just
as clouds (in which the Chinese saw dragons) could be dissipated in the
sky. The belief in these powers of the dragon was as sincere as that of
learned men of other countries in the beneficent attributes which
tradition had taught them to assign to their particular deities. In the
passages I have quoted the Chinese scholars were presumably attempting
to bridge the gap between the ideas inculcated by faith and the evidence
of their senses, in much the same sort of spirit as, for instance,
actuated Dean Buckland last century, when he claimed that the glacial
deposits of this country afforded evidence in confirmation of the Deluge
described in the Book of Genesis.

The tiger and the dragon, the gods of wind and water, are the keystones
of the doctrine called *fung shui*, which Professor de Groot has
described in detail. <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162)

He describes it "as a quasi-scientific system, supposed to teach men
where and how to build graves, temples, and dwellings, in order that the
dead, the gods, and the living may be located therein exclusively, or as
far as possible, under the auspicious influences of Nature". The dragon
plays a most important part in this system, being "the chief spirit of
water and rain, and at the same rime representing one of the four
quarters of heaven (*i.e.* the East, called the Azure Dragon, and the
first of the seasons, spring)." The word Dragon comprises the high
grounds in general, and the water streams which have their sources
therein or wind their way through them. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163)

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

The attributes thus assigned to the Blue Dragon, his control of water
and streams, his dwelling on high mountains whence they spring, and his
association with the East, will be seen to reveal his identity with the
so-called "god B" of American archaeologists, the elephant-headed god
*Tlaloc* of the Aztecs, *Chac* of the Mayas, whose more direct parent
was Indra.

It is of interest to note that, according to Gerini, <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164) the word *Nâga* denotes not only a snake
but also an elephant. Both the Chinese dragon and the Mexican
elephant-god are thus linked with the Nâga, who is identified both with
Indra himself and Indra's enemy Vritra. This is another instance of
those remarkable contradictions that one meets at every step in pursuing
the dragon. In the confusion resulting from the blending of hostile
tribes and diverse cultures the Aryan deity who, both for religious and
political reasons, is the enemy of the Nâgas becomes himself identified
with a Nâga!

I have already called attention (*Nature*, Jan. 27, 1916) to the fact
that the graphic form of representation of the American elephant-headed
god was derived from Indonesian pictures of the *makara*. In India
itself the *makara* (see ) is represented in a great variety of forms,
most of which are prototypes of different kinds of dragons. Hence the
homology of the elephant-headed god with the other dragons is further
established and shown to be genetically related to the evolution of the
protean manifestations of the dragon's form.

The dragon in China is "the heavenly giver of fertilizing rain (oft.
cit., p. 36). In the *Shu King* "the emblematic figures of the ancients
are given as the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountain, the *dragon*,
and the variegated animals (pheasants) which are depicted on the upper
sacrificial garment of the Emperor (p. 39). In the *Li Ki* the unicorn,
the phoenix, the tortoise, and the dragon are called the four *ling* (p.
39), which de Visser translates "spiritual beings," creatures with
enormously strong vital spirit. The dragon possesses the most *ling* of
all creatures (p. 64). The tiger is the deadly enemy of the dragon (p.
42).

The dragon sheds a brilliant light at night (p. 44), usually from his
glittering eyes. He is the giver of omens (p. 45), good and bad,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

rains and floods. The dragon-horse is a vital spirit of Heaven and Earth
(p. 58) and also of river water: it has the tail of a huge serpent.

The ecclesiastical vestments of the Wu-ist priests are endowed with
magical properties which are considered to enable the wearer to control
the order of the world, to avert unseasonable and calamitous events,
such as drought, untimely and superabundant rainfall, and eclipses.
These powers are conferred by the decoration upon the dress. Upon the
back of the chief vestment the representation of a range of mountains is
embroidered as a symbol of the world: on each side (the right and left)
of it a large dragon arises above the billows to represent the
fertilizing rain. They are surrounded by gold-thread figures
representing clouds and spirals typifying rolling thunder. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165)

A ball, sometimes with a spiral decoration, is commonly represented in
front of the Chinese dragon. The Chinese writer Koh Hung tells us that
"a spiral denotes the rolling of thunder from which issues a flash of
lightning ". <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) De Visser discusses
this question at some length and refers to Hirth's claim that the
Chinese triquetrum, *i.e.*, the well-known three-comma shaped figure,
the Japanese *mitsu-tomoe*, the ancient spiral, represents thunder
also.' <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) Before discussing this
question, which involves the consideration of the almost world-wide
belief in a thunder-weapon and its relationship to the spiral ornament,
the octopus,

<span id="img_fig15"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
15.PHOTOGRAPH OF A CHINESE EMBROIDERY IN THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL OF ART
REPRESENTING THE DRAGON AND THE PEARL-MOON SYMBOL](tn/fig15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig15.jpg)  
FIG. 15.—PHOTOGRAPH OF A CHINESE EMBROIDERY IN THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL OF
ART REPRESENTING THE DRAGON AND THE PEARL-MOON SYMBOL  
</span>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the pearl, the swastika and triskele, let us examine further the problem
of the dragon's ball (see [Fig. 15](#img_fig15)).

De Groot regards the dragon as a thunder-god and therefore, like Hirai,
assumes that the supposed thunder-ball is being *belched forth* and not
being *swallowed* by the dragon. But de Visser, as the result of a
conversation with Mr. Kramp and the study of a Chinese picture in
Blacker's "Chats on Oriental China" (1908, p. 54), puts forward the
suggestion that the ball is the moon or the pearl-moon which the dragon
is swallowing, thereby causing the fertilizing rain. The Chinese
themselves refer to the ball as the "precious pearl," which, under the
influence of Buddhism in China, was identified with "the pearl that
grants all desires" and is under the special protection of the Nâga,
*i.e.*, the dragon. Arising out of this de Visser puts the conundrum:
"Was the ball originally also a pearl, not of Buddhism but of Taoism?"

In reply to this question I may call attention to the fact that the
germs of civilization were first planted in China by people strongly
imbued with the belief that the pearl was the quintessence of
life-giving and prosperity-conferring powers: <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) it was not only identified with the
moon, but also was itself a particle of moon-substance which fell as dew
into the gaping oyster. It was the very people who held such views about
pearls and gold who, when searching for alluvial gold and freshwater
pearls in Turkestan, were responsible for transferring these same
life-giving properties to jade; and the magical value thus attached to
jade was the nucleus, so to speak, around which the earliest
civilization of China was crystallized.

As we shall see, in the discussion of the thunder-weapon ([p.
121](eod24.htm#page_121)), the luminous pearl, which was believed to
have fallen from the sky, was homologized with the thunderbolt, with the
functions of which its own magical properties were assimilated.

Kramp called de Visser's attention to the fact that the Chinese
hieroglyphic character for the dragon's ball is compounded of the signs
for *jewel* and *moon*, which is also given in a Japanese lexicon as
*divine pearl*, the pearl of the bright moon.

"When the clouds approached and covered the moon, the ancient

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chinese may have
thought that the dragons had seized and swallowed this pearl, more
brilliant than all the pearls of the sea" (de Visser, p. 108).

The difficulty de Visser finds in regarding his own theory as wholly
satisfactory is, first, the red colour of the ball, and secondly, the
spiral pattern upon it. He explains the colour as possibly an attempt to
represent the pearl's lustre. But de Visser seems to have overlooked the
fact that red and rose-coloured pearls obtained from the conch-shell
were used in China and Japan. <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169)

"The spiral is much used in delineating the sacred pearls of Buddhism,
so that it might have served also to design those of Taoism; although I
must acknowledge that the spiral of the Buddhist pearl goes upward,
while the spiral of the dragon is flat" (p. 103).

De Visser sums up the whole argument in these words:—

"These are, however, all mere suppositions. The only facts we know are:
the eager attitude of the dragons, ready to grasp and swallow the ball;
the ideas of the Chinese themselves as to the ball being the moon or a
pearl; the existence of a kind of sacred "moon-pearl"; the red colour of
the ball, its emitting flames and its spiral-like form. As the three
last facts are in favour of the thunder theory, I should be inclined to
prefer the latter. Yet I am convinced that the dragons do not *belch
out* the thunder. If their trying to *grasp* or *swallow* the thunder
could be explained, I should immediately accept the theory concerning
the thunder-spiral, especially on account of the flames it emits. But I
do not see the reason why the god of thunder should persecute thunder
itself. Therefore, after having given the above facts that the reader
may take them into consideration, I feel obliged to say: 'non liquet'"
(p. 108).

It does not seem to have occurred to the distinguished Dutch scholar,
who has so lucidly put the issue before us, that his demonstration of
the fact of the ball being the pearl-moon about to be swallowed by the
dragon does not preclude it being also confused with the thunder.
Elsewhere in this volume I have referred to the origin of the spiral
symbolism and have shown that it became associated with the pearl
*before* it became the symbol of thunder. The pearl-association in fact
was

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

one of the links in the chain of events which made the pearl and the
spirally-coiled arm of the octopus the sign of thunder. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170)

It seems quite clear to me that de Visser's pearl-moon theory is the
true interpretation. But when the pearl-ball was provided with the
spiral, painted red, and given flames to represent its power of emitting
light and shining by night, the fact of the spiral ornamentation and of
the pearl being one of the surrogates of the thunder-weapon was
rationalized into an identification of the ball with thunder and the
light it was emitting as lightning. It is, of course, quite irrational
for a thunder-god to swallow his own thunder: but popular
interpretations of subtle symbolism, the true explanation of which is
deeply buried in the history of the distant past, are rarely logical and
almost invariably irrelevant.

In his account of the state of Brahmanism in India after the times of
the two earlier Vedas, Professor Hopkins <span
id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171) throws light upon the real significance
of the ball in the dragon-symbolism. "Old legends are varied. The
victory over Vritra is now expounded thus: Indra, who slays Vritra, is
the sun. Vritra is the moon, who swims into the sun's mouth on the night
of the new moon. The sun rises after swallowing him, and the moon is
invisible because he is swallowed. The sun vomits out the moon, and the
latter is then seen in the west, and increases again, to serve the sun
as food. In another passage it is said that when the moon is invisible
he is hiding in plants and waters."

This seems to clear away any doubt as to the significance of the ball.
It is the pearl-moon, which is both swallowed and vomited by the dragon.

The snake takes a more obtrusive part in the Japanese than in the
Chinese dragon and it frequently manifests itself as a god of the sea.
The old Japanese sea-gods were often female water-snakes. The cultural
influences which reached Japan from the south by way of Indonesia—many
centuries before the coming of Buddhism—naturally emphasized the serpent
form of the dragon and its connexion with the ocean.

But the river-gods, or "water-fathers," were real four-footed dragons
identified with the dragon-kings of Chinese myth, but at the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

same time were strictly homologous with the Nâga Rajas or cobra-kings of
India.

The Japanese "Sea Lord" or "Sea Snake" was also called
"Abundant-Pearl-Prince," who had a magnificent palace at the bottom of
the sea. His daughter ("Abundant-Pearl-Princess") married a youth whom
she observed, reflected in the well, sitting on a cassia tree near the
castle gate. Ashamed at his presence at her lying-in she was changed
into a wane or crocodile (de Visser, p. 139), elsewhere described as a
dragon (*makara*). De Visser gives it as his opinion that the *wani* is
"an old Japanese dragon, or serpent-shaped sea-god, and the legend is an
ancient Japanese tale, dressed in an Indian garb by later generations"
(p. 140). He is arguing that the Japanese dragon existed long before
Japan carne under Indian influence. But he ignores the fact that at a
very early date both India and China were diversely influenced by
Babylonia, the great breeding place of dragons; and, secondly, that
Japan was influenced by Indonesia, and through it by the West, for many
centuries before the arrival of such later Indian legends as those
relating to the palace under the sea, the castle gate and the cassia
tree. As Aston (quoted by de Visser) remarks, all these incidents and
also the well that serves as a mirror, "form a combination not unknown
to European folklore".

(After de Visser had given his own views, he modified them on p. 141)
when he learned that essentially the same dragon-stories had been
recorded in the Kei Islands and Minahassa (Celebes). In the light of
this new information he frankly admits that "the resemblance of several
features of this myth with the Japanese one is so striking, that we may
be sure that the latter is of Indonesian origin." He goes further when
he recognizes that "probably the foreign invaders, who in prehistoric
times conquered Japan, came from Indonesia, and brought the myth with
them" (p. 141). The evidence recently brought together by W. J. Perry in
his book "The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia" makes it certain that the
people of Indonesia in turn got it from the West.

An old painting reproduced by F. W. K. Müller, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172) who called de Visser's attention to
these interesting stories, shows Hohodemi (the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

youth on the cassia tree who married the princess) returning home
mounted on the back of a crocodile, like the Indian Varuna upon the
*makara* in a drawing reproduced by the late Sir George Birdwood. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173)

The *wani* or crocodile thus introduced from India, via Indonesia, is
really the Chinese and Japanese dragon, as Aston has claimed. Aston
refers to Japanese pictures in which the Abundant-Pearl-Prince and his
daughter are represented with dragon's heads appearing over their human
ones, but in the old Indonesian version they maintain their forms as
*wani* or crocodiles.

The dragon's head appearing over a human one is quite an Indian motive,
transferred to China and from there to Korea and Japan (de Visser, p.
142), and, I may add, also to America.

\[Since the foregoing paragraphs have been printed, the Curator of the
Liverpool Museum has kindly called my attention to a remarkable series
of Maya remains in the collection under his care, which were obtained in
the course of excavations made by Mr. T. W. F. Gann, M.R.C.S., an
officer in the Medical Service of British Honduras (see his account of
the excavations in Part II. of the 19th Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution of Washington). Among them is a
pottery figure of a *wani* or *makara* in the form of an alligator,
equipped with diminutive deer's horns (like the dragon of Eastern Asia);
and its skin is studded with circular elevations, presumably meant to
represent the spots upon the star-spangled "Celestial Stag" of the
Aryans (p. 130). As in the Japanese pictures mentioned by Aston, a human
head is seen emerging from the creature's throat. It affords a most
definite and convincing demonstration of the sources of American
culture.\]

The jewels of flood and ebb in the Japanese legends consist of the
pearls of flood and ebb obtained from the dragon's palace at the bottom
of the sea. By their aid storms and floods could be created to destroy
enemies or calm to secure safety for friends. Such stories are the
logical result of the identification of pearls with the moon, the
influence of which upon the tides was probably one of the circumstances
which was responsible for bringing the moon into the circle of the great
scientific theory of the life-giving powers of water. This in turn
played a great, if not decisive, part in originating the earliest belief
in a sky world, or heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[83:1](eod22.htm#fr_136) "Precolumbian
Representations of the Elephant in America," Nature, Nov. 25, 1915, p.
340; Dec. 16, 1915, p. 425; and Jan. 27, 1916, p. 593.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[83:2](eod22.htm#fr_137) History of Melanesian
Society," Cambridge, 1914.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[84:1](eod22.htm#fr_138) H. Beuchat, "Manuel d’
Archéologie Americaine," 1912, p. 319.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[84:2](eod22.htm#fr_139) "Representation of
Deities of the Maya Manuscripts," *Papers of the Peabody Museum*, vol.
iv., 1904.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[84:3](eod22.htm#fr_140) *Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie*, Bd. 40, 1908, p. 716.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[84:4](eod22.htm#fr_141) "Die Tierbilder der
mexikanischen and der Maya-Handschriften," *Zeitschrift für Ethnologie*,
Bd. 42, 1910, pp. 75 and 77. In the remarkable series of drawings from
Maya and Aztec sources reproduced by Seler in his articles in the
*Zeitschrift für Ethnologie*, the *Peabody Museum Papers*, and his
monograph on the *Codex Vaticanus*, not only is practically every
episode of the dragon-myth of the Old World graphically depicted, but
also every phase and incident of the legends from India (and Babylonia,
Egypt and the Ægean) that contributed to the building-up of the myth.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[85:1](eod22.htm#fr_142) Compare Hopkins,
"Religions of India," p. 94.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[85:2](eod22.htm#fr_143) Herbert J. Spinden,
"Maya Art," p. 62.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[86:1](eod22.htm#fr_144) Seler, "Codex
Vaticanus," Figs. 299-304.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[86:2](eod22.htm#fr_145) See, for example, F.
W. K. Müller, "Nang," *Int. Arch. f. Ethnolog*., 1894, Suppl. zu Bd.
vii., Taf. vii., where the mask of *Ravana* (a late surrogate of Indra
in the *Ramayana*) reveals a survival of the prototype of the Mexican
designs.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[86:3](eod22.htm#fr_146) Joyce, *op. cit.*, p.
37.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[86:4](eod22.htm#fr_147) For the incident of
the stealing of the soma by Garuda, who in this legend is the
representative of Indra, see Hopkins, "Religions of India," pp. 360-61.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[87:1](eod22.htm#fr_148) "The Influence of
Ancient Egyptian Civilization in the East and in America," *Bulletin of
the John Rylands Library*, 1916, Fig. 4, "The Serpent-Bird".

<span id="fn_149"></span>[87:2](eod22.htm#fr_149) Probably from about
300 B.C. to 700 A.D.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[88:1](eod22.htm#fr_150) For information
concerning Ea's "Goat-Fish," which can truly be called the "Father of
Dragons," as well as the prototype of the Indian *makara*, the mermaid,
the "sea-serpent," the "dolphin of Aphrodite," and of most composite
sea-monsters, see W. H. Ward's "Seal Cylinders of Western Asia," pp. 382
*et seq*. and 399 *et seq*.; and especially the detailed reports in de
Morgan's *Mémoires* (Délégation en Perse).

<span id="fn_151"></span>[88:2](eod22.htm#fr_151) *Nature*, *op. cit.*,
*supra*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[88:3](eod22.htm#fr_152) "Juan Martinez
Hernández, "La Creación del Mundo segun los Mayas," Paginas Inéditas del
MS. De Chumayel, *International Congress of Americanists, Proceedings of
the XVIII. Session*, London, 1912, p. 164.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[89:1](eod22.htm#fr_153) From the folk-lore of
America I have collected many interesting variants of the Indra story
and other legends (and artistic designs) of the elephant. I hope to
publish these in the near future.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[90:1](eod22.htm#fr_154) *Peabody Museum
Papers*, 1901.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[90:2](eod22.htm#fr_155) See, for example,
Wilfrid Jackson's "Shells as Evidence of the Migration of Early
Culture," pp. 50-66.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[90:3](eod22.htm#fr_156) "Notes on the Maoris,
etc.," Journal of the Ethnological Society, vol. i., 1869, p. 368.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[91:1](eod22.htm#fr_157) *Op. cit.*, p. 231.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[92:1](eod22.htm#fr_158) I quote this and the
following paragraphs verbatim from Garrick Mallery, "Picture Writing of
the American Indians," 10*th* *Annual Report*, 1888-89, *Bureau of
Ethnology* (*Smithsonian Institute*), p. 78.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[95:1](eod22.htm#fr_159) *Op. cit.*, pp. 35 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[95:2](eod22.htm#fr_160) See de Visser, p. 41.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[95:3](eod22.htm#fr_161) There can be no doubt
that the Chinese dragon is the descendant of the early Babylonian
monster, and that the inspiration to create it probably reached Shensi
during the third millennium B.C. by the route indicated in my "Incense
and Libations" (*Bull. John Ryland's Library*, vol. iv., No. 2, p. 239).
Some centuries later the Indian dragon reached the Far East via
Indonesia and mingled with his Babylonian cousin in Japan and China.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[96:1](eod22.htm#fr_162) "Religious System of
China," vol. iii., chap. xii., pp. 936-1056.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[96:2](eod22.htm#fr_163) This paragraph is
taken almost verbatim from de Visser, *op. cit.*, pp. 59 and 60.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[97:1](eod22.htm#fr_164) G. E. Gerini,
"Researches on Ptolemy's Geography of Eastern Asia," *Asiatic Society's
Monographs*, No. 1, 1909, p. 146.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[98:1](eod22.htm#fr_165) De Visser, p. 102, and
de Groot, vi., p. 1265, Plate XVIII. The reference to "a range of
mountains … as a symbol of the world" recalls the Egyptian
representation of the eastern horizon as two hills between which Hathor
or her son arises (see Budge, "Gods of the Egyptians," vol. ii., p. 101;
and compare Griffith's "Hieroglyphs," p. 30): the same conception was
adopted in Mesopotamia (see Ward, "Seal Cylinders of Western Asia," fig.
412, p. 156) and in the Mediterranean (see Evans, "Mycenæan Tree and
Pillar Cult," pp. 37 *et seq*.). It is a remarkable fact that Sir Arthur
Evans, who, upon p. 64 of his memoir, reproduces two drawings of the
Egyptian "horizon" supporting the sun's disk, should have failed to
recognize in it the prototype of what he calls "the horns of
consecration". Even if the confusion of the "horizon" with a cow's horns
was very ancient (for the horns of the Divine Cow supporting the moon
made this inevitable), this rationalization should not blind us as to
the real origin of the idea, which is preserved in the ancient Egyptian,
Babylonian, Cretan and Chinese pictures (see , facing [p.
188](eod39.htm#page_188)).

<span id="fn_166"></span>[98:2](eod22.htm#fr_166) De Visser, p. 103.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[98:3](eod22.htm#fr_167) P. 104, The Chinese
triquetrum has a circle in the centre and five or eight commas.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[99:1](eod22.htm#fr_168) See on this my paper
"The Origin of Early Siberian Civilization," now being published in the
*Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical
Society*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[100:1](eod22.htm#fr_169) Wilfrid Jackson,
"Shells as Evidence of the Migrations of Early Culture," p. 106.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[101:1](eod22.htm#fr_170) I shall discuss this
more fully in "The Birth of Aphrodite".

<span id="fn_171"></span>[101:2](eod22.htm#fr_171) "Religions of India,"
p. 197.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[102:1](eod22.htm#fr_172) "Mythe der
Kei-Insulaner und Verwandtes," *Zeitsch. f. Ethnologie*, vol. xxv.,
1893, pp. 533 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[103:1](eod22.htm#fr_173) See [Fig.
14](#img_fig14).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Evolution of the Dragon](eod23)
