[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod30)  [Next](eod32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE SEARCH FOR THE ELIXIR OF LIFE. BLOOD AS LIFE.

In delving into the remotely distant history of our species we cannot
fail to be impressed with the persistence with which, throughout the
whole of his career, man (of the species *sapiens*) has been
seeking <span id="fr_248"></span>[4](#fn_248) for an elixir of life, to
give added "vitality" to the dead (whose existence was not consciously
regarded as ended), to prolong the days of active life to the living, to
restore youth, and to protect his own life from all assaults, not merely
of time, but also of circumstance. In other words, the elixir he sought
was something that would bring "good luck" in all the events of his life
and its continuation. Most of the amulets, even of modern times, the
lucky trinkets, the averters of the "Evil Eye," the practices and
devices for securing good luck in love and sport, in curing bodily ills
or mental distress, in attaining material prosperity, or a continuation
of existence after death, are survivals of this ancient and persistent
striving after those objects which our earliest forefathers called
collectively the "givers of life".

From statements in the earliest literature <span
id="fr_249"></span>[5](#fn_249) that has come down to us from antiquity,
no less than from the views that still prevail among

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

the relatively more primitive peoples of the present day, it is clear
that originally man did not consciously formulate a belief in
immortality.

It was rather the result of a defect of thinking, or as the modern
psychologist would express it, an instinctive repression of the
unpleasant idea that death would come to him personally, that primitive
man refused to contemplate or to entertain the possibility of life
coming to an end. So intense was his instinctive love of life and dread
of such physical damage as would destroy his body that man unconsciously
avoided thinking of the chance of his own death: hence his belief in the
continuance of life cannot be regarded as the outcome of an active
process of constructive thought.

This may seem altogether paradoxical and incredible.

How, it may be asked, can man be said to repress the idea of death, if
he instinctively refused to admit its possibility? How did he escape the
inevitable process of applying to himself the analogy he might have been
supposed to make from other men's experience and recognize that he must
die?

Man appreciated the fact that he could kill an animal or another man by
inflicting certain physical injuries on him. But at first he seems to
have believed that if he could avoid such direct assaults upon himself,
his life would flow on unchecked, When death does occur and the
onlookers recognize the reality, it is still the practice among certain
relatively primitive people to search for the man who has inflicted
death on his fellow.

It would, of course, be absurd to pretend that any people could fail to
recognize the reality of death in the great majority of cases. The mere
fact of burial is an indication of this. But the point of difference
between the views of these early men and ourselves, was the tacit
assumption on the part of the former, that in spite of the obvious
changes in his body (which made inhumation or some other procedure
necessary) the deceased was still continuing an existence not unlike
that which he enjoyed previously, only somewhat duller, less eventful
and more precarious. He still needed food and drink, as he did before,
and all the paraphernalia of his mortal life, but he was dependent upon
his relatives for the maintenance of his existence.

Such views were difficult of acceptance by a thoughtful people, once
they appreciated the fact of the disintegration of the corpse in the
grave; and in course of time it was regarded as essential for continued

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

existence that the body should be preserved. The idea developed, that so
long as the body of the deceased was preserved and there were restored
to it all the elements of vitality which it had lost at death, the
continuance of existence was theoretically possible and worthy of
acceptance as an article of faith.

Let us consider for a moment what were considered to be elements of
vitality by the earliest members of our species. <span
id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250)

From the remotest times man seems to have been aware of the fact that he
could kill animals or his fellow men by means of certain physical
injuries. He associated these results with the effusion of blood. The
loss of blood could cause unconsciousness and death. Blood, therefore,
must be the vehicle of consciousness and life, the material whose escape
from the body could bring life to an end. <span
id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_251)

The first pictures painted by man, with which we are at present
acquainted, are found upon the walls and roofs of certain caves in
Southern France and Spain. They were the work of the earliest known
representatives of our own species, *Homo sapiens*, in the phase of
culture now distinguished by the name "Aurignacian".

The animals man was in the habit of hunting for food are depicted. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[3](#fn_252) In some of them arrows are shown
implanted in the animal's flank near the region of the heart; and in
others the heart itself is represented.

This implies that at this distant time in the history of our species, it
was already realized how vital a spot in the animal's anatomy the heart
was, But even long before man began to speculate about the functions of
the heart, he must have learned to associate the loss of blood on the
part of man or animals with death, and to regard the pouring out of
blood as the escape of its vitality. Many factors must have contributed
to the new advance in physiology which made the heart the centre or the
chief habitation of vitality, volition, feeling, and knowledge.

Not merely the empirical fact, acquired by experience in hunting, of the
peculiarly vulnerable nature of the heart, but perhaps also the
knowledge that the heart contained life-giving blood, helped in

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

developing the ideas about its functions as the bestower of life and
consciousness.

The palpitation of the heart after severe exertion or under the
influence of intense emotion would impress the early physiologist with
the relationship of the heart to the feelings, and afford confirmation
of his earlier ideas of its functions.

But whatever the explanation, it is known from the folk-lore of even the
most unsophisticated peoples that the heart was originally regarded as
the seat of life, feeling, volition, and knowledge, and that the blood
was the life-stream. The Aurignacian pictures in the caves of Western
Europe suggest that these beliefs were extremely ancient.

The evidence at our disposal seems to indicate that not only were such
ideas of physiology current in Aurignacian times, but also certain
cultural applications of them had been inaugurated even then. The
remarkable method of blood-letting by chopping off part of a finger
seems to have been practised even in Aurignacian times. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253)

If it is legitimate to attempt to guess at the meaning these early
people attached to so singular a procedure, we may be guided by the
ideas associated with this act in outlying corners of the world at the
present time. On these grounds we may surmise that the motive underlying
this, and other later methods of blood-letting, such as circumcision,
piercing the ears, lips, and tongue, gashing the limbs and body, et
cetera, was the offering of the life-giving fluid.

Once it was recognized that the state of unconsciousness or death. was
due to the loss of blood it was a not illogical or irrational procedure
to imagine that offerings of blood might restore consciousness and life
to the dead. <span id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_254) If the blood was
seriously believed to be the vehicle of feeling and knowledge, the
exchange of blood or the offering of blood to the community was a
reasonable method for initiating anyone into the wider knowledge of and
sympathy with his fellow-men.

Blood-letting, therefore, played a part in a great variety of
ceremonies, of burial and of initiation, and also those of a
therapeutic <span id="fr_255"></span>[3](#fn_255) and, later, of a
religious significance.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

But from Aurignacian times onwards, it seems to have been admitted that
substitutes for blood might be endowed with a similar potency.

The extensive use of red ochre or other red materials for packing around
the bodies of the dead was presumably inspired by the idea that
materials simulating blood-stained earth, were endowed with the same
life-giving properties as actual blood poured out upon the ground in
similar vitalizing ceremonies.

As the shedding of blood produced unconsciousness, the offering of blood
or red ochre was, therefore, a logical and practical means of restoring
consciousness and reinforcing the element of vitality which was
diminished or lost in the corpse.

The common statement that primitive man was a fantastically irrational
child is based upon a fallacy. He was probably as well endowed mentally
as his modern successors; and was as logical and rational as they are;
but many of his premises were wrong, and he hadn't the necessary body of
accumulated wisdom to help him to correct his false assumptions.

If primitive man regarded the dead as still existing, but with a reduced
vitality, it was a not irrational procedure on the part of the people of
the Reindeer Epoch in Europe to pack the dead in red ochre (which they
regarded as a surrogate of the life-giving fluid) to make good the lack
of vitality in the corpse.

If blood was the vehicle of consciousness and knowledge, the exchange of
blood was clearly a logical procedure for establishing communion of
thought and feeling and so enabling an initiate to assimilate the
traditions of his people.

If red carnelian was a surrogate of blood the wearing of bracelets or
necklaces of this life-giving material was a proper means of warding off
danger to life and of securing good luck.

If red paint or the colour red brought these magical results, it was
clearly justifiable to resort to its use.

All these procedures are logical. It is only the premises that were
erroneous.

The persistence of such customs in Ancient Egypt makes it possible for
us to obtain literary evidence to support the inferences drawn from
archæological data of a more remote age. For instance, the red jasper
amulet sometimes called the "girdle-tie of Isis," was supposed to
represent

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

the blood of the goddess and was applied to the mummy "to stimulate the
functions of his blood"; <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](eod32.htm#fn_256)
or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that it was intended to add
to the vital substance, which was so obviously lacking in the corpse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_248"></span>[145:4](eod31.htm#fr_248) In response to the
prompting of the most fundamental of all instincts, that of the
preservation of life.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[145:5](eod31.htm#fr_249) See Alan Gardiner,
*Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. IV, Parts II-III, April-July,
1917, p. 205. Compare also the Babylonian story of Gilgamesh.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[147:1](eod31.htm#fr_250) Some of these have
been discussed in Chapter I ("Incense and Libations") and will not be
further considered here.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[147:2](eod31.htm#fr_251) "The life which is
the blood thereof" (Gen. ix. 4).

<span id="fn_252"></span>[147:3](eod31.htm#fr_252) See, for example,
Sollas, "Ancient Hunters," 2nd Edition, 1915, pp. 326 (fig. 163), 333
(fig. 171), and 36 (fig. 189).

<span id="fn_253"></span>[148:1](eod31.htm#fr_253) Sollas, *op. cit.*,
pp. 347 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[148:2](eod31.htm#fr_254) The "redeeming
blood," Φαρμακον ἀθανασίας.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[148:3](eod31.htm#fr_255) The practice of
blood-letting for therapeutic purposes was probably first suggested by a
confused rationalization. The act of blood-letting was a means of
healing; and the victim himself supplied the vitalizing fluid!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cowry as a Giver of Life](eod32)
