[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod33)  [Next](eod35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### PEARLS.

During the chequered history of the Great Mother the attributes of the
original shell-amulet from which the goddess was sprung were also
changing and being elaborated to fit into a more complex scheme. The
magical properties of the cowry came to be acquired by other Red Sea
shells, such as *Pterocera*, the pearl oyster, conch shells, and others.
Each of these became intimately associated with the moon. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[3](#fn_269) The pearls found in the oysters were
supposed to be little moons, drops of the moon-substance (or dew) which
fell from the sky into the gaping oyster. Hence pearls acquired the
reputation of "shining by night," like the moon from which they were
believed to have come: and every surrogate of the Great Mother, whether
plant, animal, mineral or mythical instrument, came to be endowed with
the power of "shining by night". But pearls were also regarded as the
quintessence of the shell's life-giving properties, which were
considered to be all the more potent because they were sky-given
emanations of the moon-goddess herself. Hence pearls acquired the
reputation of

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

being the "givers of life" *par excellence*, an idea which found literal
expression in the ancient Persian word *margan* (from *mar*, "giver" and
*gan*, "life"). This word has been borrowed in all the Turanian
languages (ranging from Hungary to Kamskatckha), but also in the
non-Turanian speech of Western Asia, thence through Greek and Latin
(*margarita*) to European languages. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_270) The same life-giving attributes were
also acquired by the other pearl-bearing shells; and at some subsequent
period, when it was discovered that some of these shells could be used
as trumpets, the sound produced was also believed to be life-giving or
the voice of the great Giver of Life. The blast of the trumpet was also
supposed to be able to animate the deity and restore his consciousness,
so that he could attend to the appeals of supplicants. In other words
the noise woke up the god from his sleep. Hence the shell-trumpet
attained an important significance in early religious ceremonials for
the ritual purpose of summoning the deity, especially in Crete and
India, and ultimately in widely distant parts of the world. <span
id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_271) Long before these shells are known to
have been used as trumpets, they were employed like the other Red Sea
shells as "givers of life" to the dead in Egypt. Their use as trumpets
was secondary.

And when it was discovered that purple dye could be obtained from
certain of the trumpet-shells, the colouring-matter acquired the same
life-giving powers as had already been conferred upon the trumpet and
the pearls: thus it became regarded as a divine substance and as the
exclusive property of gods and kings.

Long before, the colour red had acquired magic potency as a surrogate of
life-giving blood; and this colour-symbolism undoubtedly helped in the
development of the similar beliefs concerning purple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[156:3](eod34.htm#fr_269) For the details see
Jackson, *op. cit.*, pp. 57-69. Both the shells and the moon were
identified with the Great Mother. Hence they were homologized the one
with the other.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[157:1](eod34.htm#fr_270) Dr. Mingana has given
me the following note: "It is very probable that the Græco-Latin
*margarita*, the Aramæo-Syriac *margarita*, the Arabic *margan*, and the
Turanian *margan* are derived from the Persian *mar-gân*, meaning both
'pearl' and 'life,' or etymologically 'giver, owner, or possessor, of
life'. The word *gān*, in Zend *yān*, is thoroughly Persian and is
undoubtedly the original form of this expression."

<span id="fn_271"></span>[157:2](eod34.htm#fr_271) See Chapter II of
Jackson's book, *op. cit.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sharks and Dragons](eod35)
