[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod42)  [Next](eod44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

#### THE PIG.

I have already referred to the circumstances that were responsible for
the identification of the cow with the Great Mother, the sky, and the
moon. Once this had happened, the process seems to have been extended to
include other animals which were used as food, such as the sheep, goat,
pig, and antelope (or gazelle and deer). In Egypt the cow continued to
occupy the pre-eminent place as a divine animal; and the cow-cult
extended from the [Mediterranean](errata.htm#9) to equatorial Africa, to
Western Europe, and as far East as India. But in the Mediterranean area
the pig played a more prominent part than it did in Egypt. <span
id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_421) In the latter country Osiris, Isis, and
especially Set, were identified with the pig; and in Syria the place of
Set as the enemy of Osiris (Adonis) was taken by an actual pig. But
throughout the Eastern Mediterranean the pig was also identified with
the Great Mother and associated with lunar and sky phenomena. In fact at
Troy the pig was represented <span id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_422) with
the star-shaped decorations with which Hathor's divine cow (in her rôle
as a sky-goddess) was embellished in Egypt. To complete the
identification with the cow-mother Cretan fable represents a sow
suckling the infant Minos or the youthful Zeus-Dionysus as his Egyptian
prototype was suckled by the divine cow.

Now the cowry-shell was called χοῖρος by the Greeks. The pig, in fact,
was identified both with the Great Mother and the shell; and it is clear
from what has been said already in these pages that the reason for this
strange homology was the fact that originally the Great Mother was
nothing more than the cowry-shell.

But it was not only with the shell itself that the pig was identified
but also with what the shell symbolized. Thus the term, χοῖρος had an
obscene significance in addition to its usual meaning "pig" and its
acquired meaning "cowry". This fact seems to have played some part in
fixing upon the pig the notoriety of being "an unclean animal". <span
id="fr_423"></span>[3](#fn_423) But it was mainly for other reasons of a
very different kind that the eating of swine-flesh was forbidden. The
tabu seems to have arisen

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

originally because the pig was a sacred animal identified with the Great
Mother and the Water God, and especially associated with both these
deities in their lunar aspects.

According to a Cretan legend the youthful god Zeus-Dionysus was suckled
by a sow. For this reason "the Cretans consider this animal sacred, and
will not taste of its flesh; and the men of Præsos perform sacred rites
with the sow, making her the first offering at the sacrifice". <span
id="fr_424"></span>[1](#fn_424)

But when the pig also assumed the rôle of Set, as the enemy of Osiris,
and became the prototype of the devil, an active aversion took the place
of the sacred tabu, and inspired the belief in the unwholesomeness of
pig flesh. To this was added the unpleasant reputation as a dirty animal
which the pig itself acquired, for the reasons which I have already
stated.

I have already referred to the irrelevance of Miss Jane Harrison's
denial of the birth of Aphrodite from the sea ([p.
141](eod30.htm#page_141)). Miss Harrison does not seem to have realized
that in her book <span id="fr_425"></span>[2](#fn_425) she has collected
evidence which is much more relevant to the point at issue. For, in the
interesting account of the Eleusinian Mysteries (pp. 150 *et seq*.), she
has called attention to the important rite upon the day "called in
popular parlance 'ἅλαδε μύσται,' 'to the sea ye mystics'" (p. 152),
which, I think, has a direct bearing upon the myth of Aphrodite's birth
from the sea.

The Mysteries were celebrated at full moon; and each of the candidates
for admission "took with him his own pharmakos, <span
id="fr_426"></span>[3](#fn_426) a young pig".

"Arrived at the sea, each man bathed with his pig" (p. 152). On one
occasion, so it is said, "when a mystic was bathing his pig, a
sea-monster ate off the lower part of his body" (p. 153). So important
was the pig in this ritual "that when Eleusis was permitted (B.C.
350-327) to issue her autonomous coinage it is the pig she chooses as
the sign and symbol of her mysteries" (p. 153).

"On the final day of the Mysteries, according to Athenæus, two vessels
called *plemochoæ* are emptied, one towards the East and the other
towards the West, and at the moment of outpouring a mystic

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

formulary was pronounced. … What the mystic formulary was we cannot
certainly say, but it is tempting to connect the libation of the
*plemochoæ* with a formulary recorded by Proclos. He says 'In the
Eleusinian mysteries, looking up to the sky they cried aloud "Rain," and
looking down to earth they cried "Be fruitful"'" (p. 161).

In these latter incidents we see, perhaps, a distant echo of Hathor's
pots of blood-coloured beer that were poured out upon the soil, which in
a later version of the story became the symbol of the inundation of the
river and the token of the earth's fruitfulness. The personification in
the Great Mother of these life-giving powers of the river occurred at
about the same time; and this was rationalized by the myth that she was
born of the sea. She was also identified with the moon and a sow. Hence
these Mysteries were celebrated, both in Egypt and in the Mediterranean,
at full moon, and the pig played a prominent part in them. The
candidates washed the sacrificial pig in the sea, not primarily as a
rite of purification, <span id="fr_427"></span>[1](#fn_427) as is
commonly claimed, but because the sacrificial animal was merely a
surrogate of the cowry, which lived in the sea, and of the Great
Mother, <span id="fr_428"></span>[2](#fn_428) who was sprung from the
cowry and hence born of the sea. In the story of the man carrying the
pig being attacked by a sea-monster, perhaps we have an incident of that
widespread story of the shark guarding the pearls. We have already seen
how it was distorted into the fantastic legend of the dog's rôle in the
digging up of mandrakes. In the version we are now considering the
pearl's place is taken by the pig, both of them surrogates of the cowry.

The object of the ceremony of carrying the pig into the sea was not the
cleansing of "the unclean animal," nor was it *primarily* a rite of
purification in any sense of the term: it was simply a ritual procedure
for identifying the sacrifice with the goddess by putting it in her own
medium, and so transforming the surrogate of the sea-shell, the
prototype of the sea-born goddess, into the actual Great Mother.

The question naturally arises: what was the real purpose of the
sacrifice of the pig?

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

In the story of the Destruction of Mankind we have seen that originally
a human victim was slain for the purpose of obtaining the life-giving
human blood to rejuvenate the ageing king. Two circumstances were
responsible for the modification of this procedure. In the first place,
there was the abandonment of human sacrifice and the substitution of
either beer coloured red with ochre to resemble blood (or in other cases
red wine) or the actual blood of an animal sacrifice in place of the
human blood. Secondly, the blood of the Great Mother herself
(personified in the special *avatar* that was recognized in a particular
locality, the cow in one place, the pig in another, and so on) was
regarded as more potent as a life-giving force than that of a mere
mortal human being. It is possible, perhaps even probable, that this was
the real reason for the abandoning of human sacrifice and the
substitution of an animal for a human being. For it is unlikely that, in
the rude state of society which had become familiarized with and
brutalized by the practice of these bloody rites of homicide, ethical
motives alone would have prompted the abolition of the custom of human
sacrifice, to which such deep significance was attached. The
substitution of the animal was prompted rather by the idea of obtaining
a more potent elixir from the life-blood of the Great Mother herself in
her cow- or sow-forms.

In the transitional stage of the process of substitution of an animal
for a human being some confusion seems to have arisen as to the ritual
meaning of the new procedure. If Moret's account of the Egyptian
Mysteries <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_429) is correct—and without a
knowledge of Egyptian philology I am not competent to express an opinion
upon this matter—the attempt was made to identify the animal victim of
sacrifice with the human being whose place it had taken. In the
procession a human being wore the skin of an animal; and, according to
Moret, there was a ceremony of passing a human being through the skin as
a ritual procedure for transforming the mock victim into the animal
which was to be sacrificed in his place. If there is any truth in this
interpretation, such a ceremony must have been prompted by a
misunderstanding of the meaning of the sacrifice, unless the
identification of the sacrificial animal with the goddess was merely a
secondary rationalization of the substitution which had been made for
ethical or some other reasons.

We know that the dead were often buried in the skins of sacrificial

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

animals, and so identified with the life-giving deities and given
rebirth. We know also that in certain ceremonies the appropriate skins
were worn by those who were impersonating particular gods or goddesses.
The wearing of these skins of divine animals seems to have been prompted
not so much by the idea of a reincarnation in animal form as by the
desire for identification and communion with the particular deity which
the animal represented. The whole question, however, is one of great
complexity, which can only be settled by a critical study of the texts
by some scholar who keeps clearly before his mind the real issues, and
refuses to take refuge in the stereotyped evasions of conventional
methods of interpretation.

The sacrifice of the sow to Demeter is merely a late variant of Hathor's
sacrifice of a human being to rejuvenate the king Re. How the real
meaning of the story became distorted I have already explained in
Chapter II ("Dragons and Rain Gods"). The killing of the sow to obtain a
good harvest is homologous with the sacrifice of a maiden to obtain a
good inundation of the river. The sow is the surrogate of the beautiful
princess of the fairy tale. Instead of the maiden being slain, in one
case, as Andromeda, she is rescued by the hero, in the other her place
is taken by a sow. These late rationalizations are merely glosses of the
deep motives which more than fifty centuries ago seem to have prompted
early pharmacologists to obtain a more potent elixir than human blood by
stealing from the heights of Olympus the divine blood of the life-giving
deities themselves.

The pig was identified not only with the Great Mother, but with Osiris
and Set also. With the pig's lunar and astral associations 1 do not
propose to deal in these pages, as the astronomical aspects of the
problems are so vast as to need much more space than the limits imposed
in this statement. But it is important to note that the identification
of Set with a pig was perhaps the main factor in riveting upon this
creature the fetters of a reputation for evil. The evil dragon was the
representative of both Set and the Great Mother (Sekhet or Tiamat); and
both of them were identified with the pig. Just as Set killed Osiris, so
the pig gave Adonis his mortal injury. <span
id="fr_430"></span>[1](#fn_430) When these earthly incidents were
embellished with a celestial significance, the conflict

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of Horus with Set was interpreted as the struggle between the forces of
light and order and the powers of darkness and chaos. When worshipped as
a tempest-god the Mesopotamian Rimmon was known as "the pig" <span
id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_431) and, as "the wild boar of the desert,"
was a form of Set.

I have discussed the pig at this length because the use of the words
χοίρος by the Greeks, and *porcus* and *porculus* by the Romans, reveals
the fact that the terms had the double significance of "pig" and
"cowry-shell". As it is manifestly impossible to derive the word "cowry"
from the Greek word for "pig," the only explanation that will stand
examination is that the two meanings must have been acquired from the
identification of both the cowry and the pig with the Great Mother and
the female reproductive organs. In other words, the pig-associations of
Aphrodite afford clear evidence that the goddess was originally a
personification of the cowry. <span id="fr_432"></span>[2](#fn_432)

The fundamental nature of the identification of the cowry, the pig, and
the Great Mother, the one with the other, is revealed not merely in the
archæology of the Ægean, but also in the modern customs and ancient
pictures of the most distant peoples. For example, in New Guinea the
place of the sacrificial pig may be taken by the cowry-shell; <span
id="fr_433"></span>[3](#fn_433) and upon the chief façade of the east
wing of the ancient American monument, known as the Casa de las Monjas
at Chichen Itza, the hieroglyph of the planet Venus is placed in
conjunction with a picture of a wild pig. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[4](#fn_434)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[216:1](eod43.htm#fr_421) And also, in a
misunderstood form, even as far as America.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[216:2](eod43.htm#fr_422) Schliemann, "Ilios,"
Fig. 1450, p. 616.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[216:3](eod43.htm#fr_423) This is seen in the
case of the Persian word *khor*, which means both "pig" and "harlot" or
"filthy woman". The possibility of the derivation of the old English
word "\[w\]hore" from the same source is worth considering.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[217:1](eod43.htm#fr_424) L. R. Farnell, "Cults
of the Greek States," Vol. I, p. 37.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[217:2](eod43.htm#fr_425) "Prolegomena to the
Study of Greek Religion."

<span id="fn_426"></span>[217:3](eod43.htm#fr_426) Which, in fact, was
intended as the equivalent of φάρμακον ἀθανασίας, "the redeeming blood".

<span id="fn_427"></span>[218:1](eod43.htm#fr_427) Blackman
("Sacramental Ideas and Usages in Ancient Egypt," *Proceedings of the
Society of Biblical Archæology*, March, 1918, p. 57; and May, 1918, p.
85) has shown that the idea of purification was certainly entertained.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[218:2](eod43.htm#fr_428) In some places an
image of the goddess was washed in the sea.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[219:1](eod43.htm#fr_429) "Mystères Égyptiens."

<span id="fn_430"></span>[220:1](eod43.htm#fr_430) Mr. Donald Mackenzie
has collected a good deal of folklore concerning the pig ("Myths of
Egypt," pp. 66 *et seq*.; also his books on Babylonian, Indian, and
Cretan myths, *op. cit. supra*).

<span id="fn_431"></span>[221:1](eod43.htm#fr_431) According to Sayce,
"Hibbert Lectures," p. 153, note 6.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[221:2](eod43.htm#fr_432) In Egypt not only was
the sow identified with Isis, but "lucky pigs" were worn on necklaces
just like the earlier cowry-amulets (Budge, "Guide to the Egyptian
Collections" (British Museum), p. 96).

<span id="fn_433"></span>[221:3](eod43.htm#fr_433) Malinowski, *Trans.
and Proc. Royal Society, South Australia*, XXXIX, 1915, p. 587 et. seq.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[221:4](eod43.htm#fr_434) Seler, "Die
Tierbilder der mexikanischen und der Maya-Handschriften," *Zeitsch. f.
Ethnologie*, Bd. 41, 1909, p. 405, and Fig. 242 in Maudslay, "Biologia
Centrali-Americana, Vol. III, Pl. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gold and the Golden Aphrodite](eod44)
