<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe061)  [Next](wwe063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_37"></span>

CHAPTER 37

How Ralph Justed With the Aliens

Meanwhile Captain Otter had brought Ralph into the staked-out lists,
which, being hastily pitched, were but slenderly done, and now the
Upmeads stripling stood there beside a good horse which they had brought
to him, and Otter had been speaking to him friendly. But Ralph saw the
Lord come forth from the pavilion and take his seat on an ivory chair
set on a turf ridge close to the stakes of the lists:  for that place
was used of custom for such games as they exercised in the lands of
Utterbol. Then presently the Lady's women came out of their tents, and,
being marshalled by Agatha, went into the Queen's pavilion, whence they
came forth again presently like a bed of garden flowers moving, having
in the midst of them a woman so fair, and clad so gloriously, that Ralph
must needs look on her, though he were some way off, and take note of
her beauty. She went and sat her down beside the Lord, and Ralph doubted
not that it was the Queen, whom he had but glanced at when they first
made stay before the pavilion. Sooth to say, Joyce being well nigh as
tall as the Queen, and as white of skin, was otherwise a far fairer
woman.

Now spake Otter to Ralph:  "I must leave thee here, lad, and go to the
other side, as I am to run against thee."  Said Ralph: "Art thou to run
first?"  "Nay, but rather last," said Otter; "they will try thee first
with one of the sergeants, and if he overcome thee, then all is done,
and thou art in an evil plight. Otherwise will they find another and
another, and at last it will be my turn.  So keep thee well, lad."

Therewith he rode away, and there came to Ralph one of the sergeants,
who brought him a spear, and bade him to horse. So Ralph mounted and
took the spear in hand; and the sergeant said: "Thou art to run at
whatsoever meeteth thee when thou hast heard the third blast of the
horn.  Art thou ready?"  "Yea, yea," said Ralph; "but I see that the
spear-head is not rebated, so that we are to play at sharps."

"Art thou afraid, youngling?" said the sergeant, who was old and
crabbed, "if that be so, go and tell the Lord: but thou wilt find that
he will not have his sport wholly spoiled, but will somehow make a bolt
or a shaft out of thee."

Said Ralph:  "I did but jest; I deem myself not so near my death to-day
as I have been twice this summer or oftener." Said the sergeant, "It is
ill jesting in matters wherein my Lord hath to do.  Now thou hast heard
my word: do after it."

Therewith he departed, and Ralph laughed and shook the spear aloft, and
deemed it not over strong; but he said to himself that the spears of the
others would be much the same.

Now the horn blew up thrice, and at the latest blast Ralph pricked
forth, as one well used to the tilt, but held his horse well in hand;
and he saw a man come driving against him with his spear in the rest,
and deemed him right big; but this withal he saw, that the man was ill
arrayed, and was pulling on his horse as one not willing to trust him to
the rush; and indeed he came on so ill that it was clear that he would
never strike Ralph's shield fairly. So he swerved as they met, so that
his spear-point was never near to Ralph, who turned his horse toward him
a little, and caught his foeman by the gear about his neck, and spurred
on, so that he dragged him clean out of his saddle, and let him drop,
and rode back quietly to his place, and got off his horse to see to his
girths; and he heard great laughter rising up from the ring of men, and
from the women also.  But the Lord of Utterbol cried out: "Bring forth
some one who doth not eat my meat for nothing: and set that wretch and
dastard aside till the tilting be over, and then he shall pay a little
for his wasted meat and drink."

Ralph got into his saddle again, and saw a very big man come forth at
the other end of the lists, and wondered if he should be overthrown of
him; but noted that his horse seemed not over good.  Then the horn blew
up and he spurred on, and his foeman met him fairly in the midmost of
the lists: yet he laid his spear but ill, and as one who would thrust
and foin with it rather than letting it drive all it might, so that
Ralph turned the point with his shield that it glanced off, but he
himself smote the other full on the shoulder, and the shaft brake, but
the point had pierced the man's armour, and the truncheon stuck in the
wound: yet since the spear was broken he kept his saddle. The Lord cried
out, "Well, Black Anselm, this is better done; yet art thou a big man
and a well-skilled to be beaten by a stripling."

So the man was helped away and Ralph went back to his place again.

Then another man was gotten to run against Ralph, and it went the
same-like way:  for Ralph smote him amidst of the shield, and the spear
held, so that he fell floundering off his horse.

Six of the stoutest men of Utterbol did Ralph overthrow or hurt in this
wise; and then he ran three courses with Otter, and in the first two
each brake his spear fairly on the other; but in the third Otter smote
not Ralph squarely, but Ralph smote full amidst of his shield, and so
dight him that he well-nigh fell, and could not master his horse, but
yet just barely kept his saddle.

Then the Lord cried out:  "Now make we an end of it! We have no might
against this youngling, man to man: or else would Otter have done it. 
This comes of learning a craft diligently."

So Ralph got off his horse, and did off his helm and awaited tidings;
and anon comes to him the surly sergeant, and brought him a cup of wine,
and said:  "Youngling, thou art to drink this, and then go to my Lord;
and I deem that thou art in favour with him.  So if thou art not too
great a man, thou mightest put in a word for poor Redhead, that first
man that did so ill.  For my Lord would have him set up, and head down
and buttocks aloft, as a target for our bowmen. And it will be his luck
if he be sped with the third shot, and last not out to the twentieth."

"Yea, certes," said Ralph, "I will do no less, even if it anger the
Lord."  "O thou wilt not anger him," said the man, "for I tell thee,
thou art in favour.  Yea, and for me also thou mightest say a word also,
when thou becomest right great; for have I not brought thee a good bowl
of wine?" "Doubt it not, man," said Ralph, "if I once get safe to
Utterbol: weary on it and all its ways!"  Said the sergeant: "That is an
evil wish for one who shall do well at Utterbol. But come, tarry not."

So he brought Ralph to the Lord, who still sat in his chair beside that
fair woman, and Ralph did obeysance to him; yet he had a sidelong glance
also for that fair seeming-queen, and deemed her both proud-looking, and
so white-skinned, that she was a wonder, like the queen of the fays: and
it was just this that he had noted of the Queen as he stood before her
earlier in the day when they first came into the vale; therefore he had
no doubt of this damsel's queenship.

Now the Lord spake to him and said:  "Well, youngling, thou hast done
well, and better than thy behest:  and since ye have been playing at
sharps, I deem thou would'st not do ill in battle, if it came to that.
So now I am like to make something other of thee than I was minded to at
first:  for I deem that thou art good enough to be a man. And if thou
wilt now ask a boon of me, if it be not over great, I will grant it
thee."

Ralph put one knee to the ground, and said:  "Great Lord, I thank thee: 
but whereas I am in an alien land and seeking great things, I know of no
gift which I may take for myself save leave to depart, which I deem thou
wilt not grant me. Yet one thing thou mayst do for my asking if thou
wilt. If thou be still angry with the carle whom I first unhorsed, I
pray thee pardon him his ill-luck."

"Ill-luck!" said the Lord, "Why, I saw him that he was downright afraid
of thee.  And if my men are to grow blenchers and soft-hearts what is to
do then?  But tell me, Otter, what is the name of this carle?" Said
Otter, "Redhead he hight, Lord."  Said the Lord:  "And what like a man
is he in a fray?"  "Naught so ill, Lord," said Otter. "This time, like
the rest of us, he knew not this gear. It were scarce good to miss him
at the next pinch. It were enough if he had the thongs over his back a
few dozen times; it will not be the first day of such cheer to him."

"Ha!" said the Lord, "and what for, Otter, what for?" "Because he was
somewhat rough-handed, Lord," said Otter. "Then shall we need him and
use him some day.  Let him go scot free and do better another bout. 
There is thy boon granted for thee, knight; and another day thou mayst
ask something more. And now shall David have a care of thee.  And when
we come to Utterbol we shall see what is to be done with thee."

Then Ralph rose up and thanked him, and David came forward, and led him
to his tent.  And he was wheedling in his ways to him, as if Ralph were
now become one who might do him great good if so his will were.

But the Lord went back again into the Tower.

As to the Lady, she abode in her pavilion amidst many fears and desires,
till Agatha entered and said:  "My Lady, so far all has gone happily."
Said the Lady:  "I deemed from the noise and the cry that he was doing
well. But tell me, how did he?"  "My Lady," quoth Agatha, "he knocked
our folk about well-favouredly, and seemed to think little of it."

"And Joyce," said the Lady, "how did she?"  "She looked a queen, every
inch of her, and she is tall," said Agatha:  "soothly some folk stared
on her, but not many knew of her, since she is but new into our house. 
Though it is a matter of course that all save our new-come knight knew
that it was not thou that sat there. And my Lord was well-pleased, and
now he hath taken her by the hand and led her into the Tower."

The Lady reddened and scowled, and said:  "And he... did he come anigh
her?" "O yea," said Agatha, "whereas he stood before my Lord a good
while, and then kneeled to him to pray pardon for one of our men who had
done ill in the tilting:  yea, he was nigh enough to her to touch her
had he dared, and to smell the fragrance of her raiment. And he seemed
to think it good to look out of the corners of his eyes at her; though I
do not say that she smiled on him." The Lady sprang up, her cheeks
burning, and walked about angrily a while, striving for words, till at
last she said:  "When we come home to Utterbol, my lord will see his new
thrall again, and will care for Joyce no whit: then will I have my will
of her; and she shall learn, she, whether I am verily the least of women
at Utterbol!  Ha! what sayest thou? Now why wilt thou stand and smile on
me?—Yea, I know what is in thy thought; and in very sooth it is good
that the dear youngling hath not seen this new thrall, this Ursula. 
Forsooth, I tell thee that if I durst have her in my hands I would have
a true tale out of her as to why she weareth ever that pair of beads
about her neck."

"Now, our Lady," said Agatha, "thou art marring the fairness of thy face
again.  I bid thee be at peace, for all shall be well, and other than
thou deemest.  Tell me, then, didst thou get our Lord to swear immunity
for me?"  Said the Lady: "Yea, he swore on the edge of the sword that
thou mightest say what thou wouldst, and neither he nor any other should
lay hand on thee."

"Good," said Agatha; "then will I go to him to-morrow morning, when
Joyce has gone from him.  But now hold up thine heart, and keep close
for these two days that we shall yet abide in Tower Dale: and trust me
this very evening I shall begin to set tidings going that shall work and
grow, and shall one day rejoice thine heart."

So fell the talk betwixt them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38: A Friend Gives Ralph Warning](wwe063)

</div>
