<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe017)  [Next](wwe019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_17"></span>

CHAPTER 17

Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance

Therewithal they gat to horse and rode away through that stony land,
wherein was no river, but for water many pools in the bottoms, with
little brooks running from them. But after a while they came upon a
ridge somewhat high, on the further side whereof was a wide valley
well-grassed and with few trees, and no habitation of man that they
might see. But a wide river ran down the midst of it; and it was now
four hours after noon.  Quoth Roger:  "The day wears and we shall by no
means reach harbour before dark night, even if we do our best: art thou
well used to the water, lord?"  "Much as a mallard is," said Ralph. 
Said Roger:  "That is well, for though there is a ford some mile and a
half down stream, for that same reason it is the way whereby men mostly
cross the water into the wildwood; and here again we are more like to
meet foes than well-wishers; or at the least there will be question of
who we are, and whence and whither; and we may stumble in our answers." 
Said Ralph: "There is no need to tarry, ride we down to the water."

So did they, and took the water, which was deep, but not swift. On the
further side they clomb up a hill somewhat steep; at the crown they drew
rein to give their horses breath, and Ralph turned in his saddle and
looked down on to the valley, and as aforesaid he was clear-sighted and
far-sighted; now he said: "Fellow-farer, I see the riding of folk down
below there, and meseems they be spurring toward the water; and they
have weapons: there! dost thou not see the gleam?"

"I will take thy word for it, fair sir," said Roger, "and will even
spur, since they be the first men whom we have seen since we left the
thickets." And therewith he went off at a hand gallop, and Ralph
followed him without more ado.

They rode up hill and down dale of a grassy downland, till at last they
saw a wood before them again, and soon drew rein under the boughs; for
now were their horses somewhat wearied. Then said Ralph:  "Here have we
ridden a fair land, and seen neither house nor herd, neither sheep-cote
nor shepherd. I wonder thereat."

Said Roger:  "Thou wouldst wonder the less didst thou know the story of
it." "What story?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger:  "A story of war and
wasting." "Yea?" said Ralph, "yet surely some bold knight or baron hath
rights in the land, and might be free to build him a strong house and
gather men to him to guard the shepherds and husbandmen from burners and
lifters." "Sooth is that," said Roger; "but there are other things in
the tale." "What things?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger:  "Ill hap and sorrow
and the Hand of Fate and great Sorcery."  "And dastards withal?" said
Ralph.  "Even so," said Roger, "yet mingled with valiant men. Over long
is the tale to tell as now, so low as the sun is; so now ride we on with
little fear of foemen.  For look you, this wood, like the thickets about
the Burg of the Four Friths, hath an evil name, and few folk ride it
uncompelled; therefore it is the safer for us. And yet I will say this
to thee, that whereas awhile agone thou mightest have departed from me
with little peril of aught save the stumbling on some of the riders of
the Burg of the Four Friths, departing from me now will be a hard matter
to thee; for the saints in Heaven only know whitherward thou shouldest
come, if thou wert to guide thyself now. This a rough word, but a true
one, so help me God and Saint Michael! What sayest thou; art thou
content, or wilt thou cast hard words at me again?"

So it was that for all that had come and gone Ralph was light-hearted
and happy; so he laughed and said: "Content were I, even if I were not
compelled thereto. For my heart tells me of new things, and marvellous
and joyous that I shall see ere long."

"And thine heart lieth not," said Roger, "for amidst of this wood is the
house where we shall have guesting to-night, which will be to thee,
belike, the door of life and many marvels. For thence have folk sought
ere now to the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

Ralph turned to him sharply and said:  "Many times in these few days
have I heard that word.  Dost thou know the meaning thereof?  For as to
me I know it not."  Said Roger:  "Thou mayest well be as wise as I am
thereon: belike men seek to it for their much thriving, and oftenest
find it not. Yet have I heard that they be the likeliest with whom all
women are in love."

Ralph held his peace, but Roger noted that he reddened at the word.

Now they got on horseback again, for they had lighted down to breathe
their beasts, and they rode on and on, and never was Roger at fault:
long was the way and perforce they rested at whiles, so that night fell
upon them in the wood, but the moon rose withal.  So night being fairly
come, they rested a good while, as it would be dawn before moonset. Then
they rode on again, till now the summer night grew old and waned, but
the wood hid the beginnings of dawn.

At last they came out of the close wood suddenly into an open plain, and
now, as the twilight of the dawn was passing into early day, they saw
that wide grassy meadows and tilled fields lay before them, with a
little river running through the plain; and amidst the meadows, on a
green mound, was a white castle, strong, and well built, though not of
the biggest.

Roger pointed to it, and said, "Now we are come home," and cried on his
wearied beast, who for his part seemed to see the end of his journey.
They splashed through a ford of the river and came to the gate of the
castle as day drew on apace; Roger blew a blast on a great horn that
hung on the gate, and Ralph looking round deemed he had never seen
fairer building than in the castle, what he could see of it, and yet it
was built from of old.  They waited no long while before they were
answered; but whereas Ralph looked to see armed gatewards peer from the
battlements or the shot window, and a porter espying them through a
lattice, it happened in no such way, but without more ado the wicket was
opened to them by a tall old woman, gaunt and grey, who greeted them
courteously: Roger lighted down and Ralph did in likewise, and they led
their horses through the gate into the court of the castle; the old
woman going before them till they came to the hall door, which she
opened to them, and taking the reins of their horses led them away to
the stable, while those twain entered the hall, which was as goodly as
might be. Roger led Ralph up to a board on the dais, whereon there was
meat and drink enow, and Ralph made his way-leader sit down by him, and
they fell to. There was no serving-man to wait on them nor a carle of
any kind did they see; the old woman only, coming back from the horses,
served them at table. Ever as she went about she looked long on Ralph,
and seemed as if she would have spoken to him, but as often, she glanced
at Roger and forbore.

So when they were well nigh done with their meat Ralph spake to the
carline and said:  "Belike the lord or the lady of this house are abed
and we shall not see them till the morrow?"

Ere the carline could speak Roger broke in and said: "There is neither
lord nor lady in the castle as now, nor belike will there be to-morrow
morning, or rather, before noon on this day; so now ye were better to
let this dame lead thee to bed, and let the next hours take care of
themselves."

"So be it," said Ralph, who was by this time heartily wearied, "shall we
two lie in the same chamber?"

"Nay," said the carline shortly, "lodging for the master and lodging for
the man are two different things."

Roger laughed and said nought, and Ralph gave him good night, and
followed the carline nothing loth, who led him to a fair chamber over
the solar, as if he had been the very master of the castle, and he lay
down in a very goodly bed, nor troubled himself as to where Roger lay,
nor indeed of aught else, nor did he dream of Burg, or wood, or castle,
or man, or woman; but lay still like the image of his father's father on
the painted tomb in the choir of St. Laurence of Upmeads.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18: Of Ralph in the Castle of Abundance](wwe019)

</div>
