<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe096)  [Next](wwe098) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_09"></span>

CHAPTER 9

They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King Thereof

Toward evening comes Redhead, and tells Ralph how he hired him a dozen
men-at-arms to follow him well-weaponed to Cheaping Knowe: withal he
counselled him to take a good gift with him to that same town to buy the
good will of the King there; who was a close-fist and a cruel lord.

Afterwards they sat together in the court of that fair house before good
wine, Ralph and Ursula, and Redhead and the Sage of Swevenham, and spake
of many things, and were merry and kind together. But on the morrow
Redhead departed from Goldburg with his men, and he loth to depart, and
they gave him farewell lovingly. Thereafter Ralph's new men came to him
in the hostelry, and he feasted them and did well to them, so that they
praised him much. Then he gat him victuals and sumpter-horses for the
journey, and bought good store of bows and arrows withal.  Furthermore
he took heed to Redhead's word and bought a goodly gift of silver vessel
and fine cloth for the King of Cheaping Knowe.

The day after he and his company departed from Goldburg toward the
mountains, which they passed unfought and unwaylaid: partly because they
were a band of stout men, and partly because a little before there had
been a great overthrow of the wild men of those mountains at the hands
of the men of Goldburg and the Chapmen; so that now the mountain-men lay
close, and troubled none that rode with any force.

On the way they failed not to pass by the place where they had erst
found Bull Nosy slain:  there they saw his howe, heaped up exceeding
high, covered in with earth, whereon the grass was now beginning to
grow, and with a great standing stone on the top thereof, whereon was
graven the image of a bull, with a sword thereunder; whereby the
wayfarers wotted that this had been done in his memory by his brother,
the new Lord of Utterbol.

So they came down out of the mountains to Whiteness, where they had good
entertainment, but tarried not save for one night, riding their ways
betimes to Cheaping Knowe: and they came before the gate thereof safe
and sound on the third day; and slept in the hostelry of the chapmen. On
the morrow Ralph went up to the King's Castle with but three men
unweaponed bearing the gift which he had got for the King. Albeit he
sent not away his men-at-arms till he should know how the King was
minded towards him.

As he went he saw in the streets sad tokens of the lord's cruel justice,
as handless men, fettered, dragging themselves about, and folk hung up
before chapmen's booths, and whipping-cheer, and the pillar, and such
like. But whereas he might not help he would not heed, but came right to
the Castle-gate, and entered easily when he had told his errand, for
gift-bearing men are not oftenest withstood.

He was brought straightway into the great hall, where sat the King on
his throne amidst the chiefs of the Porte, and his captains and
sergeants, who were, so to say, his barons, though they were not barons
of lineage, but masterful men who were wise to do his bidding.

As he went up the hall he saw a sort of poor caytiffs, women as well as
men, led away from the high-place in chains by bailiffs and tipstaves;
and he doubted not that these were for torments or maiming and death;
and thought it were well might he do them some good.

Being come to the King, he made his obeisance to him, and craved his
good will and leave to wage men-at-arms to bring him through the
mountains.

The King was a tall man, a proper man of war; long-legged, black
bearded, and fierce-eyed. Some word he had heard of Ralph's gift,
therefore he was gracious to him; he spake and said:  "Thou hast come
across the mountains a long way, fair Sir; prithee on what errand?"
Answered Ralph:  "For no errand, lord, save to fare home to mine own
land." "Where is thine own land?" said the King, stretching out his legs
and lying back in his chair.  "West-away, lord, many a mile," said
Ralph. "Yea," quoth the King, "and how far didst thou go beyond the
mountains? As far as Utterbol?"  Said Ralph:  "Yet further, but not to
Utterbol." "Hah!" said the King, "who goeth beyond Utterbol must have a
great errand; what was thine?"

Ralph thought for a moment, and deemed it best to say as little as he
might concerning Ursula; so he answered, and his voice grew loud and
bold: "I was minded to drink a draught of the WELL at the WORLD'S END,
and even so I did."  As he spake, he drew himself up, and his brows were
knit a little, but his eyes sparkled from under them, and his cheeks
were bright and rosy. He half drew the sword from the scabbard, and sent
it back rattling, so that the sound of it went about the hall; he
upreared his head and looked around him on this and that one of the
warriors of the aliens, and he sniffed the air into his nostrils as he
stood alone amongst them, and set his foot down hard on the floor of the
King's hall, and his armour rattled upon him.

But the King sat bolt upright in his chair and stared Ralph's face; and
the warriors and lords and merchants fell back from Ralph and stood in
an ordered rank on either side of him and bent their heads before him.
None spoke till the King said in a hoarse voice, but lowly and
wheedling: "Tell us, fair Sir, what is it that we can do to pleasure
thee?"

"King," said Ralph, "I am not here to take gifts but to give them
rather: yet since thou biddest me I will crave somewhat of thee, that
thou mayst be the more content:  and moreover the giving shall cost thee
nothing: I crave of thee to give me life and limb and freedom for the
poor folk whom I saw led down the hall by thy tipstaves, even now. Give
me that or nothing."  The King scowled, but he spake: "This is indeed a
little gift of thee to take; yet to none else save thee had I given it."

Therewith he spake to a man beside him and said:  "Go thou, set them
free, and if any hurt hath befallen them thy life shall answer for it. 
Is it enough, fair Sir, and have we thy goodwill?" Ralph laughed for joy
of his life and his might, and he answered: "King, this is the token of
my goodwill; fear naught of me." And he turned to his men, and bade them
bright forth the gift of Goldburg and open it before the King; and they
did so. But when the King cast eyes on the wares his face was gladdened,
for he was a greedy wolf, and whoso had been close to his mouth would
have heard him mutter:  "So mighty! yet so wealthy!" But he thanked
Ralph aloud and in smooth words.  And Ralph made obeisance to him again,
and then turned and went his ways down the hall, and was glad at heart
that he had become so mighty a man, for all fell back before him and
looked on him with worship. Howbeit he had looked on the King closely
and wisely, and deemed that he was both cruel and guileful, so that he
rejoiced that he had spoken naught of Ursula, and he was minded to keep
her within gates all the while they abode at Cheaping-Knowe.

When he came to the hostel he called his men-at-arms together and asked
them how far they would follow him, and with one voice they said all
that they would go with him whereso he would, so that it were not beyond
reason. So they arrayed them for departure on the morrow, and were to
ride out of gates about mid-morning. So wore the day to evening; but ere
the night was old came a man asking for Ralph, as one who would have a
special alms of him, a poor man by seeming, and evilly clad. But when
Ralph was alone with him, the poor man did him to wit that for all his
seeming wretchedness he was but disguised, and was in sooth a man of
worship, and one of the Porte.  Quoth he: "I am of the King's Council,
and I must needs tell thee a thing of the King: that though he was at
the first overawed and cowed by the majesty of thee, a Friend of the
Well, he presently came to himself, which was but ill; so that what for
greed, what for fear even, he is minded to send men to waylay thee, some
three leagues from the town, on your way to the mountains, but ye shall
easily escape his gin now I have had speech of thee; for ye may take a
by-road and fetch a compass of some twelve miles, and get aback of the
waylayers.  Yet if ye escape this first ambush, unless ye are timely in
riding early tomorrow it is not unlike that he shall send swift riders
to catch up with you ere ye come to the mountains. Now I am come to warn
thee hereof, partly because I would not have so fair a life spilt, which
should yet do so well for the sons of Adam, and partly also because I
would have a reward of thee for my warning and my wayleading, for I
shall show thee the way and the road."

Said Ralph:  "Ask and fear not; for if I may trust thee I already owe
thee a reward."  "My name is Michael-a-dale," said the man, "and from
Swevenham I came hither, and fain would I go thither, and little hope I
have thereof save I go privily in some such band as thine, whereas the
tyrant holdeth me on pain, as well I know, of an evil death."

"I grant thine asking, friend," said Ralph; "and now thou wert best go
to thine house and truss what stuff thou mayst have with thee and come
back hither in the grey of the morning."

The man shook his head and said:  "Nay; here must I bide night-long, and
go out of gates amongst thy men-at-arms, and clad like one of them with
iron enough about me to hide the fashion of me; it were nowise safe for
me to go back into the town; for this tyrant wages many a spy:  yea,
forsooth, I fear me by certain tokens that it is not all so certain that
I have not been spied upon already, and that it is known that I have
come to thee. And I will tell thee that by hook or by crook the King
already knoweth somewhat of thee and of the woman who is in thy
company."

Ralph flushed red at that word, and felt his heart bound: but even
therewith came into them the Sage; and straightway Ralph took him apart
and told him on what errand the man was come, and ask him if he deemed
him trusty.  Then the Sage went up to Michael and looked him hard in the
face awhile, and then said: "Yea, honest he is unless the kindred of
Michael of the Hatch of Swevenham have turned thieves in the third
generation."

"Yea," said Michael, "and dost thou know the Hatch?"

"As I know mine own fingers," said the Sage; "and even so I knew it
years and years before thou wert born."  Therewith he told the new-comer
what he was, and the two men of Swevenham made joy of each other. And
Ralph was fain of them, and went into the chamber wherein sat Ursula,
and told her how all things were going, and she said that she would be
naught but glad to leave that town, which seemed to her like to Utterbol
over again.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10: An Adventure on the Way to the Mountains](wwe098)

</div>
