<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe051)  [Next](wwe053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_27"></span>

CHAPTER 27

Clement Tells of Goldburg

Now when it was morning he rose early and roused Bull and the captain,
and they searched in divers places where they had not been the night
before, and even a good way back about the road they had ridden
yesterday, but found no tidings.  And Ralph said to himself that this
was naught but what he had looked for after that vision of the night.

So he rode with his fellows somewhat shamefaced that they had seen that
sudden madness in him; but was presently of better cheer than he had
been yet.  He rode beside Clement; they went downhill speedily, and the
wilderness began to better, and there was grass at whiles, and bushes
here and there.  A little after noon they came out of a pass cleft deep
through the rocks by a swift stream which had once been far greater than
then, and climbed up a steep ridge that lay across the road, and looking
down from the top of it, beheld the open country again. But this was
otherwise from what they had beheld from the mountain's brow above
Cheaping Knowe.  For thence the mountains beyond Whiteness, even those
that they had just ridden, were clear to be seen like the wall of the
plain country.  But here, looking adown, the land below them seemed but
a great spreading plain with no hills rising from it, save that far away
they could see a certain break in it, and amidst that, something that
was brighter than the face of the land elsewhere. Clement told Ralph
that this was Goldburg and that it was built on a gathering of hills,
not great, but going up steep from the plain. And the plain, said he,
was not so wholly flat and even as it looked from up there, but swelled
at whiles into downs and low hills. He told him that Goldburg was an
exceeding fair town to behold; that the lord who had built it had
brought from over the mountains masons and wood-wrights and artificers
of all kinds, that they might make it as fair as might be, and that he
spared on it neither wealth nor toil nor pains. For in sooth he deemed
that he should find the Well at the World's End, and drink thereof, and
live long and young and fair past all record; therefore had he builded
this city, to be the house and home of his long-enduring joyance.

Now some said that he had found the Well, and drank thereof; others
naysaid that; but all deemed that they knew how that Goldburg was not
done building ere that lord was slain in a tumult, and that what was
then undone was cobbled up after the uncomely fashion of the towns
thereabout.

Clement said moreover that, this happy lord dead, things had not gone so
well there as had been looked for.  Forsooth it had been that lord's
will and meaning that all folks in Goldburg should thrive, both those
who wrought and those for whom they wrought. But it went not so, but
there were many poor folk there, and few wealthy.

Again said Clement that though the tillers and toilers of Goldburg were
not for the most part mere thralls and chattels, as in the lands beyond
the mountains behind them, yet were they little more thriving for that
cause; whereas they belonged not to a master, who must at worst feed
them, and to no manor, whose acres they might till for their livelihood,
and on whose pastures they might feed their cattle; nor had they any to
help or sustain them against the oppressor and the violent man; so that
they toiled and swinked and died with none heeding them, save they that
had the work of their hands good cheap; and they forsooth heeded them
less than their draught beasts whom they must needs buy with money, and
whose bellies they must needs fill; whereas these poor wretches were
slaves without a price, and if one died another took his place on the
chance that thereby he might escape present death by hunger, for there
was a great many of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28: Now They Come to Goldburg](wwe053)

</div>
