<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe012)  [Next](wwe014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_12"></span>

CHAPTER 12

Ralph Entereth Into the Burg of the Four Friths

When they came up to the wall they saw that it was well builded of good
ashlar, and so high that they might not see the roofs of the town
because of it; but there were tall towers on it, a many of them, strong
and white.  The road led up straight to the master-gate of the Burg, and
there was a bailey before it strongly walled, and manned with weaponed
men, and a captain going about amongst them. But they entered it along
with men bringing wares into the town, and none heeded them much, till
they came to the very gate, on the further side of a moat that was both
deep and clean; but as now the bridge was down and the portcullis up, so
that the market-people might pass in easily, for it was yet early in the
day. But before the door on either side stood men-at-arms well weaponed,
and on the right side was their captain, a tall man with bare grizzled
head, but otherwise all-armed, who stopped every one whom he knew not,
and asked their business.

As Ralph came riding up with Roger beside him, one of the guard laid his
spear across and bade them stand, and the captain spake in a dry cold
voice: "Whence comest thou, man-at-arms?" "From the Abbey of St. Mary at
Higham," said Ralph.  "Yea," said the captain, smiling grimly, "even so
I might have deemed:  thou wilt be one of the Lord Abbot's lily lads."
"No I am not," quoth Ralph angrily.  "Well, well," said the captain,
"what is thy name?"

"Ralph Motherson," quoth Ralph, knitting his brow.  Said the captain
"And whither wilt thou?"  Said Ralph, "On mine own errands." "Thou
answerest not over freely," quoth the captain. Said Ralph, "Then is it
even; for thou askest freely enough." "Well, well," said the captain,
grinning in no unfriendly wise, "thou seemest a stout lad enough; and as
to my asking, it is my craft as captain of the North Gate:  but now tell
me friendly, goest thou to any kinsman or friend in the Burg?"

Then Ralph's brow cleared and he said, "Nay, fair sir." "Well then,"
said the captain, "art thou but riding straight through to another gate,
and so away again?"  "Nay," said Ralph, "if I may, I would abide here
the night over, or may-happen longer." "Therein thou shalt do well,
young man," said the captain; "then I suppose thou wilt to some
hostelry? tell me which one."

Said Ralph, "Nay, I wot not to which one, knowing not the town." But
Roger close by him spake and said:  "My lord shall go to the Flower de
Luce, which is in the big square."

"Truly," said the captain, "he goes to a good harbour; and moreover,
fair sir, to-morrow thou shalt see a goodly sight from thine inn; thou
mayst do no better, lord.  But thou, carle, who art thou, who knowest
the inside of our Burg so well, though I know thee not, for as well as I
know our craftsmen and vavassors?"

Then Roger's words hung on his lips awhile, and the knight bent his brow
on him, till at last he said, "Sir Captain, I was minded to lie, and say
that I am this young knight's serving-man." The captain broke in on him
grimly, "Thou wert best not lie."

"Yea, sir," quoth Roger, "I deemed, as it was on my tongue's end, that
thou wouldst find me out, so I have nought to do but tell thee the very
sooth: this it is:  I am a man made masterless by the thieves of the Dry
Tree. From my land at Hampton under Scaur have I been driven, my
chattels have been lifted, and my friends slain; and therefore by your
leave would I ride in the host of the Burg, that I may pay back the harm
which I had, according to the saw, 'better bale by breeding bale.'  So,
lord, I ask thee wilt thou lend me the sword and give me the loaf, that
I may help both thee, and the Burg, and me?"

The captain looked at him closely and sharply, while the carle faced him
with open simple eyes, and at last he said: "Well, carle, thou wert
about to name thyself this young knight's serving-man; be thou even so
whiles he abideth in the Burg; and when he leaveth the Burg then come
back to me here any day before noon, and may be I shall then put a sword
in thy fist and horse between thy thighs.  But," (and he wagged his head
threateningly at Roger) "see that thou art at the Flower de Luce when
thou art called for."

Roger held his peace and seemed somewhat abashed at this word, and the
captain turned to Ralph and said courteously:  "Young knight, if thou
art seeking adventures, thou shalt find them in our host; and if thou be
but half as wise as thou seemest bold, thou wilt not fail to gain honour
and wealth both, in the service of the Burg; for we be overmuch beset
with foemen that we should not welcome any wight and wary warrior,
though he be an alien of blood and land. If thou thinkest well of this,
then send me thy man here and give me word of thy mind, and I shall lead
thee to the chiefs of the Port, and make the way easy for thee."

Ralph thanked him and rode through the gate into the street, and Roger
still went beside his stirrup.

Presently Ralph turned to Roger and spake to him somewhat sourly, and
said:  "Thou hadst one lie in thy mouth and didst swallow it; but how
shall I know that another did not come out thence? Withal thou must
needs be my fellow here, will I, nill I; for thou it was that didst put
that word into the captain's mouth that thou shouldst serve me while I
abide in the Burg. So I will say here and now, that my mind misgives me
concerning thee, whether thou be not of those very thieves and tyrants
whom thou didst mis-say but a little while ago."

"Yea," said Roger, "thou art wise indeed to set me down as one of the
Dry Tree; doubtless that is why I delivered thee from their ambush even
now. And as for my service, thou mayst need it; for indeed I deem thee
not so safe as thou deemest thyself in this Burg."

"What!" said Ralph, "Dost thou blow hot and cold? why even now, when we
were in the wood, thou wert telling me that I had nought at all to fear
in the Burg of the Four Friths, and that all was done there by reason
and with justice. What is this new thing then which thou hast found out,
or what is that I have to fear?"

Roger changed countenance thereat and seemed somewhat confused, as one
who has been caught unawares; but he gat his own face presently, and
said:  "Nay, Sir Knight, I will tell thee the truth right out. In the
wood yonder thy danger was great that thou mightest run into the hands
of them of the Dry Tree; therefore true it is that I spake somewhat
beyond my warrant concerning the life of the folk of the Burg, as how
could I help it?  But surely whatever thy peril may be here, it is
nought to that which awaited thee at Hampton."

"Nay, but what is the peril?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger, "If thou wilt
become their man and enter into their host, there is none; for they will
ask few questions of so good a man-at-arms, when they know that thou art
theirs; but if thou naysay that, it may well be that they will be for
turning the key on thee till thou tellest them what and whence thou
art." Ralph answered nought, thinking in his mind that this was like
enough; so he rode on soberly, till Roger said:

"Anyhow, thou mayst turn the cold shoulder on me if thou wilt. Yet were
I thee, I would not, for so it is, both that I can help thee, as I deem,
in time to come, and that I have helped thee somewhat in time past."

Now Ralph was young and could not abide the blame of thanklessness; so
he said, "Nay, nay, fellow, go we on together to the Flower de Luce."

Roger nodded his head and grumbled somewhat, and they made no stay
except that now and again Ralph drew rein to look at goodly things in
the street, for there were many open booths therein, so that the whole
street looked like a market. The houses were goodly of building, but not
very tall, the ways wide and well-paved. Many folk were in the street,
going up and down on their errands, and both men and women of them
seemed to Ralph stout and strong, but not very fair of favour. Withal
they seemed intent on their business, and payed little heed to Ralph and
his fellow, though he was by his attire plainly a stranger.

Now Ralph sees a house more gaily adorned than most, and a sign hung out
from it whereon was done an image of St. Loy, and underneath the same a
booth on which was set out weapons and war-gear exceeding goodly; and
two knaves of the armourer were standing by to serve folk, and crying
their wares with "what d'ye lack?" from time to time. So he stayed and
fell to looking wistfully at the gleam and glitter of those fair things,
till one of the aforesaid knaves came to his side and said:

"Fair Sir, surely thou lackest somewhat; what have we here for thy
needs?"  So Ralph thought and called to mind that strong little steel
axe of the man whom he had slain yesterday, and asked for the sight of
such a weapon, if he might perchance cheapen it.  And the lad brought a
very goodly steel axe, gold-inlaid about the shaft, and gave him the
price thereof, which Ralph deemed he might compass; so he brought round
his scrip to his hand, that he might take out the money. But while his
hand was yet in the bag, out comes the master-armourer, a tall and very
stark carle, and said in courteous wise: "Sir Knight, thou art a
stranger to me and I know thee not; so I must needs ask for a sight of
thy license to buy weapons, under the seal of the Burg."

"Hear a wonder," said Ralph, "that a free man for his money shall not
buy wares set out to be bought, unless he have the Burg-Reeve's hand and
seal for it!  Nay, take thy florins, master, and give me the axe and let
the jest end there." "I jest not, young rider," quoth the armourer. 
"When we know thee for a liegeman of the Burg, thou shalt buy what thou
wilt without question; but otherwise I have told thee the law, and how
may I, the master of the craft, break the law? Be not wrath, fair sir, I
will set aside thine axe for thee, till thou bring me the license, or
bid me come see it, and thou shalt get the said license at the Town Hall
straight-way, when they may certify thee no foeman of the Burg."

Ralph saw that it availed nothing to bicker with the smith, and so went
his way somewhat crestfallen, and that the more as he saw Roger grinning
a little.

Now they come into the market-place, on one side whereof was the master
church of the town, which was strongly built and with a tall tower to
it, but was not very big, and but little adorned.  Over against it they
saw the sign of the Flower de Luce, a goodly house and great.
Thitherward they turned; but in the face of the hostelry amidmost the
place was a thing which Roger pointed at with a grin that spoke as well
as words; and this was a high gallows-tree furnished with four forks or
arms, each carved and wrought in the fashion of the very bough of a
tree, from which dangled four nooses, and above them all was a board
whereon was written in big letters THE DRY TREE.  And at the foot of
this gallows were divers folk laughing and talking.

So Ralph understood at once that those four men whom he had seen led
away bound yesterday should be hanged thereon; so he stayed a franklin
who was passing by, and said to him, "Sir, I am a stranger in the town,
and I would know if justice shall be done on the four woodmen to-day."
"Nay," said the man, "but to-morrow; they are even now before the
judges."

Then said Roger in a surly voice, "Why art thou not there to look on?"
"Because," quoth the man, "there is little to see there, and not much
more to hearken.  The thieves shall be speedily judged, and not
questioned with torments, so that they may be the lustier to feel what
the hangman shall work on them to-morrow; then forsooth the show shall
be goodly. But far better had it been if we had had in our hands the
great witch of these dastards, as we looked to have her; but now folk
say that she has not been brought within gates, and it is to be feared
that she hath slipped through our fingers once more."

Roger laughed, and said:  "Simple are ye folk of the Burg and know
nought of her shifts.  I tell thee it is not unlike that she is in the
Burg even now, and hath in hand to take out of your prison the four whom
ye have caught."

The franklin laughed scornfully in his turn and said: "If we be simple,
thou art a fool merely:  are we not stronger and more than the Dry
Tree?  How should she not be taken? How should she not be known if she
were walking about these streets? Have we no eyes, fool-carle?" And he
laughed again, for he was wroth.

Ralph hearkened, and a kind of fear seemed griping his heart, so he
asked the franklin:  "Tell me, sir, are ye two speaking of a woman who
is Queen of these strong-thieves?" "Yea," said he, "or it might better
be said that she is their goddess, their mawmet, their devil, the very
heart and soul of their wickedness. But one day shall we have her body
and soul, and then shall her body have but an evil day of it till she
dieth in this world."

"Yea, forsooth, if she can die at all," quoth Roger.

The franklin looked sourly on him and said:  "Good man, thou knowest
much of her, meseemeth—Whence art thou?" Said Roger speedily:  "From
Hampton under Scaur; and her rebel I am, and her dastard, and her
runaway. Therefore I know her forsooth."

"Well," the Franklin said, "thou seemest a true man, and yet I would
counsel thee to put a rein on thy tongue when thou art minded to talk of
the Devil of the Dry Tree, or thou mayst come to harm in the Burg."

He walked away towards the gallows therewith; and Roger said, almost as
if he were talking to himself; "A heavy-footed fool goeth yonder; but
after this talk we were better hidden by the walls of the
Flower-de-Luce." So therewith they went on toward the hostel.

But the market place was wide, and they were yet some minutes getting to
the door, and ere they came there Ralph said, knitting his brows
anxiously: "Is this woman fair or foul to look on?"  "That is nought so
easy to tell of," said Roger, "whiles she is foul, whiles very fair,
whiles young and whiles old; whiles cruel and whiles kind. But note
this, when she is the kindest then are her carles the cruellest; and she
is the kinder to them because they are cruel."

Ralph pondered what he said, and wondered if this were verily the woman
whom he had delivered, or some other. As if answering to his unspoken
thought, Roger went on: "They speak but of one woman amongst them of the
Dry Tree, but in sooth they have many others who are like unto her in
one way or other; and this again is a reason why they may not lay hands
on the very Queen of them all."

Therewithal they came unto the hostel, and found it fair enough within,
the hall great and goodly for such a house, and with but three
chapmen-carles therein.  Straightway they called for meat, for it was
now past noon, and the folk of the house served them when the grooms had
taken charge of Falcon. And Roger served Ralph as if he were verily his
man. Then Ralph went to his chamber aloft and rested a while, but came
down into the hall a little before nones, and found Roger there walking
up and down the hall floor, and no man else, so he said to him:  "Though
thou art not of the Burg, thou knowest it; wilt thou not come abroad
then, and show it me? for I have a mind to learn the ways of the folk
here."

Said Roger, and smiled a little:  "If thou commandest me as my lord, I
will come; yet I were better pleased to abide behind; for I am weary
with night-waking and sorrow; and have a burden of thought, one which I
must bear to the end of the road; and if I put it down I shall have to
go back and take it up again."

Ralph thought that he excused himself with more words than were needed;
but he took little heed of it, but nodded to him friendly, and went out
of the house afoot, but left his weapons and armour behind him by the
rede of Roger.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13: The Streets of the Burg of the Four Friths](wwe014)

</div>
