<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe086)  [Next](wwe088) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_21"></span>

CHAPTER 21

Now They Drink of the Well at the World's End

 Ralph awoke from some foolish morning dream of Upmeads, wondering where
he was, or what familiar voice had cried out his name:  then he raised
himself on his elbow, and saw Ursula standing before him with flushed
face and sparkling eyes, and she was looking out seaward, while she
called on his name. So he sprang up and strove with the slumber that
still hung about him, and as his eyes cleared he looked down, and saw
that the sea, which last night had washed the face of the cliff, had now
ebbed far out, and left bare betwixt the billows and the cliff some half
mile of black sand, with rocks of the like hue rising out of it here and
there. But just below the place where they stood, right up against the
cliff, was builded by man's hand of huge stones a garth of pound, the
wall whereof was some seven feet high, and the pound within the wall of
forty feet space endlong and overthwart; and the said pound was filled
with the waters of a spring that came forth from the face of the cliff
as they deemed, though from above they might not see the issue thereof;
but the water ran seaward from the pound by some way unseen, and made a
wide stream through the black sand of the foreshore: but ever the great
basin filled somewhat faster than it voided, so that it ran over the lip
on all sides, making a thin veil over the huge ashlar-stones of the
garth. The day was bright and fair with no wind, save light airs playing
about from the westward ort, and all things gleamed and glittered in the
sun.

Ralph stood still a moment, and then stretched abroad his arms, and with
a great sob cast them round about the body of his beloved, and strained
her to his bosom as he murmured about her, THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END. 
But she wept for joy as she fawned upon him, and let her hands beat upon
his body.

But when they were somewhat calmed of their ecstasy of joy, they made
ready to go down by that rocky stair.  And first they did off their
armour and other gear, and when they were naked they did on the hallowed
raiment which they had out of the ark in the House of the Sorceress; and
so clad gat them down the rock-hewn stair, Ralph going first, lest there
should be any broken place; but naught was amiss with those hard black
stones, and they came safely to a level place of the rock, whence they
could see the face of the cliff, and how the waters of the Well came
gushing forth from a hollow therein in a great swelling wave as clear as
glass; and the sun glistened in it and made a foam-bow about its edges.
But above the issue of the waters the black rock had been smoothed by
man's art, and thereon was graven the Sword and the Bough, and above it
these words, to wit:

YE WHO HAVE COME A LONG WAY TO LOOK UPON ME, DRINK OF ME, IF YE DEEM
THAT YE BE STRONG ENOUGH IN DESIRE TO BEAR LENGTH OF DAYS: OR ELSE DRINK
NOT; BUT TELL YOUR FRIENDS AND THE KINDREDS OF THE EARTH HOW YE HAVE
SEEN A GREAT MARVEL.

So they looked long and wondered; and Ursula said:  "Deemest thou, my
friend, that any have come thus far and forborne to drink?"

Said Ralph:  "Surely not even the exceeding wise might remember the
bitterness of his wisdom as he stood here."

Then he looked on her and his face grew bright beyond measure, and cried
out: "O love, love! why tarry we?  For yet I fear lest we be come too
late, and thou die before mine eyes ere yet thou hast drunken."

"Yea," she said, "and I also fear for thee, though thy face is ruddy and
thine eyes sparkle, and thou art as lovely as the Captain of the Lord's
hosts."

Then she laughed, and her laughter was as silver bells rung tunably, and
she said:  "But where is the cup for the drinking?"

But Ralph looked on the face of the wall, and about the height of his
hand saw square marks thereon, as though there were an ambrye; and
amidst the square was a knop of latten, all green with the weather and
the salt spray. So Ralph set his hand to the knop and drew strongly, and
lo it was a door made of a squared stone hung on brazen hinges, and it
opened easily to him, and within was a cup of goldsmith's work, with the
sword and the bough done thereon; and round about the rim writ this
posey: "THE STRONG OF HEART SHALL DRINK FROM ME."  So Ralph took it and
held it aloft so that its pure metal flashed in the sun, and he said:
"This is for thee, Sweetling."

"Yea, and for thee," she said.

Now that level place, or bench-table went up to the very gushing and
green bow of the water, so Ralph took Ursula's hand and led her along,
she going a little after him, till he was close to the Well, and stood
amidst the spray-bow thereof, so that he looked verily like one of the
painted angels on the choir wall of St. Laurence of Upmeads. Then he
reached forth his hand and thrust the cup into the water, holding it
stoutly because the gush of the stream was strong, so that the water of
the Well splashed all over him, wetting Ursula's face and breast withal:
and he felt that the water was sweet without any saltness of the sea.
But he turned to Ursula and reached out the full cup to her, and said:
"Sweetling, call a health over the cup!"

She took it and said:  "To thy life, beloved!" and drank withal, and her
eyes looked out of the cup the while, like a child's when he drinketh. 
Then she gave him the cup again and said: "Drink, and tarry not, lest
thou die and I live."

Then Ralph plunged the cup into the waters again, and he held the cup
aloft, and cried out:  "To the Earth, and the World of Manfolk!" and
therewith he drank.

For a minute then they clung together within the spray-bow of the Well,
and then she took his hand and led him back to the midst of the
bench-table, and he put the cup into the ambrye, and shut it up again,
and then they sat them down on the widest of the platform under the
shadow of a jutting rock; for the sun was hot; and therewithal a sweet
weariness began to steal over them, though there was speech betwixt them
for a little, and Ralph said: "How is it with thee, beloved?"

"O well indeed," she said.

Quoth he:  "And how tasteth to thee the water of the Well?"

Slowly she spake and sleepily:  "It tasted good, and as if thy love were
blended with it."

And she smiled in his face; but he said:  "One thing I wonder over: how
shall we wot if we have drunk aright?  For whereas if we were sick or
old and failing, or ill-liking, and were now presently healed of all
this, and become strong and fair to look on, then should we know it for
sure— but now, though, as I look on thee, I behold thee the fairest of
all women, and on thy face is no token of toil and travail, and the
weariness of the way; and though the heart-ache of loneliness and
captivity, and the shame of Utterbol has left no mark upon thee—yet hast
thou not always been sweet to my eyes, and as sweet as might be?  And
how then?"...But he broke off and looked on her and she smiled upon the
love in his eyes, and his head fell back and he slept with a calm and
smiling face. And she leaned over him to kiss his face but even
therewith her own eyes closed and she laid her head upon his breast, and
slept as peacefully as he.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22: Now They Have Drunk and Are Glad](wwe088)

</div>
