<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe084)  [Next](wwe086) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_19"></span>

CHAPTER 19

They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert

Past the Valley of the Dry Tree they saw but few dead men lying about,
and soon they saw never another: and, though the land was still utterly
barren, and all cast up into ridges as before, yet the salt slime grew
less and less, and before nightfall of that day they had done with it:
and the next day those stony waves were lower; and the next again the
waste was but a swelling plain, and here and there they came on patches
of dwarf willow, and other harsh and scanty herbage, whereof the horses
might have a bait, which they sore needed, for now was their fodder
done: but both men and horses were sore athirst; for, as carefully as
they had hoarded their water, there was now but little left, which they
durst not drink till they were driven perforce, lest they should yet die
of drought.

They journeyed long that day, and whereas the moon was up at night-tide
they lay not down till she was set; and their resting place was by some
low bushes, whereabout was rough grass mingled with willow-herb, whereby
Ralph judged that they drew nigh to water, so or ever they slept, they
and the horses all but emptied the water-skins. They heard some sort of
beasts roaring in the night, but they were too weary to watch, and might
not make a fire.

When Ralph awoke in the morning he cried out that he could see the
woodland; and Ursula arose at his cry and looked where he pointed, and
sure enough there were trees on a rising ground some two miles ahead,
and beyond them, not very far by seeming, they beheld the tops of great
dark mountains. On either hand moreover, nigh on their right hand, far
off on their left, ran a reef of rocks, so that their way seemed to be
as between two walls. And these said reefs were nowise like those that
they had seen of late, but black and, as to their matter, like to the
great mountains by the rock of the Fighting Man:  but as the reefs ran
eastward they seemed to grow higher.

Now they mounted their horses at once and rode on; and the beasts were
as eager as they were, and belike smelt the water. So when they had
ridden but three miles, they saw a fair little river before them winding
about exceedingly, but flowing eastward on the whole.  So they spurred
on with light hearts and presently were on the banks of the said river,
and its waters were crystal-clear, though its sands were black: and the
pink-blossomed willow-herb was growing abundantly on the sandy shores. 
Close to the water was a black rock, as big as a man, whereon was graven
the sign of the way, so they knew that there was no evil in the water,
wherefore they drank their fill and watered their horses abundantly, and
on the further bank was there abundance of good grass. So when they had
drunk their fill, for the pleasure of the cool water they waded the ford
barefoot, and it was scarce above Ursula's knee. Then they had great joy
to lie on the soft grass and eat their meat, while the horses tore
eagerly at the herbage close to them. So when they had eaten, they
rested awhile, but before they went further they despoiled them, one
after other, and bathed in a pool of the river to wash the foul
wilderness off them. Then again they rested and let the horses yet bite
the grass, and departed not from that pleasant place till it was two
hours after noon.  As they were lying there Ralph said he could hear a
great roar like the sound of many waters, but very far off: but to
Ursula it seemed naught but the wind waxing in the boughs of the
woodland anigh them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20: They Come to the Ocean Sea](wwe086)

</div>
