<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe007)  [Next](wwe009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_07"></span>

CHAPTER 7

The Maiden of Bourton Abbas

So went he through the gate, and many, both of men and maids gazed at
him, for he was fair to look on, but none meddled with him.

There was a goodly fauburg outside the gate, and therein were fair
houses, not a few, with gardens and orchards about them; and when these
were past he rode through very excellent meadows lying along the water,
which he crossed thrice, once by a goodly stone bridge and twice by
fords; for the road was straight, and the river wound about much.

After a little while the road led him off the plain meads into a country
of little hills and dales, the hill-sides covered with vineyards and
orchards, and the dales plenteous of corn-fields; and now amongst these
dales Higham was hidden from him.

Through this tillage and vine-land he rode a good while, and thought he
had never seen a goodlier land; and as he went he came on husbandmen and
women of the country going about their business: yet were they not too
busy to gaze on him, and most greeted him; and with some he gave and
took a little speech.

These people also he deemed well before the world, for they were well
clad and buxom, and made no great haste as they went, but looked about
them as though they deemed the world worth looking at, and as if they
had no fear either of a blow or a hard word for loitering.

So he rode till it was noon, and he was amidst a little thorp of grey
stone houses, trim enough, in a valley wherein there was more of
wild-wood trees and less of fruit-bearers than those behind him. In the
thorp was a tavern with the sign of the Nicholas, so Ralph deemed it but
right to enter a house which was under the guard of his master and
friend; therefore he lighted down and went in. Therein he found a lad of
fifteen winters, and a maiden spinning, they two alone, who hailed him
and asked his pleasure, and he bade them bring him meat and drink, and
look to his horse, for that he had a mind to rest a while.  So they
brought him bread and flesh, and good wine of the hill-side, in a little
hall well arrayed as of its kind; and he sat down and the damsel served
him at table, but the lad, who had gone to see to his horse, did not
come back.

So when he had eaten and drunk, and the damsel was still there, he
looked on her and saw that she was sad and drooping of aspect; and
whereas she was a fair maiden, Ralph, now that he was full, fell to
pitying her, and asked her what was amiss.  "For," said he, "thou art
fair and ailest nought; that is clear to see; neither dwellest thou in
penury, but by seeming hast enough and to spare. Or art thou a servant
in this house, and hath any one misused thee?"

She wept at his words, for indeed he spoke softly to her; then she
said:  "Young lord, thou art kind, and it is thy kindness that draweth
the tears from me; else it were not well to weep before a young man: 
therefore I pray thee pardon me. As for me, I am no servant, nor has any
one misused me: the folk round about are good and neighbourly; and this
house and the croft, and a vineyard hard by, all that is mine own and my
brother's; that is the lad who hath gone to tend thine horse.  Yea, and
we live in peace here for the most part; for this thorp, which is called
Bourton Abbas, is a land of the Abbey of Higham; though it be the
outermost of its lands and the Abbot is a good lord and a defence
against tyrants. All is well with me if one thing were not."

"What is thy need then?" said Ralph, "if perchance I might amend it."
And as he looked on her he deemed her yet fairer than he had done at
first. But she stayed her weeping and sobbing and said:  "Sir, I fear me
that I have lost a dear friend."  "How then," said he, "why fearest
thou, and knowest not? doth thy friend lie sick between life and death?"
"O Sir," she said, "it is the Wood which is the evil and disease."

"What wood is that?" said he.

She said:  "The Wood Perilous, that lieth betwixt us and the Burg of the
Four Friths, and all about the Burg.  And, Sir, if ye be minded to ride
to the Burg to-day, do it not, for through the wood must thou wend
thereto; and ye are young and lovely. Therefore take my rede, and abide
till the Chapmen wend thither from Higham, who ride many in company. 
For, look you, fair lord, ye have asked of my grief, and this it is and
nought else; that my very earthly love and speech-friend rode five days
ago toward the Burg of the Four Friths all alone through the Wood
Perilous, and he has not come back, though we looked to see him in three
days' wearing:  but his horse has come back, and the reins and the
saddle all bloody."

And she fell a-weeping with the telling of the tale.  But Ralph said
(for he knew not what to say): "Keep a good heart, maiden; maybe he is
safe and sound; oft are young men fond to wander wide, even as I
myself."

She looked at him hard and said:  "If thou hast stolen thyself away from
them that love thee, thou hast done amiss. Though thou art a lord, and
so fair as I see thee, yet will I tell thee so much."

Ralph reddened and answered nought; but deemed the maiden both fair and
sweet.  But she said:  "Whether thou hast done well or ill, do no worse;
but abide till the Chapmen come from Higham, on their way to the Burg of
the Four Friths.  Here mayst thou lodge well and safely if thou wilt. Or
if our hall be not dainty enough for thee, then go back to Higham: I
warrant me the monks will give thee good guesting as long as thou wilt."

"Thou art kind, maiden," said Ralph, "but why should I tarry for an
host? and what should I fear in the Wood, as evil as it may be? One man
journeying with little wealth, and unknown, and he no weakling, but
bearing good weapons, hath nought to dread of strong-thieves, who ever
rob where it is easiest and gainfullest.  And what worse may I meet than
strong-thieves?"

"But thou mayest meet worse," she said; and therewith fell a-weeping
again, and said amidst her tears:  "O weary on my life!  And why should
I heed thee when nought heedeth me, neither the Saints of God's House,
nor the Master of it; nor the father and the mother that were once so
piteous kind to me? O if I might but drink a draught from the WELL AT
THE WORLD'S END!"

He turned about on her hastily at that word; for he had risen to depart;
being grieved at her grief and wishful to be away from it, since he
might not amend it.  But now he said eagerly:

"Where then is that Well?  Know ye of it in this land?"

"At least I know the hearsay thereof," she said; "but as now thou shalt
know no more from me thereof; lest thou wander the wider in seeking it.
I would not have thy life spilt."

Ever as he looked on her he thought her still fairer; and now he looked
long on her, saying nought, and she on him in likewise, and the blood
rose to her cheeks and her brow, but she would not turn her from his
gaze.  At last he said: "Well then, I must depart, no more learned than
I came: but yet am I less hungry and thirsty than I came; and have thou
thanks therefor."

Therewith he took from his pouch a gold piece of Upmeads, which was
good, and of the touch of the Easterlings, and held it out to her. And
she put out her open hand and he put the money in it; but thought it
good to hold her hand a while, and she gainsayed him not.

Then he said:  "Well then, I must needs depart with things left as they
are: wilt thou bid thy brother bring hither my horse, for time presses."

"Yea," she said (and her hand was still in his), "Yet do thine utmost,
yet shalt thou not get to the Burg before nightfall. O wilt thou not
tarry?"

"Nay," he said, "my heart will not suffer it; lest I deem myself a
dastard."

Then she reddened again, but as if she were wroth; and she drew her hand
away from his and smote her palms together thrice and cried out: "Ho
Hugh! bring hither the Knight's horse and be speedy!"

And she went hither and thither about the hall and into the buttery and
back, putting away the victual and vessels from the board and making as
if she heeded him not:  and Ralph looked on her, and deemed that each
way she moved was better than the last, so shapely of fashion she was;
and again he bethought him of the Even-song of the High House at
Upmeads, and how it befitted her; for she went barefoot after the manner
of maidens who work afield, and her feet were tanned with the sun of hay
harvest, but as shapely as might be; but she was clad goodly withal, in
a green gown wrought with flowers.

So he watched her going to and fro; and at last he said: "Maiden, wilt
thou come hither a little, before I depart?"

"Yea," she said; and came and stood before him: and he deemed that she
was scarce so sad as she had been; and she stood with her hands joined
and her eyes downcast. Then he said:

"Now I depart.  Yet I would say this, that I am sorry of thy sorrow: and
now since I shall never see thee more, small would be the harm if I were
to kiss thy lips and thy face."

And therewith he took her hands in his and drew her to him, and put his
arms about her and kissed her many times, and she nothing lothe by
seeming; and he found her as sweet as May blossom.

Thereafter she smiled on him, yet scarce for gladness, and said: "It is
not all so sure that I shall not see thee again; yet shall I do to thee
as thou hast done to me."

Therewith she took his face between her hands, and kissed him
well-favouredly; so that the hour seemed good to him.

Then she took him by the hand and led him out-a-doors to his horse,
whereby the lad had been standing a good while; and he when he saw his
sister come out with the fair knight he scowled on them, and handled a
knife which hung at his girdle; but Ralph heeded him nought. As for the
damsel, she put her brother aside, and held the stirrup for Ralph; and
when he was in the saddle she said to him:

"All luck go with thee!  Forsooth I deem thee safer in the Wood than my
words said.  Verily I deem that if thou wert to meet a company of
foemen, thou wouldest compel them to do thy bidding."

"Farewell to thee maiden," said Ralph, "and mayst thou find thy beloved
whole and well, and that speedily.  Fare-well!"

She said no more; so he shook his rein and rode his ways; but looked
over his shoulder presently and saw her standing yet barefoot on the
dusty highway shading her eyes from the afternoon sun and looking after
him, and he waved his hand to her and so went his ways between the
houses of the Thorp.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8: Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous. An Adventure
Therein](wwe009)

</div>
