<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe008)  [Next](wwe010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_08"></span>

CHAPTER 8

Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous. An Adventure Therein

Now when he was clear of the Thorp the road took him out of the dale;
and when he was on the hill's brow he saw that the land was of other
fashion from that which lay behind him. For the road went straight
through a rough waste, no pasture, save for mountain sheep or goats,
with a few bushes scattered about it; and beyond this the land rose into
a long ridge; and on the ridge was a wood thick with trees, and no break
in them. So on he rode, and soon passed that waste, which was dry and
parched, and the afternoon sun was hot on it; so he deemed it good to
come under the shadow of the thick trees (which at the first were wholly
beech trees), for it was now the hottest of the day. There was still a
beaten way between the tree-boles, though not overwide, albeit, a
highway, since it pierced the wood. So thereby he went at a soft pace
for the saving of his horse, and thought but little of all he had been
told of the perils of the way, and not a little of the fair maid whom he
had left behind at the Thorp.

After a while the thick beech-wood gave out, and he came into a place
where great oaks grew, fair and stately, as though some lord's
wood-reeve had taken care that they should not grow over close together,
and betwixt them the greensward was fine, unbroken, and flowery. Thereby
as he rode he beheld deer, both buck and hart and roe, and other wild
things, but for a long while no man.

The afternoon wore and still he rode the oak wood, and deemed it a
goodly forest for the greatest king on earth. At last he came to where
another road crossed the way he followed, and about the crossway was the
ground clearer of trees, while beyond it the trees grew thicker, and
there was some underwood of holly and thorn as the ground fell off as
towards a little dale.

There Ralph drew rein, because he doubted in his mind which was his
right road toward the Burg of the Four Friths; so he got off his horse
and abode a little, if perchance any might come by; he looked about him,
and noted on the road that crossed his, and the sward about it, the sign
of many horses having gone by, and deemed that they had passed but a
little while. So he lay on the ground to rest him and let his horse
stray about and bite the grass; for the beast loved him and would come
at his call or his whistle.

Ralph was drowsy when he lay down, and though he said to himself that he
would nowise go to sleep, yet as oft happens, he had no defence to make
against sleepiness, and presently his hands relaxed, his head fell
aside, and he slept quietly. When he woke up in a little space of time,
he knew at once that something had awaked him and that he had not had
his sleep out; for in his ears was the trampling of horse-hoofs and the
clashing of weapons and loud speech of men.  So he leapt up hastily, and
while he was yet scarce awake, took to whistling on his horse; but even
therewith those men were upon him, and two came up to him and laid hold
of him; and when he asked them what they would, they bade him hold his
peace.

Now his eyes cleared, and he saw that those men were in goodly war-gear,
and bore coats of plate, and cuir-bouilly, or of bright steel; they held
long spears and were girt with good swords; there was a pennon with
them, green, whereon was done a golden tower, embattled, amidst of four
white ways; and the same token bore many of the men on their coats and
sleeves. Unto this same pennon he was brought by the two men who had
taken him, and under it, on a white horse, sat a Knight bravely armed at
all points with the Tower and Four Ways on his green surcoat; and beside
him was an ancient man-at-arms, with nought but an oak wreath on his
bare head, and his white beard falling low over his coat:  but behind
these twain a tall young man, also on a white horse and very gaily clad,
upheld the pennon. On one side of these three were five men, unarmed,
clad in green coats, with a leafless tree done on them in gold:  they
were stout carles, bearded and fierce-faced: their hands were bound
behind their backs and their feet tied together under their horses'
bellies.  The company of those about the Knight, Ralph deemed, would
number ten score men.

So when those twain stayed Ralph before the Knight, he turned to the old
man and said:

"It is of no avail asking this lither lad if he be of them or no: for no
will be his answer.  But what sayest thou, Oliver?"

The ancient man drew closer to Ralph and looked at him up and down and
all about; for those two turned him about as if he had been a joint of
flesh on the roasting-jack; and at last he said:

"His beard is sprouting, else might ye have taken him for a maid of
theirs, one of those of whom we wot.  But to say sooth I seem to know
the fashion of his gear, even as Duke Jacob knew Joseph's tabard. So ask
him whence he is, lord, and if he lie, then I bid bind him and lead him
away, that we may have a true tale out of him; otherwise let him go and
take his chance; for we will not waste the bread of the Good Town on
him."

The Knight looked hard on Ralph, and spake to him somewhat courteously:

"Whence art thou, fair Sir, and what is thy name? for we have many foes
in the wildwood."

Ralph reddened as he answered:  "I am of Upmeads beyond the down
country; and I pray thee let me be gone on mine errands. It is meet that
thou deal with thine own robbers and reivers, but not with me."

Then cried out one of the bounden men:  "Thou liest, lad, we be no
robbers." But he of the Knight's company who stood by him smote the man
on the mouth and said:  "Hold thy peace, runagate!  Thou shalt give
tongue to-morrow when the hangman hath thee under his hands."

The Knight took no heed of this; but turned to the ancient warrior and
said: "Hath he spoken truth so far?"

"Yea, Sir Aymer," quoth Oliver; "And now meseems I know him better than
he knoweth me."

Therewith he turned to Ralph and said:  "How fareth Long Nicholas, my
lord?"

Ralph reddened again:  "He is well," said he.

Then said the Knight:  "Is the young man of a worthy house, Oliver?"

But ere the elder could speak, Ralph brake in and said: "Old warrior, I
bid thee not to tell out my name, as thou lovest Nicholas."

Old Oliver laughed and said:  "Well, Nicholas and I have been friends in
a way, as well as foes; and for the sake of the old days his name shall
help thee, young lord." Then he said to his Knight:  "Yea, Sir Aymer, he
is of a goodly house and an ancient; but thou hearest how he adjureth
me. Ye shall let his name alone."

The Knight looked silently on Ralph for a while; then he said: "Wilt
thou wend with us to the Burg of the Four Friths, fair Sir? Wert thou
not faring thither?  Or what else dost thou in the Wood Perilous?"

Ralph turned it over in his mind; and though he saw no cause why he
should not join himself to their company, yet something in his heart
forbade him to rise to the fly too eagerly; so he did but say: "I am
seeking adventures, fair lord."

The Knight smiled:  "Then mayst thou fill thy budget with them if thou
goest with us," quoth he.  Now Ralph did not know how he might gainsay
so many men at arms in the long run, though he were scarce willing to
go; so he made no haste to answer; and even therewith came a man
running, through the wood up from the dale; a long, lean carle, meet for
running, with brogues on his feet, and nought else but a shirt; the
company parted before him to right and left to let him come to the
Knight, as though he had been looked for; and when he was beside him,
the Knight leaned down while the carle spake softly to him and all men
drew out of ear-shot. And when the carle had given his message the
Knight drew himself straight up in his saddle again and lifted up his
hand and cried out:

"Oliver!  Oliver! lead on the way thou wottest!  Spur! spur, all men!"

Therewith he blew one blast from a horn which hung at his saddle-bow;
the runner leapt up behind old Oliver, and the whole company went off at
a smart trot somewhat south-east, slantwise of the cross-roads, where
the wood was nought cumbered with undergrowth; and presently they were
all gone to the last horse-tail, and no man took any more note of Ralph.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9: Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous](wwe010)

</div>
