<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe091)  [Next](wwe093) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_04"></span>

CHAPTER 4

A Feast in the Red Pavilion

So in a while they went with him to the Tower, and there was woman's
raiment of the best gotten for Ursula, and afterwards at nightfall they
went to the feast in the Red Pavillion of Utterbol, which awhile ago the
now-slain Lord of Utterbol had let make; and it was exceeding rich with
broidery of pearl and gems: since forsooth gems and fair women were what
the late lord had lusted for the most, and have them he would at the
price of howsoever many tears and groans.  But that pavilion was yet in
all wise as it was wont to be, saving that the Bull had supplanted the
Bear upon the Castle-wall.

Now the wayfarers were treated with all honour and were set upon the
high-seat, Ralph upon the right-hand of the Lord, and Ursula upon his
left, and the Sage of Swevenham out from her. But on Ralph's right hand
was at first a void place, whereto after a while came Otter, the old
Captain of the Guard. He came in hastily, and as though he had but just
taken his armour off: for his raiment was but such as the men-at-arm of
that country were wont to wear under their war-gear, and was somewhat
stained and worn; whereas the other knights and lords were arrayed
grandly in silks and fine cloth embroidered and begemmed.

Otter was fain when he saw Ralph, and kissed and embraced him, and said:
"Forsooth, I saw by thy face, lad, that the world would be soft before
thee; and now that I behold thee I know already that thou hast won thy
quest; and the Gods only know to what honour thou shalt attain."

Ralph laughed for joy of him, and yet said soberly:  "As to honour,
meseems I covet little world's goods, save that it may be well with my
folk at home." Nevertheless as the words were out of his mouth his
thought went back to the tall man whom he had first met at the
churchyard gate of Netherton, and it seemed to him that he wished his
thriving, yea, and in a lesser way, he wished the same to Roger of the
Rope-walk, whereas he deemed that both of these, each in his own way,
had been true to the lady whom he had lost.

Then Otter fell a-talking to him of the change of days at Utterbol, and
how that it was the Lord's intent that a cheaping town should grow up in
the Dale of the Tower, and that the wilderness beyond it should be
tilled and builded. "And," said he, "if this be done, and the new lord
live to see it, as he may, being but young of years, he may become
exceedingly mighty, and if he hold on in the way whereas he now is, he
shall be well-beloved also."

So they spake of many things, and there was minstrelsy and diverse
joyance, till at last the Lord of Utterbol stood up and said:  "Now
bring in the Bull, that we may speak some words over him; for this is a
great feast." Ralph wondered what bull this might be whereof he spake;
but the harps and fiddlers, and all instruments of music struck up a gay
and gallant tune, and presently there came into the hall four men richly
attired, who held up on spears a canopy of bawdekin, under which went a
man-at-arms helmed, and clad in bright armour, who held in his hands a
great golden cup fashioned like to a bull, and he bore it forth unto the
dais, and gave it into the hands of the Lord.  Then straightway all the
noise ceased, and the glee and clatter of the hall, and there was dead
silence. Then the Lord held the cup aloft and said in a loud voice:

"Hail, all ye folk!  I swear by the Bull, and they that made him, that
in three years' time or less I will have purged all the lands of
Utterbol of all strong-thieves and cruel tyrants, be they big or little,
till all be peace betwixt the mountains and the mark of Goldburg; and
the wilderness shall blossom like the rose. Or else shall I die in the
pain."

Therewith he drank of the cup, and all men shouted.  Then he sat him
down and bade hand the cup to Otter; and Otter took the cup and looked
into the bowl and saw the wave of wine, and laughed and cried out: "As
for me, what shall I swear but that I will follow the Bull through thick
and thin, through peace and unpeace, through grief and joy. This is my
oath-swearing."

And he drank mightily and sat down.

Then turned the Lord to Ralph and said:  "And thou who art my master,
wilt thou not tell thy friends and the Gods what thou wilt do?"

"No great matter, belike," said Ralph; "but if ye will it, I will speak
out my mind thereon."

"We will it," said the Lord.

Then Ralph arose and took the cup and lifted it and spake: "This I
swear, that I will go home to my kindred, yet on the road will I not
gainsay help to any that craveth it. So may all Hallows help me!"

Therewith he drank:  and Bull said:  "This is well said, O happy man!
But now that men have drunk well, do ye three and Otter come with me
into the Tower, whereas the chambers are dight for you, that I may make
the most of this good day wherein I have met thee again."

So they went with him, and when they had sat down in the goodliest
chamber of the Tower, and they had been served with wine and spices, the
new Lord said to Ralph:  "And now, my master, wilt thou not ask somewhat
concerning me?"  "Yea," said Ralph, "I will ask thee to tell the tale of
how thou camest into thy Lordship." Said the Lord, "This shall ye hear
of me with Otter to help me out.  Hearken!"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5: Bull Telleth of His Winning of the Lordship of
Utterbol](wwe093)

</div>
