<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe072)  [Next](wwe074) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_07"></span>

CHAPTER 7

An Adventure by the Way

When morrow dawned they arose betimes and did on their worldly raiment;
and when they had eaten a morsel they made them ready for the road, and
the elder gave them victual for the way in their saddle-bags, saying:
"This shall suffice for the passing days, and when it is gone ye have
learned what to do."

Therewithall they gat to horse; but Ralph would have the Elder ride his
nag, while he went afoot by the side of Ursula. So the Sage took his
bidding, but smiled therewith, and said: "Thou art a King's son and a
friendly young man, else had I said nay to this; for it needeth not,
whereas I am stronger than thou, so hath my draught of the Well dealt
with me."

Thus then they went their ways; but Ralph noted of Ursula that she was
silent and shy with him, and it irked him so much, that at last he said
to her:  "My friend, doth aught ail me with thee?  Wilt thou not tell
me, so that I may amend it? For thou are grown of few words with me and
turnest thee from me, and seemest as if thou heedest me little.  Thou
art as a fair spring morning gone cold and overcast in the afternoon.
What is it then? we are going a long journey together, and belike shall
find little help or comfort save in each other; and ill will it be if we
fall asunder in heart, though we be nigh in body."

She laughed and reddened therewithal; and then her countenance fell and
she looked piteously on him and said:  "If I seemed to thee as thou
sayest, I am sorry; for I meant not to be thus with thee as thou
deemest. But so it is that I was thinking of this long journey, and of
thee and me together in it, and how we shall be with each other if we
come back again alive, with all things done that we had to do."

She stayed her speech awhile, and seemed to find it hard to give forth
the word that was in her; but at last she said: "Friend, thou must
pardon me; but that which thou sawest in me, I also seemed to see in
thee, that thou wert grown shy and cold with me; but now I know it is
not so, since thou hast seen me wrongly; but that I have seen thee
wrongly, as thou hast me."

Therewith she reached her hand to him, and he took it and kissed it and
caressed it while she looked fondly at him, and they fared on sweetly
and happily together.  But as this was a-saying and a-doing betwixt
them, and a while after, they had heeded the Elder little or not at all,
though he rode on the right hand of Ralph. And for his part the old man
said naught to them and made as if he heard them not, when they spake
thuswise together.

Now they rode the wood on somewhat level ground for a while; then the
trees began to thin, and the ground grew broken; and at last it was very
rugged, with high hills and deep valleys, and all the land populous of
wild beasts, so that about sunset they heard thrice the roar of a lion.
But ever the Sage led them by winding ways that he knew, round the feet
of the hills, along stream-sides for the most part, and by passes over
the mountain-necks when they needs must, which was twice in the day.

Dusk fell on them in a little valley, through which ran a stream bushed
about its edges, and which for the rest was grassy and pleasant, with
big sweet-chestnut trees scattered about it.

"Now," quoth the Elder; "two things we have to beware of in this valley,
the lions first; which, though belike they will not fall upon weaponed
men, may well make an onslaught on your horses, if they wind them; and
the loss of the beasts were sore to you as now. But the second thing is
the chase from Utterbol.  As to the lions, if ye build up a big fire,
and keep somewhat aloof from the stream and its bushes, and tether you
horses anigh the fire, ye will have no harm of them."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but if the riders of Utterbol are anigh us, shall we
light a candle for them to show them the way?"  Said the Sage: "Were ye
by yourselves, I would bid you journey night-long, and run all risk
rather than the risk of falling into their hands. But whereas I am your
guide, I bid you kindle your fire under yonder big tree, and leave me to
deal with the men of Utterbol; only whatso I bid you, that do ye
straightway."

"So be it," said Ralph, "I have been bewrayed so oft of late, that I
must needs trust thee, or all help shall fail me. Let us to work."  So
they fell to and built up a big bale and kindled it, and their horses
they tethered to the tree; and by then they had done this, dark night
had fallen upon them. So they cooked their victual at the fire (for
Ralph had shot a hare by the way) and the Sage went down to the stream
and fetched them water in a lethern budget:  "For," said he, "I know the
beasts of the wood and they me, and there is peace betwixt us." There
then they sat to meat unarmed, for the Sage had said to them: "Doff your
armour; ye shall not come to handystrokes with the Utterbol Riders."

So they ate their meat in the wilderness, and were nowise ungleeful, for
to those twain the world seemed fair, and they hoped for great things.
But though they were glad, they were weary enough, for the way had been
both rugged and long; so they lay them down to sleep while the night was
yet young.  But or ever Ralph closed his eyes he saw the Sage standing
up with his cloak wrapped about his head, and making strange signs with
his right hand; so that he deemed that he would ward them by wizardry.
So therewith he turned about on the grass and was asleep at once.

After a while he started and sat up, half awake at first; for he felt
some one touch him; and his halfdreams went back to past days, and he
cried out:  "Hah Roger! is it thou?  What is toward?" But therewith he
woke up fully, and knew that it was the Sage that had touched him, and
withal he saw hard by Ursula. sitting up also.

There was still a flickering flame playing about the red embers of their
fire, for they had made it very big; and the moon had arisen and was
shining bright in a cloudless sky.

The Sage spake softly but quickly:  "Lie down together, ye two, and I
shall cast my cloak over you, and look to it that ye stir not from out
of it, nor speak one word till I bid you, whate'er may befall: for the
riders of Utterbol are upon us."

They did as he bade them, but Ralph got somewhat of an eye-shot out of a
corner of the cloak, and he could see that the Sage went and stood up
against the tree-trunk holding a horse by the bridle, one on each side
of him. Even therewith Ralph heard the clatter of horse-hoofs over the
stones about the stream, and a man's voice cried out: "They will have
heard us; so spur over the grass to the fire and the big tree:  for then
they cannot escape us." Then came the thump of horse-hoofs on the turf,
and in half a minute they were amidst of a rout of men a-horseback, more
than a score, whose armour and weapons gleamed in the moonlight: yet
when these riders were gotten there, they were silent, till one said in
a quavering voice as if afeard: "Otter, Otter! what is this?  A minute
ago and we could see the fire, and the tree, and men and horses about
them: and now, lo you! there is naught save two great grey stones lying
on the grass, and a man's bare bones leaning up against the tree, and a
ruckle of old horse-bones on either side of him. Where are we then?"

Then spake another; and Ralph knew the voice for Otter's: "I wot not,
lord; naught else is changed save the fire and the horses and the men: 
yonder are the hills, yonder overhead is the moon, with the little light
cloud dogging her; even that is scarce changed. Belike the fire was an
earth-fire, and for the rest we saw wrong in the moonlight."

Spake the first man again, and his voice quavered yet more: "Nay nay,
Otter, it is not so.  Lo you the skeleton and the bones and the grey
stones!  And the fire, here this minute, there the next. O Otter, this
is an evil place of an evil deed!  Let us go seek elsewhere; let us
depart, lest a worse thing befall us." And so with no more ado he turned
his horse and smote his spurs into him and galloped off by the way he
had come, and the others followed, nothing loth; only Otter tarried a
little, and looked around him and laughed and said: "There goes my
Lord's nephew; like my Lord he is not over bold, save in dealing with a
shackled man.  Well, for my part if those others have sunk into the
earth, or gone up into the air, they are welcome to their wizardry, and
I am glad of it. For I know not how I should have done to have seen my
mate that out-tilted me made a gelded wretch of; and it would have irked
me to see that fair woman in the hands of the tormentors, though
forsooth I have oft seen such sights.  Well, it is good; but better were
it to ride with my mate than serve the Devil and his Nephew."

Therewith he turned rein and galloped off after the others, and in a
little while the sound of them had died off utterly into the night, and
they heard but the voices of the wild things, and the wimbrel laughing
from the hill-sides. Then came the Sage and drew the cloak from those
two, and laughed on them and said: "Now may ye sleep soundly, when I
have mended our fire; for ye will see no more of Utterbol for this time,
and it yet lacks three hours of dawn:  sleep ye then and dream of each
other." Then they arose and thanked the Sage with whole hearts and
praised his wisdom.  But while the old man mended the fire Ralph went up
to Ursula and took her hand, and said: "Welcome to life, fellow-farer!"
and he gazed earnestly into her eyes, as though he would have her fall
into his arms: but whereas she rather shrank from him, though she looked
on him lovingly, if somewhat shyly, he but kissed her hand, and laid him
down again, when he had seen her lying in her place. And therewith they
fell asleep and slept sweetly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8: They Come to the Sea of Molten Rocks](wwe074)

</div>
