<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe064)  [Next](wwe066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_40"></span>

CHAPTER 40

They Ride Toward Utterness From Out of Vale Turris

So they rode by a good highway, well beaten, past the Tower and over the
ridge of the valley, and came full upon the terrible sight of the Great
Mountains, and the sea of woodland lay before them, swelling and
falling, and swelling again, till it broke grey against the dark blue of
the mountain wall.  They went as the way led, down hill, and when they
were at the bottom, thence along their highway parted the tillage and
fenced pastures from the rough edges of the woodland like as a ditch
sunders field from field. They had the wildwood ever on their right
hand, and but a little way from where they rode the wood thickened for
the more part into dark and close thicket, the trees whereof were so
tall that they hid the overshadowing mountains whenso they rode the
bottoms, though when the way mounted on the ridges, and the trees gave
back a little, they had sight of the woodland and the mountains. On the
other hand at whiles the thicket came close up to the roadside.

Now David biddeth press on past the wains and the driven beasts, which
were going very slowly.  So did they, and at last were well nigh at the
head of the Lord's company, but when Ralph would have pressed on still,
David refrained him, and said that they must by no means outgo the
Queen's people, or even mingle with them; so they rode on softly. But as
the afternoon was drawing toward evening they heard great noise of horns
behind them, and the sound of horses galloping. Then David drew Ralph to
the side of the way, and everybody about, both before and behind them,
drew up in wise at the wayside, and or ever Ralph could ask any
question, came a band of men-at-arms at the gallop led by Otter, and
after them the Lord on his black steed, and beside him on a white
palfrey the woman whom Ralph had seen in the Tower, and whom he had
taken for the Queen, her light raiment streaming out from her, and her
yellow hair flying loose. They passed in a moment of time, and then
David and Ralph and the rest rode on after them.

Then said Ralph:  "The Queen rideth well and hardily." "Yea," said
David, screwing his face into a grin, would he or no. Ralph beheld him,
and it came into his mind that this was not the Queen whom he had looked
on when they first came into Vale Turris, and he said: "What then! this
woman is not the Queen?"

David spake not for a while, and then he answered: "Sir Knight, there be
matters whereof we servants of my Lord say little or nothing, and thou
wert best to do the like." And no more would he say thereon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41: Redhead Keeps Tryst](wwe066)

</div>
