<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe111)  [Next](wwe113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_24"></span>

CHAPTER 24

The Folkmote of the Shepherds

In about an hour all the folk within the castle began to set toward the
ingle wherein lay Ralph and his fellows, and then all rose up, while the
folk of the Shepherds took their places on the slopes of the earth
walls, but on the top hard by the fire, which was still burning, stood
up an old hoar man with a beard exceeding long; he had a sallet on his
head, and held a guisarme in his hand. All men held their peace when
they saw him standing there; and straightway he proclaimed the hallowing
of the Mote in such form of words as was due amongst that folk, and
which were somewhat long to tell here. Then was silence again for a
little, and then the old man spake: "Few words are best to-day,
neighbours; for wherefore are we met together?" There arose a hum of
assent from the Shepherds as he spoke and men clashed their weapons
together; but none said any clear word. Then spake the old man:  "We be
met together because we have trouble on hand, and because there is a
helper to hand, of whom the words of the wise and tales of old have told
us; and because as he shall help us, so shall we help him, since indeed
our trouble is his also: now, neighbours, shall I say the word for you
which ye would say to this young man, who is nevertheless old in wisdom,
and true-hearted and kind?"

Then came the hum of yeasay again, the clashing of weapons, and the old
man spake again:  "Ralph of Upmeads, there thou standest, wilt thou help
us against the tyrants, as we shall help thee?"

"Yea," said Ralph.  Said the Elder:  "Wilt thou be our Captain, if we do
according to thy bidding?  For thou needest not fear our failing thee."

"Yea verily," said Ralph.

Said the Elder:  "Ralph of Upmeads, wilt thou be our Captain as an alien
and a hireling, or as a brother?"

"As a brother," quoth Ralph.

"Come up here then, Captain of our folk, and take my hand in thine, and
swear by our fathers and thine to be a true brother of us, and take this
ancient staff of war in thine hand. And, ye kindred of the Shepherds,
bear witness of his swearing. Yea and ye also, O neighbours of the Dry
Tree!"

So Ralph went up on the wall-top and took the Elder's hand, and took
from him the ancient guisarme, which was inlaid with gold letters of old
time; and he swore in a loud voice to be a true brother of the
Shepherd-folk, and raised the weapon aloft and shook it strongly, and
all the Folk cried, "Hail our brother!" and the Champions shouted gladly
withal, and great joy there was in that ingle of the ancient work.

Then spake the Elder and said:  "Ye champions of the Dry Tree, will ye
wend with us under the Captain our brother against his foemen and ours?"

Then stood forth Stephen a-Hurst and said, "Master shepherd, for nought
else are we come hither."

Said the Elder:  "Will ye come with us as friends or as hirelings? for
in any case we would have you by our sides, and not in face of us; and
though we be shepherds, and unhoused, or ill-housed, yet have we
wherewithal to wage you, as ye know well enough, who have whiles lifted
our gear."

Then Stephen laughed and said:  "True it is that we have whiles driven
prey in your country, yea, and had some hard knocks therein; but all
that was in playing the game of war, and now since we are to fight side
by side, we will be paid by our foes and not by our friends; so neither
hair nor wool will we have of yours, whatever we may have of the
Burgers; and it is like that we shall be good friends of yours
hence-forward."

Once more all they that were there shouted.  But once more the Elder
spoke and said:  "Is any man now wishful to speak?" None answered till a
big and burly man rose up and said: "Nay, Tall Thomas, thou hast said
and done all that need was, and I deem that time presses; wherefore my
mind is that we now break up this mote, and that after we have eaten a
morsel we get ourselves into due array and take to the road. Now let any
man speak against this if he will."

None gainsaid him; nay, all seemed well-pleased. So the Elder proclaimed
the breaking up of the mote, and they went from out the hallowed place
and sat down in the dyke on the outside of the rampart and behind the
country which stretched out all lovely and blue before them, for the day
was bright and fair. There then certain women brought victual and drink
to them, and served the strangers first.

So when they had eaten and drunk, Ralph bade the Shepherds array them
duly, and appointed them leaders of tens and hundreds with the help of
Giles, who was now clad in a hauberk and mail-coif and looked a proper
man-at-arms. Then they told over their company, and numbered of the Dry
Tree one hundred and fifty champions, outtaken Stephen and Roger; of the
men of Garton were twenty and two, and of the Shepherds three hundred
and seventy and seven stout carles, some eighty of whom had bows, and
the rest glaives and spears and other staff-weapons. There was not much
armour of defence amongst them, but they were one and all stark carles
and doughty.

So when they were told over and made five hundred and fifty and four,
they gat them into array for the road; and Ralph went afoot with no
armour but his sallet, and a light coat of fence which he had gotten him
in the Burg. He would have had Ursula ride on her palfrey with the Sage,
but she would not, and held it for mirth and pleasure that she should go
afoot through the land, now she was so nigh come home to her lord's
house; so she went forth by Ralph's side with her broidered gown trussed
through her girdle so that the trimness of her feet drew the eyes of all
men to them. As for Richard, he took a half score of the champions, and
they rode on ahead to see that all was clear before the main host; which
he might well do, as he knew the country so well.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25: They Come to Wulstead](wwe113)

</div>
