[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tsb04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Beowulf*, by Strafford Riggs \[1933\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

WHICH TELLS of how a DRAGON appeared in Geatsland, and how Beowuif and
Wiglaf destroyed it, and how sleep came to Beowulf.

<span id="img_illus26"></span>

[![](tn/illus26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus26.jpg)

    MANY years passed, during which we know very little of what befell
our hero Beowulf. He returned safely to Geatsland after his adventures
among the Danes, and he was received with great acclaim at the court of
his uncle Hygelac, and was hailed as the greatest of all living heroes
in the North. Minstrels roamed the land singing of his deeds of strength
and valor.

    At last, however, death came to Hygelac during a momentous battle
with the Frisians and the Franks, those warlike tribes, and his son
Heardred became king in Hygelac's place. But Heardred's reign was not
long, and after him Beowulf came to the throne of Geatsland.

 

    WHEN there began a long and happy period in the country of the
Geats. Prosperity rained upon them. The Geatish warriors were ever
successful in battle, and the treasury was filled to bursting with gold
and silver and precious stones and armor.

    The nets of the fisher-folk were so laden with sea-spoils that they
could scarce be lifted. The crops in the fields increased so that the
people were well fed and contented even throughout the long and arduous
winters.

    Great contests were held at the hall of Beowulf at frequent
intervals, and all the heroes from near and far gathered there to match
the strength and skill of the Geatish warriors.

    So passed the happy years, and Beowulf grew in stature and dignity
and strength. A vast beard fell from his cheeks, and as he moved among
his people many sought to touch the hand that had slain Grendel. For
Beowulf's fame was known not only in his own land but across the wide
seas, and his enemies (for he had excellent ones) trembled at the
mention of his name and thought twice before they went to engage him in
battle.

    The years passed, but no adventure equal to the slaying of Grendel
and that monster's mother came to test out Beowulf's valor and strength.
And the king waxed restless for a great adventure, for his years were
now many and he felt that a not long season remained to him on earth.

<span id="img_illus27"></span>

[![](tn/illus27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus27.jpg)

    ONE night, when the winter was at its deepest, and the king sat in
his mead-hall with all his lords about him, there came a knocking at the
door. When the servants opened to the knocking, there entered the
shabbiest visitor that had ever crossed that noble threshold.

    The servants would have thrown the stranger out again, so
disgraceful was his attire, had not Wiglaf, son of Weohstan, called to
them to let the visitor remain, for there was something in the man's
face that caught the earl's interest.

    "Who are you?" demanded Wiglaf. "Whence come you? Speak, and do not
fear, for no one will harm you. I see your knees shaking with fright and
cold, and your eyes are wild with want of sleep and strange things that
you have seen. Come and eat, my good man, and then you shall tell your
story to the king."

    But the stranger made a sign with his head that Wiglaf took for a
denial, and so led him, a little roughly, before Beowulf.

    "This fellow," the noble Wiglaf said, "will not say his name or
whence he comes. But to you, my dear lord, he will speak, I know."

    Then Beowulf bent on him his kindly-strong gaze and bade the visitor
have no fear. The man fell on his knees before the king and spoke in a
high voice:

    "Great king, I have no name and am but a poor escaped slave from a
Frankish galley, and I am seeking my own home in the Northland. Early
this morning, faint from cold and hunger and want of rest, I came upon a
deep barrow in which I discovered, sleeping, the hugest dragon, surely,
in all the wide world. At first I was so overcome with fear that I fled
from the place. But after a while, when I got back my breath, I was
taken with a burning curiosity, and when my hair had lain down again
upon my head, I returned, and there I saw, heaped round and about the
sleeping dragon, the lordliest treasure that ever man beheld in one
place together. Gold and jewels--" the slave raised his arms high and
wide--"so much that twenty cart-loads would make no diminishment that
the eye could see."

    Beowulf leaned forward in his great chair, his vast hands gripping
the carven arms.

    "Slave," he cried in a loud voice, "if you lie, I will have you
first beaten like a dog and then torn limb from limb until you are
dead!"

    But the stranger did not flinch under the blue fire of the king's
glance. Instead, he drew from beneath his tattered cloak a wondrous
jeweled cup, set about with a hundred brilliants of all the rainbow's
colors, and standing upon a base of purest gold, most delicately carved.

<span id="img_illus28"></span>

[![](tn/illus28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus28.jpg)

    "Lord," he replied simply, "I do not lie."

    The court crowded about, better to see this marvel of workmanship
and worth. Beowulf handled it lovingly, and held it to the firelight.

    But at this point the escaped slave was seen to totter in a faint
and quickly he was led away to be given food and warm clothes and a
bench to lie upon.

    Then Beowulf the king stood up in his place and said to the
assembled company:

    "My friends, you have heard this man's tale, and you see that he is
no idle spinner of yarns who would obtain food and shelter on a bitter
winter's night, for he has shown us this wondrous cup of gold and
jewels. Surely there is no fairer goblet on earth, and this slave says
that whence this came there is more and still more treasure. My
comrades, eleven men I want, who will follow me to the foul dragon's
lair. This grave menace must be destroyed before he wakens and finds
that he has been discovered and plundered. Eleven of you, then, to my
side. There will be deeds of bravery for all, and of treasure more than
each man can dream."

    Then Wiglaf, the son of Weohstan, the best beloved of Beowulf's
earls, stepped forward, but as he opened his lips to swear allegiance to
his king, the night was shattered by a roar that shook the roof of the
hall and made the earth tremble underfoot.

    The warriors, having laid aside their armor and swords, rushed to
secure the door, but as confusion spread among them and women screamed,
the roar persisted in its clangor and at the entrance door blue flames
began to lick along the sill.

    Then Beowulf cried in a loud voice to the court that they must
escape from the monster until they could assume their weapons and armor,
and secure the women against the hot anger of the furious dragon. So, in
orderly manner, the company followed their king through a back way,
leaving the vast hall in emptiness, the benches overturned, the fire on
the hearths burning low.

 

    DAWN came slowly over the snows lying heavy about the house of
Wiglaf, and the wife of Beowulf's favorite earl was ordering her
servants in their early tasks when Wiglaf burst in upon the family
hearth. His face was drawn with rage and fear, and he embraced his wife
with such impetuousness that the good lady became instantly consumed
with the darkest of thoughts and forebodings.

    "My lord," she cried, "what dread errand brings you hither at this
hour from the king? Speak! Some disaster has befallen the world, that
you should look so distraught."

    And she hastened to relieve him of his great cloak.

    But he put her away from him, and cried out in anguish:

    "Dear lady, gather together all that we have of value which the
servants can carry upon swift horses, for this night a dragon, the
vastest dragon in all the world, has come upon our Geatsland, and even
as I speak pursues his hideous way across the snow toward this our home.
Already the mead-hall of the king is naught but a heap of smoldering
ashes, and the granaries and storehouses of our people are hiding the
sun from the world with the smoke of their burning. Make haste, I pray
you, my lady, and fetch me the biggest of my swords and the stoutest of
my armor. Then get you gone to the caves by the Whale's Headland while
we pursue this hellish demon to his lair.

    "I go at once to my king. There is such death and destruction abroad
this morn as never man has beheld, and the ruins of our fairest farms
and halls are dotting the white land with sorrow and woeful suffering."

    Then Wiglaf's wife brought him his great broadsword and his stoutest
armor, and embraced him tenderly ere he strode to the door.

    Even now the sky was brown with dense smoke, and a vast and sinister
rumbling was heard upon the air, proclaiming the steady and awful
approach of the dragon.

    Gathered together in the depths of the great forest, Beowulf and his
band of eleven trusted warriors held a council of war.

    There arose a warm debate concerning how the dragon should be
fought. Some thought they should attempt to slay him while he wrought
destruction. Others, again, would lure him, if possible, to a high
cliff, and force him into the boiling sea below. Yet others were in
favor of letting him wreak his vengeance at will upon the country-side
until such time should come when, sated in his lust for killing, he
might fall into an exhausted sleep and become fair game for their sharp
swords.

    Then Beowulf spoke:

    "My lords, each of these three plans has excellent reasons for
pursuing it. But it is my opinion that none of them is sufficient for
our dear purpose.

    "For, in the first instance, if we attack the dragon while he is yet
roaring through the land, the creature will be able to retreat in any
direction.

    "In the second instance, it is not likely that he will permit
himself to be forced over a cliff into the sea, for by all tokens he is
a wily dragon and the treasure is close to his heart.

    "And in the third instance, we cannot permit him to continue his
depredations throughout the country-side, and further impoverish our
people.

    "Therefore, hear you what I have to say: It is necessary that we
track this vile enemy to his very lair, there to slay him. For when he
finds that Beowulf and his noble earls are gone to his barrow, then will
he leave our halls and farms and seek to defend his heart's treasure.
Let us away forthwith, for soon enough will he discover our ruse."

    And Beowulf was right, for, even as he spoke, the dragon, writhing
his way from the desolation or the king s country, was informed, by
magic, of the plans that were being made for his destruction, and
switching his scaly tail so that twenty stout trees fell at its
movement, and snapping gigantic jaws in horrid rage, the creature
hastened to protect that which he had guarded during three hundred years
of sleepless vigilance.

 

    NIGHT was coming down when at last Beowulf and his eleven earls
approached the dragon's barrow. It lay deep in a dark and gloomy forest,
and the only light was the reflection of the dead day upon the
ground-snow. The tall trees stood naked in their places, and all about
hung a cold stillness which was broken only by the trampling of the
adventurers upon the crunching snow.

<span id="img_illus29"></span>

[![](tn/illus29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus29.jpg)

    It was quite dark now, as they neared the spot, and through the dim
night they beheld in the distance a reddish glow. Nearer they came,
until, peering through the dense wood, they saw a broad clear space
among the trees.

    At one side was an old burial-mound, and at its entrance there
issued in hissing gusts the red steam of the dragon's hot breathing. All
about the place, the snow was trampled by huge feet and the tree trunks
were blackened and scorched.

    Then brave Beowulf drew his earls about him and said to them:

    "I go alone to engage this dragon. You shall remain here at the
clearing's edge in readiness to stand by me in case I fail. For I am an
old man now, and it comes to me, as in a dream, that this will be my
last adventure,  my final fight."

    Then gripping his vast shield of iron surely in his left hand, and
in his right the noble sword Naegling, Beowulf advanced to meet the
dragon.

    But his earls, all those trusted earls, save only that faithful and
loving lord Wiglaf, were seized with a sudden fear, and-fled away into
the darkness of the night and the shelter of the encircling forests.
King Beowulf did not see their fleeing, as his eyes were upon the mouth
of the barrow, and his ears were dimmed by the noise of the dragon's
breathing and the swishswish of the angry body within the cave's
fastness.

   Then Beowulf cried out in a ringing voice:

    "Come out, O most foul fiend, for Beowulf, King of Geatsland, Prince
of Weders, and son of great Ecgtheow, stands without and calls you to
battle. Come out, I say, arch-dragon, and pit your vaunted strength
against my strength, which is the greatest known in all this cold
Northland!"

    And Wiglaf, standing ready and alone at the circle's edge, laughed a
clarion challenge to the dragon's undoing.

    For a moment there was a death-like stillness in the night. No sound
came from the cave, and no steamy breath, and no dull glare of fire.
Then with sudden roaring that caused the night to splinter and the earth
to quiver in horrified response, the lordliest dragon in all the world
rushed from its lair.

<span id="img_illus30"></span>

[![](tn/illus30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus30.jpg)

    Over ten ells in length it measured, from the proud head to the
poisoned tail-tip, and its vast body was covered with scales of brass as
big as plates and thicker, each, than three fingers. Its forefeet were
armed with six-inch claws of razor edge, and helped support a head so
large and terrible that Beowulf marveled for a moment at the size. Its
eyes were of green fire, its wide nostrils belched red flame and steam,
and the immense jaws dripped livid ooze as they snapped in hideous
savagery. So great was the issuing heat that Beowulf held up his shield,
else he would have perished upon the spot.

    Again came a moment's pause while the two antagonists stood firm and
eyed each other, each gaging his own strength and that of his adversary.

    Battle came upon them with the swiftness of lightning. The still
forest was filled with the clamor of their combat. Beowulf slashed out
bravely, but his good sword Naegling glanced helplessly against the
brazen scales of the dragon's armor, and so great was the heat of the
creature's breath that Beowulf was forced to resort to cunning in an
attempt both to wear out his enemy and keep himself from being burned to
death.

    He wove this way and that, feinting now here, now there, until the
dragon was so bewildered with this wonderful display of agility that his
roaring grew louder and more terrible, and the violent swing of his huge
body grew wider and wilder. Trees fell to earth at the flick of his
tail, the snow melted beneath his breath, and his green eyes bit through
the steamclouds of his breathing.

    And always Beowulf fought for the advantage of a well-placed thrust
of his sword, for he knew that every dragon has its vulnerable spot, and
this he sought to find.

    Back and forth over the hard ground they raged. Now the dragon
seemed the victor and Beowulf spent and weakening--but only to renew his
attack.

    And time stood still in the black night, and the stars in their
courses stayed to watch this struggle of giants.

    Beowulf's breath came short and stifled, his arms grew weak from the
weight of his great sword and shield, and this last grew so hot that it
no longer served to protect him from the living furnace which he fought.
His strong legs shook beneath him, and short cries were wrung from his
throat. The encircling trees swam before his faltering eyes, the heavens
seemed to close down upon him.

    Then at last to his aid came Wiglaf the faithful, and Beowulf's ears
were gladdened by the sound of his dear friend's shout, and new strength
streamed through his veins. Together they fought, side by side, and the
dragon gave way to their onslaught.

    But in one wide sweep of the dragon's tail Beowulf was caught, and
he sank to the ground broken, at last, in body. But Wiglaf, fresh in the
fray, with a great cry of rage, found the weak spot in the dragon's
armor, and into the heart of the beast sank his good sword to the hilt.

    No sound came from the dragon. But he rose to his full and terrible
height in great majesty of dying, and fell prone beside Beowulf.

    Then there went up a shout from the cowardly earls who had hidden in
the forest to watch the fight in safety, and they crowded about their
dying king. But Wiglaf drove them away, saying:

    "Away, wretches of faithlessness! Not for you the honors of a battle
you feared to engage in. Away, cowards! Our king is done to death in a
noble adventure, to save you and your foul breed from the dragon's
wrath."

    Then turning to Beowulf, he knelt at his side, took him dying into
his arms, and loosened the helmet from his brow.

    "O my dear master," he cried over him, "leave us not in your hour of
triumph!"

    "Nay," answered Beowulf, "'tis not my triumph but that of a faithful
friend, my Wiglaf. Take the treasure, do what you will with it. But...
but let me have one piece of it about me as I die. For I die soon, my
friend . . . so haste you . . . haste . . ."

    Then Wiglaf went into the dragon's barrow and beheld there the
greatest treasure, surely, in all the wide world. And he selected from
the heaped-up gold and jewels a wondrous crown of glittering gems, and
this he placed upon the brow of his king.

    "I die," whispered Beowulf, "and I forgive those others-those
foolish ones who deserted me in my hour. Farewell, good Wiglaf, my own
true friend. Make a barrow for me upon the Whale's Headland. Farewell .
. .and now I shall sleep ... the longest sleep."

    And so died Beowulf, greatest and truest of all the early heroes of
legend.

<span id="img_illus31"></span>

[![](tn/illus31.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus31.jpg)

 

    THEY carried his body to the Whale's Headland, where a great barrow
was made for him, and Wiglaf ordered all the treasure of the dragon's
cave to be brought, that it should burn most rightly upon the funeral
pyre of Beowulf the king. And so great was their sense of the fitness of
this, and their sorrow at loss of their excellent lord, that not one of
the cowardly earls lifted his voice in protest against Wiglaf's order.

<span id="img_illus32"></span>

[![](tn/illus32.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus32.jpg)

    From far and near the men and women of Geatsland gathered to honor
and mourn their dead lord and marvel at the great bulk of the dragon.

    And beside the huge barrow upon the Whale's Headland, above the
darkling sea, many hands raised a vast funeral pyre of scented logs and
evergreen boughs.

    Then the dragon was dragged to the precipice, and when it fell into
the gray sea far, far below, a loud shout went up from a hundred throats
as it slipped to the lonely waves.

    They brought Beowulf's body to the pyre. He was borne upon his
mighty shield, the great sword Naegling was laid upon his breast, and
the jeweled crown from the cave was on his brow, and he was carried upon
the shoulders of six earls.

<span id="img_illus33"></span>

[![](tn/illus33.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/illus33.jpg)

    Behind the bier walked fifty barons of Geatsland, the highest and
mightiest in all the North; and following them, fifty musicians, with
horns and pipes, making a doleful music.

    Three times the sad procession marched around the high pyre, and the
music rang out clear and loud, and the weeping multitude fell upon its
knees.

    Darkness came down upon the land, and the sound of the waves beneath
the Whale's Headland grew more and more insistent, as though the sea,
remembering Beowulf's early mastery of it, lamented also his passing.

    Now, at the last, Beowulf was laid upon the sweet-scented pyre, and
all about him were heaped the countless treasures from the dragon's
mound. Then Wiglaf approached with two flaming torches, to do the dead
king honor. Proclaiming the greatness of his dear lord, he held high
above his head the flares and plunged them into the pyre. The flames
leaped up, staining crimson the dark night, and so great was the glare
from the burning that the stars put out their light, and the sea stopped
its sad mourning.

    Higher and higher rose the flames and with them the lamentations of
the people. And the noble earls took up again their sad marching about
the burning pyre, and all night long they marched, until at long last
there was nothing left of the pyre but a high mound of gray ashes in the
gray dawn.

 

    THUS passed to his own gods Beowulf, King of Geatsland, in the
North.

 

END

 

 

 
