[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tsb00)  [Next](tsb02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Beowulf*, by Strafford Riggs \[1933\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOREWORD

    JUST as Conrad's character Singleton, in The Nigger of the
Narcissus, sat in the fo'c'sle reading, so, on board the Gulf of Akaba,
off Cape Verde, I saw Old Man Seastream with a tattered copy of Beowulf,
which, by some strange chance, had been sent down to the ship as
suitable reading for sailors. Off the lonely island of Fernando Naronha,
Seastream and I fell into talk just after the third mate had twitted the
sailor for reading "them kindergarten fairy tales."

  Seastream was in a mood of quiet defensiveness. "There isn't," he
said, "much more than a story of how the hero killed Grendel, then
Grendel's mother, which was more frightful, then the fiery dragon with
only one true man to help. But the tale is a fine one if you get the
spirit of it; and it gets me. That's what it does--gets me."

    Strange that I should look back over crowded years to remember that
remark. Seastream, unschooled, not only brought me to Beowulf but with
his unconsidered words made me see something that should be obvious to
all of us, though it is not. It is that what we would see introduced
into the life of a nation must be first introduced into the schools, or
in other ways carried into the world of youth.

    History tells us that the Beowulf epic was forgotten for nigh upon a
thousand years and might have been irrevocably lost had not a solitary
manuscript been discovered. If some grain of superstition be allowed us,
I should hold that among the high gods sits one encharged with the care
of literary treasures, so that nothing is utterly lost, but merely
forgotten by men because purposely hidden until the proper time arrives
when the world is ready to receive, just as the Rosetta Stone, and the
tale of Hasisdra, and the monoliths at Tiahuanaca, and the litany
scratched on the bricks at Ur were hidden; for had they been found
earlier, vandal hands might have marred them. Carrying this belief down
to to-day, I like to think that in these days when knighthood is at low
ebb, and when the desire for acquisition looms large in the thoughts of
men, someone in that workaday hive of New York chanced to hear a
whispered word of that guardian god of literature, so bethought himself,
or herself, that a tale of heroism, of faith in self, of courage, of
patience, of forbearance might find readers in a world too much involved
in trivialities. For it certainly seems marvelous to me that this book
should appear at this moment, quite as marvelous as that it appeared out
of the dark in the nineteenth century when, as now, waves upon waves of
broken hopes and desperate efforts dashed against the ship of state,
dangerously threatening. For the marvel of that appearance I am grateful
as the sailor is grateful for the light. That gratitude is touched with
high happiness because the someone who thought to bring a new Beowulf
into the world should have found, as illustrator, one whose soul seems
"sticht to the starres," whose discernment is rare, who has dared in
originality, whose enthusiasm is contagious.

CHARLES J. FINGER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tsb02)
