[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhl06)  [Next](mhl08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

# LEVITICUS RABBA

The great characteristic of Moses--humility--pervades his life
throughout. When he was first charged with the mission to Pharaoh his
hesitation in accepting the charge was based upon self-abasement. "Who
am I," he says, "that I should go to Pharaoh and that I should bring out
Israel from Egypt?" Any other man, having been selected by God himself
as the fit and proper person to be his own messenger, would surely have
been induced to think more of himself; but not so Moses. Coming to the
Red Sea, he again retires in his humility, not being bold enough to take
the initiative until called upon by the Lord. "And thou lift up thy rod,
and stretch out thy hand over the sea and divide it" (Exod. xiv.). At
the Tabernacle of the congregation his deep humility again manifests
itself; he does not venture to approach until the Lord calls him (Lev.
i. 1).

If you are a man of distinction and entitled to a prominent seat at an
assembly, seat yourself, nevertheless, two or three seats lower, for it
is better to be told "Go up," than to be asked to "go down." Hillel was
wont to say, "If I condescend I am exalted, but if I am haughty I am
degraded."

Pharaoh's daughter married Caleb.

The Torah sets us an example of refinement of speech. If allusion is
made to an offering made by man, it is said (Lev. i. 2), "If any man of
you bring an offering," but if anything objectionable needs to be spoken
of--such as leprosy--the expression is not "if any one of you shall have
leprosy," but "if there shall happen to be a boil in any flesh."
Further, when a blessing is pronounced it is given fully and distinctly,
"these shall stand up to bless the people" (Deut. xxvii. 12); but when
it is necessary to threaten with a curse, the words, "the people," are
omitted, and the phrase used is, "they shall curse."

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Better for you to have no more than two *Zehubim* (coins equal to about
twenty-five cents) as the means with which to gain a livelihood, than to
be a man of large capital and employ it in usury.

If sincere converts to Judaism enter heaven, Antoninus will be at the
head of them.

The proverb says, "If you give out your money in usury you will lose
what you gain as well as your original capital."

 

Whom will the Lord bold responsible after death for the unrighteous life
on earth? The body as inanimate matter can surely not be affected by
anything done to it. The soul has surely a very tangible plea in the
fact that all misdeeds were committed by the body whilst alive, for
which it (the soul) should not be held responsible. But it is as though
the owner of a very valuable garden, being anxious for the preservation
of his fruit, employed two men, one blind and the other lame, to watch
his orchard.

Said the lame one to the blind one, "Would I could walk! I could feast
on the wonderful and enticing fruit which I see all round about me."
"I," said the blind man, "am strong enough in my legs, but unfortunately
have not the sense of sight, and can not even feast my eyes on the
choice fruit of which you tell me. Supposing," suggested he to his lame
comrade, "you were to get on my back and pilot me to those wonderful
trees which you see, I could with ease carry you there and you could
pluck the coveted fruit for both of us." The suggestion was adopted, and
the garden was quickly despoiled. When the owner visited his garden he
was shocked at the havoc committed on what to him was his most precious
possession, and charged the two men with depredation.

Said the blind man, "I surely can not be guilty of the theft of a thing
the existence and whereabouts of which I could not even see." "Neither
was I able," said the lame watchman, "to lay my hand on any of the
fruit, for you know that my legs refuse to carry me a step." The owner
of the orchard was, however, able to demonstrate the method employed by
the pair in robbing him of his precious fruit, by

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

taking the lame man and putting him on the back of the blind watchman,
and making the latter carry the former to the trees. Thus the Psalmist
intimates (Ps. l. 4), "He will call to the heavens above and to the
earth that he may judge his people": that is to say, he will unite man's
heavenly element (the soul) with his earthly element (the body) again,
and will fix the responsibility on the reunited whole.

 

"Your Torah tells you," argued a heathen with one of the Rabbis, "to be
guided by the majority. Why then do you decline to adopt the religion of
the majority?" "Apart from the fact," replied the sage, "that a large
number is no argument in a matter of religion, and my Torah also tells
me, 'You shall not go after the multitude to do evil,' I will ask you a
question. Have you any children?" "Yes, to my sorrow," replied the
questioner, "for they cause me sorrow with their religious views;
whenever they come together there is contention between them as to the
truth of their respective beliefs." "Try, then," retorted the Rabbi, "to
create unity and harmony regarding religion in your own family, rather
than waste your efforts in trying to bring me to your views." When the
questioner had gone the Rabbi's disciples said to him, "It is well that
the heathen left you with the lame argument you gave him; but what have
you in reality to say as to the paucity of followers of our religion?"

"Esau's family," answered their teacher, "is spoken of as consisting of
so many souls, whilst the seventy members of Jacob's family are
described as one soul, because the former had many gods, but the latter
had all of them one and the same God. So that even if a majority were an
argument in favor of religion, still, though we are apparently smaller
in number, we are actually larger if we are not divided in our
monotheism."

Great and dignified names which have been given to Israel have also been
bestowed on other nations, such as "Congregation," "mighty," "wise,"
"perfect," and "righteous.

If a man is a witness, whether he has seen or otherwise

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

knows of a thing, if he does not testify he shall bear his iniquity
(Lev. v. 1). "You, my people," says God to Israel, "have both seen
(Deut. iv. 35) and know (Deut. v. 39) that I am God, and thus you are my
proper witnesses (Isa. xliii. 10). If then you will not proclaim me as
God to all nations of the earth, you shall bear your iniquity."

A certain ruler there was who, when thieves and the recipients of their
stolen goods were brought before him, invariably discharged the former
and severely punished the latter.

 

If you sit in judgment and you find one of the litigants anxious to
verify his statement by taking an oath, have suspicion against that
individual.

There was a man named Bar Talmion, with whom one deposited a sum of
money for safe keeping. When the depositor called for his deposit Bar
Talmion said, "Surely I have placed in your own hands the amount you
left with me." When they came before Rabbi Assé and his court Bar
Talmion was anxious to verify his assertion on oath, and the two
litigants, accompanied by the Rabbi, went to the synagogue to have the
oath taken there. At the entrance of the sacred edifice Bar Talmion said
to the plaintiff, "Just take this stick and hold it for me whilst I take
the solemn oath." The stick being unusually heavy excited suspicion, and
was broken to see the cause of its remarkable weight, when the coins
deposited with the rascal fell out from the hollow made for the purpose
of being a receptacle for the money; the perjurer having placed the
stick in the hands of the plaintiff, thinking that by this subterfuge he
could honestly swear that he had returned the money to the claimant's
own hands.

 

Broken things are not admired, but God is pleased with a broken spirit
and contrite heart.

God pairs--in marriages--and appoints all destinies.

By the ordinance of sacrifices we are taught lessons of frugality. He
who could afford it had to bring a bullock; if a man's means did not
reach so far, then a sheep was as well accepted; and if that was beyond
his means, a goat was

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

accepted, or a dove if a goat was too costly; and the very poor who
could afford neither of these could bring a handful of flour. This very
inexpensive sacrifice could be brought in two instalments (Lev. vi.).

All sacrifices, except thank-offerings, will be abolished in future; and
even should prayer be abolished, that portion thereof which comes under
Praises will not be abolished.

All contention amongst the Israelites ceased when they stood at the foot
of Sinai to receive the commandments, and owing to the peace and harmony
that existed then amongst them they were fit and qualified to receive
God's behests.

Amongst the heavenly bodies and beings there is no envy, jealousy,
hatred, or contention; yet it is said (Job xxv. 2), "He maketh peace in
his high places." How much more, then, is peace needed amongst God's
creatures in this lower sphere.

The creation of peace and good-will amongst men towers above all other
of God's commandments. Take, for instance, that beautiful commandment of
restoring your enemy's lost cattle. One is not bidden to go and seek
them, only if you meet them you are bound to restore them (Exod.
xxiii.). Or, again, the injunction regarding a bird's nest; you have not
to seek this out, it is only when you happen to meet with one that your
duty applies. But with regard to peace and good-will we are distinctly
asked to pursue it (Ps. xxxiv.). We are to seek and establish it in our
midst, and pursue and found it everywhere else.

The prophet Amos was a stutterer.

Where repentance effects half, prayer is wholly effective.

Without the young there would be no pupils, and without them there would
be no scholars; and without them, again, there would be no want of the
Torah, without which we would have no place of worship, no place of
study; and without these God would not vouchsafe his Shechinah amongst
us.

King Solomon was very abstemious till he married Pharaoh's daughter;
then he began to indulge in wine rather freely. On his marriage there
was a double rejoicing, the one in honor of the temple, and the other to
celebrate his

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

(forbidden) marriage. His new wife danced eighty rounds; and Solomon,
who kept the keys of the temple under his pillow, overslept himself four
hours, and there could consequently be no service in the temple the
following morning. His. mother administered to him a sharp rebuke for
this, reminding him of his father's great joy when the prophet Nathan
foretold the birth of Solomon, and that his great joy was because of the
temple which his son was to build for the service of God, which he
(Solomon) so shamefully neglected.

Alexander of Macedonia invariably rose when he saw Simeon the Righteous.
Some of his ministers expressed their amazement that so proud a king
should rise--as they said--for a Jew. His explanation was that when he
embarked on a war and had, previous to his starting, seen the image of
this holy man he could reckon on victory.

The last Darius was the son of Esther.

God considered all the nations, and found Israel in the wilderness the
most fit and proper to be the recipients of his Torah. Likewise Sinai
was decided to be the most fitting spot for the purpose. Jerusalem was
fixed upon as the best place for the temple, and Palestine as the
country for Israel.

A man is not consulted by his parents as to whether he wishes to be
brought into this world.

Man is the last in creation and the first in responsibility.

A woman can only conceive either immediately before or a certain number
of days after menstruation.

There was a limit to every prophet's inspiration. Beeri, the father of
Hosea, only uttered a few words of prophecy, and as they were
insufficient to be embodied in a book by themselves they were
incorporated within the book of Isaiah, *viz.*, verses 19 and 20 of the
8th chapter of Isaiah.

Man's body should contain an equal portion of water and blood; if the
blood increases and preponderates over the water, he becomes afflicted
with leprosy.

It is very dangerous to be within four yards of a leper, and of his
breath even within a hundred yards.

Ninety-nine out of a hundred evils which overtake man can be traced to
his own acts.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

If your prayers are earnest, hope for the fulfilment of them. The human
tongue is not free, like some other members of the human body, but is
confined in the mouth, and, moreover, is constantly in moisture: yet how
many burns can it cause with its sharp edge and its fire. How much
worse, then, would it have been were that dangerous member of the human
body possessed of more facilities.

If speech is silver, then silence is gold.

Sweet is the attainment of the evil inclination at the start, but
bitter, very bitter in the end.

Antoninus asked Rabbi Judah Hannasi to pray for him.

"May you be protected against cold," said the wise man. Antoninus
demurred, saying, "Oh, an additional coat will do that for me." "Then,"
exclaimed the Rabbi, "may you be sheltered against heat and drought!" a
wish that thoroughly pleased Antoninus.

At the approach of the Israelites to the promised land, the Girgashites
offered no resistance, but were ready to vacate their country for the
Israelites to take possession of it, in consideration of which
compensation was granted them, *viz.*, Africa was given to them, a
country in every respect as good as the one they had given up. The
Gibeonites formed a peaceful alliance with the Israelites, but
thirty-one of the princes and chieftains offered resistance and were
conquered.

At first sight it would be difficult to understand why the message
concerning leprosy in the land which the Israelites were to take
possession of should be couched in language like that of a promise.
"When you come into the land of Canaan," says Holy Writ, "I *put* the
plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession" (Lev. xiv.
34). But when the Canaanites heard of Israel's approaching their borders
they hid their treasures in the secret places of their houses and in the
fields; and when they vacated the country in haste their hidden
treasures, which they had no time to take up, were left behind. When,
therefore, the plague of leprosy was sent, the houses--according to the
law of Moses--had to be razed to the ground, and the hidden treasures
were discovered and taken possession of by the Israelites.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Joshua sent these tribes due notice of the approach of the Israelites to
possess themselves of the land of promise, and offered them the
opportunity of either leaving the country with all their movable
property or offering resistance, in which event, in case of their
defeat, they would forfeit their movables with their immovables.

The prophet Obadiah was an Edomite who embraced the Jewish faith.

God tells man, "Behold, I am pure, my habitation is pure, my ministering
angels are pure, and the spark of myself (the soul) deposited with you
is pure: take heed that you restore to me that spark in the same state
of purity as when it was given to you."

If man with all his knowledge and wisdom were to try his utmost to alter
so little of nature or of creation as even to make the wing of the raven
white, he would utterly fail in his efforts. Equally would they fail, if
all nations of the world were to endeavor to annul one word of the
Torah.

Nebuchadrezzar came to Jerusalem and took up his position at the side of
Antisachia. The great Sanhedrin went out to him, asking the object of
his coming. He demanded to have Jehoiakim delivered to him, or he would
lay siege to the city. Jehoiakim pleaded hard against being delivered
into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, but was reminded of his shocking
career of iniquity, of the gross and unspeakable misdeeds he was guilty
of. He was given up to Nebuchadrezzar, who put him in irons, subjected
him to a cruel death, and had the corpse exhibited in a wooden box in
the shape of a donkey, throughout Judea. He then set Jechoniah, the son
of Jehoiakim, on his father's throne, but when he returned to Babylon
his people reproached him for his act of folly in having given the
throne to the son of so inveterate an enemy and so notorious a sinner.
Nebuchadrezzar then returned to Jerusalem and demanded the delivery of
Jechoniah, with which demand the people complied. Before he was given
over to Nebuchadrezzar he went with the keys of the temple to the top of
his house and threw the keys down, saying that he delivered them up to
God, who would appoint a worthier

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

man to take charge of them. He was carried to Babylon, and through the
influence of Shealtiel and Nebuchadrezzar's wife (Shemirimith) he was
treated with less rigor, and he was even subsequently allowed certain
privileges. His son Zerubbabel was born in Babylon, and the kingdom was
restored to this good man. Jechoniah died penitent and at peace with his
Maker.

If you want to court derision, give your opinion on weighty matters in
the presence of your teachers or your superiors.

Do not enter any house without some indication of your coming, such as
knocking at the door: even in your own house you should not make your
appearance suddenly or unexpectedly; something may be going on there
which, however innocent, may cause you annoyance and may lead to a want
of peace and harmony in your household.

The 27th Psalm contains the song of the Red Sea.

The high priest, with all his dignity and greatness, was not to enter
the sanctuary in golden but in modest linen garments. It would be
inconsistent that he who made atonement for the people should be attired
in the very material (gold) with which they committed such grievous sin.
Another reason for the humble attire was that the high priest was to be
impressed and to impress others with humility and not with pride.

There were but eighteen priests ministering in the first temple, but
they were skilful servants, and the temple service was kept up for four
hundred and ten years. Not so was it, unfortunately, in the second
temple, where over eighty priests officiated. With a few honorable
exceptions, they were unworthy to serve on the altar of God. Some bought
their position with money, and there were others amongst them who did
not disdain to use witchcraft.

He who defrauds his fellow man--no matter how small an amount--has it in
him to go to the extent of taking life.

A king had a stupid son who was in the habit of eating all sorts of
abominations when absent from his father's table. The king ordered that
his son should be indulged in his fancy at his (the king's) own table,
considering this the best means

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of weaning his son of his objectionable habit. Thus the Israelites, when
in Egypt, got into the habit of offering sacrifices to the Egyptian
gods; they were therefore commanded to bring the sacrifices which they
used to offer to demons (Lev. xvii. 7) unto the Tabernacle of the Lord.

The present Rome is Edom.

Adultery can be committed with the eyes.

The nineteenth chapter of Leviticus contains the Ten Commandments..

The inhabitants of Canaan had vices similar to those of the Egyptians,
as regards witchcraft and immorality. The Israelites,, who had seen
nothing but evil practises up to now, would be prone to conclude--seeing
the same vicious practises amongst the remaining nations of Canaan--that
these practises were common to mankind. Wherefore God tells them (Lev.
xviii. 2), "After the doings of the land of Egypt wherein you dwelt
shall ye not do, and after the doings of the land of Canaan wherein I
bring you shall ye not do." As in Egypt, so will you be in Canaan, a
rose amongst thorns.

"Thy camp shall be holy" (Deut. xxiii. 15). By this it is meant that we
must be choice in speech.

The Israelites were commanded to plant trees in Canaan when it came into
their possession (Lev. xix. 23). Thus they were to occupy themselves in
agriculture, and even imitate their God, who, after calling the world
into existence, planted trees therein.

Adrianus (Hadrian) was passing on his way to Tiberias when he saw a very
old man digging holes preparatory to planting trees. Addressing the old
man, he said: "I can understand you having worked in your younger days
to provide food for yourself, but you seem to labor in vain at this
work. You can surely not expect to eat of the fruits which the trees,
that you intend planting, will bring forth?" "I," said the old man,
"must nevertheless do my duty as long as I am able to do it." "How old
are you?" asked Adrianus. "I am a hundred years old," replied the
planter, "and the God who granted me these long years may even vouchsafe
me to eat of the fruit of these trees. But in any

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

case I do not grudge the labor on them, and as it pleases the Lord so he
may do with me." "Promise me," said Adrianus, "that if you should be
alive when these trees bear figs you will apprise me of it." When the
trees brought forth their fruit the old man loaded a basket full of
figs, and made his way with the fruit to the King's palace. Arrived at
the gate he was at first refused admission, but owing partly to his
persistence, and partly to his venerable appearance, his wish for an
audience was conveyed to the King, who granted it. On being asked his
wish, he reminded the King that he was the old man whom his Majesty had
observed planting trees, and that he had expressed the wish to be
acquainted with the fact if the old man should be alive when the trees
bore fruit. "Here," continued the old man, "I have brought a basket full
of the figs which I plucked from the trees your Majesty saw me
planting." So pleased was Adrianus with the incident that he accepted
the fruit from the gray-haired man and ordered the basket, now empty, to
be filled with coins.

Slander injures the slanderer, the victim, and the listener, and sad
indeed may be its baneful effects. A man, it is related, was affianced
to a woman afflicted with this dreadful vice, and in spite of the man's
entreaties she could not nor would not give up entirely the vicious
practise. One day she told her affianced that his own father had made
unbecoming advances to her, and suggested that, in order to satisfy
himself of the truth of her statement, he should arrive at the house in
the evening unexpectedly, and he would find his father making advances
to her. Arriving at the house, he found his father in a kneeling posture
before the woman, as he was begging of her, on his knees, to give up her
slanderous habits and render herself worthy of being the wife of such a
good young man as his beloved son was. The young man, however,
remembering what his affianced had repeatedly stated, and seeing his
father in a suspicious attitude, considered her story confirmed, and in
a moment of rage killed his father. On the affair being investigated it
was found that the murdered man was quite innocent. His son was put to

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

death for the murder, and the woman suffered the same penalty, for being
the chief cause of the whole tragedy. Thus were three lives sacrificed
through a lying and slanderous tongue.

There is a Rabbinical phrase not infrequently met with: "He who wilfully
transgresses the enactments of the sages deserves the bite of the
serpent." The Midrash explains this peculiar expression as follows: One
asks the serpent, "Why are you so fond of hiding under fences?" and its
reply is, "Because I broke down the first great fence of the world, the
fence that existed between Adam and death." Now the enactments of the
sages are "fences," set round about the law of God to guard it, and he
who breaks through them deserves to meet with the one hidden under them
who was the first to break them.

King Saul's conduct may well be compared to that of the king who decreed
that all the cocks of the town should be destroyed, but the following
day, having to undertake a journey and wishing to rise early, gave
orders to procure him a cock to wake him at an early hour. Saul ordered
all witches and wizards to be destroyed, and yet he was anxious to seek
out a witch to learn from her the secrets of heaven.

God makes no choice of persecutors, but rather of the persecuted. Abel
was the victim of Cain, Abel's offerings were accepted; Noah was
persecuted by his contemporaries, Abraham by Nimrod, Isaac by the early
Philistines, Jacob by Esau, Joseph by his brothers, Moses by Pharaoh,
David by Saul, and Saul himself by the Philistines; and amongst all
these the persecuted, and not the persecutors, were chosen by God. This
does not apply to man only, but also to the lower animals. The ox is
pursued by the lion, the sheep by the wolf, and not the pursuer, but the
pursued, is chosen for God's altar.

Heathens were in the habit of taunting the Israelites with making the
golden calf, a transgression which they said would never be forgiven
them. As a mark, therefore, of having pardoned their sin, God mentioned
the ox at the head of sacrifices.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

The trumpets used in the temple could be made from the horns of any
animal, but might not be made from the horns of a cow, because that
animal was connected with Israel's idolatry.

Israel had not to maintain the three leaders with whom God provided them
in the wilderness, though it is invariably incumbent on any organized
society to have to maintain their officers of State. Here, on the
contrary, they were the means of sustaining the people: Moses brought
down the manna, Miriam brought up the waters of the wells, and Aaron
invoked the clouds of glory.

It can not be doubted that those who instigated the Israelites to make
the golden calf were of "the mixed multitude," who fastened themselves
on to the Israelites at the Exodus, and there is incontestable evidence
of this in the words employed at the end of the pernicious work, for it
is said (Exod. xxxii. 4), "These are thy gods." Had the Israelites been
the workers of this iniquity, they would have more appropriately said,
"This is *our* god that brought us out," etc.

The number seven seems to be particularly selected and sanctified.
Arovoth is the seventh name of heaven, and is especially favored (Ps.
lxviii. 5). "Tebel" is the seventh name by which this world is known,
and that, too, has special mention (Ps. xcvi. 4). Enoch was in the
seventh generation from Adam, and Moses was in the seventh generation
from Abraham; David was the seventh son of Jesse, and Asa was the
seventh king after Saul. Then the seventh day was sanctified as the
Sabbath, the seventh year as the Sabbatical year, and seven Sabbatical
years as the Jubilee; and almost the whole of the seventh month is
devoted to solemn festivals.

The temple required no light from the outer world, but had to diffuse
light to the outer world. The formation of its windows indicated this
fact.

There were some beautiful traits in the character of the Israelites in
Egypt, by which alone they merited redemption. They did not change their
names, such as Rufus instead of Reuben, Leon in lien of Simeon, Listus
in place of Joseph,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

or Alexander for Benjamin. Neither had they changed their language, but
they retained the Hebrew tongue. They eschewed slander, and they were
very chaste.

"The merciful man," says King Solomon, "doeth good to his own soul, but
he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh" (Prov. xi. 17). Solomon meant
by this the rich who disdain to invite their poor relatives to their
festive tables.

The opening words of the 41st Psalm, "Happy is he that considereth the
poor," were interpreted by the Rabbis in various ways. It is maintained
by one authority that the words fit him whose better propensities
prevail over the evil ones; another has it that they allude to him who
visits the sick; and yet another refers the words to the: man who not
only helps the poor, but considers the best way of really helping them
without making them feel the sense of shame which receipt of charity may
cause them. Thus Rabbi Jonah, to whose knowledge it came that a person,
formerly in affluence had met with reverses, approached the man with the
words "I understand you have some expectations, and I shall therefore be
glad to advance you some money with which you can make some profitable
transactions, and then you can pay me back when you have no longer need
for the money." The question of assisting the man having thus been
opened in an inoffensive manner, he was only too glad of the proffered
help, and was then told that there was no need to repay the money, as it
was a gift.

Rabbi Tanchuma, son of R. Cheya, laid. it down as a maxim that it is
man's duty, when he becomes aware of any one having come down in the
world, to consider the best means of helping him as quickly as possible.
He himself would never purchase anything for his household without, at
the same time, providing an equal quantity for the poor.

When the poor stand at your door, remember that their Maker stands at
their right hand (Ps. cix.), and consider it a high privilege for you to
help them.

It is man's duty to keep his body in a state of cleanliness, as well as
to keep his soul in a state of purity. Hillel, when going to bathe, used
to tell his pupils that he was going to

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

do a godly deed. Once his pupils ventured to ask for an explanation.
"Have you not observed," said he to his disciples, "how the caretakers
in the theaters and other public places always wash the statues and keep
them clean? If then such care is bestowed on inanimate sculptures, the
works of man, it must surely be a holy duty scrupulously to clean the
handiwork and masterpiece of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Rabba](mhl08)
