[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhl16)  [Next](mhl18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

# THE PHILOSOPHERS

"*When creation was all but ended, the world with all its grandeur and
splendor stood out in its glorious beauty. There was but one thing
wanting to consummate the marvelous work, and that was a creature with
thought and understanding able to behold, reflect, and marvel on this
great handiwork of God*."

--MIDRASH BERESHIT.

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

### THE PHILOSOPHERS

#### (INTRODUCTION)

THE reason why medieval Hebrew thinkers wrote chiefly in Arabic has been
already explained. Only their religious works were, as a rule composed
in Hebrew. So far indeed was this carried that the most celebrated of
them all, Maimonides, wrote even his chief theological work, his "Guide
to the Perplexed," in the Arabic tongue. Hence for his Hebraic writing
we are compelled to turn to his familiar letters, such as the celebrated
one here given. Of Maimonides himself and the fame of his religious
writings among his own people, we have already spoken in the general
introduction. It may be well, however, to emphasize that his "Guide to
the Perplexed" was studied by Christians as well as Jews, and draws
almost as much from Aristotle as from Hebraic teachings. His
Codification of all Jewish religious law, known as the *Mishneh Toreh*,
in many regions superseded the Talmud and crowded out the study of that
ancient work. Maimonides was born in Spain, is indeed accounted as the
greatest of all the sons of Arabic Cordova; but he fled thence to escape
persecution, and after much wandering became physician to the Sultan of
Egypt.

We have still to give a clearer view of the most celebrated of medieval
Hebraic Bible commentators before Maimonides. This was Abraham ben Meir
ben Ezra, commonly called Ben Ezra or Ibn Ezra. He was born in Spain, at
Toledo, in 1092, but traveled much, resided long in Italy and in
England, and saw most of Europe before he died, about 1168. He was a
philosopher, astronomer, physician, and poet. Chiefly, however, in the
eyes of his own race he was a grammarian. That is, he first turned into
scientific grammatical channels the commentaries on the Bible of

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

which his people were so fond. Under his lead they abandoned fancy for
fact, and sought to study the literal meaning of the Bible text. Among
his people, therefore, Ibn Ezra ranks second only to Maimonides, in
helping to bring their religion to its fixed and final shape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Commentaries of Ibn Ezra (Extracts)](mhl18)
