[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhl10)  [Next](mhl12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

# RELIGIOUS POETRY

"*The word of God is in them as they burst forth, and as they return;
they obey the divine command, rushing along as a whirlwind, and
returning to prostrate themselves at His throne*."

--THE BOOK OF CREATION.

"*Thy flocks are scattered o'er the barren waste,  
Yet do they not forget thy sheltering fold*."

--ODE TO ZION.

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

### RELIGIOUS POETRY

##### (INTRODUCTION)

AMONG the noted Hebrew poets of the Middle Ages, Ibn Gebirol was the
earliest, and Judah Halevi was the greatest. Ibn Gebirol, or, to give
his name in full, Solomon ben Jehudah ibn Gebirol, was, like most of the
medieval Hebrew poets, a native of Spain, born during the most brilliant
epoch of its Mohammedan Arab conquerors, the days of the Caliphs, or
priest-kings, of Cordova. Ibn Gebirol wrote chiefly in the Arabic
tongue, was indeed the author of a work of philosophy famous among
medieval scholars who knew its author only by his Arabic name as
Avicebron. Yet even in his short and busy life--he died in the year
1058, when scarcely beyond thirty years old--Ibn Gebirol found time to
turn to the language of his brethren and compose some tender Hebrew
melodies, such as are given here.

Judah Halevi, or Jehudah hal-Levi, was born in Toledo, Spain, in the
year 1080 and died in Jerusalem, or at least there disappeared from
human sight and knowledge, in 1150. In those days of tumult and
persecution in the East, such a disappearance implied death, whether
mercifully immediate or coming only after long misery and possible
imprisonment. Halevi's poems were composed in Spain, and are still
treasured by his people as among their chief poetic treasures,
especially his Ode to Zion. He also wrote in prose the highly poetical
book "Cusari," which is given a later place in our volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Poems of Ibn Gebirol](mhl12)
