[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khz05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CONCLUSION OF THE BOOK

21\. This and similar subjects afford proper points for research,
comprising as they do the character of the divine decrees concerning
man, as intimated in the prophetic words: 'He visits the sin of the
fathers on the children . . . of his enemies . . . and showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love Him and keep His commandments' (Exod.
xx. 5 sq.). This means that every iniquity is remembered till the time
of punishment comes, as laid down in the Tōrāh and the teachings of the
Sages; that some punishments can be warded off by repentance, and some
not. It further includes the conditions of repentance, the trials,
tribulations, and punishments for past transgressions winch visit man as
retaliation in this world, or the next, or for paternal transgressions,
and, finally, the good fortune which we enjoy as a reward for former
pious actions, or the 'merit of the fathers,' or which are sent to try
us. These points of view are complicated by others and deeper ones, and
there remains some doubt whether an examination will disclose the
majority of causes of the misfortune of the just and the prosperity of
the wicked. That which we cannot discover may be confidently left to
God's omniscience and justice, and man must admit that he does not know
the reasons, although they may

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

lie on the surface, and still less can be known those which are really
hidden. If man's contemplations lead him to the Prime Being and to the
necessary attributes, he withdraws from it, because he sees a curtain of
light which blinds the eye. We are debarred from perceiving it on
account of our defective sight and narrow minds, but not because it is
hidden or faulty. To those endowed with prophetic vision it appears too
bright and resplendent to require any other proof. The culminating point
of our appreciation of His nature is that we are able to distinguish
supernatural causes in natural occurrences. This we ascribe to a
non-corporeal and divine power, just as Galen, speaking of the forming
power, places it above all other forces. In his opinion it did not arise
out of certain combinations, but miraculously, by command of God, and we
see substances changed, the course of nature altered, and new things
produced without craft. This is the difference between the work of Moses
and that of the magicians whose secret art was open to discovery, just
as Jeremiah says: 'They are vanity, the work of errors' (chap. x. 15).
He means to say that when they are closely examined they appear vain as
any contemptible thing. The Divine Influence, however, if investigated,
appears as pure gold. If we have reached this degree, we say, that there
is surely an incorporeal being which guides all corporeal substances,
but which our mind is inadequate to examine. We therefore dwell on His
works, but refrain from describing His nature. For if we were able to
grasp it, this were a defect in Him. We take, however, no heed of the
words of philosophers who divide the divine world into various degrees.
As soon as we are free from our bodies there is for us only one divine

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

degree. It is God alone who controls everything corporeal. The reason
why philosophers adopted many gods is to be found in their
investigations of the movements of the spheres, of which they counted
more than forty. They found for every movement a separate cause, from
which they concluded that these movements were independent rather than
necessary or natural. Each movement, therefore, originated with a soul.
Every soul has intellect, and this intellect is an angel severed from
material substance. They called these intellects, or angels, or
secondary causes and other names. The nethermost degree, nearest to us,
is the Active Intelligence, of which they taught that it guided the
nether world. The next is the Hylic Intellect, then comes the soul,
nature, the natural and animal forces, and the faculties of each
\[human\] organ. All these, however, are subtleties, and pleasant for
investigation. He who is deceived by them is in any case a heretic.
Leave also alone the argument of the Karaites, taken from David's last
will to his son: 'And thou, Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy
father, and serve Him' (1 Chron. xxviii. 9). They conclude from this
verse that a complete knowledge of God must precede His worship. As a
matter of fact, David reminded his son to imitate his father and
ancestors in their belief in the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whose
solicitude was with them, and who fulfilled His promises in multiplying
their descendants, gave them Palestine, and caused His Shekhinah to
dwell among them. It is also written: 'Gods which ye did not know,' but
this does not allude to the real truth, but those objects from which
neither good nor evil can issue, and deserve neither confidence nor
fear.--

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

22\. The Rabbi was then concerned to leave the land of the Khazari and
to betake himself to Jerusalem. The king was loth to let him go, and
spoke to him in this sense as follows: What can be sought in Palestine
nowadays, since the divine reflex is absent from it, whilst, with a pure
mind and desire, one can approach God in any place. Why wilt thou run
into danger. on land and water and among various peoples?

23\. The Rabbi answered: The visible Shekhināh has, indeed, disappeared,
because it does not reveal itself except to a prophet or a favoured
community, and in a distinguished place. This is what we look for in the
passage: 'Let our eyes behold when Thou returnest to Zion.' As regards
the invisible and spiritual Shekhināh, it is with every born Israelite
of virtuous life, pure heart, and upright mind before the Lord of
Israel. Palestine is especially distinguished by the Lord of Israel, and
no function can be perfect except there. Many of the Israelitish laws do
not concern those who do not live there; heart and soul are only
perfectly pure and immaculate in the place which is believed to be
specially selected by God. If this is true in a figurative sense, how
much more true in reality, as we have shown Thus the longing for it is
awakened with disinterested motives, especially for him who wishes to
live there, and to atone for past transgressions, since there is no
opportunity of bringing the sacrifices ordained by God for intentional
and unintentional sins. He is supported by the saying of the Sages:
'Exile atones for sins,' especially if his exile brings him into the
place of God's choice. The danger he runs on land and sea does not come
under the category of: 'You shall not tempt the Lord' (Deut. vi. 16);
but the verse refers to risks

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

which one takes when travelling with merchandise in the hope of gain. He
who incurs even greater danger on account of his ardent desire to obtain
forgiveness is free from reproach if he has closed the balance of his
life, expressed his gratitude for his past life, and is satisfied to
spend the rest of his days in seeking the favour of his Lord. He braves
danger, and if he escapes he praises God gratefully. But should he
perish through his sins, he has obtained the divine favour, and may be
confident that he has atoned for most of his sins by his death. In my
opinion this is better than to seek the dangers of war in order to gain
fame and spoil by courage and bravery. This kind of danger is even
inferior to that of those who march into war for hire.

24\. Al Khazari: I thought that thou didst love freedom, but now I see
thee finding new religious duties which thou wilt be obliged to fulfil
in Palestine, which are, however, in abeyance here.

25\. The Rabbi: I only seek freedom from the service of those numerous
people whose favour I do not care for, and shall never obtain, though I
worked for it all my life. Even if I could obtain it, it would not
profit me--I mean serving men and courting their favour. I would rather
seek the service of the One whose favour is obtained with the smallest
effort, yet it profits in this world and the next. This is the favour of
God, His service spells freedom, and humility before Him is true honour.

26\. Al Khazari: If thou believest in all that thou gayest, God knows
thy mind. The mind is free before God, who knows the hearts and
discloses what is hidden.

27\. The Rabbi: This is true when action is impossible. Man is free in
his endeavours and work. But he deserves blame who does not look for
visible reward for

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

visible work. For this reason it is written: 'Ye shall blow an alarm
with the trumpets, and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God
(Num. x. 9) . . . They shall be to you for a memorial (ver. 10) . . . A
memorial of blowing of trumpets' (Lev. xxiii. 24). God need not be
reminded, but actions must be perfect to claim reward. Likewise must the
ideas of the prayers be pronounced in the most perfect way to be
considered as prayer and supplication. Now if thou bringest intention
and action to perfection thou mayest expect reward. This is popularly
expressed by *reminding*, and 'the Tōrāh speaks in the manner of human
beings.' If the action is minus the intention, or the intention minus
the action, the expectation \[for reward\] is lost, except in impossible
things. It is, however, rather useful to show the good intention if the
deed is impossible, as we express this in our prayer: 'On account of our
sins have we been driven out of our land.' This sacred place serves to
remind men and to stimulate them to love God, being a reward and
promise, as it is written: 'Thou shalt arise and have mercy upon Zion,
for the time to favour her, yea, the set time is come. For thy servants
take pleasure in her stones and embrace the dust thereof' (Ps. cii. 14
sq.). This means that Jerusalem can only be rebuilt when Israel yearns
for it to such an extent that they embrace her stones and dust.

28\. Al Khazari: If this be so, it would be a sin to hinder thee. It is,
on the contrary, a merit to assist thee. May God grant thee His help,
and be thy protector and friend. May He favour thee in His mercy.

 

Completed is the book with the help of God and His assistance. Praise
without end be to the Giver of Help.
