[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft06)  [Next](hft08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### IV

### PELE AND KAHAWALI

###### FROM ELLIS'S "TOUR OF HAWAII"

IN the reign of Kealiikukii, an ancient king of. Hawaii, Kahawali, chief
of Puna, and one of his favorite companions went one day to amuse
themselves with the *holua* (sled), on the sloping side of a hill, which
is still called *ka holua ana o Kahawali* (Kahawali's sliding-place).
Vast numbers of the people gathered at the bottom of the hill to witness
the game, and a company of musicians and dancers repaired thither to add
to the amusement of the spectators. The performers began their dance,
and amidst the sound of drums and the songs of the musicians the
sledding of Kahawali and his companion commenced. The hilarity of the
occasion attracted the attention of Pele, the goddess of the volcano,
who came down from Kilauea to witness the sport. Standing on the summit
of the hill in the form of a woman, she challenged Kahawali to slide
with her. He accepted the offer, and they set off together down the
hill. Pele, less acquainted with the art of balancing herself on the
narrow sled than her rival, was beaten, and Kahawali was applauded by
the spectators as he returned up the side of the hill.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Before starting again, Pele asked him to give her his *papa holua*, but
he, supposing from her appearance that she was no more than a native
woman, said: "*Aole!* (no!) Are you my wife, that you should obtain my
sled?" And, as if impatient at being delayed, he adjusted his papa, ran
a few yards to take a spring, and then, with this momentum and all his
strength he threw himself upon it and shot down the hill.

Pele, incensed at his answer, stamped her foot on the ground and an
earthquake followed, which rent the hill in sunder. She called, and fire
and liquid lava arose, and, assuming her supernatural form, with these
irresistible ministers of vengeance, she followed down the hill. When
Kahawali reached the bottom, he arose, and on looking behind saw Pele,
accompanied by thunder and lightning, earthquake, and streams of burning
lava, closely pursuing him. He took up his broad spear which he had
stuck in the ground at the beginning of the game, and, accompanied by
his friend, fled for his life. The musicians, dancers, and crowds of
spectators were instantly overwhelmed by the fiery torrent, which,
bearing on its foremost wave the enraged goddess, continued to pursue
Kahawali and his companion. They ran till they came to an eminence
called Puukea. Here Kahawali threw off his cloak of netted ki leaves and
proceeded toward his house, which stood near the shore. He met his
favorite pig and saluted it by touching noses, then ran to the house of
his mother, who lived at Kukii, saluted her by touching noses, and said:
"*Aloha ino oe, eia ibonei paha oe e make ai, ke ai mainei Pele*."
(Compassion great to you!

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Close here,
perhaps, is your death; Pele comes devouring.) Leaving her, he met his
wife, Kanakawahine, and saluted her. The burning torrent approached, and
she said: "Stay with me here, and let us die together." He said: "No; I
go, I go." He then saluted his two children, Poupoulu and Kaohe, and
said, "*Ke ue nei au is olua*." (I grieve for you two.) The lava rolled
near, and he ran till a deep chasm arrested his progress. He laid down
his spear and walked over on it in safety. His friend called out for his
help; he held out his spear over the chasm; his companion took hold of
it and he drew him securely over. By this time Pele was coming down the
chasm with accelerated motion. He ran till he reached Kula. Here he met
his sister, Koai, but had only time to say, "*Aloha oe!*" (Alas for
you!) and then ran on to the shore. His younger brother had just landed
from his fishing-canoe, and had hastened to his house to provide for the
safety of his family, when Kahawali arrived. He and his friend leaped
into the canoe, and with his broad spear paddled out to sea. Pele,
perceiving his escape, ran to the shore and hurled after him, with
prodigious force, great stones and fragments of rock, which fell thickly
around but did not strike his canoe. When he had paddled a short
distance from the shore the *kumukahi* (east wind) sprung up. He fixed
his broad spear upright in the canoe, that it might answer the double
purpose of mast and sail, and by its aid he soon reached the island of
Maui, where they rested one night and then proceeded to Lanai. The day
following

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

they moved on to Molokai, thence to Oahu, the abode of Kolonohailaau,
his father, and Kanewahinekeaho, his sister, to whom he related his
disastrous perils, and with whom he took up his permanent abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Hiku and Kawelu](hft08)
