[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft08)  [Next](hft10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### VI

### LONOPUHA; OR, ORIGIN OF THE ART OF HEALING IN HAWAII

###### TRANSLATED BY THOS. G. THRUM

DURING the time that Milu was residing at Waipio, Hawaii, the year of
which is unknown, there came to these shores a number of people, with
their wives, from that vague foreign land, Kahiki. But they were all of
godly kind (*ano akua nae*), it is said, and drew attention as they
journeyed from place to place. They arrived first at Niihau, and from
there they travelled through all the islands. At Hawaii they landed at
the south side, thence to Puna, Hilo, and settled at Kukuihaele,
Hamakua, just above Waipio.

On every island they visited there appeared various diseases, and many
deaths resulted, so that it was said this was their doings, among the
chiefs and people. The diseases that followed in their train were
chills, fevers, headache, *pani*, and so on.

These are the names of some of these people: Kaalaenuiahina,
Kahuilaokalani, Kaneikaulanaula, besides others. They brought death, but
one Kamakanuiahailono followed after them with healing powers. This was
perhaps the origin of sickness and the art of healing with medicines in
Hawaii.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

As has been said, diseases settled on the different islands like an
epidemic, and the practice of medicine ensued, for Kamakanuiahailono
followed them in their journeyings. He arrived at Kau, stopping at
Kiolakaa, on the west side of Waiohinu, where a great multitude of
people were residing, and Lono was their chief. The stranger sat on a
certain hill, where many of the people visited him, for the reason that
he was a newcomer, a custom that is continued to this day. While there
he noticed the redness of skin of a certain one of them, and remarked,
"Oh, the redness of skin of that man!"

The people replied, "Oh, that is Lono, the chief of this land, and he is
a farmer."

He again spoke, asserting that his sickness was very great; for through
the redness of the skin he knew him to be a sick man.

They again replied that he was a healthy man, "but you consider him very
sick." He then left the residents and set out on his journey.

Some of those who heard his remarks ran and told the chief the strange
words, "that he was a very sick man." On hearing this, Lono raised up
his *oo* (digger) and said, "Here I am, without any sign of disease, and
yet I am sick." And as he brought down his *oo* with considerable force,
it struck his foot and pierced it through, causing the blood to flow
freely, so that he fell and fainted away. At this, one of the men seized
a pig and ran after the stranger, who, hearing the pig squealing, looked
behind him and saw the man running with it; and as he neared him he
dropped it

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

before him, and told him of Lono's misfortune. Kamakanuiahailono then
returned, gathering on the way the young popolo seeds and its tender
leaves in his garment (*kihei*). When he arrived at the place where the
wounded man was lying he asked for some salt, which he took and pounded
together with the popolo and placed it with a cocoanut covering on the
wound. From then till night the flowing of the blood ceased. After two
or three weeks had elapsed he again took his departure.

While he was leisurely journeying, some one breathing heavily approached
him in the rear, and, turning around, there was the chief, and he asked
him: "What is it, Lono, and where are you going?"

Lono replied, "You healed me; therefore, as soon as you had departed I
immediately consulted with my successors, and have resigned my offices
to them, so that they will have control over all. As for myself, I
followed after you, that you might teach me the art of healing."

The *kahuna lapaau* (medical priest) then said, "Open your mouth." When
Lono opened his mouth, the kahuna spat into it, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) by which he would become proficient in the
calling he had chosen, and in which he eventually became, in fact, very
skilful.

As they travelled, he instructed Lono (on account of the accident to his
foot he was called Lonopuha) in the various diseases, and the different
medicines for the proper treatment of each. They journeyed through Kau,
Puna, and Hilo, thence onward to Hamakua as

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

far as Kukuihaele. Prior to their arrival there, Kamakanuiahailono said
to Lonopuha, "It is better that we reside apart, lest your healing
practice do not succeed; but you settle elsewhere, so as to gain
recognition from your own skill."

For this reason, Lonopuha went on farther and located in Waimanu, and
there practised the art of healing. On account of his labors here, he
became famous as a skilful healer, which fame Kamakanuiahailono and
others heard of at Kukuihaele; but he never revealed to *Kaalaenuiahina
ma* (company) of his teaching of Lonopuha, through which he became
celebrated. It so happened that *Kaalaenuiahina ma* were seeking an
occasion to cause Milu's death, and he was becoming sickly through their
evil efforts.

When Milu heard of the fame of Lonopuha as a skilful healer, because of
those who were afflicted with disease and would have died but for his
treatment, he sent his messenger after him. On arriving at .Milu's
house, Lonopuha examined and felt of him, and then said, "You will have
no sickness, provided you be obedient to my teachings." He then
exercised his art, and under his medical treatment Milu recovered.

Lonopuha then said to him: "I have treated you, and you are well of the
internal ailments you suffered under, and only that from without
remains. Now, you must build a house of leaves and dwell therein in
quietness for a few weeks, to recuperate." These houses are called
*pipipi*, such being the place to which invalids are moved for
convalescent treatment unless something unforeseen should occur.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Upon Milu's removal thereto, Lonopuha advised him as follows: "O King!
you are to dwell in this house according to the length of time directed,
in perfect quietness; and should the excitement of sports with attendant
loud cheering prevail here, I warn you against these as omens of evil
for your death; and I advise you not to loosen the *ti* leaves of your
house to peep out to see the cause, for on the very day you do so, that
day you will perish."

Some two weeks had scarcely passed since the King had been confined in
accordance with the kahuna's instructions, when noises from various
directions in proximity to the King's dwelling were heard, but he
regarded the advice of the priest all that day. The cause of the
commotion was the appearance of two birds playing in the air, which so
excited the people that they kept cheering them all that day.

Three weeks had almost passed when loud cheering was again heard in
Waipio, caused by a large bird decorated with very beautiful feathers,
which flew out from the clouds and soared proudly over the *palis*
(precipices) of Koaekea and Kaholokuaiwa, and poised gracefully over the
people; therefore, they cheered as they pursued it here and there. Milu
was much worried thereby, and became so impatient that he could no
longer regard the priest's caution; so he lifted some of the ti leaves
of his house to look out at the bird, when instantly it made a thrust at
him, striking him under the armpit, whereby his life was taken and he
was dead (*lilo ai kona ola a make iho la*).

The priest saw the bird flying with the liver of Milu;

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

therefore, he followed after it. When it saw that it was pursued, it
immediately entered into a sunken rock just above the base of the
precipice of Koaekea. As he reached the place, the blood was spattered
around where the bird had entered. Taking a piece of garment
(*pahoola*), he soaked it with the blood and returned and placed it in
the opening in the body of the dead King and poured healing medicine on
the wound,, whereby Milu recovered. And the place where the bird entered
with Milu's liver has ever since been called Keakeomilu (the liver of
Milu).

A long while afterward, when this death of the King was as nothing (*i
mea ole*), and he recovered as formerly, the priest refrained not from
warning him, saying: "You have escaped from this death; there remains
for you one other."

After Milu became convalescent from his recent serious experience, a few
months perhaps had elapsed, when the surf at Waipio became very high and
was breaking heavily on the beach. This naturally caused much commotion
and excitement among the people, as the numerous surf-riders,
participating in the sport, would land upon the beach on their
surf-boards. Continuous cheering prevailed, and the hilarity rendered
Milu so impatient at the restraint put upon him by the priest that he
forsook his wise counsel and joined in the exhilarating sport.

Seizing a surf-board he swam out some distance to the selected spot for
suitable surfs. Here he let the first and second combers pass him; but
watching his opportunity he started with the momentum of the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

heavier third comber, catching the crest just right. Quartering on the
rear of his board, he rode in with majestic swiftness, and landed nicely
on the beach amid the cheers and shouts of the people. He then repeated
the venture and was riding in as successfully, when, in a moment of
careless abandon, at the place where the surfs finish as they break on
the beach, he was thrust under and suddenly disappeared, while the
surf-board flew from under and was thrown violently upon the shore. The
people in amazement beheld the event, and wildly exclaimed: "Alas! Milu
is dead! Milu is dead!" With sad wonderment they searched and watched in
vain for his body. Thus was seen the result of repeated disobedience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[53:1](hft09.htm#fr_5) An initiatory act, as in
the priesthood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. A Visit to the Spirit Land; or, the Strange Experience of a
Woman in Kona, Hawaii](hft10)
