[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft05)  [Next](hft07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### III

### PELE AND THE DELUGE

###### REV. A. O. FORBES

ALL volcanic phenomena are associated in Hawaiian legendary lore with
the goddess Pele; and it is a somewhat curious fact that to the same
celebrated personage is also attributed a great flood that occurred in
ancient times. The legends of this flood are various, but mainly
connected with the doings of Pele in this part of the Pacific Ocean. The
story runs thus:

Kahinalii was the mother of Pele; Kanehoalani was her father; and her
two brothers were Kamohoalii and Kahuilaokalani. Pele was born in the
land of Hapakuela, a far-distant land at the edge of the sky, toward the
southwest. There she lived with her parents until she was grown up, when
she married Wahialoa; and to these were born a daughter named Laka, and
a son named Menehune. But after a time Pele's husband, Wahialoa, was
enticed away from her by Pelekumulani. The deserted Pele, being much
displeased and troubled in mind on account of her husband, started on
her travels in search of him, and came in the direction of the Hawaiian
Islands. Now, at that time these islands were a vast waste. There was no
sea, nor was there any fresh water. When Pele set

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

out on her journey, her parents gave her the sea to go with her and bear
her canoes onward. So she sailed forward, flood-borne by the sea, until
she reached the land of Pakuela, and thence onward to the land of
Kanaloa. From her head she poured forth the sea as she went, and her
brothers composed the celebrated ancient mele:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O the sea, the great sea!  
Forth bursts the sea:  
Behold, it bursts on Kanaloa!</span>

</div>

But the waters of the sea continued to rise until only the highest
points of the great mountains, Haleakala, Maunakea, and Maunaloa, were
visible; all else was covered. Afterward the sea receded until it
reached its present level. This event is called the *Kai a Kahinalii*
(Sea of Kahinalii), because it was from Kahinalii, her mother, that Pele
received the gift of the sea, and she herself only brought it to Hawaii.

And from that time to this, Pele and all her family forsook their former
land of Hapakuela and have dwelt in Hawaii-nei, Pele coming first and
the rest following at a later time.

On her first arrival at Hawaii-nei, Pele dwelt on the island of Kauai.
From there she went to Kalaupapa, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) on
the island of Molokai, and dwelt in the crater of Kauhako at that place;
thence she departed to Puulaina, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) near
Lahainaluna, where she dug out that crater. Afterward she moved still
further to Haleakala,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

where she stayed until she hollowed out that great crater; and finally
she settled at Kilauea, on the island of Hawaii, where she has remained
ever since. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[37:1](hft06.htm#fr_0) Now the Leper Settlement.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[37:2](hft06.htm#fr_1) The hill visible from the
Lahaina anchorage to the north of Lahainaluna School, and near to it.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[38:1](hft06.htm#fr_2) It is not a little
remarkable that the progress of Pele, as stated in this tradition,
agrees with geological observation in locating the earliest volcanic
action in this group, on the island of Kauai, and the latest, on the
island of Hawaii.--*Translator*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Pele And Kahawali](hft07)
