[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft00)  [Next](hft02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE

IT is becoming more and more a matter of regret that a larger amount of
systematic effort was not established in early years for the gathering
and preservation of the folk-lore of the Hawaiians. The world is under
lasting obligations to the late Judge Fornander, and to Dr. Rae before
him, for their painstaking efforts to gather the history of this people
and trace their origin and migrations; but Fornander's work only has
seen the light, Dr. Rae's manuscript having been accidentally destroyed
by fire.

The early attempts of Dibble and Pogue to gather history from Hawaiians
themselves have preserved to native and foreign readers much that would
probably otherwise have been lost. To the late Judge Andrews we are
indebted for a very full grammar and dictionary of the language, as also
for a valuable manuscript collection of *meles* and antiquarian
literature that passed to the custody of the Board of Education.

There were native historians in those days; the newspaper articles of S.
M. Kamakau, the earlier writings of David Malo, and the later
contributions of G. W. Pilipo and others are but samples of a wealth of
material, most of which has been lost forever to the world. From time to
time Prof. W. D. Alexander,

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

as also C. J. Lyons, has furnished interesting extracts from these and
other hakus.

The Rev. A. O. Forbes devoted some time and thought to the collecting of
island folk-lore: and King Kalakaua took some pains in this line also,
as evidenced by his volume of "Legends and Myths of Hawaii," edited by
R. M. Daggett, though there is much therein that is wholly foreign to
ancient Hawaiian customs and thought. No one of late years had a better
opportunity than Kalakaua toward collecting the *meles*, *kaaos*, and
traditions of his race; and for purposes looking to this end there was
established by law a Board of Genealogy, which had an existence of some
four years, but nothing of permanent value resulted therefrom.

Fornander's manuscript collection of *meles*, legends, and genealogies
in the vernacular has fortunately become, by purchase, the property of
the Hon. C. R. Bishop, which insures for posterity the result of one
devoted scholar's efforts to rescue the ancient traditions that are
gradually slipping away; for the *haku meles* (bards) of Hawaii are
gone. This fact, as also the Hawaiian Historical Society's desire to aid
and stimulate research into the history and traditions of this people,
strengthens the hope that some one may yet arise to give us further
insight into the legendary folk-lore of this interesting race.

T. G. T.

HONOLULU, January 1, 1907.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](hft02.md)
