[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft09)  [Next](hft11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### VII

### A VISIT TO THE SPIRIT LAND; OR, THE STRANGE EXPERIENCE OF A WOMAN IN KONA, HAWAII

###### MRS. E. N. HALEY

KALIMA had been sick for many weeks, and at last A Her friends gathered
around her with loud cries of grief, and with many expressions of
affection and sorrow at their loss they prepared her body for its
burial.

The grave was dug, and when everything was ready for the last rites and
sad act, husband and friends came to take a final look at the rigid form
and ashen face before it was laid away forever in the ground. The old
mother sat on the mat-covered ground beside her child, brushing away the
intrusive flies with a piece of cocoanut-leaf, and wiping away the tears
that slowly rolled down her cheeks. Now and then she would break into a
low, heart-rending wail, and tell in a sob-choked, broken voice, how
good this her child had always been to her, how her husband loved her,
and how her children would never have any one to take her place. "Oh,
why," she cried, "did the gods leave me? I am old and heavy with years;
my back is bent and my eyes are getting dark. I cannot work, and am too
old and weak to enjoy fishing in the sea, or dancing

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and feasting under the trees. But this my child loved all these things,
and was so happy. Why is she taken and I, so useless, left?" And again
that mournful, sob-choked wail broke on the still air, and was borne out
to the friends gathered under the trees before the door, and was taken
up and repeated until the hardest heart would have softened and melted
at the sound. As they sat around on the mats looking at their dead and
listening to the old mother, suddenly Kalima moved, took a long breath,
and opened her eyes. They were frightened at the miracle, but so happy
to have her back again among them.

The old mother raised her hands and eyes to heaven and, with rapt faith
on her brown, wrinkled face, exclaimed: "The gods have let her come
back! How they must love her!"

Mother, husband, and friends gathered around and rubbed her hands and
feet, and did what they could for her comfort. In a few minutes she
revived enough to say, "I have something strange to tell you."

Several days passed before she was strong enough to say more; then
calling her relatives and friends about her, she told them the following
weird and strange story:

"I died, as you know. I seemed to leave my body and stand beside it,
looking down on what was me. The me that was standing there looked like
the form I was looking at, only, I was alive and the other was dead. I
gazed at my body for a few minutes, then turned and walked away. I left
the house and village,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

and walked on and on to the next village, and there I found crowds of
people,--Oh, so many people! The place which I knew as a small village
of a few houses was a very large place, with hundreds of houses and
thousands of men, women, and children. Some of them I knew and they
spoke to me,--although that seemed strange, for I knew they were
dead,--but nearly all were strangers. They were all so happy! They
seemed not to have a care; nothing to trouble them. Joy was in every
face, and happy laughter and bright, loving words were on every tongue.

"I left that village and walked on to the next. I was not tired, for it
seemed no trouble to walk. It? was the same there; thousands of people,
and every one so joyous and happy. Some of these I knew. I spoke to a
few people, then went on again. I seemed to be on my way to the
volcano,--to Pele's pit,--and could not stop, much as I wanted to do so.

"All along the road were houses and people, where I had never known any
one to live. Every bit of good ground had many houses, and many, many
happy people on it. I felt so full of joy, too, that my heart sang
within me, and I was glad to be dead.

"In time I came to South Point, and there, too, was a great crowd of
people. The barren point was a great village. I was greeted with happy
alohas, then passed on. All through Kau it was the same, and I felt
happier every minute. At last I reached the volcano. There were some
people there, but not so many as at other places. They, too, were happy
like

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the others, but they said, You must go back to your body. You are not to
die yet.'

"I did not want to go back. I begged and prayed to be allowed to stay
with them, but they said, 'No, you must go back; and if you do not go
willingly, we will make you. go.'

"I cried and tried to stay, but they drove me back, even beating me when
I stopped and would not go on. So I was driven over the road I had come,
back through all those happy people. They were still joyous and happy,
but when they saw that I was not allowed to stay, they turned on me and
helped drive me, too.

"Over the sixty miles I went, weeping, followed by those cruel people,
till I reached my home and stood by my body again. I looked at it and
hated it. Was that my body? What a horrid, loathsome thing it was to me
now, since I had seen so many beautiful, happy creatures! Must I go and
live in that thing again? No, I would not go into it; I rebelled and
cried for mercy.

"'You must go into it; we will make you!' said my tormentors. They took
me and pushed me head foremost into the big toe.

"I struggled and fought, but could not help myself. They pushed and beat
me again, when I tried for the last time to escape. When I passed the
waist, I seemed to know it was of no use to struggle any more, so went
the rest of the way myself. Then my body came to life again, and I
opened my eyes.

"But I wish I could have stayed with those happy

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

people. It was cruel to make me come back. My other body was so
beautiful, and I was so happy, so happy!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Kapeepeekauila; or, The Rocks of Kana](hft11)
