[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hft27)  [Next](hft29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHH0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hawaiian Folk Tales*, by Thomas G. Thrum, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

### XXV

### FISH STORIES AND SUPERSTITIONS

###### TRANSLATED BY M. K. NAKUINA

THE following narration of the different fishes here given is told and
largely believed in by native fishermen. All may not agree as to
particulars in this version, but the main features are well known and
vary but little. Some of these stories are termed mythical, in others
the truth is never questioned, and together they have a deep hold on the
Hawaiian mind. Further and confirmatory information may be obtained from
fishermen and others, and by visiting the market the varieties here
mentioned may be seen almost daily.

In the olden time certain varieties of fish were tabooed and could not
be caught at all times, being subject to the kapu of Ku-ula, the fish
god, who propagated the finny tribes of Hawaiian waters. While deep sea
fishing was more general, that in the shallow sea, or along shore, was
subject to the restrictions of the konohiki of the land, and aliis, both
as to certain kinds and periods. The sign of the shallow sea kapu was
the placing of branches of the hau tree all along the shore. The people
seeing this token of the kapu respected it, and any violation thereof in
ancient times was said to be punishable by death.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While this kapu
prevailed the people resorted to the deep sea stations for their food
supply. With the removal of the hau branches, indicating that the kapu
was lifted, the people fished as they desired, subject only to the
makahiki taboo days of the priest or alii, when no canoes were allowed
to go out upon the water.

The first fish caught by a fisherman, or any one else, was marked and
dedicated to Ku-ula. After this offering was made, Ku-ula's right
therein being thus recognized, they were free from further oblations so
far as that particular variety of fish was concerned. All fishermen,
from Hawaii to Niihau, observed this custom religiously. When the
fishermen caught a large supply, whether by the net, hook, or shell, but
one of a kind, as just stated, was reserved as an offering to Ku-ula;
the remainder was then free to the people.

#### DEIFIED FISH SUPERSTITION

Some of the varieties of fish we now eat were deified and prayed to by
the people of the olden time, and even some Hawaiians of to-day labor
under like superstition with regard to sharks, eels, oopus, and some
others. They are afraid to eat or touch these lest they suffer in
consequence; and this belief has been perpetuated, handed down from
parents to children, even to the present day. The writer was one of
those brought up to this belief, and only lately has eaten the kapu fish
of his ancestors without fearing a penalty therefor.

#### STORY OF THE ANAE-HOLO

The anae-holo is a species of mullet unlike the shallow water, or pond,
variety; and the following

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

story of its habit is well known to any *kupa* (native born) of Oahu.

The home of the anae-holo is at Honouliuli, Pearl Harbor, at a place
called Ihuopalaai. They make periodical journeys around to the opposite
side of the island, starting from Puuloa and going to windward, passing
successively Kumumanu, Kalihi, Kou, Kalia, Waikiki, Kaalawai and so on,
around to the Koolau side, ending at Laie, and then returning by the
same course to their starting-point. This fish is not caught at Waianae,
Kaena, Waialua, Waimea, or Kahuku because it does not run that way,
though these places are well supplied with other kinds. The reason given
for this is as follows:

Ihuopalaai had a Ku-ula, and this fish god supplied anaes. Ihuopalaai's
sister took a husband and went and lived with him at Laie, Koolauloa. In
course of time a day came when there was no fish to be had. In her
distress and desire for some she bethought herself of her brother, so
she sent her husband to Honouliuli to ask Ihuopalaai for a supply,
saying: "Go to Ihuopalaai, my brother, and ask him for fish. If he
offers you dried fish, refuse it by all means;--do not take it, because
the distance is so long that you would not be able to carry enough to
last us for any length of time."

When her husband arrived at Honouliuli he went to Ihuopalaai and asked
him for fish. His brother-in-law gave him several large bundles of dried
fish, one of which he could not very well lift, let alone carry a
distance. This offer was refused and reply given

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

according to instruction. Ihuopalaai sat thinking for some time and then
told him to return home, saying: "You take the road on the Kona side of
the island; do not sit, stay, nor sleep on the way till you reach your
own house."

The man started as directed, and Ihuopalaai asked Ku-ula to send fish
for his sister, and while the man was journeying homeward as directed a
school of fish was following in the sea, within the breakers. He did not
obey fully the words of Ihuopalaai, for he became so tired that he sat
down on the way; but he noticed that whenever he did so the fish rested
too. The people seeing the school of fish went and caught some of them.
Of course, not knowing that this was his supply, he did not realize that
the people were taking his fish. Reaching home, he met his wife and told
her he had brought no fish, but had seen many all the way, and pointed
out to her the school of anae-holo which was then resting abreast of
their house. She told him it was their supply, sent by Ihuopalaai, his
brother-in-law. They fished, and got all they desired, whereupon the
remainder returned by the same way till they reached Honouliuli where
Ihuopalaai was living. Ever afterward this variety of fish has come and
gone the same way every year to this day, commencing some time in
October and ending in March or April.

Expectant mothers are not allowed to eat of the anae-holo, nor the
aholehole, fearing dire consequences to the child, hence they never
touch them till after the eventful day. Nor are these fish ever given to
children till they are able to pick and eat them of their own accord.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

#### MYTH OF THE HILU

The hilu is said to have once possessed a human form, but by some
strange event its body was changed to that of a fish. No knowledge of
its ancestry or place of origin is given, but the story is as follows:

Hilu-ula and Hilu-uli were born twins, one a male and the other a
female. They had human form, but with power to assume that of the fish
now known as hilu. The two children grew up together and in due time
when Hilu-uli, the sister, was grown up, she left her brother and
parents without saying a word and went into the sea, and, assuming her
fish form, set out on a journey, eventually reaching Heeia, Koolaupoko.
During the time of her journey she increased the numbers of the hilu so
that by the time they came close to Heeia there was so large a school
that the sea was red with them. When the people of Heeia and Kaneohe saw
this, they paddled out in their canoes to discover that it was a fish
they had never seen nor heard of before. Returning to the shore for
nets, they surrounded the school and drew in so many that they were not
able to care for them in their canoes. The fishes multiplied so rapidly
that when the first school was surrounded and dragged ashore, another
one appeared, and so on, till the people were surfeited. Yet the fish
stayed in the locality, circling around. The people ate of them in all
styles known to Hawaiians; raw, lawalued, salted, and broiled over a
fire of coals.

While the Koolau people were thus fishing and

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

feasting, Hilu-ula, the brother, arrived among them in his human form;
and when he saw the hilu-uli broiling over the coal fire he recognized
the fish form of his sister. This so angered him that he assumed the
form of a whirlwind and entered every house where they had hilu and blew
the fish all back into the sea. Since then the hilu-uli has dark scales,
and is well known all over the islands.

#### THE HOU, OR SNORING FISH

The hou lives in shallow water. When fishing with torches on a quiet,
still night, if one gets close to where it is sleeping it will be heard
to snore as if it were a human being. This is a small, beautifully
colored fish. Certain sharks also, sleeping in shallow water, can be
heard at times indulging in the same habit.

There are many kinds of fish known to these islands, and other stories
connected with them, which, if gathered together, would make an
interesting collection of yarns as "fishy" as any country can produce.

 

THE END

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Glossary of Hawaiian Words](hft29)
