[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Ovid](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lboo00)  [Next](lboo02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417905824/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# INTRODUCTION I

PUBLIUS OVIDIUS NASO was born at Sulmo--the modern Sulmona--on March the
20th, 43 B.C. He was fortunate in his birthplace, and it may not perhaps
be over fanciful to ascribe the airy charm, the delicate grace, which
his Muse so plentifully displays, at least as much to his early
environment as to heredity. Sulmo, indeed, lies amid a region of great
natural beauty. Its pastures, as Ovid himself tells us, were cool and
rich, it produced abundant crops of corn, and yet so light and fine was
the soil that the vine and the olive flourished there in profusion. It
was a land of streams, of streams that hurried down from the mountains
so clear and cold that the place is called by the poets "gelidus Sulmo."
Even in the hottest of Italian summers, when the canicular is at its
height, its meadows are fresh and green and its atmosphere sparkling and
salubrious.

Ovid's family was of hereditary equestrian rank and possessed a
sufficiency if not an abundance of wealth. The poet was proud of his
ancestry and his family traditions, and he is careful to impress upon us
that he is no upstart, no *parvenu*, emphatically not one of the postwar
rich, as we are wont to say nowadays. At an early age he and his only
brother--his elder by exactly a year--brought up in their father's house
with the care and attention that would naturally be bestowed on the sons
of well-to-do and aristocratic parents, were sent to

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

continue their education in Rome. It was their father's intention that
they should both follow the profession of advocate, and with this
purpose in view they were sent to study rhetoric under two of the most
celebrated professors of that art--Porcius Latro and Arellius Fuscus.
For in the Rome of Ovid's time, though the days of the great political
orators were gone for ever, oratory, the lucrative and harmless oratory
of the schools or the bar, was a highly popular pursuit. The elder
brother, Lucius, appears to have devoted himself to his studies with a
will. Ovid's tastes, however, lay in a very different direction. He
tried hard to follow the parental injunctions and to make himself an
effective advocate, but he achieved only indifferent success. The elder
Seneca tells us that he once heard Ovid delivering a speech before his
master Fuscus, and he gives us to understand that the effort was more
remarkable for the beauty of its phrasing than for its argumentative
power. Indeed he describes the speech as nothing more or less than
poetry without metre. Ovid himself confesses that, try as he would to
declaim in prose, he constantly found himself gliding into poetry. He
"lisped in numbers, for the numbers came." His heart was with the Muses.
He wanted to be, not a barrister, but a poet. One can imagine the
paternal chagrin when the boy made known his ambitions. A country
gentleman with family traditions, and not too much money to throw away,
could hardly be expected to look with favour on poetry. As a pastime,
well enough perhaps, but rather effeminate. As a profession, mere
starvation. Naso *père* seems to have entertained the typical country
squire's contempt for "those writing fellows" and to have given
expression to it in no ambiguous terms. So for a time, at least, our
poet had to stick to his declamatory exercises and turn his back on the
Muses. It is clear that had his father remained obdurate, Ovid might
well have achieved no more than mediocrity as a professional barrister,
have filled

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

with tolerable credit a few minor offices of State and, in course of
time, have gone back to Sulmo to wear out the evening of his days in
such innocent pursuits as usually fall to the lot of retired Civil
servants with landed interests and a private income. The prudent and
level-headed father would have had his way; the world would have lost
one of its most delightful poets, and the literatures of Italy, France
and England would have been immeasurably the poorer. But when Ovid had
attained the age of nineteen or thereabouts, an event occurred which
averted the threatened triumph of parental common-sense. That event was
the death of Ovid's elder brother Lucius. His removal from the scene,
though we have no reason to doubt that Ovid sincerely regretted it, went
a long way to disarm the parental opposition, which had always been
based on practical grounds of finance, for obviously what would have
provided a bare sufficiency for two would furnish an easy if not
abundant competence for one. Ovid doubtless returned to the charge and
pressed his suit with the persuasive eloquence which his genius and his
training would have placed at his command. His father, realising, like
the good sensible man he was, that it is useless trying to drive a nail
where it won't go, and wisely concluding that a willing poet is better
than a reluctant advocate, "sealed his hard consent." Whether Ovid would
have gone to Athens had he followed the forensic career designed for him
by his father is perhaps doubtful, but, for the man of letters, and
above all for the poet, such a crown to his education was in the highest
degree desirable; so to Athens he went, much in the same way that a
public school boy of to-day goes up to Oxford or Cambridge. What he did
there we do not know. He himself, usually so communicative about his own
affairs, contents himself with informing us that he went there for
purposes of study. He would, at all events, have learned to read Homer,
Euripides and

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sophocles. A
knowledge of Greek was in those days a mark of a superior education, and
Greek he certainly acquired; but whatever he learned or did not
learn--and we can scarcely picture this child of the Muses as a
*fort-en-thème*, a determined reading man--we may be quite sure that he
was not insensible to the beauty of the incomparable city to which his
good fortune had sent him, or to the charm of the region in which it was
set, and Attica, with its delicate and brilliant atmosphere, with its
soil so favourable to the vine and olive, may well have reminded him of
his native Sulmo.

His sojourn in Athens was followed by a tour which he made in company
with Pompeius Macer, another youthful aspirant to poetic fame. In the
course of these leisurely wanderings the two young men visited Sicily
and the famous Greek cities of Western Asia Minor, bathing their spirits
in the perennial springs from which Anacreon and Theocritus derived
their inspiration. Altogether Ovid was away from Rome about three years.
When he returned he sought, probably at his father's instigation, and
obtained, certain public appointments, which, though not in themselves
of great importance, were stepping-stones to the quæstor-ship, an office
which, under the Empire, was shorn of much of its ancient importance,
notably the care of the treasury, but which nevertheless carried with it
the right to a seat in the Senate. He successively discharged the duties
of *Triumvir Capitalis*, whose functions largely corresponded with those
of a modern police magistrate, and *Decemvir Stlitibus Judicandis*, a
member of a tribunal for the trial of private causes, representing the
prætor. If, however, the father had entertained the hope that the
fulfilment of these offices would divert his son from his poetic
ambitions, that hope was doomed to disappointment, for, though Ovid
appears to have filled these preliminary positions with credit, he made
what his father at least must have considered *il gran rifiuto*.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He declined the
quæstorship, and exchanged the broad purple band which he had worn as a
future member of the Senate for the narrower stripe to which he was
entitled as a member of the equestrian order. In other words, he decided
to retire into private life, preferring, it would seem, to indulge his
dilettantism and to enjoy the distractions of society, as the fancy took
him, rather than to incur the diminution of his freedom which the
adoption of a public career would have necessarily involved.

When he was very young, scarcely more than a boy, Ovid was married, to a
wife who was probably chosen for him by his parents. All we know about
this union is that it was speedily dissolved. Another wife was promptly
discovered, the bride on this occasion being a native of Falisci in
Etruria and a woman of some social standing. Ovid's attitude towards her
appears to have been dictated by respect rather than affection--he
confesses that her conduct gave him nothing to complain of, yet the
second marriage lasted but little, if any, longer than the first. All
his devotion, in those early days, seems to have been reserved for the
mistress whom he celebrates in his earliest poem, "The Loves," under the
name of Corinna. Who Corinna was we do not know. That she was not Julia,
as Sidonius Apollinaris would have us believe, is as certain as that she
was a real and not an imaginary personage. How long Corinna continued to
reign supreme in Ovid's heart is a matter of conjecture. Her dominion
had probably come to an end some considerable time before his marriage
with his third wife, to whom he appears to have been sincerely attached.
Since his daughter, Perilla, the fruit of this third union, had attained
the age of twenty and was herself married when Ovid was banished., A.D.
8, the marriage could scarcely have taken place later than 12 B.C. Until
his fiftieth year Ovid lived at Rome in a house near the Capitol,
whence, from time to time, he would

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

go to seek refreshment and repose on his country estate at Sulmo. It
seemed as though everything had combined to make Ovid's lot a happy one.
Endowed with talents that shone with special lustre even among the
brilliant society of the day, blest with sufficient but not burdensome
wealth, popular with the men, idolized by the women, smiled on by
Augustus himself, Ovid seemed to be indeed a favourite of the gods. But
suddenly, when the barometer of his fortune was at its height, this
brilliant and fascinating child of the age, this refined and delicate
voluptuary, was commanded by an Imperial edict to quit Rome and to take
himself to Tomi, a town on the Euxine, by the mouths of the Danube and
on the very confines of the Empire. Though the sentence which thus fell
upon him was harsh enough, it was not as terrible as it might have been.
It was not an *exsilium*, but a *relegatio*. He did not lose his
citizenship, he was permitted to enjoy the income of his property, to
correspond with his friends and to indulge in the hope (alas, illusory!)
of ultimate pardon. Still, even with all these mitigating circumstances,
such a fate would have been hard enough on any man. On a man of Ovid's
habits and disposition it was peculiarly so. The place of his banishment
was surrounded and continually threatened by hostile and barbarous
tribes. The cold was so intense that the snow would sometimes remain
unmelted from one winter to another. The wine turned to ice in the jar;
the broad waters of the Danube were often frozen completely over, and
afforded but too easy a viaduct to the men and horses of the barbarian
foe, when they came to murder, outrage and destroy.

Probably Ovid exaggerated the horrors of his situation in the hopes of
moving the Emperor's pity. Those hopes, to which he clung with
despairing tenacity, were destined never to be fulfilled, and he died in
exile, A.D. 18, in the sixtieth year of his age.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

What was the real cause of his banishment is, and will probably always
remain, a mystery, for the publication of the *Ars Amatoria* was
obviously but a mere pretext and could have deceived nobody. It
certainly did not deceive Ovid, for whenever he mentions the ostensible
cause of his misfortune,, he darkly alludes to another which he never
discloses. He is continually harping on a "Carmen" and an "Error." The
"Carmen" was the *Ars Amatoria*; what the "Error" was he never reveals.
It is commonly supposed that, in some way or another, he had given
serious offence to Livia and that the poet's banishment was due to the
machinations of that redoubtable woman.

It may have been so, or it may merely have been that Augustus, with the
shadows of oncoming age descending upon him, viewed with misgiving the
increasing licentiousness of the times, the growing corruption, which
had not spared even the members of his own household, and which the
sternest legislation seemed unable to repress, and that he therefore
determined to make an example of those who were most conspicuously
identified with the dissolute society he thought it his duty to
castigate, foremost amongst whom was the unhappy Ovid. If, as is not
improbable, Ovid was privy to the adulterous intercourse of the younger
Julia with Silanus, he, as well as the erring lovers, would, by the *lex
de adulteriis*, have been liable to the capital sentence, so that in
suffering a mere *relegatio*, the milder form of exile, he may be
considered to have got off lightly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction: II](lboo02)
