[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3502) 
[Next](sbe3504) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE QUESTIONS

###### OF

# KING MILINDA.

REVERENCE BE TO THE BLESSED ONE, THE ARAHAT, THE SAMMÂ-SAMBUDDHA.

# BOOK I.

#### THE SECULAR NARRATIVE <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49).

1\. King Milinda, at Sâgala the famous town of yore,  
To Nâgasena, the world famous sage, repaired.  
(So the deep Ganges to the deeper ocean flows.)  
To him, the eloquent, the bearer of the torch  
Of Truth, dispeller of the darkness of men's minds,  
Subtle and knotty questions did he put, many,  
Turning on many points. Then were solutions given  
Profound in meaning, gaining access to the heart,  
Sweet to the ear, and passing wonderful and strange.  
For Nâgasena's talk plunged to the hidden depths  
Of Vinaya and of Abhidhamma (Law and Thought)

 

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

Unravelling all the meshes of the Suttas' net,  
Glittering the while with metaphors and reasoning high.  
Come then! Apply your minds, and let your hearts rejoice,  
And hearken to these subtle questionings, all grounds  
Of doubt well fitted to resolve.

2\. Thus hath it been handed down by tradition--There is in the country
of the Yonakas <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_50) a great centre of
trade <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_51), a city that is called Sâgala,
situate in a delightful country well watered and hilly, abounding in
parks and gardens and groves and lakes and tanks, a paradise of rivers
and mountains and woods. Wise architects have laid it out <span
id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_52), and its people know of no oppression,
since all their enemies and adversaries have been put down. Brave is its
defence, with many and various strong towers and ramparts, with superb
gates and entrance archways; and with the royal citadel in its midst,
white walled and deeply moated. Well laid out are its streets, squares,
cross roads, and market places <span id="fr_54"></span>[4](#fn_53). Well
displayed are the innumerable sorts of costly merchandise \[**2**\] with
which its shops are filled. It is richly adorned with hundreds of
alms-halls

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

of various kinds; and splendid with hundreds of thousands of magnificent
mansions, which rise aloft like the mountain peaks of the Himalayas. Its
streets are filled with elephants, horses, carriages, and
foot-passengers, frequented by groups of handsome men and beautiful
women, and crowded by men of all sorts and conditions, Brahmans, nobles,
artificers, and servants. They resound with cries of welcome to the
teachers of every creed, and the city is the resort of the leading men
of each of the differing sects. Shops are there for the sale of Benares
muslin, of Ko*t*umbara stuffs <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_54), and
of other cloths of various kinds; and sweet odours are exhaled from the
bazaars, where all sorts of flowers and perfumes are tastefully set out.
jewels are there in plenty, such as men's hearts desire, and guilds of
traders in all sorts of finery display their goods in the bazaars that
face all quarters of the sky. So full is the city of money, and of gold
and silver ware, of copper and stone ware, that it is a very mine of
dazzling treasures. And there is laid up there much store of property
and corn and things of value in warehouses-foods and drinks of every
sort, syrups and sweetmeats of every kind. In wealth it rivals
Uttara-kuru, and in glory it is as Â*l*akamandâ, the city of the
gods <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_55).

3\. Having said thus much we must now relate the previous birth history
of these two persons (Milinda

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

and Nâgasena) and the various sorts of puzzles <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_56). This we shall do under six heads:--

1\. Their previous history (Pubba-yoga).

2\. The Milinda problems.

3\. Questions as to distinguishing characteristics.

4\. Puzzles arising out of contradictory statements.

5\. Puzzles arising out of ambiguity.

6\. Discussions turning on metaphor.

And of these the Milinda problems are in two divisions-questions as to
distinctive characteristics, and questions aiming at the dispelling of
doubt; and the puzzles arising out of contradictory statements are in
two divisions--the long chapter, and the problems in the life of the
recluse.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### THEIR PREVIOUS HISTORY (PUBBA-YOGA).

4\. By Pubba-yoga is meant their past Karma (their doings in this or
previous lives). Long ago, they say, when Kassapa the Buddha was
promulgating the faith, there dwelt in one community near the Ganges a
great company of members of the Order. There the brethren, true to
established rules and duties, rose early in the morning, and taking the
long-handled brooms, would sweep out the courtyard and collect the
rubbish into a heap, meditating the while on the virtues of the Buddha.

5\. One day a brother told a novice to remove the heap of dust. But he,
as if he heard not, went about his business; and on being called a
second time, and a third, still went his way as if he had not heard.
Then the brother, angry with so intractable a novice, dealt him a blow
with the broom stick.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[**3**\] This time, not daring to refuse, he
set about the task crying; and as he did so he muttered to himself this
first aspiration: 'May I, by reason of this meritorious act of throwing
out the rubbish, in each successive condition in which I may be born up
to the time when I attain Nirvâ*n*a, be powerful and glorious as the
midday sun!'

6\. When he had finished his work he went to the river side to bathe,
and on beholding the mighty billows of the Ganges seething and surging,
he uttered this second aspiration: 'May I, in each successive condition
in which I may be born till I attain Nirvâ*n*a, possess the power of
saying the right thing, and saying it instantly, under any circumstance
that may arise, carrying all before me like this mighty surge!'

7\. Now that brother, after he had put the broom away in the broom
closet, had likewise wandered down to the river side to bathe, and as he
walked he happened to overhear what the novice had said. Then thinking:
'If this fellow, on the ground of such an act of merit, which after all
was instigated by me, can harbour hopes like this, what may not I attain
to?' he too made his wish, and it was thus: 'In each successive
condition in which I may be born till I attain Nirvâ*n*a, may I too be
ready in saying the right thing at once, and more especially may 1 have
the power of unravelling and of solving each problem and each puzzling
question this young man may put-carrying all before me like this mighty
surge!'

8\. Then for the whole period between one Buddha and the next these two
people wandered from existence to existence among gods and men. And our
Buddha saw them too, and just as he did

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

to the son of Moggalî and to Tissa the Elder, so to them also did he
foretell their future fate, saying: 'Five hundred years after I have
passed away will these two reappear, and the subtle Law and Doctrine
taught by me will they two explain, unravelling and disentangling its
difficulties by questions put and metaphors adduced.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. Of the two the novice became the king of the city of Sâgala in
India, Milinda by name, learned, eloquent, wise, and able; and a
faithful observer, and that at the right time, of all the various acts
of devotion and ceremony enjoined by his own sacred hymns concerning
things past, present, and to come. Many were the arts and sciences he
knew--holy tradition and secular law; the Sâ<u>n</u>khya, Yoga, Nyâya,
and Vai*s*eshika systems of philosophy; arithmetic; music; medicine; the
four Vedas, the Purâ*n*as, and the Itihâsas; astronomy, magic,
causation <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_57), and spells; the art of
war; poetry; conveyancing <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_58)--in a
word, the whole nineteen <span id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_59).

\[**4**\] As a disputant he was hard to equal, harder

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

still to overcome; the acknowledged superior of all the founders of the
various schools of thought. And as in wisdom so in strength of body,
swiftness, and valour there was found none equal to Milinda in all
India. He was rich too, mighty in wealth and prosperity, and the number
of his armed hosts knew no end.

10\. Now one day Milinda the king proceeded forth out of the city to
pass in review the innumerable host of his mighty army in its fourfold
array (of elephants, cavalry, bowmen, and soldiers on foot). And when
the numbering of the forces was over, the king, who was fond of wordy
disputation, and eager for discussion with casuists, sophists <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_60), and gentry of that sort, looked at the
sun (to ascertain the time), and then said to his ministers: 'The day is
yet young. What would be the use of getting back to town so early? Is
there no learned person, whether wandering teacher <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_61) or Brahman, the head of some school or
order, or the master of some band of pupils (even though he profess
faith

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

in the Arahat, the Supreme Buddha), who would be able to talk with me,
and resolve my doubts?'

11\. Thereupon the five hundred Yonakas said to Milinda the king: 'There
are the six Masters, O king!--Pûra*n*a Kassapa, Makkhali of the
cowshed <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_62), the Niga*nth*a of the Nâta
clan, Sa*ñg*aya the son of the Bela*tth*a woman, A*g*ita of the garment
of hair, and Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana. These are well known as famous
founders of schools, followed by bands of disciples and hearers, and
highly honoured by the people. Go, great king! put to them your
problems, and have your doubts resolved <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_63).'

12\. So king Milinda, attended by the five hundred Yonakas, mounted the
royal car with its splendid equipage, and went out to the dwelling-place
of Pûra*n*a Kassapa, exchanged with him the compliments of friendly
greeting, and took his seat courteously apart. And thus sitting he said
to

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

him: 'Who is it, venerable Kassapa, who rules the world?'

'The Earth, great king, rules the world!'

'But, venerable Kassapa, if it be the Earth that rules the world, how
comes it that some men go to the Avî*k*i hell <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64), thus getting outside the sphere of the
Earth?' \[**5**\]

When he had thus spoken, neither could Pûra*n*a Kassapa swallow the
puzzle, nor could he bring it up; crestfallen, driven to silence, and
moody <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_65), there he sat.

13\. Then Milinda the king said to Makkhali of the cowshed <span
id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_66): 'Are there, venerable Gosâla, good and
evil acts? Is there such a thing as fruit, ultimate result, of good and
evil acts?'

'There are no such acts, O king; and no such fruit, or ultimate result.
Those who here in the world are nobles, they, O king, when they go to
the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

other world, will become nobles once more. And those who are Brahmans,
or of the middle class, or workpeople, or outcasts here, will in the
next world become the same. What then is the use of good or evil
acts <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_67)? '

'If, venerable Gosâla, it be as you say then, by parity of reasoning,
those who, here in this world, have a hand cut off, must in the next
world become persons with a hand cut off, and in like manner those who
have had a foot cut off or an ear or their nose!'

And at this saying Makkhali was silenced.

14\. Then thought Milinda the king within himself <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_68): 'All India is an empty thing, it is
verily like chaff! There is no one, either recluse or Brahman, capable
of discussing things with me, and dispelling my doubts.' And he said to
his ministers: 'Beautiful is the night and pleasant! Who is the recluse
or Brahman we can visit to-night to question him, who will be able to
converse with us and dispel our doubts <span
id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_69)?' And at that saying the counsellors
remained silent, and stood there gazing upon the face of the king.

15\. Now at that time the city of Sâgala had for twelve years been
devoid of learned men, whether Brahmans, Samanas, or laymen. But
wherever the king heard that such persons dwelt, thither he would

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

go and put his questions to them <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70).
\[**6**\] But they all alike, being unable to satisfy the king by their
solution of his problems, departed hither and thither, or if they did
not leave for some other place, were at all events reduced to silence.
And the brethren of the Order went, for the most part, to the Himâlaya
mountains.

16\. Now at that time there dwelt, in the mountain region of the
Himâlayas, on the Guarded Slope, an innumerable company of Arahats
(brethren who, while yet alive, had attained Nirvâ*n*a). And the
venerable Assagutta, by means of his divine power of hearing, heard
those words of king Milinda. And he convened an assembly of the Order on
the summit of the Yugandhara mountain, and asked the brethren: 'Is there
any member of the Order able to hold converse with Milinda the king, and
resolve his doubts?'

Then were they all silent. And a second and a third time he put the same
question to them, and still none of all the number spake. Then he said
to the assembled Order: 'There is, reverend Sirs, in the heaven of the
Thirty-three <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_71), and east of the
Ve*g*ayanta palace, a mansion called Ketumatî, wherein dwells the god
Mahâsena. He is able to hold converse with Milinda the king, and to
resolve his doubts.' And the innumerable company of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Arahats vanished from the summit of the
Yugandhara mountain, and appeared in the heaven of the Thirty-three.

17\. And Sakka, the king of the gods, beheld those brethren of the Order
as they were coming from afar. And at the sight of them he went up to
the venerable Assagutta, and bowed down before him, and stood reverently
aside. And so standing he said to him: 'Great, reverend Sir, is the
company of the brethren that has come. What is it that they want? I am
at the service of the Order. What can I do for you?'

And the venerable Assagutta replied: 'There is, O king, in India, in the
city of Sâgala, a king named Milinda. As a disputant he is hard to
equal, harder still to overcome, he is the acknowledged superior of all
the founders of the various schools of thought. He is in the habit of
visiting the members of the Order and harassing them by questions of
speculative import.'

Then said Sakka, the king of the gods, to him: 'That same king Milinda,
venerable one, left this condition to be born as a man. And there dwells
in the mansion Ketumatî a god, Mahâsena by name, who is able to hold
converse with him and to resolve his doubts. \[**7**\] That god we will
beseech to suffer himself to be reborn into the world of men.'

18\. So Sakka, the king of the gods, preceded by the Order, entered the
Ketumatî mansion; and when he had embraced Mahâsena the god, he said to
him: 'The Order of the brethren, Lord, makes this request of you-to be
reborn into the world of men.'

'I have no desire, Sir, for the world of men, so overladen with action
(Karma). Hard is life as a

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

man. It is here, Sir, in the world of the gods that, being reborn in
ever higher and higher spheres, I hope to pass away!'

And a second and a third time did Sakka, the king of the gods, make the
same request, and the reply was still the same. Then the venerable
Assagutta addressed Mahâsena the god, and said: 'On passing in review,
Lord, the worlds of gods and men, there is none but thee that we find
able to succour the faith by refuting the heretical views of Milinda the
king. The whole Order beseeches thee, Lord, saying: "Condescend, O
worthy one, to be reborn among men, in order to lend to the religion of
the Blessed One thy powerful aid."'

Then was Mahâsena the god overjoyed and delighted in heart at the
thought that he would be able to help the faith by refuting the heresy
of Milinda; and he gave them his word, and said: 'Very well then,
venerable ones, I consent to be reborn in the world of men,'

19\. Then the brethren, having thus accomplished the task they had taken
in hand, vanished from the heaven of the Thirty-three, and reappeared on
the Guarded Slope in the Himâlaya mountains. And the venerable Assagutta
addressed the Order, and said: 'Is there, venerable ones, any brother
belonging to this company of the Order, who has not appeared in the
assembly?'

Thereupon a certain brother said there was, that Rohana had a week
previously gone into the mountains, and become buried in meditation,
\[**8**\] and suggested that a messenger should be sent to him. And at
that very moment the venerable Rohana aroused himself from his
meditation, and was aware

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

that the Order was expecting him <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72).
And vanishing from the mountain top, he appeared in the presence of the
innumerable company of the brethren.

And the venerable Assagutta said to him: 'How now, venerable Rohana!
When the religion of the Buddha is in danger of crumbling away, have you
no eyes for the work of the Order?'

'It was through inadvertence, Sir,' said he.

'Then, venerable Rohana, atone for it.'

'What, Sir, should I do?'

'There is a Brahman village, venerable Rohana, called Ka*g*angala <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_73), at the foot of the Himâlaya mountains,
and there dwells there a Brahman called Sonuttara. He will have a son
called Nâgasena. Go to that house for alms during seven years and ten
months. After the lapse of that time thou shalt draw away the boy from a
worldly life, and cause him to enter the Order. When he shall have
abandoned the world, then shalt thou be free of the atonement for thy
fault.'

'Let it be even as thou sayest,' said the venerable Rohana in assent.

20\. Now Mahâsena the god passed away from the world of the gods, and
was reborn in the womb of the wife of the Brahman Sonuttara. And at the
moment of his conception three strange, wonderful things took
place:--arms and weapons became all

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

ablaze, the tender grain became ripe in a moment, and there was a great
rain (in the time of drought). And the venerable Rohana went to that
house for alms for seven years and ten months from the day of Mahâsena's
re-incarnation, but never once did he receive so much as a spoonful of
boiled rice, or a ladleful of sour gruel, or a greeting, or a stretching
forth of the joined hands, or any sort of salutation. Nay rather it was
insults and taunts that fell to his share: and there was no one who so
much as said, Be so good, 'Sir, as to go on to the next house <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_74).'

But when all that period had gone by he one day happened to have those
very words addressed to him. And on that day the Brahman, on his way
back from his work in the fields, \[**9**\] saw the Elder as he met him
on his return, and said: 'Well, hermit, have you been to our place

'Yes, Brahman, I have.'

'But did you get anything there?'

'Yes, Brahman, I did.'

And he was displeased at this, and went on home, and asked them: 'Did
you give anything to that hermit?'

'We gave him nothing,' was the reply.

21\. Thereupon the Brahman, the next day, seated himself right in the
doorway, thinking to himself: 'To-day I'll put that hermit to shame for
having told a lie.' And the moment that the Elder in due course came up
to the house again, he said: 'Yesterday you said you had got something
at my house, having

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

all the while got nothing! Is lying allowed to you fellows?'

And the Elder replied: 'Brahman, for seven years and ten months no one
even went so far as to suggest politely that I should pass on. Yesterday
this courtesy was extended to me. It was to that that I referred.'

The Brahman thought to himself: 'If these men, at the mere experience of
a little courtesy, acknowledge in a public place, and with thanks, that
they have received an alms, what will they not do if they really receive
a gift!' And he was much struck by this, and had an alms bestowed upon
the Elder from the rice and curry prepared for his own use, and added
furthermore: 'Every day you shall receive here food of the same kind.'
And having watched the Elder as he visited the place from that day
onwards, and noticed how subdued was his demeanour, he became more and
more pleased with him, and invited him to take there regularly his
midday meal. And the Elder gave, by silence, his consent; and daily from
that time forth, when he had finished his meal, and was about to depart,
he would pronounce some short passage or other from the words of the
Buddha <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75).

22\. Now the Brahman's wife had, after her ten months, brought forth her
son; and they called his name Nâgasena. He grew up in due course till he
became seven years old, and his father said to the child: 'Do you want,
\[**10**\] dear Nâgasena, to study the learning traditional in this
Brahmanical house of ours?'

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

'What is it called, father?' said he.

'The three Vedas are called learning (Sikkhâ), other kinds of knowledge
are only arts, my dear.'

'Yes, I should like to learn them, father,' said the boy.

Then Sonuttara the Brahman gave to a Brahman teacher a thousand pieces
as his teaching fee, and had a divan spread for him aside in an inner
chamber, and said to him: 'Do thou, Brahman, teach this boy the sacred
hymns by heart.'

So the teacher made the boy repeat the hymns, urging him to get them by
heart. And young Nâgasena, after one repetition of them, had learnt the
three Vedas by heart, could intone them correctly, had understood their
meaning, could fix the right place of each particular verse <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76), and had grasped the mysteries they
contained <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_77). All at once there arose
in him an intuitive insight into the Vedas, with a knowledge of their
lexicography, of their prosody, of their grammar, and of the legends
attaching to the characters in them. He became a philologist and
grammarian, and skilled alike in casuistry and in the knowledge of the
bodily marks that foreshadow the greatness of a man <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_78).

23\. Then young Nâgasena said to his father: 'Is

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

there anything more to be learned in this Brahmanical family of ours, or
is this all?'

'There is no more, Nâgasena, my dear. This is all,' was the reply.

And young Nâgasena repeated his lesson to his teacher for the last time,
and went out of the house, and in obedience to an impulse arising in his
heart as the result of previous Karma, sought a place of solitude, where
he gave himself up to meditation. And he reviewed what he had learnt
throughout from beginning to end, and found no value in it anywhere at
all. And he exclaimed in bitterness of soul: 'Empty forsooth are these
Vedas, and as chaff. There is in them neither reality, nor worth, nor
essential truth!'

That moment the venerable Rohana, seated at his hermitage at Vattaniya,
felt in his mind what was passing in the heart of Nâgasena. And he robed
himself, and taking his alms-bowl in his hand, he vanished from
Vattaniya and appeared near the Brahman village Ka*g*a<u>n</u>gala. And
young Nâgasena, as he stood again in the doorway, saw him coming in the
distance. At the sight of him he became happy and glad, and a sweet hope
sprang up in his heart that from him he might learn the essential truth.
And he went \[**11**\] to him, and said: 'Who art thou, Sir, that thou
art thus bald-headed, and wearest yellow robes?'

'They call me a recluse, my child' (Pabba*g*ita: literally, 'one who has
abandoned;' that is, the worldly life).

'And why do they call thee "one who has abandoned?"'

'Because a recluse is one who has receded from

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the world in order to make the stain of sinful things recede. It is for
that reason, my child, that they call me a recluse.'

'Why, Sir, dost thou not wear hair as others do?'

'A recluse shaves off his hair and beard on the recognition of the
sixteen impediments therein to the higher life. And what are those
sixteen <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79)? The impediments of
ornamenting it, and decking it out, of putting oil upon it, of
shampooing it, of placing garlands round it, of using scents and
unguents, and myrobalan seeds, and dyes, and ribbons, and combs, of
calling in the barber, of unravelling curls, and of the possibility of
vermin. When their hair falls off they are grieved and harassed; yea,
they lament sometimes, and cry, and beat their breasts, or fall headlong
in a swoon--and entangled by these and such impediments men may forget
those parts of wisdom or learning which are delicate and subtle.'

'And why, Sir, are not thy garments, too, as those of other men?'

'Beautiful clothes, my boy, such as are worn by worldly men, are
inseparable from the five cravings <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_80).
But whatsoever dangers lurk in dress he who wears the yellow robes knows
nothing of. It is for that reason that my dress is not as other men's.'

'Dost thou know, Lord, what is real knowledge?'

'Yes, lad, the real knowledge I know; and what is the best hymn (mantra)
in the world, that too I know.'

'Couldst thou teach it, Lord, to me too?'

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

'Yes, I could.'

'Teach me, then.'

'Just now is not the right time for that; we, have come down to the
village for alms.'

24\. Then young Nâgasena took the alms-bowl the venerable Rohana was
carrying, and led him into the house, and with his own hand supplied him
with food, hard and soft, as much as he required. And when he saw that
he had finished his meal, and withdrawn his hand from the bowl, he said
to him: 'Now, Sir, will you teach me that hymn?'

'When thou hast become free from impediments, my lad, by taking upon
thee, and with thy parents' consent, the hermit's dress I wear, then I
can teach it thee.'

25\. So young \[**12**\] Nâgasena went to his father and mother, and
said: 'This recluse says he knows the best hymn in the world, but that
he cannot teach it to any one who has not entered the Order as his
pupil. I should like to enter the Order and learn that hymn.'

And his parents gave their consent; for they wished him to learn the
hymn, even at the cost of retiring from the world; and they thought that
when he had learned it he would come back again <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81).

Then the venerable Rohana took Nâgasena to the Vattaniya hermitage, to
the Vi*g*amba Vatthu, and having spent the night there, took him on to
the Guarded Slope, and there, in the midst of the innumerable company of
the Arahats, young Nâgasena was admitted, as a novice, into the Order.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

26\. And then, when he had been admitted to the Order, the venerable
Nâgasena said to the venerable Rohana: 'I have adopted your dress; now
teach me that hymn.'

Then the venerable Rohana thought thus to himself: 'In what ought I
first to instruct him, in the Discourses (Suttanta) or in the deeper
things of the faith (Abhidhamma)?' and inasmuch as he saw that Nâgasena
was intelligent, and could master the Abhidhamma with ease, he gave him
his first lesson in that.

And the venerable Nâgasena, after hearing it repeated but once, knew by
heart the whole of the Abhidhamma--that is to say, the Dhamma
Sa<u>n</u>ga*n*i, with its great divisions into good, bad, and
indifferent qualities, and its subdivisions into couples and
triplets <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82)--the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, with
its eighteen chapters, beginning with the book on the constituent
elements of beings--the Dhâtu Kathâ, with its fourteen books, beginning
with that on compensation and non-compensation--the Puggala. Pa*ññ*atti,
with its six divisions into discrimination of the various constituent
elements, discrimination of the various senses and of the properties
they apprehend, and so on <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_83)--the Kathâ
Vatthu, with its thousand sections, five hundred on as many points

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of our own views, and five hundred on as many points of our opponents'
views--the Yamaka, with its ten divisions into complementary
propositions as to origins, as to constituent elements, and so on--and
the Pa*tth*âna, with its twenty-four chapters on the reason of causes,
the reason of ideas, and the rest. And he said \[13\]: 'That will do,
Sir. You need not propound it again. That will suffice for my being able
to rehearse it.'

27\. Then Nâgasena went to the innumerable company of the Arahats, and
said: 'I should like to propound the whole of the Abhidhamma Pi*t*aka,
without abridgement, arranging it under the three heads of good, bad,
and indifferent qualities.' And they gave him leave. And in seven months
the venerable Nâgasena recited the seven books of the Abhidhamma in
full. And the earth thundered, the gods shouted their applause, the
Brahma gods clapped their hands, and there came down a shower from
heaven of sweet-scented sandal-wood dust, and of Mandârava flowers! And
the innumerable company of the Arahats, then and there at the Guarded
Slope, admitted the venerable Nâgasena, then twenty years of age, to
full membership in the higher grade of the Order.

28\. Now the next day after he had thus been admitted into full
membership in the Order, the venerable Nâgasena robed himself at dawn,
and taking his bowl, accompanied his teacher on his round for alms to
the village below. And as he went this thought arose within him: 'It
was, after all, empty-headed and foolish of my teacher to leave the rest
of the Buddha's word aside, and teach me the Abhidhamma first!'

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

And the venerable Rohana became aware in his own mind of what was
passing in the mind of Nâgasena, and he said to him: 'That is an
unworthy reflection that thou art making, Nâgasena; it is not worthy of
thee so to think.'

'How strange and wonderful,' thought Nâgasena, 'that my teacher should
be able to tell in his own mind what I am thinking of! I must ask his
pardon.' And he said: 'Forgive me, Sir; I will never make such a
reflection again.'

\[**14**\] 'I cannot forgive you, Nâgasena, simply on that promise,' was
the reply. 'But there is a city called Sâgala, where a king rules whose
name is Milinda, and he harasses the brethren by putting puzzles to them
of heretical tendency. You will have earned your pardon, Nâgasena, when
you shall have gone there, and overcome that king in argument, and
brought him to take delight in the truth.'

'Not only let king Milinda, holy one, but let all the kings of India
come and propound questions to me, and I will break all those puzzles up
and solve them, if only you will pardon me!' exclaimed Nâgasena. But
when he found it was of no avail, he said: 'Where, Sir, do you advise me
to spend the three months of the rains now coming on <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84)?'

29\. 'There is a brother named Assagutta dwelling at the Vattaniya
hermitage. Go, Nâgasena, to him; and in my name bow down to his feet,
and say: "My teacher, holy one, salutes you reverently, and asks whether
you are in health and ease, in full vigour and comfort. He has sent me
here to pass

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the three months of the rains under your charge." When he asks you your
teacher's name, tell it him. But when he asks you his own name, say: "My
teacher, Sir, knows your name."'

And Nâgasena bowed down before the venerable Rohana, and passing him on
his right hand as he left him, took his bowl and robe, and went on from
place to place till he came to the Vattaniya hermitage, begging for his
food on the way. And on his arrival he saluted the venerable Assagutta,
and said exactly what he had been told to say, \[**15**\] and to the
last reply Assagutta said: 'Very well then, Nâgasena, put by your bowl
and robe.' And the next day Nâgasena swept out the teacher's cell, and
put the drinking water and tooth-cleansers ready for him to use. The
Elder swept out the cell again, threw away the water and the
tooth-cleansers, and fetched others, and said not a word of any kind. So
it went on for seven days. On the seventh the Elder again asked him the
same questions as before. And on Nâgasena again making the same replies,
he gave him leave to pass the rainy season there.

30\. Now a certain woman, a distinguished follower of the faith, had for
thirty years and more administered to the wants of the venerable
Assagutta. And at the end of that rainy season she came one day to him,
and asked whether there was any other brother staying with him. And when
she was told that there was one, named Nâgasena, she invited the Elder,
and Nâgasena, with him, to take their midday meal the next day at her
house. And the Elder signified, by silence, his consent. The next
forenoon the Elder robed himself, and taking his bowl in his hand, went
down, accompanied by Nâgasena as his

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

attendant, to the dwelling-place of that disciple, and there they sat
down on the seats prepared for them. And she gave to both of them food,
hard and soft, as much as they required, waiting upon them with her own
hands. When Assagutta had finished his meal, and the hand was withdrawn
from the bowl, he said to Nâgasena: 'Do thou, Nâgasena, give the thanks
to this distinguished lady.' And, so saying, he rose from his seat, and
went away. \[**16**\]

31\. And the lady said to Nâgasena: 'I am old, friend Nâgasena. Let the
thanksgiving be from the deeper things of the faith.'

And Nâgasena, in pronouncing the thanksgiving discourse <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_85), dwelt on the profounder side of the
Abhidhamma, not on matters of mere ordinary morality, but on those
relating to Arahatship <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_86). And as the
lady sat there listening, there arose in her heart the Insight into the
Truth <span id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_87), clear and stainless, which
perceives that whatsoever has beginning, that has the inherent quality
of passing away. And Nâgasena also, when he had concluded that
thanksgiving discourse, felt the force of the truths he himself had
preached, and he too arrived at insight <span
id="fr_89"></span>[4](#fn_88)--he too

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

entered, as he sat there, upon the stream (that is to say, upon the
first stage of the Excellent Way to Arahatship).

32\. Then the venerable Assagutta, as he was sitting in his arbour, was
aware that they both had attained to insight, and he exclaimed: 'Well
done! well done, Nâgasena! by one arrow shot you have hit two noble
quarries!' And at the same time thousands of the gods shouted their
approval.

Now the venerable Nâgasena arose and returned to Assagutta, and saluting
him, took a seat reverently apart. And Assagutta said to him: 'Do thou
now go, Nâgasena, to Pâ*t*aliputta. There, in the Asoka Park, dwells the
venerable Dhamma-rakkhita. Under him you should learn the words of the
Buddha.'

'How far is it, Sir, from here to Pâ*t*aliputta.'

'A hundred leagues <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_89), Nâgasena.'

'Great, Sir, is the distance. It will be difficult to get food on the
way. How shall I get there?'

'Only go straight on, Nâgasena. You shall get food on the way, rice from
which the black grains have been picked out, with curries and gravies of
various sorts.'

'Very well, Sir!' said Nâgasena, and bowing

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

down before his teacher, and passing him on the right side as he went,
he took his bowl and his robe and departed for Pâ*t*aliputta.

33\. \[**17**\] At that time a merchant of Pâ*t*aliputta, was on his way
back to that city with five hundred waggons. And when he saw the
venerable Nâgasena coming in the distance, he stopped the waggons, and
saluted Nâgasena, and asked him: 'Whither art thou going, father?'

'To Pâ*t*aliputta, householder.'

'That is well, father. We too are going thither. It will be more
convenient for thee to go with us.'

And the merchant, pleased with Nâgasena's manners, provided him with
food, hard and soft, as much as he required, waiting upon him with his
own hands. And when the meal was over, he took a low seat, and sat down
reverently apart. So seated, he said to the venerable Nâgasena: 'What,
father, is your name?'

'I am called Nâgasena, householder.'

'Dost thou know, father, what are the words of Buddha?'

'I know the Abhidhamma.'

'We are most fortunate, father; this is indeed an advantage. I am a
student of the Abhidhamma, and so art thou. Repeat to me, father, some
passages from it.'

Then the venerable Nâgasena preached to him from the Abhidhamma, and by
degrees as he did so there arose in Nâgasena's heart the Insight into
the Truth, clear and stainless, which perceives that whatsoever has in
itself the necessity of beginning, that too has also the inherent
quality of passing away.

34\. And the Pâ*t*aliputta merchant sent on his

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

waggons in advance, and followed himself after them. And at a place
where the road divided, not far from Pâ*t*aliputta, he stopped, and said
to Nâgasena: 'This is the turning to the Asoka Park. Now I have here a
rare piece of woollen stuff, sixteen cubits by eight. \[**18**\] Do me
the favour of accepting it.' And Nâgasena did so. And the merchant,
pleased and glad, with joyful heart, and full of content and happiness,
saluted the venerable Nâgasena, and keeping him on his right hand as he
passed round him, went on his way.

35\. But Nâgasena went on to the Asoka Park to Dhamma-rakkhita. And
after saluting him, and telling him on what errand he had come, he
learnt by heart, from the mouth of the venerable Dhamma-rakkhita, the
whole of the three baskets <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_90) of the
Buddha's word in three months, and after a single recital, so far as the
letter (that is, knowing the words by heart) was concerned.. And in
three months more he mastered the spirit (that is, the deeper meaning of
the sense of the words).

But at the end of that time the venerable Dhamma-rakkhita

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

addressed him, and said: 'Nâgasena, as a herdsman tends the cows, but
others enjoy their produce, so thou too carriest in thy head the whole
three baskets of the Buddha's word, and still art not yet a partaker of
the fruit of Sama*n*aship.'

'Though that be so, holy one, say no more,' was the reply. And on that
very day, at night, he attained to Arahatship and with it to the
fourfold power of that Wisdom possessed by all Arahats (that is to say:
the realisation of the sense, and the appreciation of the deep religious
teaching contained in the word, the power of intuitive judgment, and the
power of correct and ready exposition) <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_91). And at the moment of his penetrating the
truth all the gods shouted their approval, and the earth thundered, and
the Brahma gods clapped their hands, and there fell from heaven a shower
of sweet-scented sandal dust and of Mandârava flowers.

36\. Now at that time the innumerable company of the Arahats at the
Guarded Slope in the Himâlaya mountains sent a message to him to come,
for they were anxious to see him. And when he heard the message the
venerable Nâgasena vanished from the Asoka Park and appeared before
them. And they said: 'Nâgasena, that king Milinda is in the habit of
harassing the brethren by knotty questions and by argumentations this
way and that. Do thou, Nâgasena, go and \[**19**\] master him.'

'Not only let king Milinda, holy ones, but let all the kings of India,
come and propound questions to

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

me. I will break all those puzzles up and solve them. You may go
fearlessly to Sâgala.'

Then all the Elders went to the city of Sâgala, lighting it up with
their yellow robes like lamps, and bringing down upon it the breezes
from the heights where the sages dwell <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_92).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

 <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_93)37. At that time the venerable
Âyupâla was living at the Sa<u>n</u>kheyya hermitage. And king Milinda
said to his counsellors: 'Beautiful is the night and pleasant! Who is
the wandering teacher or Brahman we can visit to night to question him
who will be able to converse with us and to resolve our doubts?'

And the five hundred Yonakas replied: 'There is the Elder, Lord, named
Âyupâla, versed in the three baskets, and in all the traditional lore.
He is living now at the Sa<u>n</u>kheyya hermitage. To him you might go,
O king, and put your questions to him.'

'Very well, then. Let the venerable one be informed that we are coming.'

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Then the royal astrologer sent a message to Âyupâla to the effect that
king Milinda desired to call upon him. And the venerable one said: 'Let
him come.'

So Milinda the king, attended by the five hundred Yonakas, mounted his
royal chariot and proceeded to the Sankheyya hermitage, to the place
where Âyupâla dwelt, and exchanged with him the greetings and
compliments of friendship and courtesy, and took his seat respectfully
apart. And then he said to him:

38\. 'Of what use, venerable Âyupâla, is the renunciation of the world
carried out by the members of your Order, and in what do you place the
summum bonum?'

'Our renunciation, O king,' replied the Elder, 'is for the sake of being
able to live in righteousness, and in spiritual calm.'

'Is there, Sir, any layman who lives so?'

'Yes, great king, there are such laymen. At the time when the Blessed
One set rolling the royal chariot wheel of the kingdom of righteousness
at Benares, at the Deer Park, \[**20**\] eighteen ko*t*is of the Brahma
gods, and an innumerable company of other gods, attained to
comprehension of the truth <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_94). And not
one of those beings, all of whom were laymen, had renounced the world.
And again when the Blessed One delivered the Mahâ Samaya discourse <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_95), and the discourse on the 'Greatest
Blessing <span id="fr_97"></span>[3](#fn_96),'

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

and the Exposition of Quietism <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_97), and
the Exhortation to Râhula <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_98), the
multitude of gods who attained to comprehension of the truth cannot be
numbered. And not one of those beings, all of whom were laymen, had
renounced the world <span id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_99).'

'Then, most venerable Âyupâla, your renunciation is of no use. It must
be in consequence of sins committed in some former birth, that the
Buddhist Samanas renounce the world, and even subject themselves to the
restraints of one or other of the thirteen aids to purity <span
id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_100)! Those who remain on one seat till they
have finished their repast were, forsooth, in some former birth, thieves
who robbed other men of their food. It is in consequence of the Karma of
having so deprived others of food that they have now only such food as
they can get at one sitting; and are not allowed to eat from time to
time as they want. It is no virtue on their part, no meritorious
abstinence, no righteousness of life. And they who live in the open air
were, forsooth, in

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

some former birth, dacoits who plundered whole villages. It is in
consequence of the Karma of having destroyed other people's homes, that
they live now without a home, and are not allowed the use of huts. It is
no virtue on their part, no meritorious abstinence, no righteousness of
life. And those who never lie down, they, forsooth, in some former
birth, were highwaymen who seized travellers, and bound them, and left
them sitting there. It is in consequence of the Karma of that habit that
they have become Nesa*gg*ikâ in this life (men who always sit) and get
no beds to lie on. It is no virtue on their part, no meritorious
abstinence, no righteousness of life!'

39\. And when he had thus spoken the venerable Âyupâla was silenced, and
had not a word to say in reply. Then the five hundred Yonakas said to
the king: 'The Elder, O king, is learned, but is also diffident. It is
for that reason that he makes no rejoinder. But the king on seeing how
silent Âyupâla had become, clapped his hands \[**21**\] and cried out:
'All India is an empty thing, it is verily like chaff! There is no one,
either Samana or Brahman, capable of discussing things with me and
dispelling my doubts <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_101)!'

As he looked, however, at the assembly and saw how fearless and
self-possessed the Yonakas appeared, he thought within himself: 'For a
certainty there must be, methinks, some other learned brother capable of
disputing with me, or those Yonakas would not be thus confident.' And he
said to them:

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'Is there, my good men, any other learned
brother to discuss things with me and dispel my doubts?'

40\. Now at that time the venerable Nâgasena, after making his alms-tour
through the villages, towns, and cities, had in due course arrived at
Sâgala, attended by a band of Sama*n*as, as the leader of a company of
the Order; the head of a body of disciples; the teacher of a school;
famous and renowned, and highly esteemed by the people. And he was
learned, clever, wise, sagacious, and able; a skilful expounder, of
subdued manners, but full of courage; well versed in tradition, master
of the three Baskets (Pi*t*akas), and erudite in Vedic lore <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_102). He was in possession of the highest
(Buddhist) insight, a master of all that had been handed down in the
schools, and of the various discriminations <span
id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_103) by which the most abstruse points can be
explained. He knew by heart the ninefold divisions of the doctrine of
the Buddha to perfection <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_104), and was
equally skilled in discerning both the spirit and the letter of the
Word. Endowed with instantaneous and varied power of repartee, and
wealth of language, and beauty of eloquence, he was difficult to equal,
and still more difficult to excel, difficult to answer, to repel, or to
refute. He was imperturbable as the depths of the sea, immovable as the
king of mountains; victorious in the struggle with evil, a dispeller

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of darkness and diffuser of light; mighty in eloquence, a confounder of
the followers of other masters, and a crusher-out of the adherents of
rival doctrines (malleus hereticorum). Honoured and revered by the
brethren and sisters of the Order, and its lay adherents of either sex,
and by kings and their high officials, he was in the abundant receipt of
all the requisites of a member of the Order--robes and bowl and lodging,
and whatever is needful for the sick--receiving the highest veneration
no less than material gifts. To the wise and discerning who came to him
with listening ear he displayed the ninefold jewel of the Conqueror's
word, he pointed out to them the path of righteousness, bore aloft for
them the torch of truth, set up for them the sacred pillar of the
truth <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105), and celebrated for their
benefit the sacrifice of the truth. For them he waved the banner, raised
the standard, blew the trumpet, and beat the drum of truth. And with his
mighty lion's voice, \[**22**\] like Indra's thunder but sweet the
while, he poured out upon them a plenteous shower, heavy with drops of
mercy, and brilliant with the coruscations of the lightning flashes of
his knowledge, of the nectar waters of the teaching of the Nirvâ*n*a of
the truth--thus satisfying to the full a thirsty world.

41\. There then, at the Sankheyya hermitage, did the venerable Nâgasena,
with a numerous company of the brethren, dwell <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_106). Therefore is it said:

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

'Learned, with varied eloquence, sagacious, bold,  
Master of views, in exposition sound,  
The brethren--wise themselves in holy writ,  
Repeaters of the fivefold sacred word--  
Put Nâgasena as their leader and their chief.  
Him, Nâgasena of clear mind and wisdom deep,  
Who knew which was the right Path, which the false,  
And had himself attained Nirvâ*n*a's placid heights!  
Attended by the wise, by holders to the Truth,  
He had gone from town to town, and come to Sâgala;  
And now he dwelt there in Sa<u>n</u>kheyya's grove,  
Appearing, among men, like the lion of the hills.'

42\. And Devamantiya said to king Milinda: 'Wait a little, great king,
wait a little! There is an Elder named Nâgasena, learned, able, and
wise, of subdued manners, yet full of courage, versed in the traditions,
a master of language, and ready in reply, one who understands alike the
spirit and the letter of the law, and can expound its difficulties and
refute objections to perfection <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_107).
He is staying at present at the Sa<u>n</u>kheyya hermitage. You should
go, great king, and put your questions to him. He is able to discuss
things with you, and dispel your doubts.'

Then when Milinda the king heard the name Nâgasena, thus suddenly
introduced, he was seized with fear, and with anxiety, and the hairs of
his body stood on end <span id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_108). But he
asked Devamantiya: 'Is that really so?'

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

And Devamantiya replied: 'He is capable, Sire, of discussing things with
the guardians of the world--with Indra, Yama, Varu*n*a, Kuvera,
Pra*g*âpati, Suyâma, \[**23**\] and Santushita--and even with the great
Brahma himself, the progenitor of mankind, how much more then with a
mere human being!'

'Do you then, Devamantiya,' said the king, 'send a messenger to say I am
coming.'

And he did so. And Nâgasena sent word back that he might come. And the
king, attended by the five hundred Yonakas, mounted his royal chariot,
and proceeded with a great retinue to the Sa<u>n</u>kheyya hermitage,
and to the place where Nâgasena dwelt.

43\. At that time the venerable Nâgasena was seated with the innumerable
company of the brethren of the Order, in the open hall in front of the
hermitage <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109). So king Milinda saw the
assembly from afar, and he said to Devamantiya: 'Whose, Devamantiya, is
this so mighty retinue?'

'These are they who follow the venerable Nâgasena,' was the reply.

Then at the sight there came over king Milinda

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

a feeling of fear and of anxiety, and the hairs of his body stood on
end <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_110). But nevertheless, though he
felt like an elephant hemmed in by rhinoceroses, like a serpent
surrounded by the Garu*d*as (the snake-eating mythical birds), like a
jackal surrounded by boa-constrictors, or a bear by buffaloes, like a
frog pursued by a serpent, or a deer by a panther, like a snake in the
hands of a snake charmer, or a rat played with by a cat, or a devil
charmed by an exorcist, like the moon when it is seized by Râhu, like a
snake caught in a basket, or a bird in a cage, or a fish in a net, like
a man who has lost his way in a dense forest haunted by wild beasts,
like a Yakkha (ogre) who has sinned against Vessavana (the king of ogres
and fairies), or like a god whose term of life as a god has reached its
end--though confused and terrified, anxious, and beside himself in an
agony of fear like that--yet at the thought that he must at least avoid
humiliation in the sight of the people, he took courage, and said to
Devamantiya: 'You need not \[**24**\] trouble to point out to me which
is Nâgasena. I shall pick him out unaided.'

'Certainly, Sire, recognise him yourself,' said he <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_111).

44\. Now Nâgasena was junior in seniority (reckoned from the date of his
full membership in the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Order) to the half of that great company seated
in front of him, and senior to the half seated behind him. And as he
looked over the whole of the assembly, in front, and down the centre,
and behind, king Milinda detected Nâgasena seated in the middle, and,
like a shaggy lion who knows no fear or frenzy, entirely devoid of
nervous agitation, and free from shyness and trepidation. And as soon as
he saw him, he knew by his mien that that was Nâgasena, and he pointed
him out to Devamantiya.

'Yes, great king,' said he, 'that is Nâgasena. Well hast thou, Sire,
recognised the sage.'

'Whereupon the king rejoiced that he had recognised Nâgasena without
having had him pointed out to him. But nevertheless, at the sight of
him, the king was seized with nervous excitement and trepidation and
fear. Therefore is it said:

'At the sight of Nâgasena, wise and pure,  
Subdued in all that is the best subjection,  
Milinda uttered this foreboding word--  
"Many the talkers I have visited,  
Many the conversations I have had,  
But never yet, till now, to-day, has fear,  
So strange, so terrible, o'erpowered my heart.  
Verily now defeat must be my lot,  
And victory his, so troubled is my mind."'

Here ends the introductory secular narrative (Bâhira-kathâ) <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_112).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[1:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_50) Bâhira-kathâ, literally
'outside talk;' so called in contradistinction to the religious
character of the subjects treated of in the remaining books.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[2:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_51) That is Ionians, the
Pâli word for Baktrian Greeks.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[2:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_52) Nânâ-pu*t*a-bhedana*m*,
literally 'the distributing place of parcels of merchandise of many
kinds.' Trenckner renders it 'surrounded with a number of dependent
towns,' but surely entrepôt is the idea suggested.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[2:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_53) Sutavanta-nimmitam;
which Trenckner renders 'pious are its people.' But I prefer the
Si*m*halese interpretation.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[2:4](sbe3503.htm#fr_54) This list recurs at pp.
34, 330 of the text. See below, [p. 53](sbe3504.htm#page_53).

<span id="fn_54"></span>[3:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_55) It is worth noting, as
there is a doubt about the spelling, that Hîna*t*i-kumburê reads
Ko*t*umbara, not Kodumbara.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[3:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_56) Here follow in
Hîna*t*i-kumburê's version two pages of introductory matter, explaining
how he came to undertake his translation.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[4:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_57) These six words are
added from Hîna*t*i-kumburê.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[6:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_58) Hetu, literally
'cause.' Trenckner has 'logic(?);' Hîna*t*i-kumburê repeats the word.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[6:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_59) Muddâ, literally
'seal-ring.' The meaning of the term (which recurs in similar lists at
Dîgha I, 1, 25; I, 2, 14; and below, [p. 59](sbe3504.htm#page_59) of the
text) is quite clear, but the exact details of the 'art' are unknown. I
follow Buddhaghosa's comment on those passages. Trenckner leaves the
word untranslated, and Hîna*t*i-kumburê says, 'Ængillen œl-wîma,' that
is, 'adhering with the finger,' which I do not understand, unless it
means the scaling of a document. At IV, 3, 2 5, the context makes it
probable that 'law of property' would be the best rendering.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[6:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_60) The number of the
Sippas (Arts and Sciences) is usually given as eighteen. In the *G*âtaka
(p. 58, 1. 29, Professor Fausböll's edition) it is twelve.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[7:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_61) Lokâyatas and
Vita*nd*as. Other Pâli passages, where they are mentioned, are
*K*ullavagga V, 3, 2; A<u>n</u>guttara III, 58, 1; Suma<u>n</u>gala
Vilâsinî, 96, 247; and below, § 22 (p. 17). See also Weber, 'Bhagavatî,'
II, 246; Muir, 'Sanskrit Texts,' III, 95; Deussen, 'Das Vedânta-System,'
310.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[7:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_62) Sama*n*a. There is no
expression in English corresponding to this common word in Pâli texts.
It means any 'religious' (in the technical meaning of that word) who is
not a recluse according to the orthodox Brahman rules. It includes
therefore many who were not Buddhists, and also even Brahmans if they
had joined the Buddhists or Gains, or any other of the non-conforming.
bodies. The Sama*n*as remained in one place during the rains, and for
the rest of the year wandered from place to place, promulgating their
particular views. They were not necessarily ascetics in any strict use
of that term; though they were usually celibates.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[8:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_63) So called because he
was said to have been born in a cowshed. See the Suma<u>n</u>gala, p.
143. All these six teachers were contemporaries of the Buddha, and lived
therefore about five hundred years before Milinda.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[8:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_64) All this is a mere echo
of the opening paragraphs in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala (D. 2), where
A*g*âtasattu is described as visiting these six famous sophists. And the
plagiarism is all the more inartistic as the old names are retained, and
no explanation is given of their being born twice at an interval of five
hundred years. One may indeed ask what is a glaring anachronism to our
good Buddhist romancer compared with the advantage of introducing the
stock-names when he has to talk of heretics? But the whole book is so
full of literary skill, that it is at least strange that its author
should have made this blunder; and there are other reasons for thinking
the whole episode an interpolation. (See note on §§ 13, 15.) So that
probably our § 15 came originally immediately after § 10, and then
(after the episode in §§ 15-36) § 37 takes up the narrative interrupted
at the end of § 10.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[9:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_65) Avî*k*i (probably 'the
Waveless'). The mention of this particular hell as being outside the
earth is noteworthy. One would expect to find the Lokântarika hell so
described. Spence Hardy indeed goes so far as to say that the Avî*k*i is
seven hundred miles directly under the great Bo Tree at Budh Gâyâ
(Manual, p. 26), which would be within the sphere of the earth. But
there is nothing in the Pâli texts yet published as to its position. See
*K*ullavagga VII, 4, 8; A<u>n</u>guttara III, 56; *G*âtaka I, 71, 96;
Pa*ñk*a Gati Dîpana, 20. There is a list of the hells at Sutta Nipâta
III, 10, but the Avîki is not one of them. This blunder, improbable in a
writer so learned as our author elsewhere shows himself, is another
reason for thinking these sections to be an interpolation.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[9:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_66) Pattakkhando
pa*ggh*âyanto. See my note on *K*ullavagga IV, 4, 7, and compare
A<u>n</u>guttara III, 73, 4.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[9:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_67) This, again, is most
clumsy, as the rival teachers must have dwelt far apart. And it will be
seen that, notwithstanding the parade of the six names at the beginning
of this episode, the remaining four are no further mentioned.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[10:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_68) This is quite in
accord with the opinions attributed to Makkhali Gosâla in the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala (D. 2, 20), and in the Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî on it
(see especially p. 166).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[10:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_69) See below, [p.
30](#page_30).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[10:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_70) This is an echo of the
words in the corresponding passage of the Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta (D. 2,
1).

<span id="fn_70"></span>[11:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_71) This paragraph is so
unnecessary after what has been said in the preceding episode, and at
the same time so contradictory to the fact of two teachers at least
living in or near the city, that it would really seem probable that it
(or perhaps § 14) came originally directly after § 10, the rest being an
interpolation, and a clumsy one.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[11:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_72) These are the
principal gods of the Vedic pantheon.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[14:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_73) Pa*t*imâneti. Childers
does not give this meaning to the word. But it is the usual one. Compare
Sumangala, vol. i, pp. 276, 280; Vinaya Pi*t*aka IV, 212; *K*ullavagga,
VI, 13, 2; *G*âtaka II, 423.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[14:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_74) This is a famous place
in Buddhist story. It is at the extreme limit, to the East, of the
Buddhist Holy Land, the 'Middle Country.' See Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî
on D. 2, 40 (p. 173); Mahâvagga V, 13,12; *G*âtaka I, 49.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[15:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_75) This is the ordinary
polite formula used by an Indian peasant when he wishes to express his
inability (or his disinclination) to give food to a mendicant friar.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[16:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_76) This custom is a rule
with the mendicant friars. It is their way of 'returning thanks,' as we
should say. See below, [p. 25](#page_25).

<span id="fn_76"></span>[17:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_77) Suvava*tth*âpitâ, or
perhaps its use in ceremonies or sacrifices. The phrase only occurs in
this passage. It is literally, 'The three Vedas were well fixed by the
boy.' Hîna*t*i-kumburê simply repeats the word.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[17:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_78) On the exact force of
the special terms translated in these clauses, one may further compare
the corresponding phrases used of learning the Buddhist texts in
*K*ullavagga IV, 14, 17; IX, 5, 1.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[17:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_79) The above are the
stock phrases for the learning of a scholarly Brahman, and one or two
points in the details are uncertain.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[19:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_80) This odd idea of the
'impediments' in the wearing of hair and beard is in accord both with
modern habits of shaving, and also with a good deal of early Christian
and mediaeval ethics.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[19:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_81) The lust of the eye,
of the ear, &c.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[20:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_82) Under the rules of the
Buddhist Order any one can leave it as soon as he likes.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[21:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_83) Compare, for instance,
p. 125 of the edition of this summary of Buddhist ethical psychology,
edited for the Pâli Text Society, by Dr. Edward Müller, of Bern (London,
1885).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[21:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_84) The six kinds of
discrimination (Pa*ññ*atti) referred to, are those set out in § 1 of the
Puggala. The work itself is an ethical tractate dealing only with the
last of the six (the discrimination of individuals). See the edition by
Dr. Morris, published by the Pâli Text Society (London, 1883).

<span id="fn_84"></span>[23:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_85) It would be against
the rules to go at once, during the rains, to Sâgala. So he would spend
that time in preparation.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[25:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_86) See the note above,
[p. 15](#page_15).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[25:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_87) Su*ññ*atâ, used here
in the sense of Nirvâ*n*a. Compare A<u>n</u>guttara II, 5, 6; *G*âtaka
III, 191; *K*ullavagga XII, 2, 5.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[25:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_88) Dhamma-*k*akkhu. This
perception of the impermanency of all things and all beings is called
'the Eye for the Truth,' and is the sign of the entrance upon the path
to Arahatship, i. e. Nirvâ*n*a. It is the same among Buddhists as
conversion is among the Christians. Compare Acts xxvi. 18 ('Open their
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God') and other similar passages.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[25:4](sbe3503.htm#fr_89) Vipassanâ. Childers
says this is an attribute of Arahatship and Trenckner translates it
'superior intelligence.' But Arahats <span id="page_26">p. 26</span>
only have it, because they have all the powers possessed by those in the
previous stages of the path, and it is only superior as being above and
beyond the intelligence of the worldly wise, or even of the mere
moralist. it is less than the 'Divine Eye,' and Nâgasena was not yet an
Arahat. Compare the passages quoted by Childers under Dhamma-*k*akkhu
and Dibba-*k*akkhu, and also Mahâvagga I, 6, 33; *G*âtaka I, 140;
Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî, 237, 278.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[26:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_90) Yo*g*anas: that is,
leagues of seven miles each. See my 'Ancient Coins and Measures of
Ceylon,' p. 16, in Thomas's 'Numismata orientalia,' vol. i.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[28:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_91) Pi*t*akas. This
expression is not used in the sacred books of the canon itself. When it
first came into use is unknown. This is the earliest passage in which it
has hitherto been found in the technical sense of a division of the
Scriptures. It was in full use at the time of Buddhaghosa (see the
Sumangala Vilâsinî, pp. 15, 16, 17, 18, &c., and the Samanta Pâsâdikâ,
printed in Oldenberg's 'Vinaya Pi*t*aka,' vol. iii, p. 293). The tertium
quid of the comparison is not the basket or the box as a receptacle for
preservation, but as a means of handing on (as Eastern navvies removing
earth put it into baskets and pass these latter on from hand to hand).
So the expression 'three baskets' means not 'the three collections,' but
'the three bodies of oral tradition as handed down from teacher to
teacher.' See Trenckner's decisive argument in his 'Pâli Miscellanies,'
pp. 67-69.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[29:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_92) The four
Pa*t*isambhidâs, which form the subject of one of the books of the Sutta
Pi*t*aka.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[30:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_93) Isi-vâta*m*
parivâta*m* (nagara*m*) aka*m*su. The meaning of this phrase, which has
not been found elsewhere, is doubtful. Trenckner renders 'making it
respire the odour of saints.' The literal translation would be 'making
it blown round about by *R*ishi-wind.' Perhaps it may be meant to convey
the idea of 'scented with the sweet breath of the wise.' But in any case
the connotation is intended to be a pleasant one. Calling to mind the
analogous phrase vi*g*anavâta*m* ârâma*m*, 'a hermitage with breezes
from the desert.' (Mahâvagga I, 22, 17 = *K*ullavagga VI, 4, 8) I
venture to suggest the rendering adopted above. Hîna*t*i-kumburê (p. 24)
has *R*ishiwaraya<u>n</u>ge gamanâgamanaye*m* *g*anita wa kîvara
wâtaye*m* pratiwâtaya kalâhuya. 'They set its air in commotion produced
by the waving of the robes of the coming and going *R*ishis.'

<span id="fn_93"></span>[30:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_94) We here take up the
original episode of Milinda as interrupted at § 15 (or if there is an
interpolation at § 10).

<span id="fn_94"></span>[31:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_95) See my 'Buddhist
Suttas,' pp. 153-155. There is nothing about the eighteen ko*l*is in the
Pi*t*aka text referred to.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[31:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_96) No. 20 in the Dîgha
Nikâya.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[31:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_97) In the Mahâ Mangala,
translated in my 'Buddhism,' pp. 125-127.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[32:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_98) Sama-*k*itta-pariyâya
Suttanta. It is not certain which Sutta is here referred to. Trenckner
identifies it with a short Sutta in the A<u>n</u>guttara (II, 4, 5). It
is true that the ten short Suttas in A. II, 4 are (in the Burmese MSS.
only) called collectively Sama-*k*itta-pariyâya. But the separate Suttas
have no separate titles; the title of the Vagga is not found in the
Si*m*halese MSS., and is probably later than the text; and it is not,
after all, identical with the title here given.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[32:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_99) There are several
Suttas of this name in the Pâli Pi*t*akas. The one referred to here (and
also, it may be added, in the Asoka Edicts) is probably the shorter one
(*K*ûla Râhulovâda Sutta) found both in the Ma*ggh*ima (No. 147) and in
the Sa*m*yutta (XXXIV, 120). See Trenckner's note on this passage.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[32:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_100) This way of looking
at gods as laymen, still 'in the world,' is thoroughly Buddhist.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[32:4](sbe3503.htm#fr_101) The
dhuta<u>n</u>gas, enumerated by Childers sub voce.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[33:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_102) See above, p. 10 §
14.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[34:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_103) This is always
explained as wise in the Buddhist Vedas, that is, the three Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[34:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_104) Pa*t*isambhidâs: see
above, the note on [p. 29](#page_29).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[34:3](sbe3503.htm#fr_105) Pârami-ppatto. This
is an unusual use of Pârami, but it occurs again below, [p.
36](#page_36), in a similar connection, and there can be no doubt of its
meaning. Trenckner translates it 'better than any one else.'

<span id="fn_105"></span>[35:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_106) Dhamma-yûpa*m*; with
allusion to the sacred sacrificial post, which plays so great a part in
Brahman ritual.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[35:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_107) Literally 'with
eighty thousand:' but this merely means to say, with a large (undefined)
number. See the use of the phrase in the Nâ*l*apâna *G*âtaka (Fausböll,
No. 20).

<span id="fn_107"></span>[36:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_108) See above, [p.
34](#page_34), note 3.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[36:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_109) The name itself,
which means 'Chief of Nâga Snakes,' is <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>
terrible enough, especially as the Nâgas were looked upon as
supernatural beings. But it is no doubt also intended that the king had
heard of his fame.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[37:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_110) Ma*nd*ala-mâla, that
is a hall consisting only of a roof, supported by pillars which are
connected by a dwarf wall two or three feet in height. The roof projects
beyond the pillars, so that the space within is well shaded. it is a
kind of open air drawing-room attached to most hermitages, and may be so
small that it can be rightly rendered arbour (see above, [p.
25](#page_25)), or sufficiently large to accommodate a considerable
number. Usually of wood, sometimes of stone, it is always graceful in
appearance and pleasant to use. It is mentioned in the corresponding
passage of the Sâmañña Phala (D. II, 10).

<span id="fn_110"></span>[38:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_111) This again, like the
passage at [p. 8](#page_8), is an echo of the Sâma*ññ*a Phala. (See D.
2, 10 of our forthcoming edition, or p. 116 of Grimblot.)

<span id="fn_111"></span>[38:2](sbe3503.htm#fr_112) In the corresponding
passage of the Sâma*ññ*a Phala *G*îvaka points out the Buddha to
A*g*âtasattu (§ 11, Grimblot, p. 117). This would be in the memory of
all his readers, and our author alters the story in this case to show
how superior Milinda was to the royal interlocutor in the older
dialogue.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[39:1](sbe3503.htm#fr_113) See note on [p.
1](#page_1). This book closes in Hîna*t*i-kumburê's Si*m*halese version
with the title 'Pûrwa Yoga yayi;' and is of course identical with the
Pubba-yoga referred to above, [p. 4](#page_4), as the first division of
the work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](sbe3504)
