[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3503) 
[Next](sbe3505) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

# BOOK II.

#### LAKKHANA PA*Ñ*HA.

#### THE DISTINGUISHING CHARACTERISTICS OF ETHICAL QUALITIES.

### CHAPTER 1.

1\. \[**25**\] Now Milinda the king went up to where the venerable
Nâgasena was, and addressed him with the greetings and compliments of
friendship and courtesy, and took his seat respectfully apart. And
Nâgasena reciprocated his courtesy, so that the heart of the king was
propitiated.

And Milinda began by asking,  <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113)'How
is your Reverence known, and what, Sir, is your name?'

'I am known as Nâgasena, O king, and it is by that name that my brethren
in the faith address me. But although parents, O king, give such a name
as Nâgasena, or Sûrasena, or Vîrasena, or Sîhasena, yet this,
Sire,--Nâgasena and so on--is only a generally understood term, a
designation in common use. For there is no permanent individuality (no
soul) involved in the matter <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_114).'

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Then Milinda called upon the Yonakas and the brethren to witness: 'This
Nâgasena says there is no permanent individuality (no soul) implied in
his name. Is it now even possible to approve him in that?' And turning
to Nâgasena, he said: 'If, most reverend Nâgasena, there be no permanent
individuality (no soul) involved in the matter, who is it, pray, who
gives to you members of the Order your robes and food and lodging and
necessaries for the sick? Who is it who enjoys such things when given?
Who is it who lives a life of righteousness? Who is it who devotes
himself to meditation? Who is it who attains to the goal of the
Excellent Way, to the Nirvâ*n*a of Arahatship? And who is it who
destroys living creatures? who is it who takes what is not his own? who
is it who lives an evil life of worldly lusts, who speaks lies, who
drinks strong drink, who (in a word) commits any one of the five sins
which work out their bitter fruit even in this life <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115)? If that be so there is neither merit
nor demerit; there is neither doer nor causer of good or evil
deeds <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116); there is neither fruit nor
result of good or evil Karma <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117).
\[**26**\]--If, most reverend Nâgasena, we are to think that were a man

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

to kill you there would be no murder <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_118), then it follows that there are no real
masters or teachers in your Order, and that your ordinations are
void.--You tell me that your brethren in the Order are in the habit of
addressing you as Nâgasena. Now what is that Nâgasena? Do you mean to
say that the hair is Nâgasena?'

'I don't say that, great king.'

'Or the hairs on the body, perhaps?'

'Certainly not.'

'Or is it the nails, the teeth, the skin, the flesh, the nerves, the
bones, the marrow, the kidneys, the heart, the liver, the abdomen, the
spleen, the lungs, the larger intestines, the lower intestines, the
stomach, the fæces, the bile, the phlegm, the pus, the blood, the sweat,
the fat, the tears, the serum, the saliva, the mucus, the oil that
lubricates the joints, the urine, or the brain, or any or all of these,
that is Nâgasena <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_119)?'

And to each of these he answered no.

'Is it the outward form then (Rûpa) that is Nâgasena, or the sensations
(Vedanâ), or the ideas (Sa*ññ*â), or the confections (the constituent
elements of character, Sa*m*khârâ), or the consciousness (Vig*ññ*âna),
that is Nâgasena <span id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_120)?'

And to each of these also he answered no.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

'Then is it all these Skandhas combined that are Nâgasena?'

'No! great king.'

'But is there anything outside the five Skandhas that is Nâgasena?'

And still he answered no.

'Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no Nâgasena. Nâgasena is a mere
empty sound. Who then is the Nâgasena that we see before us? It is a
falsehood that your reverence has spoken, an untruth!'

And the venerable Nâgasena said to Milinda the king: 'You, Sire, have
been brought up in great luxury, as beseems your noble birth. If you
were to walk this dry weather on the hot and sandy ground, trampling
under foot the gritty, gravelly grains of the hard sand, your feet would
hurt you. And as your body would be in pain, your mind would be
disturbed, and you would experience a sense of bodily suffering. How
then did you come, on foot, or in a chariot?'

'I did not come, Sir, on foot \[**27**\]. I came in a carriage.'

'Then if you came, Sire, in a carriage, explain to me what that is. Is
it the pole that is the chariot?'

'I did not say that.'

'Is it the axle that is the chariot?'

'Certainly not.'

'Is it the wheels, or the framework, or the ropes, or the yoke, or the
spokes of the wheels, or the goad, that are the chariot?'

And to all these he still answered no.

'Then is it all these parts of it that are the chariot?'

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

'No, Sir.'

'But is there anything outside them that is the chariot?'

And still he answered no.

'Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no chariot. Chariot is a mere
empty sound. What then is the chariot you say you came in? It is a
falsehood that your Majesty has spoken, an untruth! There is no such
thing as a chariot! You are king over all India, a mighty monarch. Of
whom then are you afraid that you speak untruth? And he called upon the
Yonakas and the brethren to witness, saying: 'Milinda the king here has
said that he came by carriage. But when asked in that case to explain
what the carriage was, he is unable to establish what he averred. Is it,
forsooth, possible to approve him in that?'

When he had thus spoken the five hundred Yonakas shouted their applause,
and said to the king: Now let your Majesty get out of that if you can?'

And Milinda the king replied to Nâgasena, and said: 'I have spoken no
untruth, reverend Sir. It is on account of its having all these
things--the pole, and the axle, the wheels, and the framework, the
ropes, the yoke, the spokes, and the goad--that it comes under the
generally understood term, the designation in common use, of "chariot."'

'Very good! Your Majesty has rightly grasped the meaning of "chariot."
And just even so it is on account of all those things you questioned me
about--\[**28**\] the thirty-two kinds of organic matter in a human
body, and the five constituent elements of being--that I come under the
generally understood term, the designation in common use, of "Nâgasena."

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

\[paragraph continues\] For it was said, Sire, by our Sister Va*g*irâ in
the presence of the Blessed One:

'"Just as it is by the condition precedent of the co-existence of its
various parts that the word 'chariot' is used, just so is it that when
the Skandhas are there we talk of a 'being <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_121).'"'

'Most wonderful, Nâgasena, and most strange. Well has the puzzle put to
you, most difficult though it was, been solved. Were the Buddha himself
here he would approve your answer. Well done, well done, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. 'How many years seniority have you, Nâgasena?'

'Seven, your Majesty.'

'But how can you say it is your "seven?" Is it you who are "seven," or
the number that is "seven?"'

Now that moment the figure of the king, decked in all the finery of his
royal ornaments, cast its shadow on the ground, and was reflected in a
vessel of water. And Nâgasena asked him: 'Your figure, O king, is now
shadowed upon the ground, and reflected in the water, how now, are you
the king, or is the reflection the king?'

'I am the king, Nâgasena, but the shadow comes into existence because of
me.'

'Just even so, O king, the number of the years is seven, I am not seven.
But it is because of me, O king, that the number seven has come into
existence; and it is mine in the same sense as the shadow is yours <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_122).'

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

'Most wonderful again, and strange, Nâgasena. Well has the question put
to you, most difficult though it was, been solved!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. The king said: 'Reverend Sir, will you discuss with me again?'

'If your Majesty will discuss as a scholar (pa*nd*it), well; but if you
will discuss as a king, no.'

'How is it then that scholars discuss?'

'When scholars talk a matter over one with another then is there a
winding up <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123), an unravelling; one or
other is convicted of error <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_124), and
he then acknowledges his mistake; \[**29**\] distinctions are drawn, and
contra-distinctions <span id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_125); and yet
thereby they are not angered. Thus do scholars, O king, discuss.'

'And how do kings discuss?'

'When a king, your Majesty, discusses a matter, and he advances a point,
if any one differ from him on that point, he is apt to fine him, saying:
"Inflict such and such a punishment upon that fellow!" Thus, your
Majesty, do kings discuss <span id="fr_127"></span>[4](#fn_126).'

'Very well. It is as a scholar, not as a king, that I will discuss. Let
your reverence talk unrestrainedly, as you would with a brother, or a
novice, or a lay disciple, or even with a servant. Be not afraid!'

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

'Very good, your Majesty,' said Nâgasena, with thankfulness.

'Nâgasena, I have a question to ask you;' said the king.

'Pray ask it, Sire.'

'I have asked it, your Reverence.'

'That is answered already.'

'What have you answered?'

'To what, then, does your Majesty refer?'

But Milinda the king thought: 'This Bhikkhu is a great scholar. He is
quite capable of discussing things with me. And I shall have a number of
points on which to question him, and before I can ask them all, the sun
will set. It would be better to carry on the discussion at home
to-morrow.' And he said to Devamantiya: 'You may let his reverence know
that the discussion with the king shall be resumed to-morrow at the
palace.' And so saying, he took leave of Nâgasena, and mounted his
horse, and went away, muttering as he went, 'Nâgasena, Nâgasena!'

And Devamantiya delivered his message to Nâgasena, who accepted the
proposal with gladness. And early the next morning Devamantiya and
Anantakâya and Mankura and Sabbadinna. went to the king, and said: 'Is
his reverence, Nâgasena, to come, \[**30**\] Sire, to-day?'

'Yes, he is to come.'

'With how many of the brethren is he to come?'

'With as many as he likes.'

And Sabbadinna said: 'Let him come with ten.' But the king repeated what
he had said.. And on Sabbadinna reiterating his suggestion, the 'king
rejoined: 'All this preparation has been made, and I say:

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

"Let him come with as many as he likes," yet Sabbadinna says: "Let him
come with ten." Does he suppose we are not capable of feeding so many?'

Then Sabbadinna was ashamed.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. And Devamantiya and Anantakâya and Mankura went to Nâgasena and told
him what the king had said. And the venerable Nâgasena robed himself in
the forenoon, and taking his bowl in his hand, went to Sâgala with the
whole company of the brethren. And Anantakâya, as he walked beside
Nâgasena, said:

'When, your reverence, I say, "Nâgasena," what is that Nâgasena?'

The Elder replied: 'What do you think Nâgasena is?'

'The soul, the inner breath which comes and goes, that I suppose to be
Nâgasena.'

'But if that breath having gone forth should not return, or having
returned should not go forth, would the man be alive?'

'Certainly \[**31**\] not, Sir.'

'But those trumpeters, when they blow their trumpets, does their breath
return again to them?'

'No, Sir, it does not.'

'Or those pipers, when they blow their pipes or horns, does their breath
return again to them?'

'No, Sir.'

'Then why don't they die?'

'I am not capable of arguing with such a reasoner. Pray tell me, Sir,
how the matter stands.'

'There is no soul in the breath. These inhalations and exhalations are
merely constituent powers

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

of the bodily frame,' said the Elder. And he talked to him from the
Abhidhamma <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127) to such effect
that <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_127) Anantakâya confessed himself
as a supporter of the Order.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. And the venerable Nâgasena went to the king, and sat down on the
seat prepared for him. And the king provided Nâgasena and his following
with food, both hard and soft, as much as they required: and presented
each brother with a suit of garments, and Nâgasena himself with a set of
three robes. And then he said to him: 'Be pleased to keep your seat
here, and with you ten of the brethren. Let the rest depart.'

And when he saw that Nâgasena had finished his meal, he took a lower
seat, and sat beside him, and said: 'What shall we discuss?'

'We want to arrive at truth. Let our discussion be about the truth.'

And the king said: 'What is the object, Sir, of your <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_128) renunciation, and what the summum bonum
at which you aim?'

'Why do you ask? Our renunciation is to the end that this sorrow may
perish away, and that no further sorrow may arise; the complete passing
away, without cleaving to the world, is our highest aim.'

'How now, Sir! Is it for such high reasons that all members of it have
joined the Order?,'

\[**32**\] 'Certainly not, Sire. Some for those reasons,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

but some have left the world in terror at the tyranny of kings. Some
have joined us to be safe from being robbed, some harassed by debt, and
some perhaps to gain a livelihood.'

'But for what object, Sir, did you yourself join.'

'I was received into the Order when I was a mere boy, I knew not then
the ultimate aim. But I thought: "They are wise scholars, these Buddhist
Samanas, they will be able to teach me." And by them I have been taught;
and now do I both know and understand what is at once the reason for,
and the advantage of renunciation.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. The king said: 'Nâgasena, is there any one who after death is not
reindividualised?'

'Some are so, and some not.'

'Who are they?'

'A sinful being is reindividualised, a sinless one is not.'

'Will you be reindividualised?'

'If when I die, I die with craving for existence in my heart, yes; but
if not, no <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_129).'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. The king said: 'Nâgasena, he who escapes reindividualisation is it
by reasoning that he escapes it?'

'Both by reasoning <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_130), your Majesty,
and by wisdom <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_131), and by other good
qualities.'

'But are not reasoning and wisdom surely much the same?'

'Certainly not. Reasoning is one thing, wisdom

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

another. Sheep and goats, oxen and buffaloes, camels and asses have
reasoning, but wisdom they have not.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. The king said: 'What is the characteristic mark of reasoning, and
what of wisdom?'

'Reasoning has always comprehension as its mark; but wisdom has cutting
off <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_132).'

'But how is comprehension the characteristic of reasoning, and cutting
off of wisdom? Give me an illustration.'

'You remember the barley reapers?'

'Yes, certainly.' \[**33**\]

'How do they reap the barley?'

'With the left hand they grasp the barley into a bunch, and taking the
sickle into the right hand, they cut it off with that.'

'Just even, so, O king, does the recluse by his thinking grasp his mind,
and by his wisdom cut off his failings. In this way is it that
comprehension is the characteristic of reasoning, but cutting off of
wisdom.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. The king said: 'When you said just now, "And by other good
qualities," to which did you refer?'

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

'Good conduct, great king, and faith, and perseverance, and mindfulness,
and meditation <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_133).

'And what is the characteristic mark of good conduct?'

'It has as its characteristic that it is the basis of all good
qualities. The five moral powers <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_134)--faith, perseverance, mindfulness,
meditation, and wisdom-; the seven conditions of Arahatship <span
id="fr_137"></span>[3](#fn_135)--self-possession, investigation of the
Dhamma, perseverance, joy, calm, meditation, and equanimity--; the Path;
readiness of memory (unbroken self-possession) <span
id="fr_138"></span>[4](#fn_136); the four kinds of right exertion <span
id="fr_139"></span>[5](#fn_137); the four constituent bases of
extraordinary powers <span id="fr_140"></span>[6](#fn_138);the four
stages of ecstasy <span id="fr_141"></span>[7](#fn_139); the eight forms
of spiritual emancipation <span id="fr_142"></span>[8](#fn_140); the
four modes of self-concentration <span id="fr_143"></span>[9](#fn_141);
and the eight states of intense contemplation <span
id="fr_144"></span>[10](#fn_142) have each and all of them good conduct
(the observance of outward morality) as their basis. And to him who
builds upon that foundation, O king, all these good conditions will not
decrease <span id="fr_145"></span>[11](#fn_143).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Just, O king, as all those forms of animal and vegetable life which
grow, develope, and mature, do so with the earth as their basis; just so
does the recluse, who is devoted in effort, develope in himself the five
moral powers, and so on, by means of virtue, on the basis of virtue.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

'Just, O king, as all the occupations which involve bodily exertion are
carried on in ultimate dependence upon the earth, just so does the
recluse develope in himself the five moral powers, and so on, by means
of virtue, on the basis of virtue.' \[**34**\]

'Give me a still better illustration.'

'Just, O king, as the architect of a city, when he wants to build one,
first clears the site of the town, and then proceeds to get rid of all
the stumps and thorny brakes, and thus makes it level, and only then
does he lay out the streets and squares, and crossroads and market
places, and so build the city; just so does the recluse develope in
himself the five moral powers, and so on, by means of virtue, on the
basis of virtue.'

'Can you give me one more simile?'

'Just, O king, as an acrobat <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_144), when
he wants to exhibit his skill, first digs over the ground, and proceeds
to get rid of all the stones and fragments of broken pottery, and thus
to make it smooth, and only then, on soft earth, shows his tricks; just
even so does the recluse develope in himself the five moral powers, and
so on, by means of virtue, on the basis of virtue. For it has been said,
Sire, by the Blessed One:

"Virtue's the base on which the man who's wise  
Can train his heart, and make his wisdom grow.  
Thus shall the strenuous Bhikkhu, undeceived,  
Unravel all the tangled skein of life <span
id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_145).

 

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

"This is the base--like the great earth to men--  
And this the root of all increase in goodness,  
The starting-point of all the Buddhas' teaching,  
Virtue, to wit, on which true bliss depends <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_146)."

'Well said, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10 <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_147). The king said, 'Venerable
Nâgasena, what is the characteristic mark of faith?'

'Tranquillisation, O king, and aspiration <span
id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_148).'

'And how is tranquillisation the mark of faith?'

As faith, O king, springs up in the heart it breaks through the five
hindrances--lust, malice, mental sloth, spiritual pride, and doubt--and
the heart, free from these hindrances, \[**35**\] becomes clear, serene,
untroubled.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Just, O king, as a suzerain king, when on the march with his fourfold
army, might cross over a small stream, and the water, disturbed by the
elephants and cavalry, the chariots and the bowmen, might become fouled,
turbid <span id="fr_151"></span>[4](#fn_149), and muddy. And

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

when he was on the other side the monarch might give command to his
attendants, saying: "Bring some water, my good men. I would fain drink."
Now suppose the monarch had a water-clearing gem <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_150), and those men, in obedience to the
order, were to throw the jewel into the water; then at once all the mud
would precipitate itself, and the sandy atoms of shell and bits of
water-plants would disappear, and the water would become clear,
transparent, and serene, and they would then bring some of it to the
monarch to drink. The water is the heart; the royal servants are the
recluse; the mud, the sandy atoms, and the bits of water-plants are evil
dispositions; and the water-cleansing gem is faith.'

'And how is aspiration the mark of faith?'

'In as much as the recluse, on perceiving how the hearts of others have
been set free, aspires to enter as it were by a leap upon the fruit of
the first stage, or of the second, or of the third in the Excellent Way,
or to gain Arahatship itself, and thus applies himself to the attainment
of what he has not reached, to the experience of what he has not yet
felt, to the realisation of what he has not yet realised,--therefore is
it that aspiration is the mark of faith.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Just, O king, as if a mighty storm \[**36**\] were to break upon a
mountain top and pour out rain, the water would flow down according to
the levels, and after filling up the crevices and chasms and gullies

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the hill, would empty itself into the brook below, so that the stream
would rush along, overflowing both its banks. Now suppose a crowd of
people, one after the other, were to come up, and being ignorant of the
real breadth or depth of the water, were to stand fearful and hesitating
on the brink. And suppose a certain man should arrive, who knowing
exactly his own strength and power should gird himself firmly and, with
a spring, land himself on the other side. Then the rest of the people,
seeing him safe on the other side, would likewise cross. That is the
kind of way in which the recluse, by faith <span
id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_151), aspires to leap, as it were by a bound,
into higher things. For this has been said, O king, by the Blessed One
in the Samyutta Nikâya:

"By faith he crosses over the stream,  
By earnestness the sea of life;  
By steadfastness all grief he stills,  
By wisdom is he purified <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_152)."

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

11 <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_153). The king said: 'What,
Nâgasena, is the characteristic mark of perseverance?'

'The rendering of support, O king, is the mark of perseverance <span
id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_154). All those good qualities which it
supports do not fall away.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Just as a man, if a house were falling, would make a prop for it of
another post, and the house so supported would not fall; just so, O
king, is the rendering of support the mark of perseverance, and all
those good qualities which it supports do not fall away.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Just as when a large army has broken up a small one, then the king of
the latter would call to mind every possible ally and reinforce his
small army <span id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_155), and by that means the
small army might in its turn break up the large one; just so, O king, is
the rendering of support the mark of perseverance, and all those good
qualities which it supports do not fall away \[**37**\]. For it has been
said by the Blessed One: "The persevering hearer of the noble truth, O
Bhikkhus, puts away evil and cultivates goodness, puts away that which
is wrong and developes in himself that which is right, and thus does he
keep himself pure."'

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. The king said: 'What, Nâgasena, is the characteristic mark of
mindfulness <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_156)?'

'Repetition, O king, and keeping up <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_157).'

'And how is repetition the mark of mindfulness?'

'As mindfulness, O king, springs up in his heart he repeats over the
good and evil, right and wrong, slight and important, dark and light
qualities, and those that resemble them, saying to himself: "These are
the four modes of keeping oneself ready and mindful, these the four
modes of spiritual effort, these the four bases of extraordinary powers,
these the five organs of the moral sense, these the five mental powers,
these the seven bases of Arahatship, these the eight divisions of the
Excellent Way, this is serenity and this insight, this is wisdom and
this emancipation <span id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_158)." Thus does the
recluse follow after

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

those qualities that are desirable, and not after those that are not;
thus does he cultivate those which ought to be practised, and not those
which ought not. That is how repetition is the mark of mindfulness.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the treasurer of the imperial sovran <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_159), who reminds his royal master early and
late of his glory, saying: "So many are thy war elephants, O king, and
so many thy cavalry <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_160), thy war
chariots and thy bowmen, so much the quantity of thy money, and gold,
and wealth, may your Majesty keep yourself in mind thereof.'

'And how, Sir, is keeping up a mark of mindfulness?'

'As mindfulness springs up in his heart, O king, he searches out the
categories of good qualities and their opposites, saying to himself:
"Such and such qualities are good, and such bad; \[**38**\] such and
such qualities helpful, and such the reverse." Thus does the recluse
make what is evil in himself to disappear, and keeps up what is good.
That is how keeping up is the mark of mindfulness.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the confidential adviser of that imperial

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

sovran <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_161) who instructs him in good
and evil, saying: "These things are bad for the king and these good,
these helpful and these the reverse." And thus the king makes the evil
in himself die out, and keeps up the good.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13 <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_162). The king said: 'What,
Nâgasena, is the characteristic mark of meditation <span
id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_163)?

'Being the leader, O king. All good qualities have meditation as their
chief, they incline to it, lead up towards it, are as so many slopes up
the side of the mountain of meditation.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'As all the rafters of the roof of a house, O king, go up to the apex,
slope towards it, are joined on together at it, and the apex is
acknowledged to be the top of all; so is the habit of meditation in its
relation to other good qualities.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'It is like a king, your Majesty, when he goes down to battle with his
army in its fourfold array. The whole army--elephants, cavalry, war
chariots, and bowmen--would have him as their chief, their

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

lines would incline towards him, lead up to him, they would be so many
mountain slopes, one above another, with him as their summit, round him
they would all be ranged. \[**39**\] And it has been said, O king, by
the Blessed One: "Cultivate in yourself, O Bhikkhus, the habit of
meditation. He who is established therein knows things as they really
are <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_164)."'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. The king said: 'What, Nâgasena, is the characteristic mark of
wisdom <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_165)?'

'I have already told you, O king, how cutting off, severance, is its
mark <span id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_166), but enlightenment is also
its mark.'

'And how is enlightenment its mark?'

'When wisdom springs up in the heart, O king, it dispels the darkness of
ignorance, it causes the radiance of knowledge to arise, it makes the
light of intelligence to shine forth <span
id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_167), and it makes the Noble Truths plain.
Thus does the recluse who is devoted to effort perceive with the
clearest wisdom the impermanency (of all beings and things), the
suffering (that is inherent in individuality), and the absence of any
soul.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like a lamp, O king, which a man might introduce into a house in
darkness. When the lamp had been brought in it would dispel the
darkness,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

cause radiance to arise, and light to shine forth, and make the objects
there plainly visible. Just so would wisdom in a man have such effects
as were just now set forth.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. The king said: 'These qualities which are so different <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_168), Nâgasena, do they bring about one and
the same result?'

'They do. The putting an end to evil dispositions.'

'How is that? Give me an illustration.'

'They are like the various parts of an army--elephants, cavalry, war
chariots, and archers--who all work to one end, to wit: the conquest in
battle of the opposing army.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

Here ends the First Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[40:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_114) There is a free
translation of the Si*m*halese version of the following dialogues (down
to the end of our § 4) in Spence Hardy's 'Manual of Buddhism,' pp.
424-429. But it is very unreliable as a reproduction of either the
Si*m*halese or the Pâli, and slurs over the doubtful passages.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[40:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_115) Na puggalo
upalabbhati. This thesis, that 'there is no individual,' is discussed at
the opening of the Kathâ Vatthu (leaf ka of my MS.) Put into modern
philosophical phraseology it amounts to saying that there is no
permanent subject underlying the temporary phenomena visible in a man's
individuality. But <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> I doubt whether, even
in our author's time, the conception 'subject' was common ground, or
that the word puggala had acquired that special connotation.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[41:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_116)
Pa*ñk*ânantariya-kamma*m* karoti. See my note on *K*ullavagga VII, 3, 9
('Vinaya Texts,' vol. iii, p. 246, in the Sacred Books of the East).

<span id="fn_116"></span>[41:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_117) This is no doubt
said in these words with allusion to the opinion ascribed in the
Sâma*ññ*a Phala (D. II, 17) to Pûra*n*a Kassapa.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[41:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_118) This is the opinion
ascribed in identical words in the Sâma*ññ*a Phala (D. II, 23) to
A*g*ita of the garment of hair.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[42:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_119) This is practically
the same opinion as is ascribed in the Sâma*ññ*a Phala (D. II, 26) to
Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[42:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_120) This list of the
thirty-two forms (â*k*âras) of organic matter in the human body occurs
already in the Khuddaka Pâ*th*a, § 3. It is the standard list always
used in similar connections; and is, no doubt, supposed to be
exhaustive. There are sixteen (half as many) â*k*âras of the mind
according to Dîpava*m*sa I, 42.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[42:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_121) These are the five
Skandhas, which include in them the whole bodily and mental constituents
of any being. See [p. 80](sbe3506.htm#page_80).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[45:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_122) From the Sa*m*yutta
Nikâya V, 10, 6.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[45:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_123) Hardy (p. 427, § 4
of the first edition) has quite missed the point of this crux.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[46:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_124) Âve*th*ana*m*; not
in Childers, but see *G*âtaka II, 9; IV, 3831 384; and Morris in the
'Journal of the Pâli Text Society,' 1887.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[46:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_125) Niggâho karîyati, as
for instance below, [p. 142](sbe3512.htm#page_142).

<span id="fn_125"></span>[46:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_126) Pa*t*iviseso; not in
Childers, but see again *G*âtaka II, 9.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[46:4](sbe3504.htm#fr_127) Hardy, loc. cit. §
5, puts all this into the mouths of 'the priests.'

<span id="fn_127"></span>[49:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_129) I venture to think
it is incorrect to put a full stop, as Mr. Trenckner has done, after
akâsi.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[49:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_130) Plural. 'You members
of the Buddhist Order.' The question is further elaborated below, III,
1, 3, and above, I, 38.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[50:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_131) Repeated below, with
an illustration, Chap. 2, § 7, [p. 76](sbe3505.htm#page_76).

<span id="fn_130"></span>[50:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_132) Yoniso manasikâra.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[50:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_133) Pa*ññ*â. See pp.
[59](#page_59), [64](sbe3505.htm#page_64), [128](sbe3511.htm#page_128).

<span id="fn_132"></span>[51:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_134) In the long list of
the distinguishing characteristics of ethical qualities given by
Buddhaghosa in the Sumangala, p. 63, pa*g*ânana is the mark of
pa*ññ*idriya, avi*gg*âya akampiya*m* of pa*ññ*abala, and tad-uttariya*m*
of pa*ññ*â simply. He gives no 'mark' of yoniso manasikâra.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[52:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_135) Sîla*m*, saddhâ,
viriya*m*, sati, samâdhi.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[52:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_136) Indriya-balâni.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[52:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_137) Bo*ggh*a<u>n</u>gâ.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[52:4](sbe3504.htm#fr_138) Satipa*tth*âna.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[52:5](sbe3504.htm#fr_139) Sammappadhâna.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[52:6](sbe3504.htm#fr_140) Iddhipâda.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[52:7](sbe3504.htm#fr_141) *Gh*âna.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[52:8](sbe3504.htm#fr_142) Vimokhâ.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[52:9](sbe3504.htm#fr_143) Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[52:10](sbe3504.htm#fr_144) Samâpatti.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[52:11](sbe3504.htm#fr_145) The above-mentioned
meritorious conditions are those the sum of which make Arahatship.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[53:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_146) La<u>n</u>ghako, not
in Childers; but compare *G*âtaka I, 431, and below, pp. 191, 331 of the
text.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[53:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_147) This verse occurs
twice in the Sa*m*yutta (I, 3, 3, and VII, 1, 6).

<span id="fn_146"></span>[54:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_148) Vara-pâtimokkhiyo, a
poetical expression found only in this passage, and of the exact
connotation of which I am uncertain. It is not in Childers; and
Hîna*t*i-kumburê gives no assistance. The whole line may mean, 'The
scheme of a virtuous life as laid down in the most excellent
Pâtimokkha.' See the use of Sa*m*yutta-Nikâya-vare below, [p.
36](sbe3503.htm#page_36) of the text. On the whole section compare M. P.
S. I, 12.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[54:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_149) This section is
summarised in Hardy's 'Manual of Buddhism,' pp. 411, 412 (1st edition).

<span id="fn_148"></span>[54:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_150) Sampasâdana and
sampakkhandana. Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., does not give faith in his list,
but he gives the power of faith (saddhâ-bala), and as its 'mark' 'that
it cannot be shaken by incredulity.'

<span id="fn_149"></span>[54:4](sbe3504.htm#fr_151) Lu*l*ita, not in
Childers; but compare A<u>n</u>guttara I, 55, and 'Book of the Great
Decease,' IV, 26-32.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[55:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_152) Udakappasâdako
ma*n*i. Doubtless a magic gem is meant: with allusion particularly to
the Wondrous Gem (the Ma*n*i-ratana) of the mythical King of Glory (see
my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 256).

<span id="fn_151"></span>[56:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_153) In the Buddha, in
the sufficiency of the Excellent Way he taught, and in the capacity of
man to walk along it. It is spoken of slightingly (compared with
Arahatship) in Mahâvagga V, 1, 21--in the Mahâparinibbâna Sutta VI, 9
(of Ânanda, who has faith, compared with the brethren, who have entered
one or other of the stages of the Excellent Way)--and in
A<u>n</u>guttara III, 21 (in comparison with intuitive insight and
intellectual perception). For this last comparison see further the
Puggala Pa*ññ*atti III, 3. From these passages a fair idea of the
Buddhist view of faith could be formed. Although the Buddhist faith and
the Christian faith are in things contradictory, the two conditions of
heart are strikingly similar both in origin and in consequence.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[56:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_154) This verse is not
yet reached in the Pâli Text Society's edition of the Sa*m*yutta, but it
is found also in the Sutta Nipâta I, 10, 4.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[57:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_155) This section is
summarised by Hardy, loc. cit. p. 409.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[57:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_156) Buddhaghosa, loc.
cit., says that paggaha (tension) is the mark of viriyindriya.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[57:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_157) A*ññ*ama*ññ*a*m*
anusâreyya anupeseyya. This is the way in which Hîna*t*i-kumburê
understands this doubtful passage. Hardy has bungled the whole simile.
Both the words are new, and I am not sure that the first does not after
all come from the root sar, to follow.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[58:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_158) Sati, summarised in
Hardy's 'Manual,' p. 412.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[58:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_159) Api*l*âpana and
upaga*n*hana, both new words. This definition is in keeping with the
etymological meaning of the word sati, which is 'memory.' It is one of
the most difficult words (in its secondary, ethical, and more usual
meaning) in the whole Buddhist system of ethical psychology to
translate, Hardy renders 'conscience,' which is certainly wrong; and
Gogerly (see my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 144) has 'meditation,' which is
equally wide of the mark. I have sometimes rendered it
'self-possession.' It means that activity of mind, constant presence of
mind, wakefulness of heart, which is the foe of carelessness,
inadvertence, self-forgetfulness. And it is a very constant theme of the
Buddhist moralist. Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., makes upa*tth*âna,
'readiness,' its mark.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[58:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_160) These are the
various moral qualities and mental habits which together make up
Arahatship, and may be said also to make up Buddhism (as the Buddha
taught it). It was on these that he laid special stress, in his last
address to the members of the Order, just before his death ('Book of the
Great Decease,' III, 65, in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' pp. 60-63); and the
details of them will be found in the note to that passage.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[59:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_161) *K*akkavattissa
bha*nd*âgâriko, no doubt with allusion to the gahapati-ratana*m*, one of
the seven treasures of the mythical King of Glory (see my 'Buddhist
Suttas,' p. 257). It is particularly interesting to me to find here the
use of the word 'treasurer' instead of 'householder;' for it was in that
exact sense that I had understood the word gahapati in that connection,
at a time when, in the then state of Pâli scholarship, it seemed very
bold to do so.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[59:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_162) Literally 'horses.'
The whole list is again a manifest allusion to the corresponding one in
the Sutta of the Great King of Glory.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[60:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_163) Pari*n*âyaka, the
seventh treasure of the King Of Glory. (Compare the 'Buddhist Suttas,'
p. 259.) It will be seen that our author is in substantial agreement
with the older tradition, and does not, like the Lalita Vistara,
understand under this officer a general.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[60:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_164) Omitted by Hardy.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[60:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_165) Samâdhi.
Buddhaghosa, loc. cit. p. 6,5, gives also 'being the chief' as its mark,
but he previously (p. 64) gives avikkhepa, 'serenity,' as the mark of
sammâ-samâdhi, and also (p. 63) of samâdhindriya, while 'being unshaken
by spiritual pride' is his mark (p. 63) of Samâdhi-bala.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[61:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_166) Sa*m*yutta Nikâya
XXI, 5.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[61:2](sbe3504.htm#fr_167) Pa*ññ*â. Hardy in
the 'Manual of Buddhism,' pp. 414, 415, gives a jumble of this passage
and several others.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[61:3](sbe3504.htm#fr_168) See above, [p.
51](#page_51).

<span id="fn_167"></span>[61:4](sbe3504.htm#fr_169) Vida*m*seti, not in
Childers; but compare Theri Gâthâ, 74; A<u>n</u>guttara III, 103; and
*G*âtaka, III, 222.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[62:1](sbe3504.htm#fr_170) That is, the five
referred to above, p. 51, § 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe3505)
