[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3505.md) 
[Next](sbe3507.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### BOOK II. CHAPTER 3.

1\. The king said: 'What is the root, Nâgasena, of past time, and what
of present, and what of future time?'

'Ignorance. By reason of Ignorance came the Confections, by reason of
the Confections consciousness, by reason of consciousness name-and-form,
by reason of name-and-form the six organs of sense <span
id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_192.md), by reason of them contact, by reason of
contact sensation, by reason of sensation thirst, by reason of thirst
craving, by reason of craving becoming, by reason of becoming birth, by
reason of birth old age and death, grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, and
despair. Thus is it that the ultimate point in the past of all this time
is not apparent.'

'You are ready, Nâgasena, in reply!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. The king said: 'You say that the ultimate point of time is not
apparent. Give me an illustration of that.'

'Suppose, O king, a man were to plant in the ground a tiny seed, and
that it were to come up as a shoot, and in due course grow, develope,
and mature until it produced a fruit. \[**51**\] And then the man,
taking a seed from that fruit, were again to plant it in the ground, and
all should happen as before. Now would there be any end to this series?'

Certainly not, Sir.'

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

'Just so, O king, the ultimate point in the past of the whole of this
time is not apparent.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'The hen lays an egg. From the egg comes a hen. From the hen an egg. Is
there any end to this series?'

'No.'

'Just so, O king, the ultimate point in the past of the whole of this
time is not apparent.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

Then the Elder drew a circle on the ground and asked the king: 'Is there
any end to this circle?'

'No, it has no end.'

4 Well, that is like those circles spoken of by the Blessed One <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_193.md). "By reason of the eye and of forms
there arises sight <span id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_194.md), when these
three come together there is touch, by reason of touch sensation, by
reason of sensation a longing (Ta*n*hâ, thirst), by reason of the
longing action (Karma), and from action eye is once more produced <span
id="fr_197"></span>[3](#fn_195.md)." Now is there any end to this series

'No.'

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Then setting out a precisely corresponding circle of each of the other
organs of sense (of the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_196).md), he in each case put the same question.
And the reply being always the same, he concluded:

'Just so, O king, the ultimate point of time in the past is not
apparent.'

'You are ready, Nâgasena, in reply.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. The king said: 'When you say that the ultimate point is not
apparent, what do you mean by "ultimate point"?'

'Of whatsoever time is past. It is the ultimate point of that, O king,
that I speak of.'

'But, if so, when you say that it is not apparent, do you mean to say
that of everything? Is the ultimate point of everything unknown?'

'Partly so, and partly not.'

'Then which is so, and which not?'

'Formerly, O king, everything in every form, everything in every mode,
was ignorance. It is to us as if it were not. In reference to that the
ultimate beginning is unknown. But that, which has not been, becomes; as
soon as it has begun to become it dissolves away again. In reference to
that the ultimate beginning is known <span
id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_197.md).' \[**52**\]

'But, reverend Sir, if that which was not, becomes, and as soon as it
has begun to become passes again

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

away, then surely, being thus cut off at both ends, it must be entirely
destroyed <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_198.md)?'

'Nay, surely, O king, if it be thus cut off at both ends, can it not at
both ends be made to grow again <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_199.md)?'

'Yes, it might. But that is not my question. Could it grow again from
the point at which it was cut off?'

'Certainly.'

'Give me an illustration.'

Then the Elder repeated the simile of the tree and the seed, and said
that the Skandhas (the constituent elements of all life, organic and
inorganic) were so many seeds, and the king confessed himself satisfied.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. The king said: 'Are there any Confections <span
id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_200.md) which are produced?'

'Certainly.'

'Which are they?'

'Where there is an eye, and also forms, there is sight <span
id="fr_203"></span>[4](#fn_201.md), where there is sight there is a contact
through the eye, where there is contact through the eye there is a
sensation, where there is sensation there is a longing <span
id="fr_204"></span>[5](#fn_202.md), where there is longing there is a
grasping <span id="fr_205"></span>[6](#fn_203.md), where there is grasping
there is a becoming,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

where there is becoming there is birth, and at birth old age and death,
grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and despair begin to be. Thus is the
rise of the whole of this class of pain.--Where there is neither eye nor
form there is no sight, where there is not sight there is no contact
through the eye, where there is not contact there is no sensation, where
there is not sensation there is no longing, where there is not longing
there is no grasping, where there is not grasping there is no becoming,
where there is not becoming there is no birth, and where there is not
birth there is neither old age nor death nor grief, lamentation, pain,
sorrow, and despair. Thus is the ending of all this class of pain.

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. The king said: 'Are there any Confections (qualities) which spring
into being without a gradual becoming?'

'No. They all have a gradual becoming.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Now what do you think, great king? Did this house in which you are
sitting spring suddenly into being?'

\[**53**\] 'Certainly not, Sir. There is nothing here which arose in
that way. Each portion of it has had its gradual becoming--these beams
had their becoming in the forest, and this clay in the earth, and by the
moil and toil of women and of men <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_204.md)
was this house produced.'

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

'Just so, great king, there is no Confection. which has sprung into
being without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of evolution that
Confections come to be!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'They are like all kinds of trees and plants which, when set in the
ground, grow, develope, and mature, and then yield their fruits and
flowers. The trees do not spring into being without a becoming. It is by
a process of evolution that they become what they are. just so, great
king, there is no Confection which has sprung into being without a
gradual becoming. It is by a process of evolution that Confections come
to be!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'They are like the pots of various kinds which a potter might form when
he has dug up the clay out of the earth. The pots do not spring into
being without a becoming. It is by a process of evolution that they
become what they are. just so, great king, there is no Confection which
has sprung into being without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of
evolution that Confections come to be!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, there were no bridge of metal on a mandolin <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_205.md), no leather, no hollow space, no frame,
no neck, no strings, no bow, and no human effort or exertion, would
there be music?'

'Certainly not, Sir.'

'But if all these things were there, would not there be a sound?'

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

'Of course there would.'

'Just so, great king, there is no Confection which has sprung into being
without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of evolution that
Confections come to be!'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, there were no fire-stick apparatus <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_206.md), no twirling-stick <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_206.md), and no cord for the twirling-stick, and
no matrix <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_206.md), and no burnt rag for
tinder, and no human effort and exertion, could there be fire by
attrition?'

'Certainly not.'

'But if all these conditions were present, then might not fire appear?'

'Yes, certainly.'

\[**54**\] 'Just so, great king, there is no Confection which has sprung
into being without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of evolution
that Confections come to be!'

'Give me one more illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, there were no burning glass, and no heat of the sun,
and no dried cow-dung for tinder, could there be fire?'

'Certainly not.'

'But where these things are present there fire might be struck, might it
not?'

'Yes.'

'Just so, great king, there is no Confection which

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

has sprung into being without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of
evolution that Confections come to be!'

'Give me another illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, there were no looking-glass, and no light, and no face
in front of it, would there appear an image?'

'No.'

'But given these things, there might be a reflection?'

'Yes, Sir, there might.'

'Just so, great king, there is no Confection which has sprung into being
without a gradual becoming. It is by a process of evolution that
Confections come to be!'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. The king said: 'Is there, Nâgasena, such a thing as the soul <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_207.md)?'

'What is this, O king, the soul (Vedagu)?'

'The living principle within <span id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_208.md) which
sees forms through the eye, hears sounds through the ear, experiences
tastes through the tongue, smells odours through the nose, feels touch
through the body, and discerns things (conditions, "dhammâ") through the
mind--just as we, sitting here in the palace, can look out of any window
out of which we wish to look, the east window or the west, or the north
or the south.'

The Elder replied: 'I will tell you about the five

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

doors <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_209.md), great king. Listen, and
give heed attentively. If the living principle within sees forms through
the eye in the manner that you mention, \[**55**\] choosing its window
as it likes, can it not then see forms not only through the eye, but
also through each of the other five organs of sense? And in like manner
can it not then as well hear sounds, and experience taste, and smell
odours, and feel touch, and discern conditions through each of the other
five organs of sense, besides the one you have in each case specified?'

'No, Sir.'

'Then these powers are not united one to another indiscriminately, the
latter sense to the former organ, and so on. Now we, as we are seated
here in the palace, with these windows all thrown open, and in full
daylight, if we only stretch forth our heads, see all kinds of objects
plainly. Can the living principle do the same when the doors of the eyes
are thrown open? When the doors of the ear are thrown open, can it do
so? Can it then not only hear sounds, but see sights, experience tastes,
smell odours, feel touch, and discern conditions? And so with each of
its windows?'

'No, Sir.'

\[**56**\] 'Then these powers are not united one to another
indiscriminately. Now again, great king, if Dinna here were to go
outside and stand in the gateway, would you be aware that he had done
so?'

'Yes, I should know it.'

'And if the same Dinna were to come back again, and stand before you,
would you be aware of his having done so?'

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

'Yes, I should know it.'

'Well, great king, would the living principle within discern, in like
manner, if anything possessing flavour were laid upon the tongue, its
sourness, or its saltness, or its acidity, or its pungency, or its
astringency, or its sweetness <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_210.md)?'

'Yes, it would know it.'

'But when the flavour had passed into the stomach would it still discern
these things?'

'Certainly not.'

'Then these powers are not united one to the other indiscriminately. Now
suppose, O king, a man were to have a hundred vessels of honey brought
and poured into one trough, and then, having had another man's mouth
closed over and tied up, were to have him cast into the trough full of
honey. Would he know whether that into which he had been thrown was
sweet or whether it was not?'

'No, Sir.'

'But why not?'

'Because the honey could not get into his mouth.'

'Then, great king, these powers are not united one to another
indiscriminately <span id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_211.md).'

'I am not capable of discussing with such a reasoner. Be pleased, Sir,
to explain to me how the matter stands.'

Then the Elder convinced Milinda the king with discourse drawn from the
Abhidhamma, saying: 'It is by reason, O king, of the eye and of forms
that sight arises, and those other conditions--contact,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

sensation, idea, thought, abstraction, sense of vitality, and
attention <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_212.md)--arise each
simultaneously with its predecessor. And a similar succession of cause
and effect arises when each of the other five organs of sense is brought
into play. \[**57**\] And so herein there is no such thing as soul
(Vedagu) <span id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_213.md).'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. The king said: 'Does thought-perception <span
id="fr_218"></span>[3](#fn_214.md) arise wherever sight arises <span
id="fr_219"></span>[4](#fn_215.md)?'

'Yes, O king, where the one is there is the other.' And which of the two
arises first?'

'First sight, then thought.'

'Then does the sight issue, as it were, a command to thought, saying:
"Do you spring up there where I have? or does thought issue command to
sight, saying: Where you spring up there will I."'

'It is not so, great king. There is no intercourse between the one and
the other.'

'Then how is it, Sir, that thought arises wherever sight does?'

'Because of there being a sloping down, and because of there being a
door, and because of there being a habit <span
id="fr_220"></span>[5](#fn_216.md), and because of there being an
association.'

'How is that? Give me an illustration of mind arising where sight arises
because of there being a sloping down.'

'Now what do you think, great king? When it rains <span
id="fr_221"></span>[6](#fn_217.md), where will the water go to?'

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

'It will follow the slope of the ground.'

'And if it were to rain again, where would the water go to?'

'It would go the same way as the first water had gone.'

'What then? Does the first water issue, as it were, command to the
second, saying: "Do you go where I have?" Or does the second issue
command to the first, saying: "Whithersoever you go, thither will I"?'

'It is not so, Sir. There is no intercourse between the two. Each goes
its way because of the slope of the ground.'

'Just so, great king, \[**58**\] is it by reason of the natural slope
that where sight has arisen there also does thought arise. And neither
does the sight-perception issue command to the mind-perception, saying:
"Where I have arisen, there do thou also spring up;" nor does the
mind-perception inform the sight-perception, saying: "Where thou hast
arisen, there will I also spring up." There is no conversation, as it
were, between them. All that happens, happens through natural slope.'

'Now give me an illustration of there being a door.'

'What do you think, great king? Suppose a king had a frontier city, and
it was strongly defended with towers and bulwarks, and had only one
gateway. If a man wanted to leave the city, how would he go out?'

'By the gate, certainly.'

'And if another man wanted to leave it, how would he go out?'

'The same way as the first.'

'What then? Would the first man tell the second:

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Mind you go out the same way as I do"? Or would
the second tell the first: "The way you go out, I shall go out too"?'

'Certainly not, Sir. There would be no communication between them. They
would go that way because that was the gate.'

'Just so, great king, with thought and sight.'

'Now give me an illustration of thought arising where sight is because
of habit.'

'What do you think, great king? If one cart went ahead, which way would
a second cart go?'

'The same as the first.'

'But would the first tell the second to go where it went, \[**59**\] or
the second tell the first that it would go where it (the first) had
gone?'

'No, Sir. There would be no communication between the two. The second
would follow the first out of habit.'

'Just so, great king, with sight and thought.'

'Now give me an illustration of how thought arises, where sight has
arisen, through association.'

'In the art of calculating by using the joints of the fingers as signs
or marks <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_218.md), in the art of arithmetic
pure and simple <span id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_219.md), in the art of
estimating the probable

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

yield of growing crops <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_220.md), and in the
art of writing, O king, the beginner is clumsy. But after a certain time
with attention and practice he becomes expert. just so is it that, where
sight has arisen, thought too by association springs up.'

And in response to similar questions, the Elder declared that in the
same way thought sprang up wherever there was hearing, or taste, or
smell, or touch: that in each case it was subsequent to the other, but
arose without communication from \[**60**\] the natural causes above set
out.

8\. The king said: 'Where thought (mental perception <span
id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_221).md) is, Nâgasena, is there always
sensation?'

'Yes, where thought arises there is contact, and there is sensation, and
there is idea, and there is conceived intention, and there is
reflection; and there is investigation <span
id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_222.md).'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. 'Reverend Sir, what is the distinguishing characteristic of contact
(Phassa)?'

'Touch <span id="fr_227"></span>[4](#fn_223.md), O king.'

'But give me an illustration.'

'It is as when two rams are butting together, O

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

king. The eye should be regarded as one of those two, the form (object)
as the other, and the contact as the union of the two.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'It is as when two cymbals <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_224.md) are
clashed together. The one is as the eye, the other as the object, and
the junction of the two is like contact.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. 'Reverend Sir, what is the characteristic mark of sensation
(Vedanâ)?'

'The being experienced, great king, and enjoyed <span
id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_225.md).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the case of the man <span id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_226.md) on
whom the king, pleased with a service he has rendered him, should bestow
an office. He while living, through that appointment, in the full
possession and enjoyment of all the pleasures of sense, would think:
"Formerly I did the king a service. For that the king, pleased with me,
gave me this office. It is on that account that I now experience such
sensations."--And it is like the case of the man \[**61**\] who having
done good deeds is re-born, on the dissolution of the body after death,
into some happy conditions of bliss in heaven. He, while living there in
the full possession and enjoyment of all the pleasures of sense, would
think: "Formerly I must have done good deeds. It is on that account that
I now experience such sensations." Thus is it, great king, that the
being experienced and enjoyed is the characteristic mark of sensation.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

11\. 'What is the distinguishing characteristic, Nâgasena, of idea
(Sa*ññ*â)?'

'Recognition, O king <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_227.md). And what
does he recognise?--blueness and yellowness and redness and whiteness
and brownness.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the king's treasurer. O king, who when he sees, on entering
the treasure, objects the property of the king, of all those colours,
recognises (that they have such). Thus it is, great king, that
recognition is the mark of idea.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

'What is the distinguishing characteristic, Nâgasena, of the conceived
purpose (*K*etanâ)?'

'The being conceived, O king, and the being prepared <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_228.md).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the case of a man, O king, who should prepare poison, and
both drink of it himself, and give of it to others to drink. He himself
would suffer pain, and so would they. In the same way some individual,
having thought out with intention some evil deed, on the dissolution of
the body after death, would be reborn into some unhappy state of woe in
purgatory, and so also would those who followed his advice.--And it is
like the case of a

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

man, O king, who should prepare a mixture of ghee, butter, oil, honey
and molasses, and should both drink thereof himself and give of it to
others to drink. He himself would have pleasure, and so would they.
\[**62**\] In the same way some individual, having thought out with
intention some good deed, will be reborn, on the dissolution of the body
after death, into some happy state of bliss in heaven, and so also would
those who follow his advice. Thus is it, great king, that the being
conceived, and the being prepared, are marks of the conceived purpose.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. 'What, Nâgasena, is the distinguishing characteristic of perception
(Vi*ññ*âna)?'

'Recognition <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_229.md), great king.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the case of the guardian of a city who, when seated at the
cross roads in the middle of the city, could see a man coming from the
East, or the South, or the West, or the North. In the same way, O king,
he knows an object which he sees with his eye, or a sound which he hears
with his ear, or an odour which he smells by his nose, or a taste which
he experiences with his tongue, or a touchable thing which he touches
with his body, or a quality that he recognises by his mind. Thus is it,
great king, that knowing is the mark of perception.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. 'What is the distinguishing characteristic, Nâgasena, of reflection
(Vitakka).

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

'The effecting of an aim <span id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_230.md).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the case of a carpenter, great king, who fixes in a joint a
well-fashioned piece of wood. Thus is it that the effecting of an aim is
the mark of reflection.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. 'What is the distinguishing characteristic, Nâgasena, of
investigation (Vi*k*âra)?'

'Threshing out again and again <span id="fr_235"></span>[2](#fn_231.md).'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the case of the copper vessel, which, when it is being
beaten into shape \[**63**\], makes a sound again and again as it
gradually gathers shape <span id="fr_236"></span>[3](#fn_232.md). The
beating into shape is to be regarded as reflection, and the sounding
again and again as investigation. Thus is it, great king, that threshing
out again and again is the mark of investigation.'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Third Chapter <span id="fr_237"></span>[4](#fn_233.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[79:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_194.md) Sa*l*âyatanâni, that
is the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body (as the organ of touch), and mind
(or, as we should say, brain).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[80:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_195.md) Hîna*t*i-kumburê
applies this to the previous words (the circles of the chain of life
quoted in § 1 from the Mahâvagga I, 1, 2), and he is followed by Hardy,
p. 434. Trenckner makes it apply to the following words, giving the
reference to No. 18 in the Ma*ggh*ima Nikâya, and I think he is right.
Whichever way it is taken, the result is much the same.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[80:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_196.md) Kakkhu-vi*ññ*â*n*a.
It is not clear from the terse phraseology of this passage whether this
is supposed to he a subjective stage preliminary to the 'touch'
(phasso), or whether it is inclusive of it. (Compare Dhamma Sangani,
589, 599, 620.) I am inclined to think it is the former. But if the
latter be meant it might be rendered 'there arises that consciousness
(of existence) which is dependent upon the eye.' See below, § 4.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[80:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_197.md) That is, another eye
in another birth.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[81:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_198.md) In the text the
whole sentence is repeated of each.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[81:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_199.md) That is, 'the
beginning of each link in the chain--the beginning of each
individuality--can be traced, but not the beginning of each chain. Each
life is a link in a chain of lives, bound together by cause and effect,
different, yet the same. There are an infinite number of such chains;
and there is no reference in the discussion to any greater unity, or to
any "ultimate point" of all the chains.'

<span id="fn_198"></span>[82:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_200.md) That is, 'each
individuality must be separate. The supposed chain does not really
exist.'

<span id="fn_199"></span>[82:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_201.md) There is an odd
change of gender here. Possibly the word 'ignorance' has been dropped
out. Trenckner says the passage is corrupt, and the Si*m*halese is so
involved as to be unintelligible.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[82:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_202.md) Sa<u>n</u>khârâ,
potentialities, possible forms, of sentient existence.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[82:4](sbe3506.htm#fr_203.md) Kakkhu-vi*ññ*â*n*a.
See note 2 above, [p. 80](#page_80.md).

<span id="fn_202"></span>[82:5](sbe3506.htm#fr_204.md) Ta*n*hâ, thirst.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[82:6](sbe3506.htm#fr_205.md) Upâdâna, a
stretching out towards a satisfaction of the longing, and therefore a
craving for life, time, in which to satisfy it.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[83:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_206.md) It is a small
matter, but noteworthy, that the Buddhist texts always put the women
first.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[84:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_207.md) Vî*n*âya patta*m*. I
don't know what this is. The Si*m*halese merely repeats the words.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[85:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_210.md) Ara*n*i,
ara*n*i-potako, and uttarâra*n*i. The exact differentiation of these
parts of the fire-stick apparatus is uncertain. The Si*m*halese throws
no real light on them, as it translates them respectively ya*t*a lîya,
'under wood,' matu lîya, 'upper wood,' and uturu lîya, also 'upper
wood.' This method of ignition was probably quite as strange to
Hîna*t*i-kumburê as it is to us.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[86:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_211.md) Vedagû, see below,
III, 5, 6, p. 111, not found in this meaning in the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[86:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_212.md) Abbhantare *g*îvo,
also not found in this sense in the Pi*t*akas. Attâ, rendered just above
'image' or 'reflection,' is the word used in them for soul.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders this here by prâ*n*a *g*îwa, 'breath-soul.' See
below, III, 7, 15, p. 132; and above, II, 4, p. 48; and II, 2, 6, p. 71.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[87:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_213.md) It is odd he does
not say six.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[88:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_214.md) This list recurs
below, II, 4, 1.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[88:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_215.md) That is: 'Your
"living principle within" cannot make use of whichever of its windows it
pleases. And the simile of a man inside a house does not hold good of
the soul.' See the end of II, 3, 16.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[89:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_216.md) The last four are
*k*etanâ, ekaggatâ, *g*îvitindriya*m*, and manasikâro; and in the
Si*m*halese are simply repeated in their Si*m*halese form.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[89:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_217.md) This conclusion is
all wrong in Hardy, pp. 457, 458.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[89:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_218.md) Mano-viññâna*m*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[89:4](sbe3506.htm#fr_219.md) Kakkhu-viññâna*m*.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[89:5](sbe3506.htm#fr_220.md) *K*i*nn*attâ, which
Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders purudu bœwin.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[89:6](sbe3506.htm#fr_221.md) Deve vassante: 'when
the god rains.'

<span id="fn_218"></span>[91:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_222.md) Muddâ.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê is here a little fuller than Buddhaghosa at vol. i, p.
95 of the Sumangala. He says: yam se œ<u>n</u>gili purukhi alwâ gena
sa*ññ*â ko*t*a kiyana hasta mudra *s*âstraya, 'the finger-ring art, so
called from seizing on the joints of the fingers, and using them as
signs.'

<span id="fn_219"></span>[91:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_223.md) Ga*n*anâ.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê says: a*kkh*idra wu ga*n*a*m* *s*âstraya, 'the art of
unbroken counting,' which is precisely Buddhaghosa's explanation
(confirming the reading we have there adopted), and probably means
arithmetic without the aids involved in the last phrase. We have here in
that case an interesting peep into the <span id="page_92">p. 92</span>
progress of arithmetical knowledge. When our author wrote, the old way
of counting on the fingers was still in vogue, but the modern system was
coming into general use.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[92:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_224.md) Sa<u>n</u>khâ,
literally 'calculation,' but which Hardy amplifies into Kshetraya
w*ri*ksha vilokaya ko*t*a phala pramâ*n*aya kiyannâwû sa*m*khyâ
*s*âstraya.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[92:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_225.md) Mano-vi*ññ*â*n*a as
all through the last section. The reader must not forget that mano is
here strictly an organ of sense, on an exact level with eye, ear,
tongue, &c.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[92:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_226.md) *K*etanâ, vitakko,
and vi*k*âro. See fuller further on, §§ 11, 13, 14.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[92:4](sbe3506.htm#fr_227.md) Phusana. So also
Buddhaghosa at p. 63 of the Suma<u>n</u>gala.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[93:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_228.md) Sammâ, compare Theri
Gâthâ, 893, 911.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[93:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_229.md) Buddhaghosa, loc.
cit., only gives the first of these.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[93:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_230.md) See for a similar
illustration above, II, 2, 7, p. 76.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[94:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_231.md) So also Buddhaghosa,
Suma<u>n</u>gala, p. 63.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[94:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_232.md) Buddhaghosa, loc.
cit., gives no mark of *K*etanâ, but he gives both it and the being
prepared' as the marks of the Confections. It is not clear from the
Milinda alone how to render the term *K*etanâ, but I follow
A<u>n</u>guttara III, 77 (where it is placed on a level with
aspiration), and Dhamma Sa*m*ga*n*i 5 (where it is said to be born of
the contact of mind, perception, and exertion).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[95:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_233.md) Vi*g*ânana. So also
Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., and below, III, 7, 15, p. 131.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[96:1](sbe3506.htm#fr_234.md) Appanâ, which
Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders pihi*t*ana. Buddhaghosa, p. 63, gives
abhiniropana as its mark, which comes to much the same thing.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[96:2](sbe3506.htm#fr_235.md) Anuma*gg*ana. So
also Buddhaghosa, loc. cit. p. 63. The word is not in Childers, but see
Morris in the journal of the Pâli Text Society, 1886, p. 118.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[96:3](sbe3506.htm#fr_236.md) Anuravati
anusandahati. Not in Childers. Hîna*t*i-kumburê says pasuwa anurâwa*n*â
kere da anuwa pihitâ da.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[96:4](sbe3506.htm#fr_237.md) The following two
sections form an appendix to this chapter corresponding to that formed
by the last three sections of Book III, Chapter 7. The numbering of the
sections is therefore carried on in both cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe3507.md)
