[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3504.md) 
[Next](sbe3506.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### BOOK II. CHAPTER 2.

1\. \[**40**\] The king said: 'He who is born, Nâgasena, does he remain
the same or become another?'

'Neither the same nor another.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Now what do you think, O king? You were once a baby, a tender thing,
and small in size, lying flat on your back. Was that the same as you who
are now grown up?'

'No. That child was one, I am another.'

'If you are not that child, it will follow that you have had neither
mother nor father, no! nor teacher. You cannot have been taught either
learning, or behaviour, or wisdom. What, great king! is the mother of
the embryo in the first stage different from the mother of the embryo in
the second stage, or the third, or the fourth <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_169.md)? Is the mother of the baby a different
person from the mother of the grown-up man? Is the person who goes to
school one, and the same when he has finished his schooling another? Is
it one who commits a crime, another who is punished by having his hands
or feet cut off <span id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_170.md)?'

'Certainly not. But what would you, Sir, say to that? '

The Elder replied: 'I should say that I am the same person, now I am
grown up, as I was when I was a tender tiny baby, flat on my back. For
all these states are included in one by means of this body.'

'Give me an illustration.'

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

'Suppose a man, O king, were to light a lamp, would it burn the night
through?'

'Yes, it might do so.'

'Now, is it the same flame that burns in the first watch of the night,
Sir, and in the second?'

'No.'

'Or the same that burns in the second watch and in the third?'

'No.'

'Then is there one lamp in the first watch, and another in the second,
and another in the third?'

'No. The light comes from the same lamp all the night through.'

'Just so, O king, is the continuity of a person or thing maintained. One
comes into being, another passes away; and the rebirth is, as it were,
simultaneous. Thus neither as the same nor as another does a man go on
to the last phase of his self-consciousness <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_171.md).'

'Give me a further illustration.'

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

'It is like milk, \[**41**\] which when once taken from the cow, turns,
after a lapse of time, first to curds, and then from curds to butter,
and then from butter to ghee. Now would it be right to say that the milk
was the same thing as the curds, or the butter, or the ghee?'

'Certainly not; but they are produced out of it.'

'Just so, O king, is the continuity of a person or thing maintained. One
comes into being, another passes away; and the rebirth is, as it were,
simultaneous. Thus neither as the same nor as another does a man go on
to the last phase of his self-consciousness.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2 <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_172.md). The king said: 'Is a man,
Nâgasena, who will not be reborn, aware of the fact?'

'Yes, O king.'

'And how does he know it

'By the cessation of all that is cause, proximate or remote <span
id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_173.md), of rebirth.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Suppose a farmer, great king, had ploughed and sown and filled his
granary; and then for a period should neither plough nor sow, but live
on the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

stored-up grain, or dispose of it in barter, or deal with it as he had
need. Would the farmer be aware, great king, that his granary was not
getting filled?'

'Yes, he ought to know it.'

'But how?'

'He would know that the cause, proximate and remote, of the filling of
the granary had ceased.'

'Just so with the man you spoke of. By the cessation of all that leads
to rebirth, he would be conscious of having escaped his liability to
it.'

'Well explained, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3 <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_174.md). The king said: 'He who has
intelligence, Nâgasena, has he also wisdom <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_175.md)?'

'Yes, great king.' \[**42**\]

'What; are they both the same?'

'Yes.'

'Then would he, with his intelligence--which, you say, is the same as
wisdom--be still in bewilderment or not?'

'In regard to some things, yes; in regard to others, no.'

'What would he be in bewilderment about?'

'He would still be in bewilderment as to those parts of learning he had
not learnt, as to those countries he had not seen, and as to those names
or terms he had not heard.'

'And wherein would he not be in bewilderment?'

'As regards that which has been accomplished by insight--(the
perception, that is,) of the impermanence

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of all beings, of the suffering inherent in individuality, and of the
non-existence of any soul <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_176.md).'

'Then what would have become of his delusions on those points.'

'When intelligence has once arisen, that moment delusion has died away.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'It is like the lamp, which when a man has brought into a darkened room,
then the darkness would vanish away, and light would appear.'

'And what, Nâgasena, on the other hand, has then become of his wisdom?'

'When the reasoning wisdom has effected that which it has to do, then
the reasoning ceases to go on. But that which has been acquired by means
of it remains--the knowledge, to wit, of the impermanence of every
being, of the suffering inherent in individuality, and of the absence of
any soul.'

'Give me an illustration, reverend Sir, of what you have last said.'

'It is as when a man wants, during the night, to send a letter, and
after having his clerk called, has a lamp lit, and gets the letter
written. Then, when that has been done, he extinguishes the lamp. But
though the lamp had been put out the writing would still be there. Thus
does reasoning cease, and knowledge remain.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'In Eastern districts \[**43**\] the peasants have a custom of arranging
five pots full of water behind

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

each hut with the object of putting out at once any spark of fire that
may be kindled. Suppose now the house had caught fire, and they had
thrown those five potfulls of water over the hut, and the fire had gone
out, would those peasants then think of still going on using the
water-pots?'

'No, Sir, the water-pots would be done with. What would be the use of
them (on that occasion) any more?'

'The five water-pots are the five organs of moral sense--faith, to wit,
and perseverance in effort, and mindfulness, and meditation, and the
reasoning wisdom. The peasantry are the recluse, who is devoted in
effort <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_177.md); the fire is sinfulness. As
the fire is put out by the water in the five pots, so is sinfulness
extinguished by the five organs of moral sense, and when once
extinguished it does not again arise <span
id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_178.md).'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'It is like a physician who goes to the sick man with the five kinds of
drugs made from medicinal

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

roots <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_179.md), and grinding them up, gives
him to drink, and thereby his sickness passes away. Would the physician
in that case think of making any further use of the medicine?'

'Certainly not, the medicine has done its work. What would be the use of
any more?'

'Just so, O king, when sinfulness is destroyed by the five moral powers,
then reasoning ceases, but knowledge remains.'

\[**44**\] 'Give me a further illustration.'

'It is like a warrior, at home in war, who takes five javelins and goes
down to 'battle to conquer the foe. And when he has cast them the enemy
is broken. There is no need for him to go on casting javelins any more.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. The king said: 'He who will not be reborn, Nâgasena, does he still
feel any painful sensation?'

The Elder replied: 'Some he feels and some not.'

'Which are they?'

'He may feel bodily pain, O king; but mental pain he would not.'

'How would that be so?'

'Because the causes, proximate or remote, of bodily pain still continue,
he would be liable to it. But the causes, proximate or remote, of mental
agony having ceased, he could not feel it. For it has been said by the
Blessed One: "One kind of pain he suffers, bodily pain: but not
mental."'

'Then why, Sir, does he not die?'

'The Arahat, O king, has need neither to curry

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

favour nor to bear malice. He shakes not down the unripe fruit, but
awaits the full time of its maturity. For it has been said, O king, by
the Elder, Sâriputta, the Commander of the faith \[**45**\]:

"It is not death, it is not life I welcome;  
As the hireling his wage, so do I bide my time.  
It is not death, it is not life I want;  
Mindful and thoughtful do I bide my time <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_180.md)."'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. The king said: 'Is a pleasant sensation, Nâgasena, good or evil or
indifferent?'

'It may be any one of the three.'

'But surely, Sir, if good conditions are not painful, and painful ones
not good, then there can arise no good condition that is at the same
time painful <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_181.md).'

'Now, what do you think, great king? Suppose a man were to hold in one
hand a red-hot ball of iron, and in the other a lump of icy snow, would
they both hurt him?'

'Yes; they both would.'

'But are they both hot?'

'Certainly not.'

'But are they both cold?'

'No.'

'Then acknowledge yourself put in the wrong! If the heat hurts, and they
are not both hot, the pain cannot come from the heat. If the cold hurts,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

and they are not both cold, the pain cannot come from the cold. How
then, O king, can they both hurt you, since they are not both hot, nor
both cold, and (as one is hot and the other cold) the pain comes neither
from the hot nor from the cold?'

'I am not equal to argument with you. Be so good, Sir, as to explain how
the matter stands.'

Then the Elder reasoned with king Milinda, persuading him by talk on the
subject drawn from the Abhidhamma, such as: 'There are these six
pleasures, O king, connected with life in the world, and these other six
with renunciation. There are six griefs connected with life in the
world, and six with renunciation. There are six kinds of indifference to
pleasure and to grief connected with life in the world, and six with
renunciation. \[**46**\] Altogether there are thus six series of six,
that is to say, thirty-six kinds of sensations in the present, and the
like number in the past, and the like in the future. And adding all
these up in one total we arrive at one hundred and eight kinds of
sensation.'

'Well put, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6 <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_182.md). The king said: 'What is it,
Nâgasena, that is reborn?'

'Name-and-form is reborn.'

'What, is it this same name-and-form that is reborn?'

'No: but by this name-and-form deeds are done, good or evil, and by
these deeds (this Karma) another name-and-form is reborn.'

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

'If that be so, Sir, would not the new being be released from its evil
Karma <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_183.md)?'

The Elder replied: 'Yes, if it were not reborn. But just because it is
reborn, O king, it is therefore not released from its evil Karma.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, some man were to steal a mango from another man, and
the owner of the mango were to seize him and bring him before the king,
and charge him with the crime. And the thief were to say: "Your Majesty!
I have not taken away this man's mangoes. Those that he put in the
ground are different from the ones I took. I do not deserve to be
punished." How then? would he be guilty?'

'Certainly, Sir. He would deserve to be punished.'

'But on what ground?'

'Because, in spite of whatever he may say, he would be guilty in respect
of the last mango which resulted from the first one (the owner set in
the ground).'

'Just so, great king, deeds good or evil are done by this name-and-form
and another is reborn. But that other is not thereby released from its
deeds (its Karma).'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'It is like rice or sugar so stolen, of which the same might be said as
of the mango. \[**47**\] Or it is like the fire which a man, in the cold
season, might kindle, and when he had warmed himself, leave still
burning, and go away. Then if that fire were to set

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

another man's field on fire, and the owner of the field were to seize
him, and bring him before the king, and charge him with the injury, and
he were to say: "Your Majesty! It was not I who set this man's field on
fire. The fire I left burning was a different one from that which burnt
his field. I am not guilty." Now would the man, O king, be guilty?'

'Certainly, Sir.'

'But why?'

'Because, in spite of whatever he might say, he would be guilty in
respect of the subsequent fire that resulted from the previous one.'

'Just so, great king, deeds good or evil are done by this name-and-form
and another is reborn. But that other is not thereby released from its
deeds (its Karma).'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, a man were to take a lamp and go up into the top
storey of his house, and there eat his meal. And the lamp blazing up
were to set the thatch on fire, and from that the house should catch
fire, and that house having caught fire the whole village should be
burnt. And they should seize him and ask: "What, you fellow, did you set
our village on fire for?" And he should reply: "I've not set your
village on fire! The flame of the lamp, by the light of which I was
eating, was one thing; the fire which burnt your village was another
thing." Now if they, thus disputing, should go to law before you, O
king, in whose favour would you decide the case?'

'In the villagers' favour.'

'But why?'

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

'Because, Sir, in spite of whatever the man might say, the one fire was
produced from the other.'

'Just so, great king, it is one name-and-form which has its end in
death, and another name-and-form, which is reborn. But the second is the
result of the first, and is therefore not set free from its evil deeds.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, a man were to choose a young girl in marriage, and
give a price <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_184.md) for her and go away.
\[**48**\] And she in due course should grow up to full age, and then
another man were to pay a price for her and marry her. And when the
first one had come back he should say: "Why, you fellow, have you
carried off my wife?" And the other were to reply: "It's not your wife I
have carried off! The little girl, the mere child, whom you chose in
marriage and paid a price for is one; the girl grown up to full age whom
I chose in marriage and paid a price for, is another." Now if they, thus
disputing, were to go to law about it before you, O king, in whose
favour would you decide the case?'

'In favour of the first.'

'But why?'

'Because, in spite of whatever the second might say, the grown-up girl
would have been derived from the other girl.'

'Just so, great king, it is one name-and-form which has its end in
death, and another name-and-form

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

which is reborn. But the second is the result of the first, and is
therefore not set free from its evil deeds.'

'Give me a further illustration.'

'Suppose a man, O king, were to buy of a herdsman a vessel of milk, and
go away leaving it in his charge, saying: "I will come for it
to-morrow;" and the next day it were to become curds. And when the man
should come and ask for it, then suppose the other were to offer him the
curds, and he should say: "It was not curds I bought of you; give me my
vessel of milk." And the other were to reply: "Without any fault of
mine <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_185.md) your milk has turned to
curds." Now if they, thus disputing, were to go to law about it before
you, O king, in whose favour would you decide the case?'

'In favour of the herdsman.'

'But why?'

'Because, in spite of whatever the other might say, the curds were
derived from the milk.'

'Just so, great king, it is one name-and-form that finds its end in
death, and another that is reborn. But that other is the result of the
first, and is therefore not thereby released from its evil deeds (its
bad Karma).'

'Very good, Nâgasena!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7 <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_186.md). The king said: 'Will you,
Nâgasena, be reborn?'

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Nay, great king, what is the use of asking that question again? Have I
not already told you that if, when I die, \[**49**\] I die with craving
in my heart, I shall; but if not, not <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_187.md)?'

'Give me an illustration.'

'Suppose, O king, a man were to render service to the king <span
id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_188.md): and the king, pleased with him, were to
bestow an office upon him. And then that he, while living through that
appointment, in the full possession and enjoyment of all the pleasures
of sense, should publicly declare that the king had repaid him naught.
Now would that man, O king, be acting rightly?'

'Most certainly not.'

'Just so, great king, what is the use of asking that question again?
Have I not already told you that if, when I die, I die with craving in
my heart, I shall; and if not, not?'

'You are ready, Nâgasena, in reply.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. The king said: 'You were talking just now of name-and-form. What
does "name" mean in that expression, and what "form"?'

'Whatever is gross therein, that is "form": whatever is subtle, mental,
that is "name."'

'Why is it, Nâgasena, that name is not reborn separately, or form
separately?'

'These conditions, great king, are connected one with the other; and
spring into being together.'

'Give me an illustration.'

'As a hen, great king, would not get a yoke or

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

an egg-shell separately, but both would arise in one, they two being
intimately dependent one on the other; just so, if there were no name
there would be no form. What is meant by name in that expression being
intimately dependent on what is meant by form, they spring up together.
And this is, through time immemorial, their nature <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_189.md).'

'You are ready, Nâgasena, in reply.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. The king said: 'You speak, Nâgasena, of time immemorial. What does
this word "time" mean?'

'Past time, O king, and present, and future.'

'But what? is there such a thing as time?'

'There is time which exists, and time which does not.'

'Which then exists, and which not?'

\[**50**\] 'There are Confections (constituent potentialities of
being) <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_190.md), O king, which are past in
the sense of having passed away, and ceased to be, or of having been
dissolved, or altogether changed. To them time is not. But there are
conditions of heart which are now producing their effect, or still have
in them the inherent possibility of producing

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

effect, or which will otherwise lead to reindividualisation. To them
time is. Where there are beings who, when dead, will be reborn, there
time is. Where there are beings who, when dead, will not be reborn,
there time is not; and where there are beings who are altogether set
free (who, having attained Nirvâna in their present life, have come to
the end of that life), there time is not--because of their having been
quite set free <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_191.md).'

'You are ready, Nâgasena, in reply.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Second Chapter.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[63:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_171.md) On these four stages
see *G*âtaka IV, 496, and Sa*m*yutta X, 1, 3.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[63:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_172.md) Hardy makes sad
nonsense of all this.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[64:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_173) Hardy (p. 429.md)
renders this as follows: 'In the same way, great king, one being is
conceived, another is born, another dies; when comprehended by the mind,
it is like a thing that has no before, and no after; no preceding, no
succeeding existence. Thus the being who is born does not continue the
same, nor does he become another; the last winyâna, or consciousness, is
thus united with the rest.' (!) He confesses himself in doubt as to the
last few words, but is quite unconscious of having completely
misinterpreted the whole paragraph.

The meaning is really quite plain in both the Pâli and the Si*m*halese.
A man, at any one moment, is precisely all that he is then conscious of.
The phase of his self-consciousness, the totality of that of which he is
conscious, is always changing; and is so different at death from what it
was at birth that, in a certain sense, he is not the same at the one
time as he was at the other. But there is a continuity in the whole
series;--a continuity dependent <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> on the
whole body. And this fits the simile, in which the lamp is the body, and
the flame the changing self-consciousness; whereas it is impossible to
make the simile fit the conclusion as rendered by Hardy.

On the phrase apubba*m* a*k*ariya*m* see Dr. Morris's note at p. 101 of
the Pâli Text Society's journal, 1887, and the passages he there quotes.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[65:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_174.md) Omitted in Hardy.
The correlative question is discussed below, III, 5, 8, [p.
112](sbe3509.htm#page_112.md).

<span id="fn_173"></span>[65:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_175.md) That is to say,
Ta*n*hâ and Upâdâna.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[66:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_176.md) Summarised in
Hardy's 'Manual,' p. 414.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[66:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_177.md) *Ñ*âna and pa*ññ*â.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[67:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_178.md) That is, he might
still be wrong on matters of mere worldly knowledge, but would be clear
in his mind as to the fundamental truths of religion. Compare the
analogous distinctions often drawn as to the inspiration of Scripture,
or the infallibility of the Pope.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[68:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_179.md) Yogâva*k*aro; one of
the technical terms in constant use by our author, but not found in the
Pâli Pi*t*akas. Hardy renders it, 'who is seeking Nirvâna;' but though
this may be suggested by the term, it is not its meaning. Literally it
is 'he whose sphere, whose constant resort, is Yoga.' Now yoga is
'diligence, devotion, mental concentration;' and there is nothing to
show that our author is using the word as an epithet of Arahatship. It
seems to me, therefore, that the whole compound merely means one of
those 'religious,' in the technical sense, who were also religious in
the higher, more usual sense. It would thus be analogous to the phrase
sa*m*gâmâva*k*aro, 'at home in war,' used of a war elephant in the
Sa*m*gâmâva*k*ara *G*âtaka (Fausböll, II, 95), and of a soldier below,
Mil. 44.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[68:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_180.md) This must, I think,
be understood in a modified sense, for the first of the four Great
Exertions (Sammappadhânas) is the effort to prevent sinful conditions
arising.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[69:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_181.md) Pa*ñk*a mûla
bhessa*gg*âni: not the five principal sorts of medicine mentioned by
Childers.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[70:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_182.md) These verses are
nearly the same as those put in reverse order into Sâriputta's mouth in
the Theri Gâthâ, 1003, 1002. And the first two lines, as Dr. Rost was
good enough to point out to me, are identical (except as to a slight
grammatical variation) with Manu V1, 45.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[70:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_183.md) And the same,
therefore, of pleasant sensations that are evil.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[71:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_184.md) This dialogue is in
Hardy, p. 429 (No. 7).

<span id="fn_183"></span>[72:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_185.md) Repeated below, III,
5, 7, [p. 112](sbe3509.htm#page_112.md).

<span id="fn_184"></span>[74:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_186.md) Su<u>n</u>ka*m*
datvâ. Literally 'paying a tax.' So early were early marriages! Compare
Theri Gâthâ, 402. Hîna*t*i-kumburê, p. 58, has wœ*t*up dî, 'having
provided her with means of subsistence.' But, of course, the
Su<u>n</u>ka must have been a price paid to the parents.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[75:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_187.md) A*g*ânato: there is
an ambiguity here, as the word may mean 'to me not knowing it,' or 'to
you not knowing it.' Hîna*t*i-kumburê takes the latter interpretation,
and renders: 'O come! Do you not know that your milk has become curds?'
(Embala, tâge kiri mawû bawa no dannehi dœyi.)

<span id="fn_186"></span>[75:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_188.md) Not in Hardy.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[76:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_189.md) See above, Chapter
i, § 6, p. 50.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[76:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_190.md) This simile, with a
different conclusion, recurs below, II, 3, 10 ([p.
93](sbe3506.htm#page_93).md).

<span id="fn_189"></span>[77:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_191.md) Evam eta*m* dîgham
addhâna*m* sa*m*bhâvita*m*: which Hardy, p. 141, renders: 'They
accompany each other (as to the species, but not as to the individual)
during infinitude.' But even the Si*m*halese text cannot be made to mean
this.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[77:2](sbe3505.htm#fr_192.md) Sa*m*khârâ. See the
full list in my 'Buddhism,' pp. 91, 92 (a list, indeed, not found as yet
in the Pi*t*akas, and probably later, but yet founded on the older
divisions, and explanatory of them). They are all those divisions into
which existence (or the process of becoming and ceasing to be as
Buddhism looks at it) should be divided, and are practically so many
sorts of action (Karma). For the older divisions see the note at the
passages quoted in 'Vinaya Texts,' I, 76.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[78:1](sbe3505.htm#fr_193.md) Parinibbutattâ.
Hardy renders this whole clause (the last lines): 'Nirvâ*n*a is
attained, time is no longer.' But this is one of the endless confusions
arising out of not knowing the distinction between Nirvâna and
Parinirvâ*n*a. To a man who had 'attained Nirvâna' there would still be
time as long as he was in the enjoyment of it, that is as long as he
continued in his present (and last) existence. The Si*m*halese is
perfectly clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe3506.md)
