[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Milinda](../milinda)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3512) 
[Next](sbe3514) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

### BOOK IV. CHAPTER 2.

### \[THE ABOLITION OF REGULATIONS.\]

1\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it has been said by the Blessed One: "It is by
insight, O Bhikkhus, that I preach the law, not without insight <span
id="fr_417"></span>[1](#fn_409)." On the other hand he said of the
regulations of the Vinaya: "When I am gone, Ânanda, let the Order, if it
should so wish, abolish all the lesser and minor precepts <span
id="fr_418"></span>[2](#fn_410)." Were then these lesser and minor
precepts wrongly laid down, or established in ignorance and without due
cause, that the Blessed One allowed them to be revoked after his death?
If the first statement had been true, the second would have been wrong.
If the second statement were really made, \[**143**\] then the first was
false. This too is a double-headed problem, fine, subtle, abstruse,
deep, profound, and hard to expound. It is now put to you, and you have
to solve it.'

2\. 'In both cases, O king, the Blessed One said as you have declared.
But in the second case it was to test the Bhikkhus that he said it, to
try whether, if leave were granted them, they would, after his death,
revoke the lesser and minor regulations, or still adhere to them. It
runs as if a

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

king of kings were to say to his sons: "This great country, my children,
reaches to the sea on every side. It is a hard thing to maintain it with
the forces we have at our disposal. So when I am gone you had better, my
children, abandon the outlying districts along the border." Now would
the princes, O king, on the death of their father, give up those
outlying districts, provinces already in their power?'

'No indeed, Sir. Kings are grasping. The princes might, in the lust of
power, subjugate an extent of country twice or thrice the size of what
they had, but they would never give up what they already possessed.'

'Just so was it, O king, that the Tathâgata to test the Bhikkhus said:
"When I am gone, Ânanda, let the Order, if it should so wish, abolish
all the lesser and minor precepts." But the sons of the Buddha, O king,
in their lust after the law, and for emancipation from sorrow, might
keep two hundred and fifty regulations <span
id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_411), but would never give up any one that
had been laid down in ordinary course.'

3\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, when the Blessed One referred to "lesser and
minor precepts," this people might therein \[**144**\] be bewildered,
and fall into doubt, and find matter for discussion, and be lost in
hesitation, as to which were the lesser, and which the minor precepts.'

'The lesser errors in conduct <span id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_412), O
king, are the lesser precepts, and the lesser errors in speech <span
id="fr_421"></span>[3](#fn_413) are the minor precepts: and these two
together make up therefore "the lesser and minor precepts." The

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

leading Elders too of old, O king, were in doubt about this matter, and
they were not unanimous on the point at the Council held for the fixing
of the text of the Scriptures <span id="fr_422"></span>[1](#fn_414). And
the Blessed One foresaw that this problem would arise.'

'Then this dark saying of the Conquerors, Nâgasena, which has lain hid
so long, has been now to-day uncovered in the face of the world, and
made clear to all.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the problem as to the revocation of rules.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[ESOTERIC TEACHING.\]

4\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One: "In respect of
the truths, Ânanda, the Tathâgata has no such thing as the closed fist
of a teacher who keeps something back <span
id="fr_423"></span>[2](#fn_415)." But on the other hand he made no reply
to the question put by the son of the Mâlu<u>n</u>kya woman <span
id="fr_424"></span>[3](#fn_416). This problem, Nâgasena, will be one of
two ends, on one of which it must rest, for he must have refrained from
answering either out of ignorance, or out of wish to conceal something.
If the first statement be true it must have been out of ignorance. But

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

if he knew, and still did not reply, then the first statement must be
false. This too is a double-pointed dilemma. It is now put to you, and
you have to solve it.'

5\. 'The Blessed One, O king, made that first statement to Ânanda, and
he did not reply to Mâlu<u>n</u>kya-putta's question. But that was
neither out of ignorance, nor for the sake of concealing anything. There
are four kinds of ways in which a problem may be explained. And which
are the four? There is the problem to which an explanation can be given
that shall be direct and final. There is the problem which can be
answered by going into details. There is the problem which can be
answered by asking another. And there is the problem which can be put on
one side.

'And which, O king, is the problem to which a direct and final solution
can be given? It is such as this--"Is form impermanent?" \[**145**\] "Is
sensation impermanent?" "Is idea impermanent?" "Are the Confections
impermanent?" "Is consciousness impermanent?"

'And which is the problem which can be answered by going into details?
It is such as this--"Is form thus impermanent?" and so on.

'And which is the problem which can be answered by asking another? It is
such as this--"What then? Can the eye perceive all things?"

'And which is the problem which can be put on one side? It is such as
this--"Is the universe everlasting?" "Is it not everlasting?" "Has it an
end?" "Has it no end?" "Is it both endless and unending?" "Is it neither
the one nor the other?" "Are the soul and the body the same

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

thing?" "Is the soul distinct from the body?" "Does a Tathâgata exist
after death?" "Does he not exist after death?" "Does he both exist and
not exist after death?" "Does he neither exist nor not exist after
death?"

'Now it was to such a question, one that ought to be put on one side,
that the Blessed One gave no reply to Mâlu<u>n</u>kya-putta. And why
ought such a question to be put on one side? Because there is no reason
or object for answering it. That is why it should be put aside. For the
Blessed Buddhas lift not up their voice without a reason and without an
object.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! Thus it is, and I accept it as you say?'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to keeping some things back <span
id="fr_425"></span>[1](#fn_417).\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[DEATH.\]

6\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, this too was said by the Blessed One: "All men
tremble at punishment, all are afraid of death <span
id="fr_426"></span>[2](#fn_418)." But again he said: "The Arahat has
passed beyond all fear <span id="fr_427"></span>[3](#fn_419)." How then,
Nâgasena? does the Arahat tremble with the fear of punishment?
\[**146**\] Or are the beings in purgatory, when they are being burnt
and boiled and scorched and tormented, afraid of that death which would
release them from the burning fiery pit of that awful place of woe <span
id="fr_428"></span>[4](#fn_420)? If the Blessed One, Nâgasena,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

really said that all men tremble at punishment, and all are afraid of
death, then the statement that the Arahat has passed beyond fear must be
false. But if that last statement is really by him, then the other must
be false. This double-headed problem is now put to you, and you have to
solve it.'

7\. 'It was not with regard to Arahats, O king, that the Blessed One
spake when he said: "All men tremble at punishment, all are afraid of
death." The Arahat is an exception to that statement, for all cause for
fear has been removed from the Arahat <span
id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_421). He spoke of those beings in whom evil
still existed, who are still infatuated with the delusion of self, who
are still lifted up and cast down by pleasures and pains. To the Arahat,
O king, rebirth in every state has been cut off, all the four kinds of
future existence have been destroyed, every re-incarnation has been put
an end to, the rafters <span id="fr_430"></span>[2](#fn_422) of the
house of life have broken, and the whole house completely pulled down,
the Confections have altogether lost their roots, good and evil have
ceased, ignorance has been demolished, consciousness has no longer any
seed (from which it could be renewed), all sin has been burnt away <span
id="fr_431"></span>[3](#fn_423), and all worldly conditions have been
overcome <span id="fr_432"></span>[4](#fn_424). Therefore is it that the
Arahat is not made to tremble by any fear.'

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

8\. 'Suppose, O king, a king had four chief ministers, faithful, famous,
trustworthy, placed in high positions of authority. And the king, on
some emergency arising, were to issue to them an order touching all the
people in his realm, saying: "Let all now pay up a tax, and do you, as
my four officers, carry out what is necessary in this emergency." Now
tell me, O king, would the tremor which comes from fear of taxation
arise in the hearts of those ministers?'

'No, Sir, it would not.'

'But why not?'

'They have been appointed by the king to high office. Taxation does not
affect them, they are beyond taxation. It was the rest that the king
referred to when he gave the order: \[**147**\] "Let all pay tax."'

'Just so, O king, is it with the statement that all men tremble at
punishment, all are afraid of death. In that way is it that the Arahat
is removed from every fear.'

9\. 'But, Nâgasena, the word "all" is inclusive, none are left out when
it is used. Give me a further reason to establish the point.'

'Suppose, O king, that in some village the lord of the village were to
order the crier, saying: "Go, crier, bring all the villagers quickly
together before me." And he in obedience to that order were to stand in
the midst of the village and were thrice to call out: "Let all the
villagers assemble at once in the presence of the lord!" And they should
assemble in haste, and have an announcement made to the lord, saying:
"All the villagers, Sire, have assembled. Do now whatsoever you
require." Now when the lord, O king, is thus summoning all the heads of

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

houses, he issues his order to all the villagers, but it is not they who
assemble in obedience to the order; it is the heads of houses. And the
lord is satisfied therewith, knowing that such is the number of his
villagers. There are many others who do not come--women and men, slave
girls and slaves, hired workmen, servants, peasantry, sick people, oxen,
buffaloes, sheep, and goats, and dogs--but all those do not count. It
was with reference to the heads of houses that the order was issued in
the words: "Let all assemble." just so, O king, it is not of Arahats
that it was said that all are afraid of death. \[**148**\] The Arahat is
not included in that statement, for the Arahat is one in whom there is
no longer any cause that could give rise to fear.'

10\. 'There is the non-inclusive expression, O king, whose meaning is
non-inclusive, and the non-inclusive expression whose meaning is
inclusive; there is the inclusive expression whose meaning is
non-inclusive, and the inclusive expression whose meaning is inclusive.
And the meaning, in each case, should be accepted accordingly. And there
are five ways in which the meaning should be ascertained-by the
connection, and by taste, and by the tradition of the teachers, and by
the meaning, and by abundance of reasons. And herein "connection" means
the meaning as seen in the Sutta itself, "taste" means that it is in
accordance with other Suttas, "the tradition of the teachers" means what
they hold, "the meaning" means what they think, and "abundance of
reasons" means all these four combined <span
id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_425).'

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

11\. 'Very well, Nâgasena! I accept it as you say. The Arahat is an
exception in this phrase, and it is the rest of beings who are full of
fear. But those beings in purgatory, of whom I spoke, who are suffering
painful, sharp, and severe agonies, who are tormented with burnings all
over their bodies and limbs, whose mouths are full of lamentation, and
cries for pity, and cries of weeping and wailing and woe, who are
overcome with pains too sharp to be borne, who find no refuge nor
protection nor help, who are afflicted beyond measure, who in the worst
and lowest of conditions are still destined to a certainty to further
pain, who are being burnt with hot, sharp, fierce, and cruel flames, who
are giving utterance to mighty shouts and groans born of horror and
fear, who are embraced by the garlands of flame which intertwine around
them from all the six directions, and flash in fiery speed through a
hundred leagues on every side--can those poor burning wretches be afraid
of death?'

'Yes, they can.'

'But, venerable Nâgasena, is not purgatory a place of certain pain? And,
if so, why should the beings in it be afraid of death, which would
release them from that certain pain? What! Are they fond of purgatory?'

'No, indeed. They like it not. They long to be released from it. It is
the power of death of which they are afraid.'

'Now this, Nâgasena, I cannot believe, that they, who want to be
released, should be afraid of rebirth.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[**149**\] They must surely, Nâgasena, rejoice
at the prospect of the very condition that they long for. Convince me by
some further reason <span id="fr_434"></span>[1](#fn_426).'

12\. 'Death, great king, is a condition which those who have not seen
the truth <span id="fr_435"></span>[2](#fn_427) are afraid of. About it
this people is anxious and full of dread. Whosoever is afraid of a black
snake, or an elephant or lion or tiger or leopard or bear or hyena or
wild buffalo or gayal, or of fire or water, or of thorns or spikes or
arrows, it is in each case of death that he is really in dread, and
therefore afraid of them. This, O king, is the majesty of the essential
nature of death. And all being not free from sin are in dread and quake
before its majesty. In this sense it is that even the beings in
purgatory, who long to be released from it, are afraid of death.'

13\. 'Suppose, O king, a boil were to arise, full of matter, on a man's
body, and he, in pain from that disease, and wanting to escape from the
danger of it, were to call in a physician and surgeon. And the surgeon,
accepting the call, were to make ready some means or other for the
removal of his disease--were to have a lancet sharpened, or to have
sticks put into the fire to be used as cauterisers, or to have something
ground on a grindstone to be mixed in a salt lotion. Now would the
patient begin to be in dread of the cutting of the sharp lancet, or of
the burning of the pair of caustic sticks, or of the application of the
stinging lotion?'

'Yes, he would.'

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

'But if the sick man, who wants to be free from his ailment, can fall
into dread by the fear of pain, just so can the beings in purgatory,
though they long to be released from it, fall into dread by the fear of
death.'

14\. 'And suppose, O king, a man who had committed an offence against
the crown, when bound with a chain, and cast into a dungeon, were to
long for release. And the ruler, wishing to release him, were to send
for him. Now would not that man, who had thus offended, and knew it, be
in dread \[**150**\] of the interview with the king?'

'Yes, Sir.'

'But if so, then can also the beings in purgatory, though they long to
be released from it, yet be afraid of death.'

'Give me another illustration by which I may be able to harmonise <span
id="fr_436"></span>[1](#fn_428) (this apparent discrepancy).'

'Suppose, O king, a man bitten by a poisonous snake should be afraid,
and by the action of the poison should fall and struggle, and roll this
way and that. And then that another man, by the repetition of a powerful
charm, should compel that poisonous snake to approach to suck the poison
back again <span id="fr_437"></span>[2](#fn_429). Now when the bitten
man saw the poisonous snake coming to him, though for the object of
curing him, would he not still be in dread of it?'

'Yes, Sir.'

'Well, it is just so with the beings in purgatory.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Death is a thing disliked by all beings. And
therefore are they in dread of it though they want to be released from
purgatory.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the fear of death.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[PIRIT.\]

15\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One:

Not in the sky, not in the ocean's midst,  
Not in the most secluded mountain cleft,  
Not in the whole wide world is found the spot  
Where standing one could 'scape the snare of death <span
id="fr_438"></span>[1](#fn_430)."

But on the other hand the Pirit service was promulgated by the Blessed
One <span id="fr_439"></span>[2](#fn_431)--that is to say, the Ratana
Sutta and the Khanda-parittâ and the Mora-parittâ and the
Dha*g*agga-parittâ \[**151**\] and the Â*t*ânâ*t*iya-parittâ and the
A<u>n</u>guli-mala-parittâ. If, Nâgasena, a man can escape death's snare
neither by going to heaven, nor by going into the midst of the sea, nor
by going to the summits of lofty palaces,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

nor to the caves or grottoes or declivities or clefts or holes in the
mountains, then is the Pirit ceremony useless. But if by it there is a
way of escape from death, then the statement in the verse I quoted is
false. This too is a double-headed problem, more knotty than a knot. It
is now put to you, and you have to solve it.'

16\. 'The Blessed One, O king, said the verse you have quoted, and he
sanctioned Pirit <span id="fr_440"></span>[1](#fn_432). But that is only
meant for those who have some portion of their life yet to run, who are
of full age, and restrain themselves from the evils of Karma. And there
is no ceremony or artificial means <span id="fr_441"></span>[2](#fn_433)
for prolonging the life of one whose allotted span of existence has come
to an end. just, O king, as with a dry and dead log of wood, dull <span
id="fr_442"></span>[3](#fn_434), and sapless, out of which all life has
departed, which has reached the end of its allotted period of life,--you
might have thousands of pots of water poured over it, but it would never
become fresh again or put forth sprouts or leaves. Just so there is no
ceremony or artificial means, no medicine and no Pirit, which can
prolong the life of one whose allotted period has come to an end. All
the medicines in the world are useless, O king, to such a one, but Pirit
is a protection and assistance to those who have a period yet to live,
who are full of life, and restrain themselves from the evil of Karma.
And it is for that use that Pirit was appointed by the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Blessed One. just, O king, as a husbandman
guards the grain when it is ripe and dead and ready for harvesting from
the influx of water, but makes it grow by giving it water when it is
young, and dark in colour like a cloud, and full of life--just so, O
king, should the Pirit ceremony be put aside and neglected in the case
of one who has reached his allotted term of life, \[**152**\] but for
those who have a period yet to run and are full of vigour, for them the
medicine of Pirit may be repeated, and they will profit by its use.'

17\. 'But, Nâgasena, if he who has a term of life yet to run will live,
and he who has none will die, then medicine and Pirit are alike
useless.'

'Have you ever seen, O king, a case of a disease being turned back by
medicine?'

'Yes, several hundred times.'

'Then, O king, your statement as to the inefficiency of Pirit and
medicine must be wrong.'

'I have seen, Nâgasena, doctors administer medicines by way of draughts
or outward applications, and by that means the disease has been
assuaged.'

'And when, O king, the voice of those who are repeating Pirit is heard,
the tongue may be dried up, and the heart beat but faintly, and the
throat be hoarse, but by that repetition all diseases are allayed, all
calamities depart. Again, have you ever seen, O king, a man who has been
bitten by a snake having the poison resorbed under a spell (by the snake
who gave the bite <span id="fr_443"></span>[1](#fn_435)) or destroyed
(by an antidote) or having a lotion applied above or below the
spot <span id="fr_444"></span>[2](#fn_436)?'

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

'Yes, that is common custom to this day in the world.'

'Then what you said that Pirit and medicine are alike useless is wrong..
And when Pirit has been said over a man, a snake, ready to bite, will
not bite him, but close his jaws--the club which robbers hold aloft to
strike him with will never strike; they will let it drop, and treat him
kindly--the enraged elephant rushing at him will suddenly stop--the
burning fiery conflagration surging towards him will die out--the
malignant poison he has eaten will become harmless, and turn to
food--assassins who have come to slay him will become as the slaves who
wait upon him--and the trap into which he has trodden will hold him not.

18\. 'Again, have you never heard, O king, of that hunter who during
seven hundred years failed to throw his net over the peacock who had
taken Pirit, but snared him the very day \[**153**\] he omitted to do
so <span id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_437)?'

'Yes, I have heard of it. The fame of it has gone through all the
world.'

'Then what you said about Pirit and medicine being alike useless must be
wrong. And have you never heard of the Dânava <span
id="fr_446"></span>[2](#fn_438) who, to guard his wife,

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

put her into a box, and swallowing it, carried her about in his stomach.
And how a Vidyâdhara <span id="fr_447"></span>[1](#fn_439) entered his
mouth, and played games with his wife. And how the Dânava when he became
aware of it, vomited up the box, and opened it, and the moment he did so
the Vidyâdhara escaped whither he would <span
id="fr_448"></span>[2](#fn_440)?

'Yes, I have heard that. The fame of it too has gone throughout the
world.'

'Well, did not the Vidyâdhara escape capture by the power of Pirit?'

'Yes, that was so.'

'Then there must be power in Pirit. And have you heard of that other
Vidyâdhara who got into the harem of the king of Benares, and committed
adultery with the chief queen, and was caught, and then became
invisible, and got away <span id="fr_449"></span>[3](#fn_441)?'

'Yes, I heard that story.'

'Well, did not he too escape capture by the power of Pirit.'

'Yes, Sir.'

'Then, O king, there must be power in Pirit.'

19\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, is Pirit a protection to everybody?'

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

'To some, not to others.'

'Then it is not always of use?'

'Does food keep all people alive?'

'Only some, not others.'

'But why not?'

'Inasmuch as some, eating too much of that same food, die of cholera.'

'So it does not keep all men alive?'

'There are two reasons which make it destroy life--over-indulgence in
it, and weakness of digestion. And even life-giving food may be made
poisonous by an evil spell.'

'Just so, O king, is Pirit a protection to some and not to others. And
there are three reasons \[**154**\] for its failure--the obstruction of
Karma, and of sin, and of unbelief. That Pirit which is a protection to
beings loses its protecting power by acts done by those beings
themselves. just, O king, as a mother lovingly nourishes the son who has
entered her womb, and brings him forth with care <span
id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_442). And after his birth she keeps him clean
from dirt and stains and mucus, and anoints him with the best and most
costly perfumes, and when others abuse or strike him she seizes them
and, full of excitement, drags them before the lord of the place. But
when her son is naughty, or comes in late, she strikes him with rods or
clubs on her knee or with her hands. Now, that being so, would she get
seized and dragged along, and have to appear before the lord?'

'No, Sir.'

'But why not?'

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

'Because the boy was in fault.'

'Just in the same way, O king, will Pirit which is a protection to
beings, yet, by their own fault, turn against them.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! The problem has been solved, the jungle made
clear, the darkness made light, the net of heresy unravelled--and by
you, O best of the leaders of schools!'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to Pirit.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[MÂRA, THE EVIL ONE.\]

20\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, your people say thus: "The Tathâgata was in
the constant receipt of the things necessary for a recluse-robes, food,
lodging, and the requisites for the sick." And again they say: "When the
Tathâgata entered the Brahman village called the Five Sâla trees he
received nothing, and had to return with his bowl as clean as before."
If the first passage is true the second is false, and if the second
passage is true \[**155**\] the first is false. This too is a
double-headed problem, a mighty crux hard to unravel. It is now put to
you. It is for you to solve it.'

21\. 'Both statements are true, but when he received nothing that day,
that was the work of Mâra, the evil one.'

'Then, Nâgasena, how was it that the merit laid up by the Blessed One
through countless æons of time came to end that day? How was it that
Mâra, who had only just been produced, could overcome the strength and
influence of that merit? In that case, Nâgasena, the blame must fall in
one of two

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

ways--either demerit must be more powerful than merit, or the power of
Mâra be greater than that of the Buddha. The root of the tree must be
heavier than the top of it, or the sinner stronger than he who has
heaped up virtue.'

22\. 'Great king, that is not enough to prove either the one or the
other of your alternatives. Still a reason is certainly desirable in
this matter.

Suppose, O king, a man were to bring a complimentary present to a king
of kings--honey or honeycomb or something of that kind. And the king's
doorkeeper were to say to him: "This is the wrong time for visiting the
king. So, my good fellow, take your present as quickly as ever you can,
and go back before the king inflicts a fine upon you." And then that
man, in dread and awe, should pick up his present, and return in great
haste. Now would the king of kings, merely from the fact that the man
brought his gift at the wrong time, be less powerful than the
doorkeeper, or never receive a complimentary present any more?'

'No, Sir. The doorkeeper turned back the giver of that present out of
the surliness of his nature, and one a hundred thousand times as
valuable \[**156**\] might be brought in by some other device.'

'Just so, O king, it was out of the jealousy of his nature that Mâra,
the evil one, possessed the Brahmans and householders at the Five Sâla
trees. And hundreds of thousands of other deities came up to offer the
Buddha the strength-giving ambrosia from heaven, and stood reverencing
him with clasped hands and thinking to themselves that they would thus
imbue him with vigour.'

23\. 'That may be so, Nâgasena. The Blessed

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One found it easy to get the four requisites of
a recluse--he, the best in the world--and at the request of gods and men
he enjoyed all the requisites. But still Mâra's intention to stop the
supply of food to the Blessed One was so far carried out. Herein, Sir,
my doubt is not removed. I am still in perplexity and hesitation about
this. My mind is not clear how the Tathâgata, the Arahat, the supreme
Buddha, the best of all the best in the world of gods and men, he who
had so glorious a treasure of the merit of virtue, the unequalled one,
unrivalled and peerless,--how so vile, mean, insignificant, sinful, and
ignoble a being as Mâra could put any obstacle in the way of gifts to
Him.'

24\. 'There are four kinds, O king, of obstacles--the obstacle to a gift
not intended for any particular person, to a gift set apart for some
one, to the gift got ready, and to the enjoyment of a gift. And the
first is when any one puts an obstacle in the way of the actual gift of
a thing put ready to be given away, but not with a view to or having
seen any particular donee,--an obstacle raised, for instance, by saying:
"What is the good of giving it away to any one else?" The second is when
any one puts an obstacle in the way of the actual gift of food intended
to be prepared to be given to a person specified. The third is when any
one puts an obstacle in the way when such a gift has been got ready, but
not yet accepted. And the fourth is when any one puts an obstacle in the
way of the enjoyment of a gift already given (and so the property of the
donee).'

25\. 'Now when Mâra, the evil one, possessed the

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahmans and householders at the Five Sâla
trees, the food in that case was neither the property of, nor got ready
for, nor intended to be prepared specially for the Blessed One. \[157\]
The obstacle was put in the way of some one who was yet to come, who had
not arrived, and for whom no gift was intended. That was not against the
Blessed One alone. But all who had gone out that day, and were coming to
the village, failed to receive an alms. I know no one, O king, in the
world of men and gods, no one among Mâras or Brahmas, no one of the
class of Brahmans or recluses, who could put any obstacle in the way of
an alms intended for, or got ready for, or already given to the Blessed
One. And if any one, out of jealousy, were to raise up any obstacle in
that case, then would his head split into a hundred or into a thousand
pieces.'

26\. 'There are four things, O king, connected with the Tathâgatas, to
which no one can do any harm. And what are the four? To the alms
intended for, and got ready for the Blessed One--to the halo of a
fathom's length when it has once spread out from him-to the treasure of
the knowledge of his omniscience--and to his life. All these things, O
king, are one in essence--they are free from defect, immovable,
unassailable by other beings, unchangeable by other circumstances <span
id="fr_451"></span>[1](#fn_443). And Mâra, the evil one, lay in ambush,
out of sight, when he possessed the Brahmans and householders at the
Five Sâla trees. It was as when robbers, O king,

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

hiding out of sight in the inaccessible country over the border, beset
the highways. But if the king caught sight of them, do you think those
robbers would be safe?'

'No, Sir, he might have them cut into a hundred or a thousand pieces
with an axe.'

'Well, just so it was, hiding out of sight, that Mâra possessed them. It
was as when a married woman, in ambush, and out of sight, frequents the
company of her paramour. \[**158**\] But if, O king, she were to carry
on her intrigues in her husband's presence, do you think she would be
safe?'

'No, Sir, he might slay her, or wound her, or put her in bonds, or
reduce her to slavery.'

'Well. It was like that, hiding out of sight, that Mâra possessed them.
But if, O king, he had raised any obstacle in the case of an alms
intended for, got ready for, or in possession of the Blessed One, then
his head would have split into a hundred or a thousand pieces.'

'That is so, Nâgasena. Mâra, the evil one, acted after the manner of
robbers, he lay in ambush, possessing the Brahmans and householders of
the Five Sâla trees. But if the same Mâra, the evil one, had interfered
with any alms intended for, or made ready for the Blessed One, or with
his partaking thereof, then would his head have been split into a
hundred or a thousand pieces, or his bodily frame have been dissipated
like a handful of chaff.'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the dilemma as to Mâra's interference with alms.\]

 

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

### \[UNCONSCIOUS CRIME.\]

2 7. 'Venerable Nâgasena, your people say: "Whosoever deprives a living
being of life, without knowing that he does so, he accumulates very
serious demerit <span id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_444)." But on the other
hand it was laid down by the Blessed One in the Vinaya: "There is no
offence to him who acts in ignorance <span
id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_445)." If the first passage is correct, the
other must be false; and if the second is right, the first must be
wrong. This too is a double-pointed problem, hard to master, hard to
overcome. It is now put to you, and you have to solve it.'

28\. 'Both the passages you quote, O king, were spoken by the Blessed
One. But there is a difference between the sense of the two. And what is
that difference? \[**159**\] There is a kind of offence which is
committed without the co-operation of the mind <span
id="fr_454"></span>[3](#fn_446), and there is another kind which has
that co-operation. It was with respect to the first of the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

two that the Blessed One said: "'There is no offence to him who acts in
ignorance <span id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_447)."'

'Very good, Nâgasena! That is so, and I accept it as you say.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to sins in ignorance.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[THE BUDDHA AND HIS FOLLOWERS.\]

29\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, it was said by the Blessed One: "Now the
Tathâgata thinks not, Ânanda, that is he who should lead the
brotherhood, or that the Order is dependent upon him <span
id="fr_456"></span>[2](#fn_448)." But on the other hand when describing
the virtues and the nature of Metteyya, the Blessed One, he said thus:
"He will be the leader of a brotherhood several thousands in number, as
I am now the leader of a brotherhood several hundreds in number <span
id="fr_457"></span>[3](#fn_449)." If the first statement be right, then
the second is wrong. If the second passage is right, the first must be
false. This too is a double-pointed problem now put to you, and you have
to solve it.'

30\. 'You quote both passages correctly, O king. But in the dilemma that
you put the sense in the one passage is inclusive, in the other it is
not. It is not the Tathâgata, O king, who seeks after a following, but
the followers who seek after him.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[**160**\] It is a mere commonly received
opinion, O king, that "This is I," or "This is mine," it is not a
transcendental truth <span id="fr_458"></span>[1](#fn_450). Attachment
is a frame of mind put away by the Tathâgata, he has put away clinging,
he is free from the delusion that "This is mine," he lives only to be a
help to others <span id="fr_459"></span>[2](#fn_451). Just as the earth,
O king, is a support to the beings in the world, and an asylum to them,
and they depend upon it, but the broad earth has no longing after them
in the idea that "These belong to me"--just so is the Tathâgata a
support and an asylum to all beings, but has no longing after them in
the idea that "These belong to me." And just as a mighty rain cloud, O
king, pours out its rain, and gives nourishment to grass and trees, to
cattle and to men, and maintains the lineage thereof, and all these
creatures depend for their livelihood upon its rain, but the cloud has
no feelings of longing in the idea that "These are mine"--just so does
the Tathâgata give all beings to know what are good qualities and
maintains them in goodness, and all beings have their life in him, but
the Tathâgata has no feelings of longing in the idea that "These are
mine." And why is it so? Because of his having abandoned all
self-regard <span id="fr_460"></span>[3](#fn_452).'

'Very good, Nâgasena! The problem has been well solved by variety of
examples. The jungle has been made open, the darkness has been turned

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

to light, the arguments of the adversaries have been broken down,
insight has been awakened in the sons of the Conqueror. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[1](#fn_453)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to the Buddha and his following.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### \[SCHISM.\]

31\. 'Venerable Nâgasena, your people say: "The Tathâgata is a person
whose following can never be broken up." And again they say: "At one
stroke Devadatta seduced five hundred of the brethren <span
id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_453)." If the first be true the second is
false, but if the second be correct then the first is wrong. \[**161**\]
This too is a double-pointed problem, profound, hard to unravel, more
knotty than a knot. By it these people are veiled, obstructed, hindered,
shut in, and enveloped. Herein show your skill as against the arguments
of the adversaries.'

32\. 'Both statements, O king, are correct. But the latter is owing to
the power of the breach maker. Where there is one to make the breach, a
mother will be separated from her son, and the son will break with the
mother, or the father with the son and the son with the father, or the
brother from the sister and the sister from the brother, or friend from
friend. A ship pieced together with timber of all sorts is broken up by
the force of the violence of the waves, and a tree in full bearing and
full of sap is broken down by the force of the violence of the wind, and
gold of the finest sort is divided by

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

bronze. But it is not the intention of the wise, it is not the will of
the Buddhas, it is not the desire of those who are learned that the
following of the Tathâgata should be broken up. And there is a special
sense in which it is said that that cannot be. It is an unheard-of
thing, so far as I know, that his following could be broken up by
anything done or taken, any unkindly word, any wrong action, any
injustice, in all the conduct, wheresoever or whatsoever, of the
Tathâgata himself. In that sense his following is invulnerable. And you
yourself, do you know of any instance in all the ninefold word of the
Buddha of anything done by a Bodisat which broke up the following of the
Tathâgata?'

'No, Sir. Such a thing has never been seen or heard in the world. It is
very good, Nâgasena, what you say: and I accept it so.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Here ends the dilemma as to schism.\]

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Second Chapter.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_409"></span>[202:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_417) Not traced as yet.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[202:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_418) Mahâparinibbâna
Sutta VI, 3 (translated in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 112). The incident
is referred to in the *K*ullavagga XI, x, 9, 10, and in his commentary
on that passage Buddhaghosa mentions the discussion between Milinda and
Nâgasena, and quotes it as an authority in support of his
interpretation.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[203:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_419) The regulations in
the Pâtimokkha, which include all the most important ones, are only 220
in number.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[203:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_420) Dukka*t*a*m*.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[203:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_421) Dubbhâsita*m*.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[204:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_422) In the *K*ullavagga
XI, 1, 10, it is one of the faults laid to Ânanda's charge, at the
Council of Râgagaha, that he had not asked for a definition of these
terms.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[204:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_423) Mahâparinibbâna
Sutta II, 32 (another passage from the same speech is quoted below, IV,
2, 29).

<span id="fn_416"></span>[204:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_424) See the two
Mâlu<u>n</u>kya Suttantas in the Magghima Nikâya (vol. i, pp. 426-437 of
Mr. Trenckner's edition for the Pâli Text Society). With regard to the
spelling of the name, which is doubtful, it may be noticed that
Hîna*t*i-kumburê has Mâlu<u>n</u>ka throughout.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[206:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_425) See my note below
on IV, 4, 8.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[206:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_426) Dhammapada 129.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[206:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_427) Not traced in these
words, but identical in meaning with Dhammapada 39.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[206:4](sbe3513.htm#fr_428) Maha-nirayâ
*k*avamânâ, I when they are on the point of passing away from it.' For
in Buddhism the time comes to each <span id="page_207">p. 207</span>
being in Niraya (often translated 'hell') when he will pass away from
it.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[207:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_429) That is from him
who attained Nirvâna in this life. Compare 1 John iv. 18.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[207:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_430) Phâsû for Phâsukâ.
Compare Dhammapada 154, Manu VI, 79-81, and Suma<u>n</u>gala, p. 16.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[207:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_431) Hîna*t*i-kumburê
adds 'by the fire of tapas.'

<span id="fn_424"></span>[207:4](sbe3513.htm#fr_432) Eight are
meant--gain, loss, fame, dishonour, praise, blame, pleasures, pains.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[209:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_433) This is much more
obscure in Pâli than in English. In the Pâli the names of each of the
five methods are ambiguous. 'Connection,' for instance, is in Pâli
âha*kk*a-pada, which is only <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> found
elsewhere (see *K*ullavagga VI, 4, 3, and my note there) as the name of
a kind of chair. And there is similar ambiguity in the other words.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[211:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_434) Kâra*n*ena, perhaps
he means 'by an example.'

<span id="fn_427"></span>[211:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_435)
Adi*tth*a-sa*kk*âna*m*. It may also mean 'who have not perceived the
(Four Noble) Truths.'

<span id="fn_428"></span>[212:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_436) Okappeyya*m*. See
the Old Commentary at Pâ*k*ittiya I, 2, 6.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[212:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_437) On this belief the
69th *G*âtaka is founded. See Fausböll, vol. i, pp. 310, 311 (where, as
Mr. Trenckner points out, we must read in the verse the same word
pa*kk*â*k*am as we have here).

<span id="fn_430"></span>[213:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_438) Either Dhammapada
127, which is the same except the last word (there 'an evil deed'), or
Dhammapada 128, except the last line (which is there 'where standing
death would not overtake one').

<span id="fn_431"></span>[213:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_439) This is a service
used for the sick. Its use so far as the Pi*t*akas are known has been
nowhere laid down by the Buddha, or by words placed in his mouth. This
is the oldest text in which the use of the service is referred to. But
the word Parittâ (Pirit) is used in *K*ullavagga V, 6, of an
asseveration of love for snakes, to be used as what is practically a
charm against snake bite, and that is attributed to the Buddha. The
particular Suttas and passages here referred to are all in the
Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[214:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_440) See last note.
Hîna*t*i-kumburê renders 'preached Pirit,' which is quite in accordance
with the Pi*t*akas, as the Suttas of which it is composed are placed in
his mouth.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[214:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_441) Upakkamo. Compare
the use of the word at *K*ullavagga VII, 3, 10; Sumangala 69, 71.
Utpatti-kramayek says the Si*m*halese.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[214:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_442) Ko*l*âpa. See
*G*âtaka III, 495, and the commentary there.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[215:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_443) See above, IV, 2,
14.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[215:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_444) All this sentence
is doubtful. Dr. Morris has a learned note on the difficult words used
(which only occur here) in the 'Journal <span id="page_216">p.
216</span> of the Pâli Text Society' for 1884, p. 87. Hîna*t*i-kumburê,
p. 191, translates as follows: Mahâ ra*g*âneni, wisha winâsa karannâwû
mantra padayakin wishaya baswana laddâwû, wisha sanhinduwana laddâwû,
ûrddhâdho bhâgayehi awushadha *g*alayen temana laddâwû, nayaku wisin
dash*t*a karana laddâwû kisiwek topa wisin daknâ ladde dœyi wi*k*âla
seka.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[216:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_445) This is the
Mora-*G*âtaka, Nos. 159, 491, or (which is the same thing) the
Mora-Parittâ.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[216:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_446) An Asura, enemy of
the gods, a Titan. Rakshasa says the Si*m*halese.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[217:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_447) They are a kind of
genii, with magical powers, who are attendants on the god *S*iva (and
therefore, of course, enemies of the Dânavas). They are not mentioned in
the Pi*t*akas.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[217:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_448) I don't know where
this story comes from. It is not in the Pi*t*akas anywhere. But
Hîna*t*i-kumburê gives the fairy tale at full length, and in the course
of it calls the Vidyâdharas by name Wâyassa-putra, 'Son of the Wind.' He
quotes also a gâthâ which he places, not in the mouth of the Bodisat,
but of Buddha himself. I cannot find the tale either in the *G*âtaka
book, as far as published by Professor Fausböll, or in the Kathâ Sarit
Sâgara, though I have looked all through both.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[217:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_449) See last note.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[218:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_450) Upa*k*ârena, which
the Si*m*halese repeats and construes with poseti.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[222:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_451) Aphusâni kiriyâni,
which I do not pretend to understand, and Mr. Trenckner says is
unintelligible to him. Hîna*t*i-kumburê has: Anya kriyâwak no wœdagannâ
bœwin apusana (sic) kriyâyo ya.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[224:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_452) Not traced as yet,
in so many words. And though there are several injunctions in the Vinaya
against acts which might haply, though unknown to the doer, destroy life
(such, for instance, as drinking water without the use of a strainer),
when these are all subjects of special rule, and in each case there is
an exception in favour of the Bhikkhu who acts in ignorance of there
being living things which could be killed. (See, for instance,
Pâ*k*ittiya 62, on the drinking of water.)

<span id="fn_445"></span>[224:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_453) A*g*ânantassa
nâpatti. Pâ*k*ittiya LXI, 2, 3 (in the Old Commentary, not ascribed to
the Buddha).

<span id="fn_446"></span>[224:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_454) Sa*ññ*â-vimokkhâ. I
am not sure of the exact meaning of this difficult compound, which has
only been found in this passage. Hîna*t*i-kumburê (p. 199) has: Mahâ
ra*g*âneni, *k*ittângayen abhâwayen midena bœwin sa*ññ*â-wimoksha-namwû
âpattit atteya, &c. (mid = mu*k*).

<span id="fn_447"></span>[225:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_455) The Si*m*halese has
here a further page, giving examples of the two kinds of offences
referred to, and drawing the conclusion for each.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[225:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_456) Book of the Great
Decease, II, 32 (translated in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 37), just after
the passage quoted above, IV, 2, 4.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[225:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_457) Not in any of the
published texts. Metteyya is, of course, the Buddha to come, the
expected messiah.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[226:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_458) Sammuti .... na
paramattho.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[226:2](sbe3513.htm#fr_459) Upâdâya avassayo
hoti.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[226:3](sbe3513.htm#fr_460) Attânudi*tth*iyâ
pahînattâ. See the passages quoted by Dr. Morris in the 'Journal of the
Pâli Text Society,' 1886, pp. 113, 114.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[227:1](sbe3513.htm#fr_462) Neither of these
phrases is to be found in the published texts in these words. But the
latter sums up the episode related in the *K*ullavagga VII. 4, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe3514)
