[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm01)  [Next](bcm03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

# EXPLANATION OF FULL-PAGE PLATES

### PLATE I

FRONTISPIECE--The witch has shot a peasant in the foot with a magic
hazel wand. The victim takes off his shoe when he feels his foot
beginning to swell. If the peasant yields to the witch the spell will be
lifted. (Ulrich Molitor was a medieval demographer.)

### PLATE II

Page [37](bcm09.htm#page_37)

The Angels of the Seven Planets, their Sigils, the Signs and Houses of
the Planets, the names of the Seven Heavens, according to the *Magical
Elements* of Peter de Abano, with the names of the Olympic Spirits of
the Planets according to the *Arbatel of Magic*, and the Infernal Sigils
of the Evil Planetary Spirits according to the *Red Dragon*.

The name of Michael, the Angel of the Lord's Day, appears over his
Sigil, together with the Astrological Symbol of Sol, the Zodiacal Sign
of Leo, which is the House of the Sun, and the name of the Fourth
Heaven, Machen. The name of Gabriel, the Angel of Monday, appears over
his Sigil, together with the Astrological Symbol of Luna, the Zodiacal
Sign of Cancer, which is the House of the Moon, and the name of the
First Heaven, Shamain. The name of Samael, the Angel of Tuesday, appears
over his Sigil, together with the Astrological Symbol of Mars, the
Zodiacal Signs of Aries and Scorpio, which are the Houses of the Planet,
and the name of the Fifth Heaven, Machon. The name of Raphael, the Angel
of Wednesday, appears over his Sigil, together with the Astrological
Symbol of Mercury, the Zodiacal Signs of Gemini and Virgo, which are the
Houses of the Planet, and the name of the Second Heaven, Raquie. The
name of Sachiel, the Angel of Thursday, appears over his Sigil, together
with the Astrological Symbol of Jupiter, the Zodiacal Signs of
Sagittarius and Pisces, which are the Houses of the Planet, and the name
of the Sixth Heaven, Zebul. The name of Anael, the Angel of Friday,
appears over

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

his Sigil, together with the Astrological Symbol of Venus, the Zodiacal
Signs of Taurus and Libra, which are the Houses of the Planet, and the
name of the Third Heaven, Sagun. The name of Cassiel, the Angel of
Saturday, appears over his Sigil, together with the Astrological Symbol
of Saturn, and the Zodiacal Signs of Capricornus and Aquarius, which are
the Houses of the Planet.

### PLATE III

Page [49](bcm11.htm#page_49)

Mystic Figures of the Enchiridion.

Figure I., the mystic symbol of the Tau, converted into a monogram which
has been supposed to signify the word Taro or Tora. Figure II., the
triple Tau. Figure III., an arbitrary figure supposed to represent the
fortieth part of the stature of Jesus Christ. Figure IV., the Labarum of
Constantine, with the usual inscription, "In this sign thou shalt
conquer," and the emblems of the Passion of Christ. Figure V., a double
door, connected by a bar, and inscribed with the first seven letters of
the Latin alphabet. Figure VI., a composite symbol of unknown meaning.
The second circle contains twenty-two letters, which recall the Keys of
the Tarot. Figure VII. represents the dimensions of the wound produced
by the lance of the Centurion in the side of Jesus Christ. Figure VIII.,
a two-edged sword, for which various simple meanings may be conjectured.
Its inscription has been adopted by alchemists.

### PLATE IV

Page [54](bcm11.htm#page_54)

Mystic Figures of the Enchiridion.

Figure I., the reversed form of a well-known occult symbol. The Hebrew
words signify *Jehovah Elohim, Agla, Elohim Tsabaoth*. Figure II., the
Labarum of Constantine, another form. Figure III., the inscription on
this talisman is unintelligible. Figure IV., the occult symbol of the
pentagram, reversed, and therefore the sign of the Demon, according to
Éliphas Lévi. Possibly misplaced by the ignorance of the printer, but it
occurs in this manner in many books which do not apparently connect with
Black Magic. Figure V., a talisman with the monogram of Michael. Figure
VI., undescribed, but belonging to a prayer of St. Augustine addressed
to the Holy Spirit to receive a revelation. Figure VII., the characters
of this talisman would seem to be Hebrew, but are so corrupt that they
are unintelligible. Figure VIII., a talisman with the monogram of
Gabriel. Figure IX., the talisman and monogram of Michael.

### PLATE V

Page [84](bcm17.htm#page_84)

The Characters of Evil Spirits, from the so-called "Fourth Book" of
Cornelius Agrippa, and described as follows in the original.

1\. A right line; 2. a crooked line; 3. a reflexed line; 4. a simple
figure; 5. penetrate; 6. broken; 7. a right letter; 8. a retrograde
letter; 9. an inverted letter; 10. flame; 11. wind; 12. water; 13. a
mass; 14. rain;

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

15\. clay; 16. a flying creature; 17. a creeping thing; 18. a serpent;
19. an eye; 20. a hand; 21. a foot; 22. a crown; 23. a crest; 24. horns;
25. a sceptre; 26. a sword; 27. a scourge.

### PLATE VI

Page [135](bcm36.htm#page_135)

The Sabbatic Goat, from the *Ritual of Transcendental Magic*, by Éliphas
Lévi, who identifies it with the Baphomet of Mendes, and does not regard
it as connected with Black Magic, but as "a pantheistic and magical
figure of the absolute."

### PLATE VII

Page [156](bcm43.htm#page_156)

The instruments of Black Magic, from the Grimoire entitled *True Black
Magic*.

Figure I., the knife with the white handle. Figure II., the knife with
the black handle. Figure III., the arctrave, or hook. Figure IV., the
bolline or sickle. Figure V., the stylet. Figure VI.. the needle. Figure
VII., the wand. Figure VIII., the lancet. Figure IX., the staff. Figure
X., the sword of the master. Figures XI., XII., XIII., the swords of the
assistants.

### PLATE VIII

Page [223](bcm61.htm#page_223)

The Magical circle used in Goëtic Theurgy, according to the Lesser Key
of Solomon the King, showing the position of the operator, the divine
names and symbols to be inscribed within and about the double circle,
and the situation of the lights.

The figure and place of the triangle into which the spirit is commanded
will be found, with description, in the text, pp.
[220](bcm60.htm#page_220)-223. The Divine Names differ in some of the
manuscripts.

### PLATE IX

Page [259](bcm64.htm#page_259)

The Goëtic Circle of Black Evocations and Pacts, according to Éliphas
Lévi.

The circle is formed from the skin of the victim, fastened to the ground
by four nails taken from the coffin of an executed criminal. The skull
is that of a parricide; the horns those of a goat; the male bat opposite
the skull must have been drowned in blood; and the black cat, whose head
forms the fourth object on the circumference of the circle, must have
been fed on human flesh. There is no authority for any of these
stipulations. The small circles within the triangle show the place of
the operator and his assistants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](bcm03)
