[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm07)  [Next](bcm09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

# CHAPTER II

## The Rituals of Transcendental Magic

### § 1. The Arbatel of Magic

THE term transcendental must not be interpreted in any exalted or
philosophical sense when it is used, informally and conventionally
enough, in such a connection as the present. It has not been adopted
because it is tolerably appropriate, but rather in the absence of a
better word of definition in respect of the claim implied, and because
also it has been previously admitted in the same connection. It is
perhaps loosely equivalent to the *Haute Magie* of Eliphas Lévi, which I
have rendered *Transcendental Magic*, not as a satisfactory equivalent
but because there is no current or admitted expression which corresponds
more closely. When due allowance has been made for the conceptions which
may be presumed to underlie the subject, it must be said that in
Ceremonial Magic there is as much and as little Transcendentalism as in
the phenomena of modern mediumship. Whatever might be claimed for the
intelligences with whom communication is sought to be established, they
reveal themselves by their offices, which are either fantasic or
frivolous. In such an association it should be understood that material
interests are to be included in the second class; in the first would be
comprised those which are outside realisation by reason of their
extravagance, while at the same time they are unconnected with spiritual
aspiration.

Supposing that it were an exact science, there would be

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

nothing in Practical Magic which interlinks, for example, with a true or
with any Mystic Purpose. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) Hence, by
Rituals of Transcendental Magic there must not be understood a
collection of processes by which the Divine in Man is sought to be
united with the Divine in the Universe. The works of St. John of the
Cross, of Ruysbroeck, of Eckart, of Molinos, of Saint-Martin, even the
*Imitation* of St. Thomas à Kempis--these contain the grand processes of
true Transcendental Magic, were it other than desecration to apply a
term which is worse than ridiculous to treasures which would be
disparaged by the association. Here there must be understood simply
those occult processes and that so-called Theurgic Ceremonial, in which
there is at least no explicit connection with Black Magic, which not
only contain no dealings with evil spirits for evil purposes, but appear
to eschew all such communication, for what purpose soever. An
exception--which, properly understood, is, however, an exception only on
the surface--should be made in favour of the procedure adopted by the
Church for the expulsion of diabolical powers from persons in the flesh,
not because the phenomena of possession are necessarily other than
pathological, even in those cases which would appear to be marked and
obstinate, but because, on the terms of the ecclesiastical assumption,
the Rite of Exorcism is a far more exalted Rite than anything which
obtains in Transcendental Magic. In this matter, as in many other cases
of much higher importance, no tolerable justice has been done to the
position of the Catholic Church. It should be observed in addition, that
while Ceremonial Magic is concerned with a variety of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

processes which may obviously tend to produce in unwary operators the
phenomena which characterise possession, there is scarcely a single
process in any one of the Rituals--White or Black, Composite or
Transcendental--which makes any pretence of relieving persons so
afflicted. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) There is, therefore, no
reason to doubt on which side of hallucination the apparatus of the
Rituals has been developed, and the sympathies of reasonable students
will be with the honourable institution which condemned the practices
and sought to liberate the victims, leaving possession itself as an open
question, and in this sense as a side issue.

<span id="img_02600"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/02600.jpg.md)  
TALISMAN OF ARBATEL

Even with the qualification which I have registered, the putative
Transcendental Rituals are exceedingly few. There is--1. The
*Enchiridion* of Pope Leo the Third. 2. The *Arbatel of Magic*. 3. The
Celestial Magic of an anonymous German occultist, entitled *Theosophia
Pneumatica*, which must be held to represent and to save enumeration of
one or two similar handbooks. Of these, the first is included among the
Rituals of Ceremonial Magic: by the invincible ignorance of almost every
person who has undertaken to class it. On the other hand, the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

third borrows all its importance from the second, in which, upon both
counts, the interest evidently centres. As regards its origin, its
authorship, and even its scope, there is, however, considerable mystery.
Within my own knowledge, there are no copies in manuscript, or none at
least which are prior to the end of the sixteenth century. It appeared
in a tiny volume at Basle and bore the date 1575. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) Back-dating and imputed authorship are the
two crying bibliographical sins of Grimoires and magical handbooks, and
the antiquity of the *Arbatel* rests under a certain suspicion on
account of its literary connections; at the same time it would require
the knowledge of an expert in typography to pronounce certainly on the
reliability of the date indicated. The text is in Latin, but there is a
slender possibility in favour of its being the work of an Italian. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13.md) It makes a reference to Theophrastic
Magic, which indicates the influence of Paracelsus, and, although it is
difficult to speak with any certainty, seems to hint at an early period
of that influence, the period, in fact, of *Benedictus Figulus*,
slightly antedating Rosicrucian enthusiasm, and thus accounting for the
omission of all Rosicrucian references, which, in view both of matter
and manner, might have been irresistibly expected had the work been
posterior to the year 1610.

It should be observed that the *Arbatel* has no connection with the
cycle, hereinafter considered, of the Keys of Solomon,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and it is permeated with Christian ideas. The authorship is completely
unknown. Arbatel, or ארבעתאל {Hebrew *ARBOTAL*}, is probably not an
assumed name, but indicative of an instructing or revealing Angel. The
use of this Hebrew term is, however, peculiar in connection with the
fact that the references to the Old Testament are few and unimportant,
while the sayings of Christ, and the New Testament narrative generally,
are subjects of continual citation. Solomon, moreover, is not mentioned
in the frequent enumerations of adepts and wise men.

So far concerning the origin, authorship and date of the book. It
remains to say that it is incomplete. Of the nine "Tomes" into which it
purports to be divided, we possess only one. It is not unlikely that the
rest were never written, because the author has left us a plan of his
entire proposal, and it is evident that his first book more than once
overlaps what should have followed. As it stands, the *Arbatel of Magic*
is concerned with the most general precepts of Magical Arts--in other
words, with the Institutions. It is entitled *Isagoge*, which means
essential or fundamental instruction. The missing books are those of
Microcosmical Magic, or Spiritual Wisdom; Olympic Magic, that is, the
evocation of the Spirits of Olympus; Hesiodiacal and Homeric Magic,
being the operations of *Caco-daimones*; Roman or Sibylline Magic,
concerning Tutelary Spirits; Pythagorical Magic, dealing with the Genii
of the Arts; the Magic of Apollonius, giving power over the enemies of
mankind; Hermetic or Egyptian Magic; and that, finally, which depends
solely on the Word of God and is called Prophetical Magic.

It is an open question whether all of these books could have been
completed without a proportion of that dangerous instruction which makes
for open Black Magic. The *Isagoge*, however, must be exempted in part
from such charge; the Seven Septenaries

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

of aphorisms of which it consists contain many moral and spiritual
exhortations, which, if they are not exactly unhackneyed, are on the
surface quite unexceptionable, and might indeed rank among the more
exalted of their kind, were it not for the art with which they are
connected. The initial groups of these aphorisms serve to introduce the
Ritual of the Olympic Spirits, dwelling in the firmament and in the
stars of the firmament, between whom the government of the world is
distributed. There are 196 <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) Olympic
Provinces in the entire universe, so that *Aratron* has 49, *Bethor* 42,
*Phaleg* 35, *Och* 28, *Hagith* 21, *Ophiel* 14, and *Phul* 7. These
Provinces are termed visible, but even as the *Seven Septenaries of
Arbatel* cover the whole ground of reputed Transcendental Magic, so
these seven successive multiples of the same mystical number may most
probably be taken to indicate powers and offices. It is further said
that the Olympic Spirits rule alternately, each for 490 years, which
would be mere confusion were separate assemblages of spheres permanently
assigned to them.

The powers possessed by these Intelligences are very curiously set
forth. They rule naturally over certain departments and operations of
the material world, but outside these departments they perform the same
operations magically. Thus *Och*, the prince of Solar things, presides
over the preparation or development of gold naturally in the veins of
the earth--that is to say, he is the Mineralogist in Chief of Nature; he
presides also over the quicker preparation of the same metal by means of
chemical art--that is, he is the Prince of Alchemists; and, finally, he
makes gold in a moment by Magic. It is in this way

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that Ceremonial Magic connects with while it assumes to transcend
Hermetic Art. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

There is another curious instruction, with regard to the names and
characters of the Spirits. In opposition to much of the traditional
doctrine of Magic, it is affirmed that there is no power in the figure
of any character or in the pronunciation of any name, except in so far
as there is a virtue or office ordained by God to both. The names,
moreover, are not definite, final or real names, whence they differ with
different writers accordingly as these have received them. The only
effectual names are those which are delivered to an operator by the
Spirits themselves, and even then their efficacy seldom endures beyond
forty years. It is, therefore, better for the student, says the
*Arbatel*, to work only by the offices of the Spirits, without their
names; should he be pre-ordained to attain the Art of Magic, the other
parts of that Art will offer themselves of their own accord.

The sources of occult wisdom, it proceeds, are, firstly, in God;
secondly, in spiritual essences--that is to say, the Angelical
Hierarchy; thirdly, in corporeal creatures, the reference being probably
to the *signatura rerum* of Paracelsus; fourthly, in Nature--that is to
say, in a knowledge of the secret virtues of natural things, as, for
example, herbs and precious stones; fifthly, but after a long interval,
in the apostate spirits reserved to the last judgment; <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16.md) sixthly, in the administers of punishment
in hell, which seems to connect with the classical conception of
avenging infernal gods; seventhly, in the people of the elements, that
is, the Salamanders, Sylphs, Undines and Gnomes or Pigmies.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

The secrets deriving from these sources range from the highest
achievements of reputed mystical science <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) to the bourgeois ambitions of daily life,
from the Regeneration of Enoch and the Knowledge of God, Christ and His
Holy Spirit--wherein is the perfection of the Microcosm--to the
attainment of honours and dignities, the ingathering, of much money, the
foundation of a family, good fortune in mercantile pursuits, and
successful housewifery both in town and country. The prolongation of
life, the transmutation of metals and the talismanic cure of all
diseases, with other "paradoxes of the highest science," also figure in
the list.

Meditation, inward contemplation and the love of God are the chief aids
to the acquisition of Magical Art, together with great faith, strict
taciturnity and even justice in the things of daily life. Finally, a
true magician is brought forth as such from his mother's womb; others
who assume the function will be unhappy. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md)

<span id="img_03100"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03100.jpg.md)  
CHARACTER OF ARATRON

The powers and offices of the Seven Olympic Spirits are as follows:
ARATRON governs those things which are ascribed astrologically to
Saturn. He can convert any living organism, plant or animal into stone,
and that in a moment of time; he can also change coals into treasure and
treasure into coals; he gives familiars and reconciles subterranean
spirits to men; he teaches Alchemy, Magic and Medicine,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

imparts the secret of invisibility, makes the barren fruitful and,
lastly, confers long life. He should be invoked on a Saturday, in the
first hour of the day, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) making use of
his character, given and confirmed by himself. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md)

<span id="img_03200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03200.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF BETHOR

The affairs of Jupiter are administered by BETHOR, who responds quickly
when called. The person dignified by his character may be exalted to
illustrious positions and may obtain large treasures. He reconciles the
Spirits of the Air to man, so that they will give true answers,
transport precious stones and compose medicines having miraculous
effects. BETHOR also grants familiars of the firmament, and can prolong
life to seven hundred years, subject to the will of God, which
qualification imparts an air of caution.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="img_03300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03300.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF PHALEG

PHALEG governs the things that are attributed to Mars. The person who
possesses his character is raised by him to great honour in military
affairs.

<span id="img_03301"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03301.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF OCH

Solar interests are administered by OCH, who prolongs life to six
hundred years, with perfect health therein. He imparts great wisdom,
gives excellent (familiar) spirits, composes perfect medicines, converts
any substance into the purest of metals, or into precious stones; he
also bestows gold and a purse, quaintly described by the English
translator of the *Arbatel* as "springing with gold." He causes the
possessor of his character to be worshipped as a god by the kings of the
whole world.

<span id="img_03302"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03302.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF HAGITH

The government of Venereal concerns is entrusted to HAGITH, and the
person possessing his character is adorned with all beauty. He converts
copper into gold in a moment and gold instantaneously into copper; he
also gives faithful serving spirits.

<span id="img_03303"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03303.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF OPHIEL

OPHIEL is the ruler of those things which are attributed to Mercury; he
gives familiar spirits, teaches all arts, and enables the possessor of
his character to change quicksilver immediately into the Philosopher's
Stone.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="img_03400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/03400.jpg.md)  
THE CHARACTER OF PHUL

Lunary concerns are under the government of PHUL, who truly transmutes
all metals into silver, heals dropsy and provides Spirits of the Water,
who serve men in a corporal and visible form; he also prolongs life to
three hundred years.

Legions of inferior spirits are commanded by each of the Governors, who
also have Kings, Princes, Presidents, Dukes and Ministers ruling under
them. Ceremonial Magic usually administers the hierarchies upon a
colossal scale. The invocation of the Governors is simple. It is
performed in the day and hour of the planet which is in correspondence
with the Olympic Intelligence by means of the following:--

PRAYER

O Eternal and Omnipotent God, Who hast ordained the whole creation for
Thy praise and Thy glory, as also for the salvation of man, I beseech
Thee to send Thy Spirit N., of the Solar Race, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

that he may instruct me concerning those things about which I design to
ask him \[or--that he may bring me medicine against the dropsy, &c.\].
Nevertheless, not my will, but Thine be dome, through Jesus Christ,
Thine only begotten Son, Who is our Lord. Amen.

Unless the Spirit, in the words of Robert Turner, be "familiarly
addicted" to the operator, he should not be detained above one hour, and
should in either case be "licensed to depart" as follows:--

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

THE DISCHARGE

Forasmuch as thou camest in peace and quietness, having also answered
unto my Petitions, I give thanks unto God, in Whose Name thou camest.
Now mayst thou depart in peace unto thine own order; but return unto me
again, when I shall call thee by thy -name, or by thine order, or by
thine office, which is granted from the Creator. Amen. \[Then add:\] *Be
not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter
anything before God: for God is in heaven, and thou art upon earth;
therefore let thy words be few. For a dream cometh through the multitude
of business, and a fool's voice is known by multitude of
words.*--Eccles. v. 3, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[25:1](bcm08.htm#fr_10.md) By Practical Magic is
here intended not certain forms of the putative: transcendent science
said to be imparted by occult initiatiors, and to be totally distinct
from childish attempts to discover hidden treasure, to obtain the ring
of invisibility, and so forth; the reference is intended solely to the
Magic of the Ceremonial Literature. I believe that the exotic form
belongs to the deeps rather than the heights because it is phenomena,
procedure, but the distinction--which I have discussed otherwise--is
advisable to note here.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[26:1](bcm08.htm#fr_11.md) There are, of course,
innumerable processes for destroying spells and enchantments; among them
one occasionally meets with an exorcism to be used in a case of
possession. There is one in the edition of the *Grimoire of Honorius*
published at Rome in 1760. It is supposed to be efficacious both for men
and animals afflicted by Satan. In the edition of 1800 there is another
process, which prescribes holy water for aspersion, in the case of a
human being, and, in that of an animal, salt exorcised with blood drawn
from the bewitched creature. See also my remarks on Sloane MS. 3884.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[27:1](bcm08.htm#fr_12.md) Arbatel, *De Magia
Veterum*, Basileæ, 1575. The mottoes on the title are *Summum Sapientiæ
Studium* and *In omnibus consule Dominum, et nihil cogites, dicas,
facias, quod tibi Deus non consuluerit*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[27:2](bcm08.htm#fr_13.md) The possibility is
warranted by references in the 30th and 31st Aphorisms to some obscure
points of Italian history. It is said that by a judgment of the
Magicians it was decreed that no Italian should reign over the kingdom
of Naples; now the monarch at the time was an Italian, and he was
dethroned in due course. To restore the national dynasty the decree must
be annulled by those who made it. A magician of greater power might be
able to enforce this, and also the restitution of a certain Book, Jewel
and Magic Horn, of which the Treasury Of Magic had been despoiled. The
mastery of the whole world would pass into the hands of their possessor.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[29:1](bcm08.htm#fr_14.md) The original edition of
the *Arbatel* reads 186, and ascribes 32 provinces to *Bethor*, which
breaks the progression of the septenary and is probably a printer's
mistake. It is followed, however, by the English and German translators.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[30:1](bcm08.htm#fr_15.md) It was also by the
magical hypothesis a gift from heaven, brought down by the Angel Uriel.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[30:2](bcm08.htm#fr_16.md) This reference, taken in
connection with the matters proposed to be treated in the seventh book,
points conclusively to the intention of including the government of Evil
Spirits in the scheme of the *Arbatel*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[31:1](bcm08.htm#fr_17.md) It should be observed
that the mystical achievements are barely mentioned, and that their
attainment is imparted by a spirit possessing the office, which is
conclusive, as I need not point out, respecting the use of the term. The
author of the *Arbatel*, however, considers it good enough Mysticism, as
does Eliphas Lévi, to cause oneself "to be worshipped as a god," in
virtue of the sigil of *Och*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:2](bcm08.htm#fr_18.md) When his highest
authorities disagree, the occult student is liable to get at the truth,
and will find occasionally that it is not at either end, nor yet in the
middle. It is edifying to compare <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> this
express statement of a ruling ceremonial process with another, not less
express, which we owe to the reconstruction of all the processes and the
reputed recoverer of the true practice of Magic. "Furthermore, certain
physical organisations are better adapted than others for the
revelations of the occult world; there are sensitive and sympathetic
natures, with whom intuition in the astral light is, so to speak,
inborn; certain afflictions and certain complaints can modify the
nervous system, and, independently of the concurrence of the will, may
convert it into a divinatory apparatus of less or more perfection; but
these phenomena are exceptional, *and generally magical power should,
and can be acquired by perseverance and labour*."--"Doctrine and Ritual
of Transcendent Magic," by Éliphas Lévi, English translation by A. E.
Waite, p. 196. In this case the genius of enlightened differentiation
rests entirely upon the later adept, As a matter of fact, occult writers
have always recognised that there is the Natural Magician and the
Magician according to Art. *Vel sanctum invenit, vel sanctum facit*--it
has been said of Magic, and so also magical knowledge means magical
power; where it does not find it, it brings it. I speak, of course, *ex
hypothesi*. But such knowledge is not of Rituals or Grimoires, of
*Arbatel* or another, nor is the word Magic, nor is the process
practical in respect of an external procedure. That which is termed.
Occultism is the art of desecrating the inmost Sanctuary.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[32:1](bcm08.htm#fr_19.md) See Part ii. c. 6.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[32:2](bcm08.htm#fr_20.md) It should be understood
that the characters of the so-called Olympic Spirits are, so to speak,
their official seals and are mot to be confused with the images
attributed to the planets, These were of various kinds in correspondence
with the variety of influences and were worn as talismans or charms.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[34:1](bcm08.htm#fr_21.md) This is merely a typical
form subject to variations according to the spirit who is evoked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2: Theosophia Pneumatica](bcm09.md)
