[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm10)  [Next](bcm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### § 4. The Seven Mysterious Orisons

SUNDAY

Pater noster, &c. Deliver me, O Lord, I beseech Thee, me even, thy
creature, N., from all evils Past, present and to come, whether of body
or soul; grant me peace and health in Thy goodness; incline favourably
unto me, Thy creature, by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary
and of Thy holy apostles, Peter, Paul, Andrew and of all the saints.
Vouchsafe peace unto Thy creature, and health during all my life, so
that, strengthened by the mainstay of Thy mercy, I may never be the
slave of sin, nor go in fear of any trouble, through the same Jesus
Christ Thy Son, our Saviour, Who, being truly God, liveth and reigneth
in the unity of the Holy Spirit for ever and ever, Amen. May the peace
of the Lord be always with me, Amen. May that peace, O Lord, which Thou
didst leave to Thy disciples abide ever with power in my heart, standing
always between me and my enemies, both visible and invisible, Amen. May
the Peace of the Lord, His countenance, His body, His blood, assist,
console and protect me, Thy creature, N., in my soul and my body, Amen.
Lamb of God, Who didst deign to be born of the Virgin Mary, Who didst
cleanse the world from its sins upon the Cross, have pity on my soul and
my body. O Christ, Lamb of God, immolated for the salvation of the
world, have Pity on my soul and my body. Lamb of God, by Whom all the
faithful are saved, give unto me Thy peace, to remain with me for ever,
both in this life and that which is to come, Amen.

MONDAY

O great God, by Whom all things have been set free, deliver me also from
all evil. O great God, Who hast granted Thy

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

consolation unto all beings, grant it even unto me. O great God, Who
hast succoured and assisted all things, aid me also; succour me in all
my necessities and miseries, my enterprises and dangers; deliver me from
all the hindrances and snares of my enemies, both visible and invisible,
in the Name of the Father Who created the whole world ✠*, in the Name of
the Son Who hath redeemed it* ✠*, in the name of the Holy Ghost Who hath
fulfilled the entire law in its Perfection. I cast myself utterly into
Thine arms, and place myself unreservedly under Thy holy protection,
Amen. May the blessing of God the Father Almighty, of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, be always with me* ✠*, Amen. May the blessing of God the
Father, Who by His only Word hath made all things, be with me for ever*
✠*, Amen. May the blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the great
living God, be with me for ever* ✠*, Amen. May the blessing and Seven
Gifts of the Holy Spirit be with me for ever* ✠

, Amen. May the blessing of the Virgin Mary, and of her Son, be with me
for ever, Amen.

TUESDAY

May the blessing and consecration of the bread and of the wine, which
our Lord Jesus Christ made when He gave them to His disciples and said
unto them: Take and eat ye all of this, for this is My body which shall
be delivered for you, in remembrance of Me and for the remission of all
sins--be with me for ever ✠*. May the blessing of the Holy Angels,
Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Thrones, Dominations, Cherubim and
Seraphim, be with me for ever* ✠*, Amen. May the blessing of the
Patriarchs and prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and of
all the saints of God, be with me for ever* ✠*, Amen. May the blessing
of all the heavens of God be with me for ever* ✠

, Amen. May the majesty of God Omnipotent sustain and protect me; may
His eternal goodness lead me; may His boundless charity

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

inflame me; may His supreme Divinity direct me; May the Power of the
Father preserve me; may the wisdom of the Son enliven me; may the virtue
of the Holy Ghost stand always between me and my enemies, both visible
and invisible. Power of the Father, strengthen me; wisdom of the Son,
enlighten me; consolation of the Holy Ghost, comfort me. The Father is
peace, the Son is life, the Holy Ghost is the consoling and saving
remedy, Amen. May the Divinity of God bless me, Amen. May His Piety warm
me; may His love preserve me. O Jesus Christ, Son of the living God,
have Pity upon me a Poor sinner.

WEDNESDAY

O Emmanuel, defend me against the malignant enemy, and against all my
enemies, visible and invisible, and deliver me from all evil. Jesus
Christ the King hath come in Peace, God made man, Who hath suffered
Patiently for us. May Jesus Christ, the gentle King, stand always for my
defence between me and my enemies, Amen. Jesus Christ triumphs, Jesus
Christ reigns, Jesus Christ commands. May Jesus Christ deliver me from
all evils for ever, A men. May Jesus Christ vouchsafe me grace to
triumph over all my adversaries, Amen. Behold the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Fly, therefore, O my enemies, at the sight thereof; the
Lion of the Tribe of Juda and of the Race of David hath conquered.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Saviour of the world, save and succour me.
Thou who hast Purchased me by Thy Cross and Thy Blood, succour me, I
conjure Thee, my God. O Agios, O Theos, Agios, Ischyros, Agios,
Athanatos, Elieson, Himas, Holy God, Strong God, Merciful and Immortal
God, have Pity upon me Thy creature, N. Sustain me, O Lord; forsake me
not, reject not my prayers, O Thou, the God of my salvation. Do Thou
assist me always, O God of my salvation.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

 

<span id="img_04900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/04900.jpg)  
MYSTIC FIGURES OF THE ENCHIRIDION

 

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

THURSDAY

Enlighten mine, eyes with true light, that they may never be closed in
eternal sleep, lest mine enemy should say: I have prevailed over him. So
long as the Lord is with me, I will not fear for malice of my enemies. O
most sweet Jesus, preserve me, aid me, save me; at the Name of Jesus let
every knee bow, in heaven, on earth and in hell, and let every tongue
confess openly that Jesus Christ is in the glory of His Father, Amen. I
know beyond doubt that in what day soever I shall call upon the Lord, in
the same hour shall I be saved. O most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, Son of
the great living God, Thou hast Performed most mighty miracles by the
sole power of Thy most precious Name, and hast enriched the poor most
abundantly, so that by force thereof the demons flee away, the blind
see, the deaf hear, the lame walk erect, the dumb speak, the lepers are
cleansed, the sick cured, the dead raised up; for wheresoever the most
sweet Name of Jesus is pronounced, the ear is ravished and the mouth is
filled with Pleasant savour; at that one utterance, I repeat, the demons
take flight, every knee is bent, all temptations, even the worst, are
scattered, all infirmities are healed, all disputes and conflicts
between the world, the flesh and the devil are ended, and the soul is
filled with every heavenly delight; for whosoever invoketh or shall
invoke this Holy Name of God is and shall be saved--even by this Holy
Name, pronounced by the angel even before His conception in the womb of
the Holy Virgin.

FRIDAY

O sacred Name, Name which strengthens the heart of man, Name of life, of
salvation, of joy, precious Name, resplendent, glorious, agreeable Name,
which fortifies the sinner, Name

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

which saves, conserves, leads and rules all. May it Please Thee,
therefore, most Precious Jesus, by the Power of this same (Name of)
Jesus, to drive away the demon from me; enlighten me, O Lord, for I am
blind; remove my deafness; set me upright, who am tame; give me speech,
who am dumb; cleanse my leprosy; restore me to health, who am sick;
raise me up, for I am dead; give me life once more, and enrich me in all
my Parts, within and without, so that, furnished and fortified by Thy
Holy Name, I may abide always in Thee, Praising and honouring Thee,
because all is due to Thee, and Thou only art worthy to be glorified,
the Lord and Eternal Son of God, in Whom all things rejoice, and by Whom
all are governed. Praise, honour and glory, be given Thee for ever and
ever, Amen. May Jesus be always in my heart and in my breast, Amen. May
our Lord Jesus Christ be ever within me, may He establish me for ever,
may He be around me and preserve me; may He be before me and lead me;
may He be behind me and guard me; may He be above me and bless me; may
He be within me and give me life; may He be near me and rule me; may He
be beneath me and fortify me; may He be always with me and deliver me
from all the Pains of eternal death, Who liveth and reigneth for ever
and ever, Amen.

SATURDAY

Jesus, Son of Mary, salvation of the world, may the Lord look favourably
upon me, with mildness and propitiation; may He give me a holy and
willing spirit, to respect and honour Him only, Who is the Liberator of
the World. On Him could .no one lay hand, for His hour was not yet
come-He Who is, Who was, Who shall remain, God and man, the beginning
and the end. May this Prayer which I offer unto Him deliver me eternally
from my enemies, Amen. Jesus of Nazareth, King

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

of the Jews, honourable title, Son of the Virgin Mary, have pity upon
me, a poor sinner, and lead me, according to Thy loving-kindness, in the
way of eternal salvation, Amen. Now Jesus, knowing what things must come
to pass concerning Him, came forward and said unto them: Whom seek ye?
They answered Him: Jesus of Nazareth. But Jesus said unto them: I am He.
And Judas, who was to deliver Him, was with them. As soon then as He had
said unto them: I am He, they fell backward upon the earth. Then asked
He them again: Whom seek ye? And they said: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
answered: I have told you that I am He; if therefore ye seek Me, let
these go their way (speaking of His disciples). The lance, the nails,
the cross ✠*, the thorns, the death which I have endured, prove that I
have effaced and expiated the crimes of the unfortunate. Preserve me. O
Lord Jesus Christ, from all afflictions of Poverty and from the snares
of my enemies. May the five wounds of our Lord be unto me an everlasting
remedy. Jesus is the Way* ✠*, Jesus is the Life* ✠*, Jesus is the Truth*
✠*, Jesus has suffered* ✠*, Jesus has been crucified* ✠*, Jesus, Son of
the living God, have Pity on me* ✠

. Now, Jesus passing went through the midst of them, and no one could
place his murderous hand upon Jesus, because His hour was not yet come.

While these prayers are in some respects curious enough, and may not be
unreasonably termed pure and simple by their intention, they compare
unfavourably with the sublimity and good sense which characterise those
of the Roman Liturgy; they are inexact in their references and confused
in their method, and no person who seriously considers them will sustain
the early date which is claimed for them. Their period is subsequent to
the Renaissance, and the ignorance of liturgical formulæ which they
shew, in common with all

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

similar forgeries, makes it doubtful whether they are the work of an
ecclesiastic at all. In any case, they are clumsy imitations, the
product of an unskilful hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5: Summary of Transcendental Magic](bcm12)
