[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm09)  [Next](bcm11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### § 3. The Enchiridion of Pope Leo

We come now to the Enchiridion of Pope Leo III., which, as already
indicated, is not a book of Ceremonial Magic; it is necessary, however,
to include it in this notice, and to analyse it at some length, so as to
establish its true character. Misconceptions and mistakes upon a subject
so obscure as Magical Rituals are, speaking generally, excusable enough,
but in this case they are found where they are not excusable, namely,
among those persons who have undertaken to give account of the work.
Catholic bibliographers of the occult sciences, or at least the
anonymous author of the occult encyclopædia in Migne's great series, are
very angry at the pontifical attribution, and stigmatise the
*Enchiridion* as an infamous storehouse of Black Magic. Éliphas Lévi,
who may possibly have read it--because occasionally he seems to have
glanced at his authors--magnifies its occult importance by stating that
it has never been printed with its true figures. In the absence of all
evidence on this point, it is impossible to entertain it seriously. The
*Enchiridion* is assuredly not a book of Black Magic, nor does it lend
itself to the introduction of other figures than those which appear in
it, and these are few and simple. Finally, Alfred Maury, in *La Magie et
l'Astrologie dans l'Antiquité et au Moyen Age*, describes the
*Enchiridion* as a work on Sorcery, bearing traces of Neo-Platonic, and
even older, influences. He also evidently had not read it, and is a
personage

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of sufficient consequence to deserve severe censure for following such
an evil principle of criticism.

The legend of the *Enchiridion* is as follows. When Charlemagne was
leaving Rome after his coronation by Leo III., that pontiff presented
him with a memorial of the visit in the shape of a collection of
prayers, to which wonderful virtues were attributed. Whosoever bore the
little work upon his person with the respect due to Holy Scripture, who
also recited it daily to the honour of God, would never be overcome by
his enemies, would pass unscathed through all perils, and the Divine
protection would abide with him to. the end of his days. These things
took place in the year 800. In the year 1523 the *Enchiridion* is
supposed to have been printed at Rome for the first time. Thus broadly
outlined, there is nothing in this legend to offend possibility or to
raise very serious objection to the authorship. The reputed connection
with occult science would indeed seem the chief presumption against it,
because there never was a literature so founded in forgery as that of
Magic, except the sister science of physical Alchemy. When we come,
however, to examine the work at first hand, the case against it assumes
a different aspect, and it is condemned out of its own mouth. While it
is not a Ritual of Magic, it is also certainly not a simple collection
of devotions designed to fortify the person making use of them against
dangers of body and soul by the operation of Divine Grace; it is rather
a collection of charms cast in the form of prayers, and is quite opposed
in its spirit to the devotional spirit of the Church; furthermore, it is
concerned with worldly advantages far more than with those of a
spiritual kind. The work opens with a characteristic stultification in
respect of its own claim, by pointing out that of all the sovereign
princes of past ages there was none more fortunate than Charlemagne, and
the source

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of his great prosperity is acknowledged by him in a letter of thanks
addressed to Pope Leo, the original of which, it is affirmed, may still
be seen in the Library of the Vatican, written with the monarch's own
hand. He states therein that since his reception of a little volume
entitled *Enchiridion*, filled with special prayers and mysterious
figures, sent by His Holiness as a precious gift, he has never ceased to
be fortunate, and that of all things in the universe which are capable
of harming man, not one has shewn any malignity against him, in
gratitude for which he proposes to devote himself and all that is his to
the service of his benefactor. The letter is in Latin; the monarch
styles himself Carolus Magnus, which appears highly unlikely, and he
terms the pontiff *Summus Antistitum Antistes*, but this is not in
itself improbable, as the Papal claim to Episcopal supremacy was fully
developed at the beginning of the ninth century.

It is needless to say that there is no such document preserved in the
Vatican Library; furthermore, there are no letters of Charlemagne
extant, and, despite the encouragement he gave to men of learning and
the Academy mentioned by Alcuin, it is not at all certain that he could
either read or write. Lastly, while it is quite true that his empire
included Germany, as it did also Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and part
of Italy, after his coronation it is much more probable that he would
have styled himself Emperor of the Romans. There is, in fact, no
colourable pretence of genuineness about the so-called autograph letter,
or to be precise it betrays itself--as I have indeed suggested already.

This fact being established, we may proceed to the consideration of the
alleged date of publication--Rome, 1523. This edition is mentioned by
Pierre Christian in his *Histoire de la Magie*, and he defends the
authenticity of the Enchiridion

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

on the ground, among others, that it passed unchallenged in the Eternal
City during such a pontificate as that of Clement VII. A second edition
is said to have been printed at Rome in 1606; between 1584 and 1633 it
appeared four times at Lyons and once at Mayence. In 1660 it was
published for the last time at Rome. Unfortunately for the purposes of
this criticism, the examples of 1633 and 1660 have been alone available.
The first claims to be *nuperrime mendis omnibus purgatum*, but it has
been evidently in the hands of a Grimoire maker, and it appears to have
been edited and extended in the Grimoire interest. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) This is certain, but it is impossible to
say how much beyond the *Seven Mysterious Orisons* connected with the
name of Pope Leo are to be found in the original, or whether the
original was antedated. Outside these Orisons the modern accent of the
work is unmistakable, and it is difficult to understand how any
instructed person, much less a bibliophile like M. Christian, could have
been deceived by it. It is certain, however, that when he approached the
secret sciences, their substitutes and their memorials in literature, he
depended more on his imagination than on his knowledge or research.

The work itself, as already said, is simply a collection of religious
charms, effectual against all the perils to which every sort and
condition of men may be made subject on land, on water, from open and
secret enemies, from the bites of wild and rabid beasts, from poisons,
from fire, from tempests. While it thus ensures against evil, it gives
happiness in domestic matters and in the enterprises which contribute to
prosperity and to the pleasures of a contented life. The proviso is that

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "the instructions must be followed as accurately
as human weakness will allow." Fortunately they are more simple than the
Grimoires. When a copy of the book has been secured, it must be placed
in a small bag of new leather, so that it may be kept clean. A vow must
be made to carry it as far as practicable on one's person, and to read
with attentive devotion at least one page daily. If a specific danger be
apprehended, a page suitable to its nature should be selected. Reading
must be done upon the knees, with the face turned to the east: "so did
Charlemagne invariably." Furthermore, works of piety must be performed
in honour of the celestial genii whose benign influence it is desired to
attract; alms also must be given to the poor, "as this is of all things
most pleasing unto such spirits, for thereby we become their coadjutors
and friends, the economy of the universe being committed to them by the
Creator."

Here we have the magical doctrine concerning planetary intelligences
which connects the *Enchiridion* with the *Arbatel*, and the hint of
"secondary deities" which connects it with Trithemius. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)\]

The *In Principio*, or first chapter of the Gospel according to St.
John, is declared to be the most potent of all the devotions in the
book, and it is to be recited the most frequently. The mysterious
figures are said to have been extracted from the rarest manuscripts
which antiquity has committed to us, and their virtue is not only highly
efficacious, but so easily Put in motion, that it is enough for this
purpose to carry the work reverently on one's person. "Experience will
remove any doubt which may be felt in this respect, while the scruples
which may be occasioned by the idea that there is Magic or

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

superstition herein will be banished by a slight exercise of reason.

As to this latter point, it is said that a little reflection upon the
infinite number of secret sympathies and antipathies found in different
beings here below will explain how it is that such figures may be in
sympathy with the Celestial Intelligences which govern this vast
universe.

It will scarcely be necessary to observe that the doctrine of sympathies
and antipathies is the very essence of Natural Magic, and connects it
with the recondite branches. The mysterious figures referred to were
originally nine in number, and in most cases recur several times. The
most conspicuous is the *Labarum* of Constantine and the *Tau* symbol,
which Lévi connects with the Tarot.

The apparently unmeaning enumeration of various Divine Names is a
special characteristic of Ceremonial Magic, and certainly makes the
*Enchiridion* interlink with a cycle of literature from which it is
otherwise thinly distinct. There is, indeed, little specific difference
between the prayers which incorporate them and the Invocations which
swarm in the Rituals. It may be added that the use of such Divine Names
is supported by a mendacious reference to the Angelical Theology of
Dionysius.

The prefatory matter ends at this point. The prose of the Gospel of St.
John follows, with versicles and a prayer. Next come the Seven
Penitential Psalms, with the Litany of the Saints, after which are the
*Mysterious Prayers of Pope Leo*, followed by a multitude of others not
less mysterious, and prevailing against human fragility, and so forth.
There are prayers for voyages, prayers addressed to the Cross, and then
under the Tau symbol, commencing with the curious exclamation, *Per
signum* ✠ *Domini Tau, libera me*, there follows a long

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

conjuration, as express as anything in Magic, designed to prevent the
petitioner from injury by any steel weapons whatsoever. Forming part of
this ceremony is the pseudo-epistle addressed by Jesus Christ to King
Abgar, explaining why our Saviour could not come Himself to that
monarch, and promising to send His disciple Thaddeus when He had
fulfilled the work given Him by His Father. It goes on to say that
Christ has written it with His own hand, and that wheresoever the
recipient shall be, in house or field, by sea or stream, *sive in prætio
Paganorum seu Christianorum*--such is the stultification thereof--his
enemy shall never prevail over him. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)
The king received the epistle with many tears and prayers, all which
being duly described, the conjuration of the *baculi, gladii, lanceæ,
enses, cultelli, sagittæ, claves, funes, et omnia alia genera armorum*,
is continued.

As it is difficult to say where the original *Enchiridion* actually
begins, so it is uncertain where it ends. A variety of miscellaneous
prayers are, however, attributed to well-known saints quite outside the
Carlovingian period, and to Innocent IV. and John XX., without prejudice
to a further orison of the great Pope Leo himself. Then come the
"curious secrets"--to conciliate and discover one's proper genius, to
become invulnerable, to prevent a gun from going off, to behold a future
husband or wife, all effected by means of formal prayers--a kind of
royal road to the chief ends of Magic, without apparently exceeding the
devotional discipline of the Church.

To complete the analysis of this curious collection, its most important
practical part is here added, namely:--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[42:1](bcm10.htm#fr_26.md) This appears more
evidently in the last Roman edition, which pretends to be based on all
those which preceded it, including impressions published at Parma,
Ancona and Frankfort which are now generally unknown. The editor has,
moreover, altered and rearranged, omitted and added at choice. He has
supplied also a Key to the whole work, which is a short process for the
government of evil spirits.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[43:1](bcm10.htm#fr_27.md) Joannis Tritemii,
Abbatis Spanheymensis, *De Septem Secundiis, id est, Intelligentiis,
sive Spiritibus, Orbes post Deum Moventibus, &c.* Coloniæ, 1567. The
treatise is well known, or at least much talked of, and this is the
original edition, belonging to the date claimed for it.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[45:1](bcm10.htm#fr_28.md) For this legend, see
Fabricius, *Cod. Apoc. N.T.*, I., p. 317.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: The Seven Mysterious Orisons](bcm11.md)
