[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm14)  [Next](bcm16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 3. The Pauline Art

If the intimation of the last section be accepted as a working
hypothesis in respect of the *Lemegeton*, and if its third and fourth
books be therefore set apart as accretions, there is possibly some
colourable pretence for placing *The Pauline Art* among composite
Rituals. It is very difficult to speak certainly, as what is offered in
the work is the Ritual for the Invocation of the Angels of Day and
Night, the Angels of the Twelve Signs and those of the Zodiacal degrees,
who are termed Angels of Men. There is, however, no distinct account
either of their offices or qualities, except in the case of the last, as
to whom it appears that their intervention can be sought only for
purposes which are in consonance with the laws of God and the good of
mankind generally. It is an and document largely consisting of name
catalogues, but as for this reason it is possible to present it shortly,
and as it counts for something in the literature, I shall give it in the
following form.

HOURS OF THE DAY

The Ruler of the First Hour is SAMAEL, who has 444 serving spirits under
eight leaders, namely: *Arniniel, Charpon, Daresiel, Monasiel, Brumiel,
Nestoriel, Charmeas, Meresijn*.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

The Ruler of the Second Hour is ANAEL, who has under his control ten
chief and one hundred lesser lords. These in their turn command serving
spirits. The chiefs include *Monarchas*, *Archiel* and *Chardiel*; the
subalterns include *Orphiel, Carsiol, Elmoym, Quosiel, Ermosiel,
Graniel*.

The Ruler of the Third Hour is VEGUANIEL, under whom are twenty chief
officers, two hundred lesser officers and a cloud of serving spirits.
The chief officers include *Murriel, Leosiel, Drelmeth, Sardiniel*;
among the lesser officers are *Parmiel, Comadiel, Glmarij, Hantiel,
Serviel, Furiel*.

The Ruler of the Fourth Hour is VACHMIEL, who has ten chief and one
hundred inferior officers, having many serving spirits. The chiefs
include *Ammiel, Larmiel, Marfiel, Ormijel, Sardiel*, and the inferiors
*Emarfiel, Permiel, Quoriel, Sturbiel, Daniel*.

The Ruler of the Fifth Hour is SAZQUIEL, having ten chief and one
hundred lesser officers, each with attendants. The chiefs include
*Damiel, Armarele, Maroch, Serapiel, Fustiel*, and the inferiors
*Jamersil, Futiniel, Ramisiel, Amisiel, Pubrisiel*.

The Ruler of the Sixth Hour is SAMIL, who has ten chief and one hundred
lesser officers, with a vast concourse of serving spirits. Among the
chiefs are *Araebel, Charuch, Medussusiel, Nathaniel, Perniel*, and
among the subordinates *Jamiel, Joustriel, Sameon, Farsiel, Zamion*.

The Ruler of the Seventh Hour is BARGINIEL, having also ten officers and
one hundred subalterns, among whom are *Abrasiel, Farmos, Nosteri,
Mamiel, Sagiel*, for the chief, and *Harmiel, Nastoro, Varmaj, Tusmas,
Crociel*, as inferior examples.

The Ruler of the Eighth Hour is OSGAEBIAL, who has many chief and
subordinate officers and a great cloud of

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

serving spirits. Among the chiefs are *Sarfiel, Amatino, Choriel,
Mosiel, Lanthros*, and among the subalterns *Demaros, Osmajloel,
Januviel, Vernael, Thribiel*.

The Ruler of the Ninth Hour is VADRIEL, having ten chief and one hundred
lesser officers and serving spirits even as the sands of the sea. The
greater include *Astroniel, Charms, Pamerif, Damiel, Madriel*; among the
lesser are *Kremos, Meros, Brasiel, Nafarin, Zoigmiel*.

The Ruler of the Tenth Hour is ORIEL, who has ten cohorts of officers
presiding over many serving spirits. These orders include *Armesi,
Darbiel, Panales, Mesriel, Chorob, Lemure, Ormas, Charnij, Zazior,
Namon*--being one of each choir.

The Ruler of the Eleventh Hour is BARIEL, whose army is similarly
divided, and as typical specimens of the ten orders there are *Almariz,
Pralimiel, Chardros, Furmiel, Lamie, Menafiel, Demasar, Ormary, Hevas,
Zemoel*.

The Ruler of the Twelfth Hour is BERATIEL, whose officers are divided
into twelve orders, some greater and some lesser, the examples of each
being--in the first class, *Cameron, Altrofiel, Penatiel, Demarae,
Famaris*; and in the second, *Pharniel, Nerostiel, Emarson, Voizia,
Sameron*.

HOURS OF THE NIGHT

The *Negotia perambulantia in tenebris* are more numerous than those of
the daylight. They are divided under their respective Supreme Rulers
into six chief and six secondary orders, and the serving spirits are
proportionately great in number.

The First Hour. Supreme Ruler--GAMIEL. The chief officers include
*Moriel, Garthiel, Sepharon, Mousien, Arathiel*,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Cosel*. Lesser officers: *Zanias, Noxin,
Tempast, Farion, Glaras, Belsal*.

The Second Hour. Supreme Ruler--FARRIS. The chief officers include
*Almodar, Tamarid, Nedros, Ormisiel, Chabril, Praxil*. Lesser officers:
*Permaz, Umeroz, Emaril, Fromezin, Ramasiel, Granozin*.

The Third Hour. Supreme Ruler--SARQUAMICH. The chief officers include
*Meriarijm, Crusiel, Penarys, Amriel, Dencinoz, Nestozoz*. Lesser
officers: *Evanel, Sarmezin, Haglon, Uvabriel, Thymitzod, Fromzon*.

The Fourth Hour. Supreme Ruler--JEFISCHA. The chief officers include
*Armesiel, Nedruel, Maneij, Ormael, Phorsiel, Rimezin*. Lesser officers:
*Rayziel, Gemezin, Fremiel, Hamayzod, Japnoill, Lamediel*.

The Fifth Hour. Supreme Ruler--ABASDARHON. The chief officers include
*Moniel, Charby, Apiniel, Dematron, Nechoxim, Hameriel*. Lesser
officers: *Harptzall, Chrymos, Patrozin, Nameton, Barmas, Phatiel*.

The Sixth Hour. Supreme Ruler--ZAAZONASH. The chief officers include
*Menorita, Prenostix, Namedor, Cheratiel, Dramazod, Fuleriel*. Lesser
officers: *Pammon, Dracon, Gemtzod, Enariel, Rudosor, Salmon*.

The Seventh Hour. Supreme Ruler--MENDRION. The chief officers include
*Ammiel, Choriel, Genaritzod, Pendroz, Memsiel, Ventariel*. Lesser
officers: *Zacharel, Razziel, Tarmitzod, Anapion, Framoch, Machmay*.

The Eighth Hour. Supreme Ruler--NARCORIEL. The chief officers: *Cambill,
Nedarijin, Astrocon, Marifiel, Dramozin, Amelzom*. Lesser officers:
*Hanoziz, Gastrion, Thomax, Hebrazym, Zimeloz, Gamsiel*.

The Ninth Hour. Supreme Ruler--NACORIEL. The chief officers, not
subdivided: Adrapen, Chermes, Fenadros, Vemasiel,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Comary, Demanor, Nameal, Maliel, Hanozoz,
Brandiel, Evandiel, Iamariel*.

The Tenth Hour: JUSGUARIN. The chief officers ten, including *Lapheriel,
Emerziel, Mameroijud*, Lesser officers one hundred, including *Chameray,
Hazamil, Vraniel*.

The Eleventh Hour: DARDARIEL. The great officers include *Cardiel,
Permon, Armiel, Hastoriel, Casmiros, Dumariel, Tumoriel*. Lesser
officers: *Hermas, Druchas, Charman, Elamiz, Ialcoajul, Lamersij,
Hamarytzod*.

The Twelfth Hour: SARINDIEL. The chief officers include *Adoniel,
Darmosiel, Ambriel, and the lesser officers Nefrias, Irmanotzod,
Melanos*. There are others cited, but the list is confused in my example
and these will serve all purposes of enumeration.

The Angels of the Twelve Signs--classing the latter according to the
elementary triplicities--are: *Fiery Triplicity*: Aries--Angel = *Aiel*;
Leo--Angel = *Ol*; Sagittarius--Angel = *Sizajasel*. *Airy Triplicity*:
Gemini--Angel = *Giel*; Libra--Angel = *Jael*; Aquarius--Angel =
*Ausiul*. *Watery Triplicity*: Cancer--Angel = *Cael*; Scorpio--Angel =
*Sosol*; Pisces--Angel = *Pasiel*. *Earthy Triplicity*: Taurus--Angel =
*Tual*; Virgo--Angel = *Voil*; Capricornus-Angel = *Casujoiah*.

But the supreme zodiacal presidency is allocated to the archangels as
follows: for the Fiery Triplicity, Michael; for the Airy Triplicity,
Raphael; for the Watery Triplicity, Gabriel; for the Earthy Triplicity,
Uriel. This follows all the traditional precedents. It is impossible to
cite here the so-called angels or genii of men who govern the zodiacal
degrees to the number of 360. They are exemplified by the ruling
archangels, whose invocation does not seem to be possible, and by the
spirits attendant on these, as, for example: *Asajel, Sochiel and
Cassiel*, of the Earthy Triplicity; *Samael*,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Madiel* and *Mael*, of the Watery Triplicity;
and so forth. These will suffer citation, but the success of the Pauline
experiments generally will depend (*a*.) upon the construction of the
seals attributed to the twenty-four ruling hours of the day and night,
which seals must exhibit the proper astrological signs referable to the
day and hour of each intelligence; (*b*.) upon the use, when invocation
takes place, of the proper planetary perfumes; (*c*.) upon the
astrological seals referable to the chief intelligences of the Twelve
Signs under the presidency of the

four great archangels; (*d*.) upon a consecrated crystal into which the
zodiacal spirits must be called by the operator; and (*e*.) upon the
ceremonial use of the invoking formulæ, specimens of which are as
follows.

HOURS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT

Invocation of a Supreme Ruler

O mighty and potent Prince Samael, who art the ruler and governor of the
first hour of the day by the decree of the Most High God, King of Glory;
I, the servant of the Most High, do desire and entreat you by three
great and potent names of God, ADONAI*,* AGLAON*,* TETRAGRAMMATON*, and
by the Power and virtue thereof, to assist me in my affairs, and by your
power and authority to send me, causing to appear before me, all or any
of the angels whom I shall call by name, the same being. resident under
your government. I do further entreat and require that they shall help
in all matters which accord with their office, even as I shall desire,
and that they shall act for me as for the servant of the Most High.
Amen*.

THE INVOCATION OP A GENIUS IN THE CRYSTAL

The ceremony is performed facing towards that quarter of heaven in which
the sign is situated.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

PRAYER

O thou great and blessed angel N., my angel guardian, vouchsafe to
descend from thy holy mansions bringing thy holy influence and presence
into this crystal stone, that I may behold thy glory and enjoy thy
society and aid, both now and evermore. O thou that art higher than the
fourth heaven, thou who knowest the secrets of ELANEL*, thou who ridest
on the wings of the wind and art endowed with superlunary motion; do
thou descend and be present, I pray thee. If ever I have merited thy
society, if my intentions are pure in thy sight, bring hither thine
eternal Presence; deign to hold commune with me, in the name of the
Great God* JEHOVAH*, to Whom the whole choir of heaven continually
sings:* O MAPPA LA MAN*, Hallelujah. Amen*.

By the proper observation of the rules laid down in the Pauline Art
respecting the Angels of Men, and on the assumption that he is
acquainted with the actual minute of his birth, it is said that the
operator may attain to all arts and sciences, even to the sum of wisdom.
In a word, it is the royal road of knowledge, both in the theoretical
and the practical degrees.

Of such is Astronomical Magic, according to the *Lemegeton* and its
dependencies. It does not differ essentially from the system of the
Enochian Tablets followed by John Dee and Edward Kelley, his skryer, as
found in the *Faithful Relation*. The same observation will apply to the
content of the next section, which may be permitted to follow without
further preface.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: The Almadel](bcm16.md)
