[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm19)  [Next](bcm21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

# CHAPTER IV

## The Rituals Of Black Magic

### § 1. The Grimorium Verum

THE four specific and undisguised handbooks of Black Magic, all in the
French language, but in three cases, like so much of the Ceremonial
literature, possessing Italian connections, real or imputed, are:--

I. GRIMORIUM VERUM, or the Most Approved Keys of Solomon the Hebrew
Rabbin, wherein the Most Hidden Secrets, both Natural and Supernatural,
are immediately exhibited; but it is necessary that the Demons should be
contented on their part. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) Translated
from the Hebrew by Plaingière, a Dominican Jesuit, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) with a Collection of Curious Secrets.
Published by Alibeck the Egyptian. 1517. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45.md)

II\. TRUE BLACK MAGIC, or the Secret of Secrets, an MS. found at
Jerusalem in the Sepulchre of Solomon, containing: 1. Forty-five
Talismans with their representation, as also the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

manner of using them, together with their Marvellous Properties. 2. All
Magical Characters known unto this day. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) Translated from the Hebrew of the Magus
Iroë-Grego. <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md) Rome. In the year of
grace, 1750.

III\. THE GRAND GRIMOIRE, with the Powerful Clavicle of Solomon and of
Black Magic; or the Infernal Devices of the Great Agrippa for the
Discovery of all Hidden Treasures and the Subjugation of every
Denomination of Spirits, together with an Abridgment of all the Magical
Arts. (In its earliest edition, without place or date.)

IV\. THE CONSTITUTION OF POPE HONORIUS THE GREAT, wherein may be found
the Arcane Conjurations which must be used against the Spirits of
Darkness. With a Collection of the Most Rare Secrets. Rome, 1670.

They are all tiny volumes, nominally in duodecimo, but much smaller
according to modern measurements.

The date specified in the title of the *Grimorium Verum* is undeniably
fraudulent; the work belongs to the middle of the eighteenth century,
and Memphis is Rome. The *Grand Grimoire* is not of higher antiquity.
That of Honorius is said to have appeared originally in 1629, but it has
been sometimes referred erroneously to the same period of the previous
century.

As indicated by the authorship which is attributed to it, the *Grimorium
Verum* is based to some extent upon the *Key of Solomon*, the main
points of resemblance being in the description of the magical
instruments and in some of the forms of prayer. It distinguishes plainly
the powers which it is proposed

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

to invoke by the name of Devils. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) At
the same time it refers them nominally to the four elements, which would
connect them with the Sylphs, Salamanders and so forth; but the
classification in question, somewhat incidentally made, does not really
obtain. There is an account of the Hierarchy of Spirits, with Lucifer,
Beelzebuth and Astaroth as potentates in chief. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md) A portion of this account is drawn from
the *Lemegeton*, perhaps through the *Pseudo-monarchia* of Wierus. The
work purports to be divided into three sections, containing:--(*a*.) The
Characters and Seals of the Demons, with the forms for their Evocation
and Dismissal. (*b*.) A description of the Natural and Supernatural
Secrets which can be operated by the power of the Demons, and that
without any deception. (*c*.) The Key of the work, and the proper
application thereof. Passing over typographical errors, the MS. from
which it has been printed must have been in a most confused state; there
are not in reality any distinct divisions, and the little volume abounds
in Latin passages which often defy translation, as, for example, *sic
pro ratione voluntas; ut illud sit hoe in opere inclusum minimo clerum
in doctis; quia amicus fiet capitalis, fiet inimicus*. So also we have
*Sanctum Regum* throughout for *Sanctum Regnum*. There are two folding
plates of Characters and Seals, of which many have no reference to the
text, while others essential to the process are missing, the
deficiencies being supplied in the modern Italian versions, which
probably follow another edition, also Italian, and the source of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the French translation, but unknown to the present writer, as indeed to
most bibliographers. The work, as it stands, is really in two parts
only, the *Grimorium Verum* proper and certain "Rare and Astounding
Magical Secrets." The first may be analysed as follows:--(*a*.)
Directions for the preparation of the Operator, all of a personal kind
and analogous to those of the Clavicle. (*b*.) Instructions for the
manufacture of the magical instruments required in the work, also
analogous to the Clavicle. (*c*.) The composition of the virgin
parchment on which the characters and seals are to be inscribed, shewing
distinct variations from the Clavicle. (*d*.) The processes of evocation
and the discharge. Beyond the fact that the evoked Spirits are Lucifer,
Beelzebuth, Astaroth and the inferiors and ministers of these, this
first and chief part is not more repulsive, as it is indeed scarcely
more unintelligent, than most of the processes in its prototype.

The second part contains the usual curiosities common to all the later
Grimoires, including the *Admirable Secrets* of the pretended Albertus
Magnus, the *Little Albert*, &c. In so far as it presents any
considerable variations, such variations are usually in the direction of
Black Magic. Some are venereal in the more objectionable sense of the
term, others merely revolting, while yet others, as that of the Magic
Garters, are derived from the Clavicle. Finally, there are certain
processes which might claim to be those of White Magic <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md) and are concerned with the ceremonial
induction of simple clairvoyance.

We may therefore conclude that the *Grimorium Verum* proper is not more
diabolical than the first part of the *Lemegeton*, which indeed contains
the ceremonial for the evocation of precisely the same spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[96:1](bcm20.htm#fr_43.md) This is only a
conjectural translation. It is impossible to render such a passage as
*modo operator per necessaria et contenta facit scia tamen oportit
Dæmonum potentia dum taxat per agantur*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[96:2](bcm20.htm#fr_44.md) It will be scarcely
necessary to advise the reader that a Dominican Jesuit is an absurdity,
which might be paralleled by "secular monk," "unordained priest," and so
forth. The order of St. Dominic and the Society of Jesus are totally
distinct. A Catholic critic might almost be justified in observing that
so gross a blunder would be possible only to a Jew or a heretic;
certainly he would have more reason than would be discoverable in the
hypothesis of Papus, that priests are the authors of the Grimoires.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[96:3](bcm20.htm#fr_45.md) On the reverse of the
title:--*The True Clavicles of Solomon*. Memphis. Published by Alibeck
the Egyptian.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[97:1](bcm20.htm#fr_46.md) That is, mystic
characters for engraving on magical instruments, vessels and vestments.
The statement is utterly untrue, for the characters given by the
Grimoire are few in number and exceedingly imperfect as well.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[97:2](bcm20.htm#fr_47.md) Mr. Mathers reads Iohé
Grevis. Iroe Gecis is another variation. It is a corruption in any case.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[98:1](bcm20.htm#fr_48.md) "Here beginneth the
*Sanctum Regnum*, called the Royalty of Spirits, or the little Keys of
Solomon, a most learned Hebrew nigromancer and Rabbin, containing
various combinations of characters, whereby the Powers, Spirits or, more
correctly, Devils are invoked, so that they are forced to appear
whensoever you may determine, each one according to his faculty, and are
compelled to bring whatsoever you may require of them, causing you no
kind of annoyance, provided only that they are contented on their part,
for these sorts of creatures give nothing for nothing."

<span id="fn_49"></span>[98:2](bcm20.htm#fr_49.md) See Part ii. c. 3.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[99:1](bcm20.htm#fr_50.md) See Part ii. c. 8, §§ 6,
7, and 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2: True Black Magic](bcm21.md)
