[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm24)  [Next](bcm26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### § 6. The Black Pullet

The Black Pullet, the *Druid of Menapienne, Red Magic, or the Cream of
the Occult Sciences*, with derivatives from the first of these works,
such as the *Queen of the Hairy Flies*, the *Green Butterfly*, &c., form
a class by themselves, and, with one exception, they are quite unserious
publications, which can scarcely be called spurious, as they are almost
without pretence. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) They belong to the
late end of the eighteenth century. Dr. Encausse, the head of the French
Martinists, suggests that they were all fabricated at Rome and
infers--as seen previously--that we owe them to the industry of priests,
which seems to follow somewhat loosely from the evidence, is
characteristic of himself and his school, and is indeed of much the same
value as the statement in *Isis Unveiled*, that the habitual practice of
*Black Magic* at the Vatican could be "easily proved."

The *Black Pullet* is far the most curious of its class and there is
indeed sufficient individuality in its narrative to lift it much above
the paltry impostures with which it connects. Its chief occult interest
centres in the series of talismanic rings which it incorporates with the
text, itself a species of magical romance. It makes no claim to
antiquity, except that it embodies its wisdom, and it does not appeal to
Solomon. In a book of Black Magic, as it certainly is, though the Goëtic
intention is disguised, such modesty makes for virtue. Many of the
Talismans seem to be original devices; at least they connect with
nothing in occult symbolism known to the present

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

writer. At the same time they are constructed in accordance with the
rules laid down by the Fourth Book attributed to Cornelius Agrippa as
regards infernal signatures.

The Black Pullet reappeared during its own period at various dates, with
slight alterations--once as the *Treasure of the Old Man of the
Pyramids*, when it was followed by a sequel or companion under the title
of the *Black Screech Owl*. It has been reprinted within recent years at
Paris in an edition intended for bibliophiles but bearing no indications
of bibliographical research. Though modest in the claims which have been
specified, the title of the original edition is portentous enough,
namely, "The Black Pullet, or the Hen with the Golden Eggs, comprising
the Science of Magical Talismans and Rings, the Art of Necromancy and of
the Kabalah, for the Conjuration of Ærial and Infernal Spirits, of
Sylphs, Undines and Gnomes, serviceable for the acquisition of the
Secret Sciences, for the Discovery of Treasures, for obtaining power to
command all beings and to unmask all Sciences and Bewitchments. The
whole following the Doctrines of Socrates, Pythagoras, Zoroaster, Son of
the Grand Aromasis, and other philosophers whose works in MS. escaped
the conflagration of the Library of Ptolemy. Translated from the
Language of the Magi and that of the Hieroglyphs by the Doctors
Mizzaboula-Jabamîa, Danhuzerus, Nehmahmiah, Judahim, and Eliaeb.
Rendered into French by A. J. S. D. R. L. G. F." The place of
publication is Egypt, which probably stands for Rome, and the date is
740, meaning 1740, which, however, is untrue, as we shall see. It may be
said at once that there is no pretence in the text to fulfil the
magnificent assurances of the title.

The preface entreats that the *Black Pullet* may not be confounded with
the collections of reveries and errors which

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

so many have sought to accredit by announcing supernatural effects. This
request, after due consideration, most readers will find it impossible
to grant. The work, it has been said, is a romance, and the first thing
which it makes clear is that even the addition of a thousand years to
the date in the title is insufficient. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) It is the narrative of a man who "formed
part of the expedition to Egypt," and was "an officer in the army of the
genius." The reference is, of course, to Napoleon and at best the date
of composition is little more than a century ago. While in Egypt, the
narrator was sent upon an expedition to the Pyramids, accompanied by
some mounted chasseurs. They lunched under the shadow of the "grand
colossus," when they were attacked by a horde of Arabs of the desert;
the comrades of the writer were slain and even he was left for dead upon
the ground. On returning to consciousness, he surrendered himself to
mournful reflections in the immediate anticipation of his end and
delivered a valedictory address to the setting sun, when a stone was
rolled back in the Pyramid, and a venerable man issued forth, who was
proclaimed to be a Turk by his turban. This personage did not fail to
discover the corpses which strewed the desert, nor to identify their
nation. When the officer in his turn was examined, he manifested life by
kissing the hand of the ancient man, who, superior to all prejudices
which might have been dictated to the ordinary Mussulman by patriotism
or religion, took pity on him, revived him by a wonderful cordial which
put the wounded man upon his feet, and he followed his preserver into
the Pyramid, wherein was the home of the ancient man and a mighty house
of Magic. There were vast halls and endless galleries, subterranean
chambers piled with treasures,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

apparitions of blazing lamps, ministering spirits innumerable, magic
suppers; above all things there was the Black Pullet. In a word, diurnal
life was illustrated throughout by the supernatural; it was a methodised
version of Aladdin with an inner meaning by Astaroth. The sage himself
proved to be the sole heir of the Magi and the makers of those Egyptian
hieroglyphics which are the "despair of the learned," while, not least,
he was himself in quest of an heir, for he felt that he was about to
pass away. In fine, the French officer, having acquired the Turkish
language by means of a grammar which had its root in sorcery, and being
thus enabled to converse with his protector, which on the whole seems
superfluous, seeing that his protector possessed a talisman which
communicated immediate proficiency in all tongues, was instructed in the
powers and wonders of twenty-two talismanic figures and the rings
corresponding to these, as well as in the secret of the manufacture of
the Black Pullet, which possessed more skill in gold-finding than the
divining rod in the discovery of water. After these instructions, in
spite of many prayers, and the ministries of the genius *Odous*, the
just man expired upon a sofa, while the fortunate kinsman in philosophy
swooned at the feet of his benefactor. In due course, accompanied by the
genius who had been transferred to his service, the French officer
managed to depart from Egypt, laden with treasures, and with the ashes
of the sage in a costly urn. He took ship for Marseilles, stilled a
tempest on the voyage and returned to his native country. He made his
abode in Provence, spending his days in experiments with the Black
Pullet, or in study, meditation and rambling. He undertook at length to
write this memorial of his good fortune, in which he threatens the
publishers of any pirated edition to adorn them, by means of a talisman,
with ears six inches longer than those of

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Midas. But this does not seem to have prevented the publishers.

The Black Pullet disclaims all connection with Black Magic and is duly
to be identified therewith, firstly by its characters and secondly by
their pretended power over evil spirits; though it should be observed
that the infernal beings mentioned in the title are not on the surface
devils but Salamanders--that is to say, elementary Spirits of Fire. But
while it thus transcends Black Magic--if it is requisite to make the
distinction--it is not superior to plagiarism and hence incorporates
many pages of the *Comte de Gabalis*.

For the evocation of the genii who served the Old Man of the Pyramid it
suffices to say: THOMATOS, BENESSER, FLIANTER. You are then liable to be
encompassed by thirty-three several intelligences. To obtain their
consideration say: LITAN, IZER, OSNAS, and they will bow down before
you, individually remarking: NANTHER. The words SOUTRAM, UBARSINENS will
cause them to transport you through the air wheresoever you are
inclined. Upon the utterance of the one word RABIAM they will return you
to your own abode. It is necessary, however, to be fortified by the
talismans and rings of the master, but they can be obtained by a cheap
process. In the cabinet of the Old Man of the Pyramid they were formed
of the precious metals and were resplendent with gems, but they are held
to answer all practical purposes if the rings are composed of bronzed
steel and the talismans of satin, in strict accordance with the
description which here follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[113:1](bcm25.htm#fr_64) Much depends, however,
on the point of view of the critic. A work which, even in its own
country, seems almost unknown, *Le Triple Vocabulaire Infernal*, a
Manual of Demonomania, by Finellan, defines the Cabala as the art of
communicating with elementary spirits, and adds that among the Grand
Cabalas are included (1) That called the Green Butterfly; (2) That of
the Black Pullet; (3) That of the Queen of Hairy Flies; and (4) That of
the Black Screech Owl. The works containing these mysteries are, it is
said, exceedingly rare.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[115:1](bcm25.htm#fr_65) It is not impossible
that the middle of the nineteenth century may be the period to which it
should be assigned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7: Talismans of the Sage of the Pyramids: I to
III](bcm26)
