[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm35)  [Next](bcm37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 8. The Gold-Finding Hen

I must pass, however, to the incubation of the gold-finding hen, which
is the head and crown of the proceedings. The grand Oromasis, the father
of Zoroaster, was the first person who possessed one of these marvellous
fowls, which are hatched from an egg in the following manner. Take
aromatic woods, such as aloes, cedar, orange, citron, laurel, iris-root,
with rose-leaves dried in the sun. Place them in a golden chafing-dish;
pour balsamic oil over them; add the finest incense and clear gum. Next
say: ATHAS, SOLINAM, ERMINATOS, PASAM; set a glass over the
chafing-dish; direct the rays of the sun thereon, and the wood will
kindle, the glass will melt--obviously by the magical power which
resides in the operation--a sweet odour will fill the place and the
compost will burn speedily to ashes. Place these ashes in a golden egg
while still red-hot; lay the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

egg upon a black cushion; cover it with a bell-glass of faceted
rock-crystal; then lift up your eyes and stretch your arms towards
heaven and cry: O SANATAPER, ISMAÏ, NONTAPILUS, ERTIVALER, CANOPISTUS.
Expose the glass to the most fierce rays of the sun till it seems
enveloped in flame, till the egg ceases to be visible, till a slight
vapour rises. Presently you will discern a black pullet just beginning
to move, when if you say: BINUSAS, TESTIPAS, it will take wings and
nestle in your bosom. it is not said that anything disastrous follows,
but rather a certain advantage, which will appear in the next paragraph.

While this is the true process of the Pyramids and easy no doubt to an
heir direct of Oromasis, it is obvious that it has its difficulties to
those born merely under the common moon of sorcery, and, merciful, like
all its companions, to human limitations, the Grimoire provides an
alternative method suitable to persons of small means. Take an unspotted
egg; expose it to the meridian rays of the sun; then select the blackest
hen that you can meet with; if it have any coloured feathers, pluck
them. Should the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals not
intervene opportunely, contrive to hood this bird with a kind of black
bonnet, drawn over the eyes so that it cannot see. Leave it the use of
its beak. Shut it up in a box, also lined with some black material, and
large enough to hold it comfortably. Place the box in a room where no
light of day can penetrate; give food only in the night to the fowl; see
that no noise disturbs it, and set it to hatch the egg. As everything
will be black to the bird, its imagination, which is likely enough, will
be overwhelmed by the sense of blackness, and if it should survive the
incarceration, it will ultimately incubate a perfectly black chicken,
provided only that the operator by his wisdom and virtue is worthy to
participate in such sacred and divine mysteries. It does not appear how
or

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

why a fowl incubated after this uncomfortable fashion should have a
particular instinct for detecting the places wherein gold is hidden, but
such is the faculty attributed to it, and it can only be concluded that
the *Black Pullet* is a degree more foolish than its idle company of
Grimoires.

The simplified process did not, however, in the opinion of sorcery, seem
the last word which it was possible to say upon the subject. Despite the
threatened vengeance of the heir of Oromasis, the mystery was adapted by
the later editors of the *Red Dragon* and reappears as the *Grand
Cabala*, without which no other can succeed. In this, its last
transformation, it becomes a recipe for evoking the devil which seems to
breathe the true spirit of Goëtic genius. Its success, as I must
premise, will depend upon a recollected and devotional spirit in the
operator, together with a clean conscience; otherwise, in place of
commanding the evil spirit, the latter will command him. This
understood, the process itself is simple. You have merely to secure a
black hen which has never been crossed by the male bird and to do this
in such a manner that it shall not cackle; it is best therefore to seize
it in its sleep, clutching it by the neck, but not more than is
necessary to prevent it from crying. You must repair to the highroad,
walk till you come to a cross-way and there, on the stroke of midnight,
describe a circle with a cypress rod, place yourself in the midst
thereof and tear the bird in twain, pronouncing three times the words,
*Euphas, Metahîm, frugativi et appellavi*. Next turn to the East, kneel
down, recite a prayer and conclude it with the Grand Appellation, when
the Unclean Spirit will appear to you in a scarlet surcoat, a yellow
vest and breeches of pale green. His head will resemble that of a dog,
but his ears will be those of an ass, with two horns above them; he will
have the legs and hoofs of a calf. He will ask for your orders, which
you will give as you

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

please, and as he cannot do otherwise than obey, you may become rich on
the spot and thus the happiest of men. Such at least is the judgment of
the Grimoire. Whether the victim of the process is to be torn in pieces
alive does not explicitly

 

<span id="img_13300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/13300.jpg.md)  
THE APPARITION OF THE GRAND CABALA

 

appear, but may be inferred from the initial precaution. This being the
case, I have so modified the procedure that, in case it should be tried
by a fool in these more civilised days, he will have only his pains for
the trouble--by the hypothesis of the ceremonial art. This is therefore
a word to the fool.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

 

<span id="img_13400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/13400.jpg.md)  
DEVIL STRUGGLING WITH ST. PETER.  
*Hyde Register, British Museum, Eleventh Century*.

 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

 

<span id="img_13500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/13500.jpg.md)  
PLATE VI: THE SABBATIC GOAT

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1: Concerning the Love of God](bcm37.md)
