[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm37)  [Next](bcm39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 2. Concerning. Fortitude

The spiritual intention of the operator being thus determined, his next
step was the acquisition of the mental attitude appropriate to his
future work. We may picture him in the traditional state of the
sorcerer--poor, proscribed, envious, ambitious, and having no capacity
for legitimate enterprises, Unable to earn money, he hankers after
hidden treasures, and haunts those spots up and down the country-side
which are reputed to conceal them. He has done this presumably for

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

a long time before determining to betake himself to Magic, but the earth
will not yield up her hoards, for the gnomes and the Earth-Spirits, the
Alastors and the Demons of the Solitudes, stand guard over the secrets
of dead misers when the human ghost has ceased to walk in the
neighbourhood. He does not long hesitate when he learns that the
Grimoires of Black Magic are full of darksome rites and fell, mysterious
words which compel or expel those guardians. The Church and State may
threaten him with a fire for his flesh and a fire for his soul, but by
watchfulness and secrecy he hopes to elude the one, and the other is a
distant danger. Obviously, however, in order to reach his determination,
he must arm himself with intrepidity and prudence, and this is the first
counsel of his guides to the *Sanctum Regnum* of Goëtia.

"O men! O impotent mortals!" cries the author of the *Grand
Grimoire*, <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) "tremble at your own
temerity when you blindly aspire to the possession of a science so
profound. Lift up your minds beyond your limited sphere, and learn of me
that before you undertake anything it is necessary that you should
become firm and immovable, besides being scrupulously attentive in the
exact observation, step by step, of all things whatsoever that I shall
tell you, without which precautions every operation will turn to your
disadvantage, confusion and total destruction; while, on the contrary,
by following my injunctions with precision, you will rise from your
meanness and poverty, achieving a complete success in all your
enterprises. Arm yourselves, therefore, with intrepidity, prudence,
wisdom and virtue, as qualifications for this grand and illimitable
work, in which I have passed sixty-and-seven years, toiling night and
day for the attainment of success in so sublime an object." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75)

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

One would think that there were shorter roads to wealth and the
satisfaction of the other common appetites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[143:1](bcm38.htm#fr_74) Book I. c. 2.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[143:2](bcm38.htm#fr_75) The speaker is
pseudo-Solomon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3: Concerning Continence and Abstinence](bcm39)
