[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm36)  [Next](bcm38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span id="img_13800"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/13800.jpg)  
DEVIL FROM HEARNE'S PRINT OF THE "DESCENT INTO HELL."  
*Engraved by Michael Burghers*, c. 1676.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

# CHAPTER I

## The Preparation of the Operator

### § 1. Concerning the Love of God

THE rites of so-called Transcendental Magic are, *ex hypothesi*, divine
and religious rites, and the counsels, spiritual and moral, which are
found in its instructions are, in their meagre and puerile way, the
vulgarised counsels of perfection, whatever element of sovereign
contra-reason may obtain in its experiments. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) The Composite Rituals, despite the result
of their analysis, also partake largely of the nature of substituted
religious observances, at times Judaistic, at times Christian. In both
cases this fact is readily intelligible; to communicate with the fabled
Spirits of the Firmament and to practise an art which offers to its
adepts the regeneration of Enoch, King of the Inferior World, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) "who was not, for God took him," may well
demand a high degree of sanctity from its candidate, to whatever ends it
may lead him; while to dominate the so-called Spirits of the Elements,
the Kabalistic *Kliphoth* and the Evil Demons, it is reasonable to
assume that the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Magus must be free from common weakness, from
common vice <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) and must be fortified by
the grace and favour of the superior world. Given the magical standpoint
in each case, the conditions essential to operation seem, in this
respect, above challenge. Its recommendations, however, were more
especially of times and seasons; they were for the work of the art in
hand rather than for the high and transcendental art of holy life. But
it will assuredly appear at first sight a bizarre anomaly that Black
Magic should involve also religious observances and should exact similar
conditions, both inward and outward, from those who would undertake its
enterprises. It is not, as generally supposed, either Christianity *à
rebours* or a reversed religion of Israel; it is not the intentional
profanation of religious ritual and observance; it is something less
outrageous but logically more insensate; so far as it has re. course to
such ritual and such observance, it is not to do outrage to God in the
interests of diabolism, but to derive power and virtue from above for
the more successful control of Evil Spirits, and this obtains
indifferently whether the purpose of the operator be otherwise lawful or
not.

The Divine Love, says the book of *True Black Magic*, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) must precede the acquisition of the
Science of Solomon, son of King David, who said: The beginning and Key
of my Wisdom are the fear of God, to do Him honour, to adore Him with
great contrition of heart, and to invoke His aid in all our intentions
and aspirations; which fulfilling, God will lead us into the good
way. <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70)

To account for this anomaly it is insufficient to say that

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the book of *True Black Magic* is simply the *Key of Solomon* adapted to
Goëtic intentions. In the first place, as already seen, it is impossible
to read the Goëtic intention out of either of the Clavicles; and, in the
second place, the same characteristics are found in the Grimoires which
derive least of all from the Clavicles, namely, that of Honorius, and
that called the *Grand Grimoire*. To meditate continually on the
undertaking and to centre every hope in the infinite goodness of the
Great Adonai, is the rule established by the latter as the first
principle of success. <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)

Nor does the insensate nature of the processes of Black Magic offer
explanation by itself. The attempt to propitiate the Deity by means of
prayers, sacrifices and abstinence, and thus to obtain the Divine
assistance for the successful consummation of hideous offences and
preposterous or impossible undertakings, is, of course, madness; for the
God acknowledged and invoked by Goëtic Magic is not the Principle of
Evil, as the myth of Modern Satanism supposes, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) but the "terrible and venerable Deity" Who
destroyed the power of the rebellious angels--alternatively the Jehovah
of the Jewish rituals and the Trinity of the Christian magical cycle.
The insane observance followed in reality from the interpretation placed
by Goëtic Theurgy on the fundamental doctrine of Practical Magic,
namely, the power of Divine words to compel the obedience of all spirits
to those who could pronounce them. <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73)

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Collections of these words and names were
recited as invoking and binding forms, and, incorporated into a suitable
setting of official prayers, were used in all magical ceremonies. Black
Magic was sometimes their application to more unlawful purposes and
sometimes to the same purposes. The utterance of the Divine Name, which
was supposed to make the devils tremble and place them at the will of
the Magus, was at least equally powerful, it was argued, to enforce
their obedience for a purpose in consonance with their own nature.
Behind this there lay also the tacit assumption that it was easier to
control demons than to persuade angels. Then seeing that prayer to God
and the invocation of the Divine Names presuppose a proper spirit of
reverence, devotion and love as the condition upon which prayer is
heard, it became a condition in Goëtia. The first impossibility required
of the adept in Black Magic is therefore that he should love God before
he bewitches his neighbour; that he should put all his hopes in God
before he makes pact with Satan; that, in a word, he should be good in
order to do evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[139:1](bcm37.htm#fr_66) The analysis of the
*Arbatel of Magic* in Part I. establishes this point, but the following
passages may be cited in support of the statement. "In all things call
upon the Name Of the Lord, and without prayer unto God, through His
only-begotten Son, do not thou undertake to do or to think anything."
Aph. 2. "Let the word of God never depart from thy mouth." *Ib*. Aph. 3.
"Look unto God in all things." *Ib*. Aph. 4. "Desire from God alone."
*Ib*. Aph. 11. "Before all things, be watchful in this, that your name
be written in heaven." *Ib*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[139:2](bcm37.htm#fr_67) The secret of this
Regeneration is promised to the adept in *Arbatel*, Aph. 24.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[140:1](bcm37.htm#fr_68) "To overcome and
subjugate the elementary spirits, we must never yield to their
characteristic defects. . . . In a word, we must overcome them in their
strength without ever being overcome by their weaknesses."--Éliphas
Lévi, *Rituel de la Haute Magie*, c. 4.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[140:2](bcm37.htm#fr_69) Book I. c. 1.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[140:3](bcm37.htm#fr_70) An adapted rendering of
*The Key of Solomon*, Book I. c. 1.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[141:1](bcm37.htm#fr_71) *Grand Grimoire*, Book
I. c. i.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[141:2](bcm37.htm#fr_72) To do evil because it
is pleasing to the Prince of Evil did not enter into the conception of
Sorcery. Refinements of this kind are of late date, and mostly of French
invention. The sorcerer who sought to do evil and had recourse for
assistance to Satan was actuated by no recondite motive; he ministered
merely to his own propensities for lust, wealth or revenge. He used
Satan as an instrument, treated him and his inferiors as slaves, and
always reckoned ultimately to elude the dangers of such dealings.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[141:3](bcm37.htm#fr_73) The doctrine is
summarised in a sentence by Éliphas Lévi, when he declares that the
virtue of things has created words. Cornelius Agrippa refers it to
Platonic teaching, affirming that a certain power or life belonging to
the idea underlies the "form of the signification," <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> that is, the voice or word, whence he also
says that Magicians regard words as the "rays of things." *De Occulta
Philosophia*, Book I. c. 70. Compare also his rendering of the Platonic
doctrine that the form comes first from the idea. *Ibid*., c. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2: Concerning. Fortitude](bcm38)
