[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm39)  [Next](bcm41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 4. Concerning the External Preparation of the Operator, and firstly Concerning Ablution

The rite of lustration, being the sacramental mark of inward
cleanliness, is prescribed in all magical ceremonies, and is equally
important in Goëtic art. The ordinary daily ablution itself becomes
symbolical. When the operator rises in the morning, during the
preparatory triduum prescribed by the *Grimorium Verum*, his hands and
face must be sponged with a clean white cloth, using water which has
been previously exorcised according to the indications of the
Ritual <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) and reciting the

PREPARATORY PRAYER

Lord God ADONAY, Who hast formed man out of nothing to Thine own image
and likeness, and me also, unworthy sinner as I am, deign, I pray Thee,
to bless ✠ *and sanctify this water, that it may be healthful to my body
and soul, that all delusion may depart from me. O Lord God, Almighty and
Ineffable, Who didst lead forth Thy people from the land of Egypt, and
didst cause them to Pass dry-shod over the Red Sea! Grant that I may be
cleansed by this water from all my sins and may appear innocent before
Thee. Amen*.

The *Book of True Black Magic* observes that the bath is most necessary
for Magical Art, <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) and that it must be
taken on

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the final day of the fast, when the exorcisor has been cleansed from all
sins, when he has written with the pen of the Art, upon virgin paper or
parchment, all the conjurations and exorcisms required in the practice,
and has performed all the other preparatory ceremonies. From the crown
of his head to the soles of his feet he must purify himself with warm
exorcised water, saying as he does so: *O Lord Adonay, Who hast formed
me in Thine image and in Thy likeness, deign to bless and sanctify this
water, so that it may become unto me the salvation of my soul and body,
and that no wickedness may ever find place within me*. . . . The Psalms
*Dominus illuminatio mea* and *Dixit insipiens in corde suo* should be
added. <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) Then he should dry himself.

The prayer following must be repeated--five times during the day and
four times during the night--for the space of three days: ASTROSCHIO,
ASATH, à sacra BEDRIMUBAL, FELUT, ANABOTOS, SERABILEM, SERGEN, GEMEN,
DOMOS. *O Lord God, Who art seated above the heavens, Who beholdest the
depths, grant me, I pray Thee, that those things which I conceive in my
mind may also be executed by me, through Thee, O Great God, Who livest
and reignest for ever and ever! Amen*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[147:1](bcm40.htm#fr_81) From these indications
it follows literally that such water would hold quicklime in solution.
The passage stands thus: "Warning: The said water must be that which was
previously exorcised, wherein thy lime was put"--namely, for the
dressing of the lambskin. But water consecrated at the same time is most
probably intended.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[147:2](bcm40.htm#fr_82) The statement is
adapted from the *Key of Solomon*, Book II. c. 5, but the analogy ends
with the prescription of warm water; the prayers differ and the whole
ceremony is simplified in the Goëtic ritual.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[148:1](bcm40.htm#fr_83) These Psalms are
numbered 13 and 26 in the Vulgate. They were possibly selected on amount
of the symbolism attaching to these numbers. Thirteen refers to death
and resurrection into new life; it thus connects with the regeneration
typified by the bath. Twenty-six is the number of Jehovah. In the
Authorised Version the same Psalms appear as 14 and 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5: Concerning the External Preparation of the Operator,
and secondly Concerning the Vestments](bcm41)
