[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm49)  [Next](bcm51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### § 9. Concerning the Time of Operation

When the sacrifice of the Art or its substitute has once been completed,
the operator is in possession of all the materials that he will require
*ex hypothesi* for the performance of Goëtic works as described in the
*Book of True Black Magic* or the *Grimorium Verum*. But as the first of
these Rituals ordains that the preparation of the artist shall be made
in accordance with certain planetary influences, so in like manner does
it regulate the time of operation or accomplishment. The instructions
still follow, and still in a confused manner, the authority of the
Clavicle. It will be well to reproduce them here in a succinct analysis,
though the piecemeal nature of the treatise attributed to Iroë-Grego
leaves the rules without much practical value, while no attention is
paid to them by other makers of Grimoires:--

An experiment of speaking with spirits or conjuring them should be
operated in the day and hour of Mercury, which hour may be the first or
the eighth, but the fifteenth or twenty-second of the same night will be
still better, for spirits appear more easily in the silence of the dark
hours. A certain atmospheric condition is also required for the
experiment of calling spirits, and an obscure uninhabited place
congruous to such an art is even more necessary, for so only will it be
accomplished and educed. But if the experiment be concerned with a
theft, <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_153) it should be performed in
the hour of the Moon and on her day--if it be possible, in the crescent
Moon--from the first to the eighth hour, or, failing this, at ten
o'clock in the night. It is better, however, in the day, because the
light has more correspondence

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

to the intention, that is, to the manifestation of hidden things. The
experience of invisibility <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_154) should
be operated when the Moon is in Pisces. Experiments of love, favour and
grace <span id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_155) should be accomplished on
the day and in the hour of the Sun or Venus, from the first to the
eighth hour, with the Moon in Pisces. Works of destruction, hatred and
desolation <span id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_156) should be performed on
the day and in the hour of Saturn, from the first or eighth to the
fifteenth or twenty-second hour of the night; they are then certain.
Burlesque and amusing experiments are performed on the day of Venus, in
the first and the eighth hour, or in the fifteenth and twenty-second
hour of the night. Extraordinary experiences should be operated in
corresponding hours on the day of Jupiter. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[4](#fn_157)

 

<span id="img_18300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/18300.jpg)  
SATAN BOUND. ON PRE-NORMAN CROSS SHAFT AT KIRKBY STEPHEN, WESTMORLAND.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[182:1](bcm50.htm#fr_154) An experiment of this
kind is reproduced by the Grimoire from the *Key of Solomon*, but does
not call for inclusion either by its connection with Black Magic--for
there is no connection, or by any inherent interest--for there is again
none.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[183:1](bcm50.htm#fr_155) See Chapter VIII.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[183:2](bcm50.htm#fr_156) See Venereal
Experiments in Chapter VIII.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[183:3](bcm50.htm#fr_157) See Chapter VIII.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[183:4](bcm50.htm#fr_158) The chapter on
Extraordinary Experiments in the *Key of Solomon* is rendered
unintelligible by want of details. It reappears in the Grimoire, but is
omitted from this translation for the reason indicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1: The Names and Offices of Evil Spirits](bcm51)
