[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm51)  [Next](bcm53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 2. Concerning the Forms of Infernal Spirits in their Manifestations

Having regard to the nature and antecedents of the Intelligences with
which Black Magic professes to be concerned, it must be highly important
that the operator should know the kind of apparitions which may be
expected, when, despite the incredulity of Horatio, the spirits from the
vasty deep do

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

respond to conjuration. The majority of the Grimoires leave it to be
inferred from their silence that they come in human shape--possibly in
"a neat surcoat and snow-white linen," like the Adonay of the sorcerer
in the *Thaumaturgic Experiences* of Éliphas Lévi. With the Composite
Rituals it is always a subject of apprehension, and a peaceable
manifestation is earnestly bargained for.

According to the *Grimorium Verum*, the spirits do not invariably
manifest under the same forms, and we have had some surprising specimens
of their mutations in the earlier texts; being disengaged from all
matter, they must of necessity borrow a body in order to appear before
us, <span id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_170) and then they assume any shape
and figure which seems good to them. Beware, however, lest they affright
thee--is another pregnant warning. Lucifer appears under the form and
figure of a comely boy; when angered, he is shewn with a ruddy
countenance, but there is nothing monstrous in his shape. Beelzebuth
appears occasionally under monstrous forms, such as the figure of a
misshapen calf, or that of a goat having a long tail; at the same time
he manifests most frequently under the semblance of an enormous
fly. <span id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_171) When angered, he vomits
floods of water and howls like a wolf. Astaroth appears of a black and
white colour, usually under a human figure, but occasionally in the
likeness of an ass.

The subject of Infernal Manifestations is, however, fully treated in the
next chapter. The indications in the present section are merely the
later variants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[194:1](bcm52.htm#fr_171) A portion of this
statement is derived from the *Key of Solomon*; but whereas it is put
clearly in the Grimoire, it is incomplete and inconsequent in the
original. It is the alternative aspect of the Kabalistic principle that
the spirit clothes itself to come down and divests itself to return
upward. When the abyss gives up forms its capacity of manifestation is
Protean, but the most beloved tendency is monstrous. And the forms
disrobe for the abyss to open and receive them when they go back to
their cover.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[194:2](bcm52.htm#fr_172) A giant, a serpent, a
woman, are also other modes of his manifestation, according to the
discretion of demonologists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1: Concerning the Spirits of the Brazen Vessel, otherwise
called the False Monarchy of Demons (Introduction)](bcm53)
