[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm68)  [Next](bcm70.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE EAST

I conjure and invoke thee, O powerful King of the East, MAGOA*, by my
holy labour, by all the names of Divinity, by the same of the
All-Powerful: I command thee to obey, and to come to me, or that
failing, forthwith and immediately to send unto me* MASSAYEL, ARIEL,
SATIEL, ARDUEL, ACORIB*, to respond concerning all that I would know and
to fulfill all that I shall command. Else thou shalt come verily in
thine own Person, to satisfy my will; which refusing, I shall compel
thee by all the virtue and power of God*.

The Grand Pentacle or Circle of Solomon will answer for the above and
following Conjurations, which can be said on all days and at all hours.
If it be desired to speak only with one spirit, one only need be named,
at the choice of the reader.

CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE SOUTH

O EGYM*, great King of the South, I conjure and invoke thee by the most
high and holy Names of God, do thou here manifest, clothed with all thy
Power; come before this circle, or at least send me forthwith* Fadal,
Nastrache*, to make answer unto me, and to execute all my wishes. If
thou failest, I shall force thee by God Himself*.

CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE WEST

O BAYMON*, most potent King, who reignest in the Western quarter, I call
and I invoke thee in the name of the Deity! I command thee by virtue of
the Most High, to send me immediately before this circle the Spirit*
Passiel Rosus

, with all other Spirits who are subject unto thee, that the same may
answer in everything, even as I shall require them. If thou failest, I

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

will torment thee with the sword of fire divine; I will multiply thy
sufferings and will burn thee.

CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE NORTH

O thou, AMAYMON*, King and Emperor of the Northern Parts, I call,
invoke, exorcise and conjure thee, by the virtue and power of the
Creator, and by the virtue of virtues, to send me presently, and without
delay,* Madael, Laaval, Bamlahe, Belem *and* Ramath*, with all other
Spirits of thine obedience, in comely and human form I In whatsoever
Place thou now art, come hither and render that honour which thou owest
to the true living God, Who is thy Creator. In the name of the Father,
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, come therefore, and be obedient, in
front of this circle, without Peril to my body or soul. Appear in comely
human form, with no terror encompassing thee, I conjure thee, make
haste, come straightway, and at once. By all the Divine names--*SECHIEL,
BARACHIEL*--if thou dost not obey promptly,* BALANDIER, suspensus,
iracundus, Origratiumgu, Partus, Olemdemis, and Bautratis*, N. I
exorcise thee, do invoke and do impose most high commandment upon thee,
by the omnipotence of the living God, and of the true God; by the virtue
of the holy God, and by the power of Him Who spake and all things were
made, even by His holy commandment the heaven and earth were made, with
all that is in them! I adjure thee by the Father, by the Son and by the
Holy Ghost, even by the Holy Trinity, by that God Whom thou canst not
resist, under Whose empire I will compel thee; I conjure thee by God the
Father, by God the Son., by God the Holy Ghost., by the Mother of Jesus
Christ, Holy Mother and Perpetual Virgin, by her sacred heart, by hey
blessed milk, which the Son of the Father sucked, by her most holy body
and soul, by all the parts and members of this Virgin, by all the
sufferings*,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

afflictions, labours, agonies which she endured during the whole course
of her life, by all the sighs she uttered, by all the holy tears which
she shed whilst her dear Son wept before the time of His dolorous
passion and on the tree of the Cross, by all the sacred holy things
which are offered and done, and also by all others, as in heaven so on
earth, in honour of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Blessed Mary,
His Mother, by whatsoever is celestial, by the Church Militant, in
honour of the Virgin and of all the Saints. In like manner, I conjure
thee by the Holy Trinity, by all other mysteries, by the sign of the
Cross, by the most precious blood and water which flowed from the side
of Jesus Christ, by the sweat which issued from His whole body, when He
said in the Garden of Olives; My Father, if it be possible, let this
chalice Pass from me. I conjure thee by His death and Passion, by His
burial and glorious resurrection, by His ascension, by the coming of the
Holy Ghost. I adjure thee, furthermore, by the crown of thorns which was
set upon His head, by the blood which flowed from His feet and hands, by
the nails with which He was nailed to the tree of the Cross, by the holy
tears which He shed, by all which He suffered willingly through great
love of us: by the lungs, the heart, the hair, the inward Parts, and all
the members of our Saviour Jesus Christ. I conjure thee by the judgment
of the living and the dead, by the Gospel words of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, by His preachings, by His sayings, by His miracles, by the child
in swaddling-clothes, by the crying child, borne by the mother in her
most pure and virginal womb; by the glorious intercession of the Virgin
Mother of our Saviour Jesus Christ; by all which is of God and of His
Most Holy Mother, as in heaven so on earth. I conjure thee by the holy
Angels and Archangels, by all the blessed orders of Spirits, by the holy
patriarchs and Prophets, by all the holy martyrs and confessors, by all
the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

holy virgins and innocent widows, by all the saints of God, both men and
women. I conjure thee by the head of St. John the Baptist, by the milk
of St. Catherine, and by all the Saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conjurations For Each Day of the Week](bcm70.md)
