[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm64)  [Next](bcm66.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

# CHAPTER VII

## The Method of Honorius

THE *Grimoire of Honorius* is perhaps the most frankly diabolical of all
the Rituals connected with Black Magic, and yet, as we have already
seen, its enormities have been much exaggerated. It suffers comparison,
for example, with the Key of Solomon, and it is preferable to the
Lemegeton because it is less disguised. Its most evident objections are:
1. Profanation of the mysteries of religion. 2. A bloody sacrifice,
characterised by details of a monstrous kind. A less manifest objection
is the superstitious nature of some of its ordinances. It must be
confessed that such a charge seems fantastic, having regard to the
innumerable offices of vain observance with which I have been dealing.
But a vain observance, it should be remembered, is not necessarily
superstitious. To assume that a virtue is resident in parchment prepared
from the skin of an animal which has not engendered, and that such
virtue is wanting in the skin of one which has reproduced its species,

<span id="img_26500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/26500.jpg.md)  
MYSTIC FIGURES FROM THE TITLE-PAGE OF THE "GRIMOIRE OF HONORIUS"

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

may have no foundation in fact, and may be eminently foolish, but it is
not a superstitious assumption. It has been well pointed out by Éliphas
Lévi that the term superstition signifies survival; that is to say, it
is the sign surviving the idea. Thus, the Catholic doctrine of
Transubstantiation, in its open theological sense, may or may not be
true doctrine, but in neither case can the worship of the consecrated
elements be superstitious, because such worship draws directly from the
idea which has created the outward sign. If a time could be supposed
when the Elements should continue to be worshipped after the doctrine
itself had passed away, that would be a superstitious observance. But
the etymological conception of superstition connects also with the idea
of redundance. Thus, a double consecration of the Eucharistic elements
would be a superstitious observance, as well as blasphemously absurd,
because the first consecration is effectual by the theological
hypothesis. But the repetition of the Angelical Salutation in the
devotion of the Holy Rosary is not superstitious, because the first
recitation is not necessarily effectual by the devotional hypothesis. So
also the magical practice which consists with the magical hypothesis
will not be superstitious, though it may not consist with reason. The
slaughter of a kid with a view to securing a virgin parchment is not a
superstitious but a precautionary or assumptive measure. The conversion
of this slaughter into a sacrifice is not superstitious, because it has
a purpose which consists with the magical hypothesis, namely, the
increase of virtue by the consecration of the religious motive. The
importation into such sacrifice of ceremonies which are not
precautionary, and do not, by the hypothesis, increase the virtue, are
redundant and so far superstitious. Such offices do not occur in the
Grimoires, with the exception of that of Honorius, in which Ritual they
are further characterised

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

by brutal features. The slaughter of a black cock and the extraction of
the eyes, tongue and heart, which must be reduced into powder, and that
powder subsequently sprinkled on the lambskin, is a redundant and
monstrous observance. Were I therefore an occultist, with a belief in
the efficacy of magical rituals, I should say that the *Grimoire of
Honorius* must be avoided, but it should be unnecessary at the present
day to warn any one against practices to which no one is likely to
resort, which belong to the foolish mysteries of old exploded doctrines,
and are interesting assuredly, but only as curiosities of the past. It
should be added that the profanations of the mysteries of religion
prescribed by the *Grimoire of Honorius* are not intentional
profanations, and may be condoned to that extent. Their purpose is not
outrage, but increase of efficacy.

Having made these initial provisions, the substance of this exceedingly
curious Ritual may now be offered to the student in the words of its
writer. It will be remembered that the person who desires to invoke the
perverse "Spirits of Darkness" according to the method of Honorius must
observe a three days' fast; he must further confess and approach the
Holy Altar. He should also, by the hypothesis, be a priest of the Latin
Church. After these three days, upon the morrow, and at the hour of
sunrise, he shall recite the Seven Gradual Psalms, with the accompanying
Litanies and Prayers, <span id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_254.md) the whole on
his knees; further, he must drink no wine and eat no meat on that day.
Next, he shall rise at midnight on the first Monday of the month, <span
id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_255.md) and, seeing that he is apparently a
priest, shall say a Mass of the Holy Ghost. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[3](#fn_256.md)

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

After the consecration, taking the Host in his left hand, he shall
recite the following prayer on his knees:--

PRAYER

My Sovereign Saviour Jesus Christ, Son of the living God! Thou Who for
the Salvation of all mankind didst suffer the death of the Cross; Thou
Who, before being abandoned to Thine enemies, by an impulse of ineffable
love, didst institute the Sacrament of Thy Body; Thou Who hast
vouchsafed to us miserable creatures the Privilege of making daily
commemoration thereof; do Thou deign unto Thine unworthy servant, thus
holding Thy Living Body in his hands, all strength and ability for the
Profitable application of that power with which he has been entrusted
against the horde of rebellious spirits. Thou art their true God, and if
they tremble at the utterance of Thy Name, upon that Holy Name will I
call, crying Jesus Christ! Jesus, be Thou my help, now and for ever!
Amen.

After sunrise, a black cock must be killed, the first feather of its
left wing being plucked and preserved for use at the required time. The
eyes must be torn out, and so also the tongue and heart; these must be
dried in the sun and afterwards reduced to powder. The remains must be
interred at sunset in a secret place, a cross of a palm in height being
set upon the mound, while at each of the four corners the signs which
here follow must be drawn with the thumb:--

<span id="img_26800"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/26800.jpg.md)

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

A later edition substitutes the following signs:--

<span id="img_26900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/26900.jpg.md)

On this day also the operator should drink no wine and abstain from
eating meat.

On Tuesday, at break of day, let him say a Mass of the Angels, <span
id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257.md) placing the feather taken from the bird
upon the altar, together with a new penknife. The signs hereinafter
represented must be inscribed on a sheet of clean paper with the
consecrated wine which is the Blood of Jesus Christ:--

<span id="img_26901"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/26901.jpg.md)

In an edition circa 1800 the following signs are substituted:--

<span id="img_26902"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/26902.jpg.md)

They should be written upon the altar, and at the end of the Mass the
paper should be folded in a new veil of violet silk, to be concealed on
the morrow, together with the oblation of the Mass and a part of the
consecrated Host. <span id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_258.md)

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

On the evening of Thursday the operator must rise at midnight and,
having sprinkled holy water about the chamber, he must light a taper of
yellow wax, which shall have been prepared on the Wednesday and pierced
in the form of a cross. When it is lighted he shall recite Psalm
lxxvii. <span id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_259.md)--*Attendite, Popule meus,
legem meam*, &c.--without the *Gloria Patri*. He shall then begin the
*Office of the Dead* with *Venite exultemus Domino*, &c. He shall recite
Matins and Lauds, but in place of the versicle of the ninth Lesson <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_260.md) he shall say: *Deliver us, O Lord, from
the fear of hell. Let not the demons destroy my soul when I shall raise
them from the deep Pit, when I shall command them to do my will. May the
day be bright, may the sun and moon shine forth, when I shall call upon
them. Terrible of aspect are they, deformed and horrible to sight; but
do Thou restore unto them their angelic shapes when I shall impose my
will upon them. O Lord, deliver me, from those of the dread visage, and
grant that they shall be obedient when I shall raise them up from hell,
when I shall impose my will upon them*.

After the Office of the, Dead the operator shall extinguish the taper,
and at sunrise shall cut the throat of a male lamb of nine days, taking
care that the blood does not gush forth upon the earth. He shall skin
the lamb, and shall cast its tongue and heart into the fire. The fire
must be freshly kindled, and the ashes shall be preserved for use at the
proper time. The skin of the lamb shall be spread in the middle of a
field and for the space of nine days shall be sprinkled four times every
day with holy water. On the tenth day, before the rising of the sun, the
lambskin shall be covered with the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

ashes of the heart and tongue, and with the ashes also of the cock. On
Thursday, <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_261.md) after sunset, the flesh
of the lamb shall be interred in a secret place where no bird can come,
and the priest with his right thumb shall inscribe on the grave the
characters here indicated:--

<span id="img_27100"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27100.jpg.md)

In the edition already cited the signs are varied thus:--

<span id="img_27101"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27101.jpg.md)

Moreover, for the space of three days he shall sprinkle the four corners
with holy water, saying:

Sprinkle me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed! Wash me, and
I shall be made whiter than snow!

After the aspersion let him recite the following prayer, kneeling with
his face towards the east:--

PRAYER

Christ Jesus, Redeemer of men, Who, being the Lamb without spot, wast
immolated for the salvation of the human

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

race, Who alone wast found worthy to open the Book of Life, impart such
virtue to this lambskin that it may receive the signs which we shall
trace thereon, written with Thy blood, so that the figures, signs and
words may become efficacious; and grant that this skin may Preserve us
against the wiles of the demons; that they may be terrified at the sight
of these figures and may only approach them trembling. Through Thee,
Jesus Christ, Who livest and reignest through all ages. So be it.

The Litanies of the Holy Name of Jesus must then be repeated, but
instead of the *Agnus Dei*, substitute: *Immolated Lamb, be Thou a
Pillar of strength against the demons! Slain Lamb, give Power over the
Powers of Darkness! Immolated Lamb, grant favour and strength unto the
binding of the Rebellious Spirits. So be it*.

The lambskin shall be stretched for eighteen days, and on the nineteenth
day the fleece shall be removed, reduced into powder and interred in the
same place. The word *vellus* shall be written above it with the finger,
together with the following character and the words:--*May this which
hath been reduced into ashes preserve against the demons through the
name of Jesus*.

<span id="img_27200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27200.jpg.md)

Or, according to the later edition:--

<span id="img_27201"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27201.jpg.md)

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

Add also these signs.--

<span id="img_27300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27300.jpg.md)

Or, according to the later edition:--

<span id="img_27301"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27301.jpg.md)

Lastly, on the eastern side, the said skin must be set to dry in the sun
for three days, the ensuing characters being cut with a new knife:--

<span id="img_27302"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27302.jpg.md)

This being accomplished, recite Psalm lxxi., *Deus, judicium tuum regi
da*, &c., and cut the following characters:--

<span id="img_27303"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27303.jpg.md)

The figure being thus far completed, recite the verses *Afferte Domino,
patriæ gentium*, occurring in Psalm xcv.: *Cantate Domino Canticum
novum*, of which the seventh versicle is: *Offerte Domino, Filii Dei*,
&c., and cut subsequently these characters:--

<span id="img_27304"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27304.jpg.md)

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

Next recite Psalm lxxvii.: *Attendite, popule meus, legem meam*, and
compose the following figure:--

<span id="img_27400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27400.jpg.md)

This being accomplished, recite Psalm ii.: *Quare fremuerunt gentes
populi meditati sunt inania*? Then make another figure as follows:--

<span id="img_27401"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27401.jpg.md)

Or, alternatively:--

<span id="img_27402"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27402.jpg.md)

And recite Psalm cxv.: *Credidi propter quod locutus sum*. Finally, on
the last day of the month a Mass for the Dead shall be offered; the
prose shall be omitted and also the Gospel of St. John, but at the end
of the Mass the priest shall recite the Psalm *Confitemini Domino
quoniam bonus*, &c. <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_262.md)

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

In Honour of the Most Holy and August Trinity, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. Amen.

The Seventy-two Sacred Names of God.--TRINITAS, SOTHER, MESSIAS,
EMMANUEL, SABAHOT, ADONAY, ATHANATOS, JESU, PENTAGNA, AGRAGON, ISCHIROS,
ELEYSON, OTHEOS, TETRAGRAMMATON, ELY, SADAY, AQUILA, MAGNUS HOMO, VISIO,
FLOS, ORIGO, SALVATOR, ALPHA AND OMEGA, PRIMUS, NOVISSIMUS, PRINCIPIUM
ET FINIS, PRIMOGENITUS, SAPIENTIA, VIRTUS, PARACLITUS, VERITAS, VIA,
MEDIATOR, MEDICUS, SALUS, AGNUS, OVIS, VITULUS, SPES, ARIES, LEO, LUX,
IMAGO, PANIS, JANUA, PETRA, SPONSA, PASTOR, PROPHETA, SACERDOS, SANCTUS,
IMMORTALITAS, JESUS, CHRISTUS, PATER, FILIUS HOMINIS, SANCTUS, PATER
OMNIPOTENS, DEUS, AGIOS, RESURRECTIO, MISCHIROS, CHARITAS, ÆTERNAS,
CREATOR, REDEMPTOR, UNITAS, SUMMUM BONUM, INFINITAS. AMEN.

Hereinafter follow the three small pentacles of Solomon, and that of the
Gospel of St. John.

<span id="img_27500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/27500.jpg.md)

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

The Beginning of the Holy Gospel according to John. Glory be to Thee, O
Lord.

IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE WORD, &c., in extenso, so far as the end of the
fourteenth versicle.

Thanks be to God. Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is He Who cometh
in the Name of the Lord. Hosanna in the Highest. We invoke Thee. We
adore Thee. We Praise. Thee. We glorify Thee, O blessed and glorious
Trinity I May the Name of the Lord be blessed, now and henceforth for
ever I Amen. In the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. May Christ conquer ✠*,
reign* ✠*, command* ✠*, and defend me from all evil. Amen*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_254"></span>[267:1](bcm65.htm#fr_255.md) The reference is
probably to the Litany of the Saints and the various orations which
follow it.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[267:2](bcm65.htm#fr_256.md) The three days' fast
must therefore have been regulated so that it expired on the previous
Saturday.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[267:3](bcm65.htm#fr_257.md) The Mass of
Pentecost, except the Epistle, which should be that of the Tuesday after
Pentecost, and the Gradual, for which there are special versicles.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[269:1](bcm65.htm#fr_258.md) The Mass for the
Apparition of St. Michael, May 8, with a special Epistle, Gospel,
Commemoration, &c.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[269:2](bcm65.htm#fr_259.md) I give this direction
as I find it: the oblation is the bread and wine, and the sacrilegious
reservation is the root-matter out of which the theory and practice of
modem French Satanism has obviously arisen.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[270:1](bcm65.htm#fr_260.md) This Psalm is
numbered lxxviii. in the Authorised Version.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[270:2](bcm65.htm#fr_261.md) This is extremely
confused; the Office of the Dead does not begin with the *Venite
exultemus*. The ninth Lesson belongs to the third Nocturne of the
Matins. The prayer given in the Grimoire is based on the verses which it
replaces.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[271:1](bcm65.htm#fr_262.md) The days on which the
various operations should be performed have been confused, after the
prevailing manner of the Grimoires.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[274:1](bcm65.htm#fr_263.md) At this point the
process of the Grimoire becomes almost unintelligible. The recitation of
the seventy-two names apparently succeeds the Psalm and is followed by
the Second Gospel, which is not omitted after all. There is then an
extension of the *Dea Gratias*, this concluded the Mass, which seems
immediately followed by the evocation. But the use of the Pentacles of
Solomon and St. John does not appear, in the one case, till the close of
the Conjurations and not at all in the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Universal Conjuration](bcm66.md)
