[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm66)  [Next](bcm68.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONJURATION OF THE BOOK <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_263.md)

I conjure thee, O Book, to be useful and profitable unto all who shall
have recourse to thee for the success of their affairs. I conjure thee
anew, by the virtue of the Blood of Jesus Christ, contained daily in the
chalice, to be serviceable unto all those who shall read thee. I
exorcise thee, in the Name

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of the Most Holy Trinity, in the Name of the Most Holy Trinity, in the
Name of the Most Holy Trinity!

What follows must be said before the sealing of the Book

I conjure and command you, O Spirits, all and so many as ye aye, to
accept this Book with good grace, so that whensoever we may read it, the
same being approved and recognised as in proper form and valid, you
shall be constrained to appear in comely human form when you are called,
accordingly as the reader shall judge. In no circumstances shall you
make any attempt upon the body, soul or spirit of the reader, nor
inflict any harm on those who may accompany him, either by mutterings,
tempests, noise, scandals, nor yet by lesion or by hindrance in the
execution of the commands of this Book. I conjure you to appear
immediately when the conjuration is made, to execute without dallying
all that is written and enumerated in its proper place in the said book.
You shall obey, serve, instruct, impart and Perform all in your power
for the benefit of those who command you, and the whole without
illusion. If perchance some of the invoked spirits be unable to come or
appear when required, they shall be bound over to send others vested
with their power, who also shall swear solemnly to execute all that the
reader may demand, and ye are all hereby enjoined by the Most Holy Names
of the Omnipotent Living God, ELOYM, JAH, EL, ELOY, TETRAGRAMMATON*, to
fulfil everything as it is set forth above. If ye obey me not, I will
force you to abide in torments for a thousand years, as also if any one
of you receive not this Book with entire resignation to the will of the
reader*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[278:1](bcm67.htm#fr_264.md) This is the *Liber
Spirituum* of Pseudo-Agrippa, sufficiently described in Part I. The
introduction of it in this Grimoire presupposes either an acquaintance
in the reader or information which is omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conjuration of the Demons](bcm68.md)
