[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm74)  [Next](bcm76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 5. Concerning the Vision of Spirits in the Air

For the Masters of Black Magic, as for the author of the *Comte de
Gabalis*, the air is the abode of far other beings than the bird and
fly, but the process by which they are rendered visible is complicated
through the exceptional nature of the

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

required materials. It is, of course, quite possible to secure the brain
of a cock, and dissection with that object may perhaps be performed by
deputy; the kitchen-maid or the poulterer's assistant would be easily
secured. The dust from the grave of a dead man is the second ingredient
of the process; but a visit to the nearest cemetery will not be
sufficient, because it is useless to collect it on the surface; that
which is next to the coffin will alone serve the purpose. In addition to
these substances there are only oil of almonds and virgin wax. A compost
must be made of the four, and it must be wrapped in a sheet of virgin
parchment inscribed previously with the words GOMERT, KAILOETH, and with
the character of *Khil*.

The materials being thus prepared, it remains to set them alight,
whereupon the operator will behold that which the Grimoire characterises
as prodigious, but does not specify except by the indication of the
title. This experiment, it adds, should be performed only by those who
fear nothing.

It is easy to deride the process, but reflective persons will see that
it is the quintessence and summary of the whole art. This is Black
Magic--and most of the white kind--in the proverbial nutshell-a
combination in equal proportions of the disgusting and the imbecile.
There are many more elaborate experiments, but few of such a
representative kind. It is not necessary to add that it has been
exceedingly popular and is to be found in most of the Grimoires.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6: Concerning Divination by the Word of Uriel](bcm76)
