[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm72)  [Next](bcm74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 3. Concerning the Experiment of Invisibility

We shall see later on that there are certain processes found in the
Grimoires which do not connect with Black Magic otherwise than by their
place in the Grimoires. There are also other processes which are not in
themselves Goëtic, but are objectionable on account of the abuse to
which they are liable. It is curious to observe how experiments of this
kind will in one Ritual appear under a harmless guise but will in
another bear all the marks of diabolism. The experience of Invisibility,
with which we are here concerned, illustrates all these points.

Here Ceremonial Magic pretends to place its adepts in possession of the
ring of Gyges. Presuming that the Key of Solomon is the most ancient of
all the Rituals, it is there that the formal process first occurs. It is
accomplished, however, without the intervention of a ring, by means of a
simple preliminary invocation, and an address to *Almiras*, Master and
Chief of Invisibility, whatsoever may be necessary for the particular
occasion, such as characters and circles, being left to the discretion
of the operator. There is also a complementary process by means of a
waxen image; it occurs in one manuscript copy and is given by the
English editor. The person who has duly made and consecrated this image
is supposed to become invisible when he carries it. If we now turn to
the *Book of True Black Magic*, we shall find the first experiment
adapted as follows:--Before making the experiment of invisibility these
words must be committed to memory: SCABOLES, HABRION,

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ELÆ, ELIMIGIT, GABOLII, SEMITRION, MENTINOBOL,
SABANITEUT, HEREMOBOL, CANE, METHÉ, BALUTI, CATEA, TIMEGUEL, BORA, *by
the empire which ye exert over us, fulfill this work, so that I may
become invisible*. <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_271) The said words
must be written with the blood before mentioned, <span
id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_272) and the following Conjuration recited:
*O Ye Spirits of Invisibility, I conjure and constrain you incontinently
and forthwith to consecrate this experiment, so that, surely and without
trickery, I may go invisible. Furthermore, I conjure you by Lucifer,
your prince, by the obedience which you owe to him and by the power of
God, incontinently to aid me by consecrating this experiment, without
loss of my body or my soul. So be it, so be it, so be it*.

Prepare all things required for this experiment with due solemnity and
diligence, as it is laid down in the chapter proper thereto: so shalt
thou operate with certainty and so find the truth; but failing any of
the things needful, thou shalt not attain thy desire, for not by the
walls but the gate may any man enter a town.

This is merely a shorter recension of the process contained in the
Clavicle, with the reference to Lucifer interpolated.

In place of these bald and somewhat unmeaning directions, the *Grimorium
Verum* supplies an excessively curious process, at once monstrous and
fantastic, recalling the sorceries of Thessaly and having direct
connections with folk-lore.

To become Invisible

Begin this operation on a Wednesday before the sun rises, being
furnished with seven black beans. Take next the head

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of a dead man; place one of the beans in his mouth, two in his eyes and
two in his ears. Then make upon this head the character of the figure
which here follows. (*Omitted in all the Grimoires*.) This done, inter
the head with the face towards heaven, and every day before sunrise, for
the space of nine days, water it with excellent brandy. On the eighth
day you will find the cited spirit, who will say unto you: What doest
thou? You shall reply: *I am watering my plant*. He will then say: *Give
me that bottle; I will water it myself*. You will answer by refusing,
and he will again ask you, but you will persist in declining, until he
shall stretch forth his hand and shew you the same figure which you have
traced upon the head suspended from the tips of his fingers. In this
case you may be assured that it is really the spirit of the head,
because another might take you unawares, which would bring you evil, and
further, your operation would be unfruitful. When you have given him
your phial, he will water the head and depart. On the morrow, which is
the ninth day, you shall return and will find your beans ripe. Take
them, place one in your mouth, and then look at yourself in a glass. If
you cannot see yourself, it is good. Do the same with the rest, or they
may be tested in the mouth of a child. All those which do not answer
must be interred with the head.

The advantage of occasional invisibility in the pursuits of illicit
affection seems to have fascinated the compiler of the Little Albert,
and he refers to the adultery of Gyges with evident relish in prefacing
his process for

Invisibility by means of a Ring

This important operation must be performed on a Wednesday in
spring-time, under the auspices of Mercury, when it is

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

known to be conjoined with other favourable planets, such as the Moon,
Jupiter, Venus or the Sun. Taking good mercury, fixed and well purified,
compose a large ring thereof, so that the same will pass easily over the
middle finger of the hand. Let the collet be enriched by a small stone
which is found in the pewit's nest, and about the ring let the following
words be enchased: *Jesus passing* ✠ *through the midst of them* ✠
*disappeared*. ✠ <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_273)

Next, having placed the ring on a palette-shaped plate of fixed mercury,
compose the perfume of mercury, and thrice expose the ring to the odour
thereof; wrap it in a small piece of taffeta corresponding to the colour
of the planet, carry it to the pewit's nest from which the stone was
obtained, let it remain there for nine days, and when removed, fumigate
it precisely as before. Then preserve it most carefully in a small box,
made also of fixed mercury, and use it when required. The method of use
is to place the ring upon the finger with the stone outwards; it will so
fascinate the spectators by its virtue. that one may be present without
being beheld. When the wearer no longer desires to be invisible, he has
merely to turn the ring, so that the stone shall be inward, and close
the hand over it.

But Éliphas Lévi affirms that the only authors who have written
seriously concerning the ring of Gyges or its equivalents are Porphyry,
Iamblichus and Peter of Apono; that their discourse is allegorical and
that they are referring to the Great Magical Arcanum. However this may
be, the *Little Albert* supplies an alternative process which it
pretends to derive from these authorities and also from Cornelius
Agrippa, sometimes termed the master of Peter of Apono in defiance of
chronology

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

and the centuries. The first requisite is a tuft of hair taken from the
head of a hyena, and from the upper part thereof. These hairs must be
plaited into a ring, which must be carried, like the other, to a pewit's
nest and deposited therein, also for the space of nine days. The
perfumes of mercury must be used in like manner. The person who wears
this ring will be invisible and he will reappear by removing it from his
finger.

Éliphas Lévi observes that the directions recall the history of the bell
of Rodilard, but the criticism is scarcely commensurate, for the
material is certainly obtainable, nor would it be necessary to catch
one's own hyena. The point which was missed by the occultist may be
evident to the ordinary reader; the head of the hyena is short-coated,
and the hairs could not be braided. It is not, however, unreasonable
that impossible conditions should attach to an impossible object. <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_274)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[307:1](bcm73.htm#fr_272) These names are given
as follows by the English editor: *Sceaboles, Arbaron, Elohi, Elimigith,
Herenobulcule, Methe, Baluth, Timayal, Villaquiel, Teveni, Yevie,
Ferete, Bacuhaba, Gimarin*.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[307:2](bcm73.htm#fr_273) Possibly that of a
mole, used in the consecration of the instruments.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[309:1](bcm73.htm#fr_274) Compare the Magic
Circle of Honorius.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[310:1](bcm73.htm#fr_275) A process was also
provided against fascination and deception by means of the ring of
invisibility. It consists in the composition of a ring similarly shaped,
made of refined lead, and enchased with the eye of a female ferret which
has had only one litter. The words *Apparuit Dominus Simoni* should be
engraved about the circumference. It should be composed on a Saturday
when Saturn is in opposition with Mercury, perfumed three times with the
perfume of Saturday, wrapped in a piece of a winding-sheet, next buried
for nine days in a churchyard, perfumed, when disinterred, as before,
and it is then ready for use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: Concerning the Hand of Glory](bcm74)
