[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm76)  [Next](bcm78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 7. Concerning the Mirror of Solomon, suitable for all Kinds of Divination

The following process is found in the *Grimorium Verum* and in some
other compilations. It is a mode of divination akin to that given in the
preceding section. It does not connect with Black Magic except by the
use of blood and is really an auto-hypnotic experiment fortified by
conventional ceremonies.

To Compose the Mirror of Solomon

In the Name o the Lord, Amen. Ye shall behold in this mirror all things
whatsoever that ye may desire. In the Name of the Lord Who is blessed,
in the Name of the Lord, Amen.

In the first place, ye shall do no fleshly actions, nor sin in thought
or deed, during the period hereinafter prescribed. In the second place,
ye shall perform many good works of piety and mercy. In the third place,
take a shining and well-polished plate of fine steel, slightly concave,
and with the blood of a white pigeon inscribe thereon--to wit, at the
four corners--the names JEHOVA, ELOYM, METATRON, ADONAY. Place the said
steel in a clean and white cloth. Now, when ye shall behold the new moon
during the first hour after sunset, draw nigh unto a window, look up to
Heaven with devotion, and say: O Eternal! O King Eternal! God ineffable!
Thou Who hast created all things for love of men, and by a secret

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

judgment for the health of man, do Thou deign to look upon me, N., Thy
most unworthy servant, and upon this my intention. Vouchsafe to send
unto me Thine Angel ANAËL

, even upon this mirror, who doth order, command and ordain his
companions and Thy subjects, whom Thou hast made, O Thou Almighty

<span id="img_31900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/31900.jpg.md)

\[paragraph continues\] *Lord, Who hast been, Who art, Who shall remain
eternally, that in Thy Name they may judge and act justly, instructing
me in all that I shall require of them*.

Lastly, cast upon burning coals a suitable perfume, and while casting it
say: *In this, by this, and with this, which I pour out before Thy face,
O God, my God, Who art blessed*,

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

Three and One, and in the most sublime exaltation, Who sittest above the
Cherubim and above the Seraphim, Who wilt judge the world by fire, hear
Thou me!

Repeat this three times, and having done so, breathe also thrice upon
the mirror, and say: *Come,* ANAËL*, come, and may it be thy good
pleasure to be with me by thy will, in the Name* ✠ *of the Father most
mighty, in the Name* ✠ *of the Son most wise, in the Name of the Holy
Spirit most living! Come,* ANAËL*, in the Name of the terrible Jehovah!
Come,* ANAËL*, by the virtue of the immortal Elohim! Come,* ANAËL*, by
the right arm of the almighty* METATRON*! Do thou come unto me, N. (here
repeat your name over the mirror), and so command thy subjects that in
love, joy and peace, they may make manifest unto my eyes the things
which are hidden from me. So be it. Amen*.

Having said and done as above, lift your eyes to heaven and say: *O Lord
Almighty, Who dost cause all things to move according to Thy good
pleasure, hear Thou my prayer, and may my desire be agreeable unto Thee!
Lord, O Lord, if Thou wilt, condescend to look upon this mirror and
bless it, that so* ANAËL*, one of Thy servants, may Pause thereon with
his companions, to satisfy me, N., Thy poor and humble servant, O God,
blessed and exalted above all the heavenly Spirits, Who livest and
reignest for ever and ever. Amen*.

When you shall have accomplished these things, make the sign of the
Cross upon yourself and upon the mirror on the first and following days
for forty-five days in succession, at the end of which time *Anaël* will
appear to you under the form of a beautiful child, will salute you, and
will command his companions to obey you. Observe--says the process in
its

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

benignity--that it does not invariably require forty-five days to
compose the mirror. The Angel will frequently appear on the fourteenth
day, according to the intention, devotion and fervour of the operator.
When he shall appear, ask of him that which you desire, and pray him to
come at all times, whensoever you shall invoke him, to grant your
demands. On subsequent occasions, when you desire to see in this mirror,
it is not necessary to recite all the prayers as above provided, but
having perfumed it, say only: *Come* ANAËL*, come, according to thy good
pleasure*, &c.

To dismiss him, say: *I thank thee, ANAËL, because thou hast appeared
and hast satisfied my demands. Do thou therefore depart in peace, and
return when I shall call thee*.

The perfume of *Anaël* is saffron.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8: Concerning the Three Rings of Solomon, Son of
David](bcm78.md)
