[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm71)  [Next](bcm73.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 2. Concerning Venereal Experiments

We have seen that the sorcerer of the Middle Ages was usually squalid
and necessitous; hence he coveted treasures: he was usually despised,
and hence he longed for mastery, for the prestige of mystery and the
power of strange arts: he was usually lonely and libidinous, and hence
he sought, by means of spells and philtres, to compel the desire of
women. To be rich in worldly goods, to trample on one's enemies and to
gratify the desires of the flesh--such are the ends, variously qualified
and variously attained, of most Ceremonial Magic; hence also the Rituals
abound in Venereal Experiments.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

In such as the *Grimorium Verum* there is no attempt to hide their
illicit nature; in the *Key of Solomon* it is disguised, but the process
for obtaining favour and love which occurs in that work is not really a
more lawful experiment than that *Pour faire venir une Fille vous
trouver, si sage qu'elle soit*. The *Key of Solomon* is reticent and the
Grimoires are frank; the one promises the fulfilment of the operator's
desire without defining it; the others are explicit and particular. It
is true also that the one has recourse to Adonai and implores his
assistance, while the others invoke the powers of Hell.

The *Book of True Black Magic* for once ignores the experience of the
Clavicle and substitutes the following:--

Concerning the Experiment of Love

Whatsoever person be the object of this experiment, whether man or
woman, it is needful in making it to observe the proper day and hour.
Note further that it is performed by means of an image of wax or other
suitable matter. Before composing it, say the following words over the
wax: NOGA, JES, ASTROPOLIM, ASMO, COCCAV, BERMONA, TENTATOR,
SOIGNATOR--*I conjure you, ministers of love and incontinence, by Him
who hath condemned you to hell! Do ye consecrate this wax in a regular
manner, that it may acquire the desired virtue, by the Power of the Most
Holy Adonay, Who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen*.

The image must then be composed and suitable characters inscribed
thereon with the male goose-quill of the Art, after which it must be
fumigated while reciting the following words:--*O thou most Powerful
King* PAYMON*, whose absolute rule and reign is in the western quarter!
O thou,* EGIM*, Most strong King, whose empire is in the cold region! O
thou,* ASMODEUS*, who governest in the South! O thou,* AYMAMON

, Most noble

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *King, monarch of the Eastern world, whose reign
began from of old and will endure to the end of time! I invoke and
beseech you by Him Who spake and it was, Whose sole word hath created
all, Whom all creatures obey; by the seat of His Majesty; by His Will
and His Name; by Him Who was before the ages and hath created the ages;
Whose Name is written with the four letters* JOD, HE, VAU, HE*; by the
enchantments and power thereof; and by all the signal Names of the
Creator; I conjure you to consecrate this image and grant that it may
acquire virtue according to our desire, by the Most Holy Name Adonay,
the Power of which is without beginning or end*.

This being done, conjure with the Conjuration of the image, and if the
woman or man should not appear, place the said image beneath the pillow
of your bed, and before three days you shall behold admirable things,
while chains or earth shall not stay the desired person from coming to
you, for the fulfilment of your purpose, nothing being excepted.

But if the experience be to find the beloved person, place the image
under the door which he or she must pass. In either case a powder must
be made and cast upon the person, or given them with their meat or
drink. The solemnities of the hours, matters and instruments must be
faithfully observed, and the Spirits conjured by name, saying also: *I
conjure and constrain you, ye Devils, who have the power to disturb the
hearts of men and women! By Him Who hath created you from nothing and by
this image, I conjure you this night into my presence, that I may have
the power to compel whomsoever I will to love me, whether male or
female*.

When the characters and images have been prepared, say over them: *I
conjure you, O* ANAËL, DONQUEL, THELIEL

, Princes of love, and all your ministers, who have power to fill

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

with fervour the hearts of men and women, and to kindle the fire of
love! I conjure. you by Him Who is seated upon the Cherubim and guardeth
the abysses, by Him Who maketh the world to tremble, Whom all creatures
obey! Grant that these characters and figures may possess this virtue,
that such man or woman may love. me, may desire me and thirst for my
love, and that it shall be impossible for him or her to love any person
save me.

Place the image in a vessel for one night, operate on the day and in the
hour appropriate thereto, and you shall behold a wonder.

The compiler of the *Grimorium Verum*, who seems to have selected almost
invariably the most bizarre processes, instructs his pupils

HOW TO CAUSE THE APPEARANCE OF THREE LADIES OR THREE GENTLEMEN IN ONE'S
ROOM AFTER SUPPER

§ 1.

Preparation

Abstain for three days from the hidden offices, and then shall your
spirit be fortified. On the fourth day, you shall cleanse and prepare
your chamber as soon as it is morning, immediately after dressing, the
whole fasting. But see you do it in such a way that it will not be
liable to disarrangement during the remainder of the day. Note that
there must be no hangings, nor anything set crosswise, no tapestries, no
hanging clothes, hats, bird-cages, bed curtains, &c. Above all, let the
appointments be clean in every respect.

§ 2.

Ceremony

After supper pass in secret to your chamber, made ready as above; kindle
a good fire; place a white cloth on the table, round which set three
chairs, and before each chair, upon the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

table, let there be a wheaten roll and a glass full of fresh clear
water. Lastly, draw up a chair and settee to the side of the bed and
retire to rest, uttering the following

CONJURATION

Besticitum consolatio, veni ad me vertat Creon, Creon, Creon, cantor
laudem omnipotentis et non commentur. Stat superior carta bient laudem
omviestra principiem da montem et inimicos meos ô prostantis vobis et
mihi dantes que passium fieri sincisibus.

The three persons, having arrived, will rest themselves near the fire,
drinking, eating and finally thanking him or her who has entertained
them; for if it be a young lady who performs this ceremony, three
gentlemen will come; but if it be a man, three young ladies will appear.
The said three persons will draw lots among each other to know which of
them shall remain with you. If a man be the operator, she who wins will
place herself in the arm-chair which you have set by the bed, and she
will remain and commune with you until midnight, at which hour she will
depart with her companions, without any need of dismissal. As regards
the two others, they will keep themselves by the fire, while the other
entertains you. So long as she remains you may question her upon any art
or science, or upon what subject soever, and she will immediately give
you a positive answer. You may also inquire of her whether she is aware
of any hidden treasure, and she will instruct you as to its locality and
the precise time suited to its removal. She will even appear there with
her companions to defend you against the assaults of the Infernal
Spirits who may have it in their possession. At parting, she will
present you with a ring, which, worn on the finger, will render you
lucky at play, while if it be placed upon the finger of any woman or
girl, you shall there <span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

and then have your will with them. Observe, however, that you must leave
your window open in order that they may enter.

This ceremony may be repeated frequently at the will of the operator.

It must be acknowledged that the above experiment offers a large return
for very small pains in the preparation, and hence it is very popular
with the makers of Grimoires. The same observation applies to the
following process, which is common to the supplementary portions of the
*Grand Grimoire*, the *Grimorium Verum*, the *Grimoire of Honorius* and
most of the minor collections. It is described as an experience of the
wonderful power of the Superior Intelligences. The nature of the
superiority may, however, be inferred from the title.

TO CAUSE A GIRL TO SEEK YOU OUT, HOWEVER PRUDENT SHE MAY BE

<span id="img_30400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/30400.jpg.md)

Whether in the increase or wane of the Moon, a star must be observed
between eleven o'clock and midnight. But before beginning do as follows.
Take a virgin parchment. Write thereon her name whose presence you
desire. The parchment must be shaped as represented in the following
figure. On the other side inscribe these words: *Melchiael*,
*Bareschas*. Then place your parchment on the earth, with the person's
name against the ground. Set your right foot above it, while your left
knee is bent to the earth. In this position observe the brightest star
in the firmament, holding in the right hand a taper of white wax, large
enough to last for an hour, and recite the following

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

CONJURATION

I salute and conjure you, O beautiful Moon, O beautiful Star, O bright
light which I hold in my hand! By the air which I breathe, by the breath
which is within me, by the earth which I touch, I conjure you, and by
all the names of the spirits who are Princes residing in you; by the
ineffable Name ON*, Which hath created all; by thee, O Resplendent Angel
Gabriel, together with the Prince Mercury,* Michiael *and* Melchidael*!
I conjure you again by all the Divine Names of God, that you send down
to obsess, torment and harass the body, spirit, soul and five senses of
the nature of N., whose name is written here below, in such a way that
she shall come unto me and accomplish my will, having no friendship for
any one in the world, but especially for N., so long as she shall be
indifferent to me. So shall she endure not, so shall she be obsessed, so
suffer, so be tormented. Go then, promptly; go,* Melchidael, Baresches,
Zazel, Firiel, Malcha*, and all those who are without you* (sic)*. I
conjure you by the great living God to accomplish my will, and I, N., do
promise to satisfy you duly*.

Having thrice pronounced this conjuration, place the taper on the
parchment and let it burn. Take the parchment on the morrow, put it in
your left shoe and there leave it until the person for whom you have
operated shall have come to seek you out. You must specify in the
Conjuration the day that you desire her to come, and she will not fail.

This process has its disadvantages, and even its difficulties. It seems
absurd to suppose that there are Spirit Princes inhabiting the flame of
a taper, and the treatment invoked upon the lady is of a turbulent kind,
nor is there any colourable pretence on which the position of the rival
lover can be justified;

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

but it has the touch of the picturesque, and, making all allowance for
the potencies which may inhere in *Sator, Arepo, Tenet, Opera, Rotas*,
it does not suffer seriously by comparison with the method of the
Clavicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3: Concerning the Experiment of Invisibility](bcm73.md)
