[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

# CONCLUSION

THE ceremonial literature of White and Black Magic has now spoken for
itself in the catholic sense of the words. We see exactly what the
Rituals had to offer, by the hypothesis of their own claim, to those who
followed in their putative practical courses. I presume once more that
it is unnecessary to debate whether the Olympic Spirits will make gold
in a moment by Magic, transport precious stones, prolong life to several
hundred years, teach all arts and provide the operator with ministering
spirits in visible and corporal form. These claims merely externalise
the cupidity and other desires of the artist. Hereof at least is the
domain of the occult working where it happens to suffer the title of
transcendental; its entire term and horizon are within the limits of low
material gain and pleasure; and the ambition of the Magus was to secure
these advantages--firstly--by the trickery and artifice of the occult
world, instead of by his proper activity, and--secondly--on a very much
larger scale than was normally likely or possible.

When we turn, however, to the Rituals which I have classed as composite,
we shall find that we are dealing with a much more valued and popular
series of handbooks, and the head or crown of all is held in the polite
opinion of occult circles to be white by its essential nature and only
Goëtic in its accretions. As a matter of fact, it is Goëtic by intention
and essence, and white only in the sense that some of its distracted
processes might, apart from their sanguinary nature, be termed

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

harmless. It is obvious, however, from the text that the Intelligences
who are the subjects of conjuration are fallen spirits, and that one of
the anxieties in respect of their apparition is the hideousness of their
native form. The main purposes of experiment are (1) the recovery of
stolen goods; (2) the power to go invisible, for reasons which are not
less certain because they pass unsaid; (3) the possession of a buried
treasure; (4) the seeking of love and favour. Those that remain are more
expressly and literally of the order of Fairyland. This is so far
concerning what is accepted as the prototype and fountain of the Art.
The Infernal Hierarchy of the *Lemegeton* seems from time to time a
promise of things more important, but the diabolism of practical Magic
was essentially of a popular kind in the bulk of its documents, and
those which aimed too high--as, for example, at logic and philosophy,
the liberal sciences, eloquence and good understanding--had
comparatively few votaries. To give riches, to kindle love and lust, to
discover treasures--as these were the sum of ambition, so they were the
qualifications in chief demand from the spirits. The class of people to
whom such considerations would appeal were those obviously--and as I
have otherwise indicated--who could not obtain their satisfaction
through the normal channels--the outcasts, the incompetent, the
ignorant, the lonely, the deformed, the hideous, the impotent and those
whom Nature and Grace alike denied.

This is the category into which the modern psychic mind would enter
unwittingly, could I suppose for a moment that, outside such purlieus as
Paris, there has been any revival of Ceremonial Magic in the nineteenth
or twentieth century. The typical occult student is preposterous enough
in his preoccupations, but when he takes the Grimoires seriously he has
usually some assumption as to a meaning behind them--not

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

that they are allegorical writings, but rather that they are the final
issue in abuse and travesty of something that looms to his intelligence
like real knowledge. The tendency in this direction has been promoted by
that knavish hypothesis concerning occult sanctuaries to which I alluded
far back in this work, and to which I must refer again for a moment in
these final words.

As part of the root-matter out of which comes the lying art of spirits
there stands forth the hypothetical efficacy of adjuration, prayer and
ceremonial acts of worship in connection therewith. But in Magic that
efficacy can be manifested only over things trivial or abominable,
because it is obvious that for any higher purpose we should have
recourse thereto through the ordinary channels of religion. If the
hypothesis of prayer is true, Magic is out of court on the side of holy
things because there is a more excellent way of obtaining the great
gifts, the good gifts and the gifts that do not pass away. But if it is
not. true, Magic is out of court also because it depends from and comes
down to the earth with that false assumption which is at its basis. As a
matter of fact, Magic, White or Black, is the attempt to direct the
admitted efficacy into evil channels--to compel the infernal cohorts
with the assistance of the blessed hierarchies, and to enlist the
sympathies of the latter on the warrant of their appeasing invocation in
foolish or discreditable transactions. I should add that I characterise
as of the essence of evil the desire after power which puts the owner at
an advantage over those about him by interventions of an occult nature,
against which it would be generally impossible to guard. I characterise
the acquisition of knowledge without learning in the same way and for
the same reasons. The other ambitions, desires, greeds do not need
express condemnation on my part, for they speak too plainly on their
own. Out of the

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

mouth of their proper hypotheses, the pseudo-art or science is that of
the abyss. It remains, however, in most cases the abyss of evil
intention, as the operator is left with his base, sordid, sorry or
fatuous ambition and not with the fruition thereof

It may seem at first sight that I have been breaking laidly worms on
larger wheels than would have been required for Gargantua, Behemoth or
Leviathan; but I am concerned first of all with the preservation of the
Secret Tradition inviolate and with the separation of fungoids and
diseased and monstrous growths which have come to overlay it. The magic
of the Ceremonial Rituals is no part of the real tradition, it is not in
any form that we know it of the veils thereof, nor are they even its
debasement. At the same time--and as we have sufficiently seen--they do
represent at a very far distance a stream of averse tradition, and it is
that of Jewry in the prescription and suspension of the greater and
age-long exile. There is no question that the mind of Israel which
produced on the one hand the signal mystic testimony of the Zoharic
literature did on the other betray the kind of preoccupations which have
given us Ceremonial Magic as their last evolution in the pit and pools
of thought. And this is their side of importance. It is this only which
has justified the present consideration and the length to which it has
extended.

<span id="img_33700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/33700.jpg.md)  
THE CORNERS OF PARADISE, GUARDED BY FIRE-BREATHING URÆI.
