[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48436)  [Next](sbe48438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

53\. But those (meditations) which are connected with members (of
sacrifices) are not (restricted) to (particular) *s*âkhâs, but rather
(belong) to all *s*âkhâs.

<span id="page_676">p. 676</span>

There are certain meditations connected with certain constituent
elements of sacrifices-as e.g. 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om
(as) the Udgîtha '(*Kh.* Up. I, 1, 1); 'Let a man meditate on the
fivefold Saman as the five worlds' (*Kh.* Up. II, 2, 1), &c. The
question here arises whether those meditations are restricted to the
members of those *s*âkhâs in whose texts they are mentioned; or to be
connected with the Udgîtha, and so on, in all *s*âkhâs. There is here a
legitimate ground for doubt, in so far as, although the general
agreement of all Vedânta-texts is established, the Udgîtha, and so on,
are different in each Veda since the accents differ in the different
Vedas--The Pûrvapakshin declares that those meditations are limited each
to its particular *s*âkhâ; for, he says, the injunction 'Let him
meditate on the Udgîtha' does indeed, verbally, refer to the Udgîtha in
general; but as what stands nearest to this injunction is the special
Udgîtha of the *s*âkhâ, in whose text this injunction occurs, and which
shares the peculiarities of accent characteristic of that *s*âkhâ, we
decide that the meditation is enjoined on members of that *s*âkhâ
only.--The Sûtra sets this opinion aside. The injunction of meditations
of this type is valid for all *s*âkhâs, since the text expressly
connects them with the Udgîtha in general. They therefore hold good
wherever there is an Udgîtha. The individual Udgîthas of the several
*s*âkhâs are indeed distinguished by different accentuation; but the
general statement, 'Let him meditate on the Udgîtha.' suggests to the
mind not any particular Udgîtha, but *the* Udgîtha in general, and hence
there is no reason to restrict the meditation to a particular *s*âkhâ.
From the principle moreover that all *s*âkhâs teach the same doctrine,
it follows that the sacrifice enjoined in the different *s*âkhâs is one
only; and hence there is no reason to hold that the Udgîtha suggested by
the injunction of the meditation is a particular one. For the Udgîtha is
only an element in the sacrifice, and the sacrifice is one and the same.
The meditations are not therefore limited to particular *s*âkhâs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 54. Or there is no contradiction as in the case of mantras and
the rest](sbe48438)
