[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48495)  [Next](sbe48497) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

50\. What belongs to this world, there being no obstruction at hand; as
this is seen.

Knowledge, as enjoined by Scripture, is twofold, having

<span id="page_713">p. 713</span>

for its fruit either exaltation within the sphere of the Sa*m*sâra, or
final Release. With regard to the former the question arises whether it
springs up only immediately subsequent to the good works which are the
means to bring it about; or, indefinitely, either subsequent to such
works or at some later time.--The Pûrvapakshin holds the former view. A
man reaches knowledge through his good deeds only, as the Lord himself
declares, 'Four kinds of men doing good works worship me,' &c.(Bha. Gî.
VII, 16); and when those works have been accomplished there is no reason
why the result, i.e. knowledge, should be delayed.--This view the Sûtra
disposes of. 'What is comprised in this world,' i.e. meditation, the
result of which is worldly exaltation, springs up immediately after the
works to which it is due, in case of there being no other works of
greater strength obstructing the rise of knowledge; but if there is an
obstruction of the latter kind, knowledge springs up later on only. 'For
this is seen,' i.e. Scripture acknowledges the effects of such
obstruction; for a statement such as ' what he does with knowledge, with
faith, with the Upanishad that is more vigorous,' means that works
joined with the knowledge of the Udgîtha, and so on, produce their
results without obstruction (which implies that the action of other
works is liable to be obstructed).--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of
'what belongs to this world.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51. In the same way there is non-determination...](sbe48497)
