[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48416)  [Next](sbe48418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

33\. But the conceptions of the Imperishable are to be comprised (in all
meditations). There being equality (of the Brahman to be meditated on)
and (those conceptions) existing (in Brahman); as in the case of what
belongs to the upasad. This has been explained.

<span id="page_653">p. 653</span>

We read in the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka (III, 8, 9),'O Gârgî, the Brâhma*n*as
call that the Akshara. It is neither coarse nor fine,' and so on. And in
the Atharva*n*a (Mu. Up. I, 1, 5) we have 'The higher knowledge is that
by which the Akshara is apprehended. That which cannot be seen nor
seized,' &c. The doubt here arises whether all the qualities there
predicated of Brahman--called akshara, i.e. the Imperishable--and
constituting something contrary in nature to the apparent world, are to
be included in all meditations on Brahman, or only those where the text
specially mentions them. The Pûrvapakshin advocates the latter view;
for, he says, there is no authority for holding that the qualities which
characterise one meditation are characteristic of other meditations
also; and such negative attributes as are mentioned in those two texts
do not--as positive qualities such as bliss do--contribute to the
apprehension of the true nature of Brahman. What those two texts do is
merely to deny of Brahman, previously apprehended as having bliss, and
so on, for its essential qualities, certain qualities belonging to the
empirical world, such as grossness, and so on; for all negation must
refer to an established basis.--This view the Sûtra refutes. The ideas
of absence of grossness, and so on, which are connected with Brahman
viewed as the Akshara, are to be included in all meditations on Brahman.
For the imperishable (akshara) Brahman is the same in all meditations,
and qualities such as non-grossness enter into the conception of its
essential nature. The apprehension of a thing means the apprehension of
its specific character. But mere bliss, and so on, does not suggest the
specific character of Brahman, since those qualities belong also to the
individual soul. What is specifically characteristic of Brahman is
bliss, and so on, in so far as fundamentally opposed to all evil and
imperfection. The individual soul, on the other hand, although
fundamentally free from evil, yet is capable of connexion with evil. Now
being fundamentally opposed to evil implies having a character the
opposite of grossness and all similar qualities which belong to the
empirical world, material and mental. He therefore who thinks of

<span id="page_654">p. 654</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Brahman must think of it as having for its
essential nature bliss, knowledge, and so on, in so far as distinguished
by absence of grossness and the like, and those qualities, being no less
essential than bliss, and so on, must therefore be included in all
meditations on Brahman.--The Sûtra gives an instance illustrating the
principle that qualities (secondary matters) follow the principal matter
to which they belong. As the mantra 'Agnir vai hotra*m* vetu,' although
given in the Sâma-veda, yet has to be recited in the Ya*g*ur-veda style,
with a subdued voice, because it stands in a subordinate relation to the
upasad-offerings prescribed for the four-days 'sacrifice called
*G*amadagnya; those offerings are the principal matter to which the
subordinate matter--the mantra--has to conform. This point is explained
in the first section, i.e. in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras III, 3, 9.--But
this being admitted, it would follow that as Brahman is the principal
matter in all meditations on Brahman, and secondary matters have to
follow the principal matter, also such qualities as 'doing all works,
enjoying all odours and the like,' which are mentioned in connexion with
special meditations only, would indiscriminately have to be included in
all meditations.--With reference to this the next Sûtra says.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. So much; on account of reflection](sbe48418)
