[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48482)  [Next](sbe48484) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

36\. Also in the case of those outside, as this is seen.

<span id="page_704">p. 704</span>

It has been declared that the members of the four â*s*ramas have a claim
to the knowledge of Brahman, and that the duties connected with each
â*s*rarna promote knowledge. A doubt now arises whether those men also
who, on account of poverty and so on, stand outside the â*s*ramas are
qualified for the knowledge of Brahman, or rtot.--They are not, the
Pûrvapakshin holds, since such knowledge is to be attained in a way
dependent on the special duties of each â*s*rama; while those who do not
belong to an â*s*rama are not concerned with â*s*rama duties.--This view
the Sûtra rejects. Those also who do not stand within any â*s*rama are
qualified for knowledge, 'because that is seen,' i.e. because the texts
declare that men such as Raikva, Bhîshma, Sa*m*varta and others who did
not belong to â*s*rama were well grounded in the knowledge of Brahman.
It can by no means be maintained that it is â*s*rama duties only that
promote knowledge; for the text 'by gifts, by penance, by fasting, and
so on' (B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 22) distinctly declares that charity also and
other practices, which are not confined to the â*s*ramas, are helpful
towards knowledge. In the same way as in the case of those bound to
chastity--who, as the texts show, may possess the knowledge of
Brahman--knowledge is promoted by practices other than the Agnihotra and
the like, so--it is concluded--in the case of those also who do not
belong to any abrama knowledge may be promoted by certain practices not
exclusively connected with any â*s*rama, such as prayer, fasting,
charity, propitiation of the divinity, and so on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 37. Smriti also states this](sbe48484)
