[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48158)  [Next](sbe48160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17\. Should it be said that this is not so on account of the inferential
marks of the individual soul and the chief vital air; we reply that this
has been explained before.

With reference to the plea urged by the Pûrvapakshin

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

that, owing to inferential marks pointing to the individual soul, and
the circumstance of mention being made of the chief vital air, we must
decide that the section treats of the enjoying individual soul and not
of the highest Self, the Sûtra remarks that this argumentation has
already been disposed of, viz. in connexion with the Pratardana vidyâ.
For there it was shown that when a text is ascertained, on the ground of
a comprehensive survey of initial and concluding clauses, to refer to
Brahman, all inferential marks which point to other topics must be
interpreted so as to fall in with the principal topic. Now in our text
Brahman is introduced at the outset 'Shall I tell you Brahman?' it is
further mentioned in the middle of the section, for the clause 'of whom
this is the work' does not refer to the soul in general but to the
highest Person who is the cause of the whole world; and at the end again
we hear of a reward which connects itself only with meditations on
Brahman, viz. supreme sovereignty preceded by the conquest of all evil.
'Having overcome all evil he obtains pre-eminence among all beings,
sovereignty and supremacy--yea, he who knows this.' The section thus
being concerned with Brahman, the references to the individual soul and
to the chief vital air must also be interpreted so as to fall in with
Brahman. In the same way it was shown above that the references to the
individual soul and the chief vital air which are met with in the
Pratardana vidyâ really explain themselves in connexion with a threefold
meditation on Brahman. As in the passage 'Then with this prâ*n*a alone
he becomes one' the two words 'this' and 'prâ*n*a' may be taken as
co-ordinated and it hence would be inappropriate to separate them (and
to explain 'in the prâ*n*a which abides in this soul'), and as the word
'prâ*n*a' is ascertained to mean Brahman also, we must understand the
mention of prâ*n*a to be made with a view to meditation on Brahman in so
far as having the prâ*n*a for its body. But how can the references to
the individual soul be put in connexion with Brahman?--This point is
taken up by the next Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. But Gaimini thinks that it has another purport...](sbe48160)
