[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48301)  [Next](sbe48303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4\. (They are seven) on account of the going of the seven and of
specification.

The question here arises whether those organs are seven only, or
eleven--the doubt on this point being due to the conflicting nature of
scriptural texts.--The Pûrvapakshin maintains the former
alternative.--On what grounds?--'On account of going, and of
specification.' For the text refers to the 'going,' i.e. to the moving
about in the different worlds, together with the soul when being born or
dying, of seven prâ*n*as only, 'seven are these worlds in which the
prâ*n*as move which rest in the cave, being placed there as seven and
seven' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 8)--where the repetition 'seven and seven'
intimates the plurality of souls to which the prâ*n*as are attached.
Moreover those moving prâ*n*as are distinctly specified in the following
text, 'when the five instruments of knowledge stand still, together with
the mind (manas), and when the buddhi does not move, that they call the
highest "going"' (gati--Ka. Up. II, 6, 10). The 'highest going' here
means the moving towards Release, all movement within the body having

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

come to an end. As thus the text declares that at the time of birth and
death seven prâ*n*as only accompany the soul, and as, with regard to the
condition of final concentration, those prâ*n*as are distinctly
specified as forms of knowledge (*gñ*ânâni), we conclude that the
prâ*n*as are the seven following instruments of the soul--the organs of
hearing, feeling, seeing, tasting and smelling, the buddhi and the
manas. In various other passages indeed, which refer to the prâ*n*as,
higher numbers are mentioned, viz. up to fourteen, speech, the hands,
the feet, the anus, the organ of generation, the ahankâra and the
*k*itta being added to those mentioned above; cp. e.g. 'there are eight
grahas' (B*ri*. Up. III, 2, i); 'Seven are the prâ*n*as of the head, two
the lower ones '(Taitt. Sa*m*h. V, 3, 2, 5). But as the text says
nothing about those additional organs accompanying the soul, we assume
that they are called prâ*n*as in a metaphorical sense only, since they
all, more or less, assist the soul.--This view the next Sûtra sets
aside.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. But the hands...](sbe48303)
