[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48572)  [Next](sbe48574) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

22\. Non-return, according to Scripture; non-return, according to
Scripture.

We know from Scripture that there is a Supreme Person whose nature is
absolute bliss and goodness; who is fundamentally antagonistic to all
evil; who is the cause of the origination, sustentation, and dissolution
of the world; who differs in nature from all other beings, who is
all-knowing, who by his mere thought and will accomplishes all his
purposes; who is an ocean of kindness as it were for all who depend on
him; who is all-merciful; who is immeasurably raised above all
possibility of any one being equal or superior to him; whose name is the
*highest Brahman*. And with equal certainty we know from Scripture that
this Supreme Lord, when pleased by the faithful worship of his
Devotees--which worship consists in daily repeated meditation on Him,
assisted by the performance of all the practices prescribed for each
caste and â*s*rama--frees them from the influence of Nescience which
consists of karman accumulated in the infinite progress of time and
hence hard to overcome; allows them to attain to that supreme bliss
which consists in the direct intuition of His own true nature: and after
that does not turn them back into the miseries of Sa*m*sâra. The text
distinctly teaching this is 'He who behaves thus all his life through
reaches the world of Brahman and does not return' (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 15).
And the Lord himself declares 'Having obtained me great-souled men do
not come into rebirth, the fleeting abode of misery; for they have

<span id="page_771">p. 771</span>

reached the highest perfection. Up to the world of Brahma the worlds
return again, O Ar*g*una; but having attained to me, O son of Kunti,
there is no rebirth' (Bha. Gi. VIII, 1, 5-16). As, moreover, the
released soul has freed itself from the bondage of karman, has its
powers of knowledge fully developed, and has all its being in the
supremely blissful intuition of the highest Brahman, it evidently cannot
desire anything else nor enter on any other form of activity, and the
idea of its returning into the Sa*m*sâra therefore is altogether
excluded. Nor indeed need we fear that the Supreme Lord when once having
taken to himself the Devotee whom he greatly loves will turn him back
into the Sa*m*sâra. For He himself has said, 'To the wise man I am very
dear, and dear he is to me. Noble indeed are all these, but the wise man
I regard as my very Self. For he, with soul devoted, seeks me only as
his highest goal. At the end of many births the wise man goes to me,
thinking all is Vâsudeva. Such great-souled men are rarely met with'
(Bha. Gî. VII, 17-19).--The repetition of the words of the Sûtra
indicates the conclusion of this body of doctrine. Thus everything is
settled to satisfaction.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'with the
exception of the world-energies.'

Here terminates the fourth pâda of the fourth adhyâya of the commentary
on the *S*ârîraka Mîmâ*m*sâ, composed by the reverend teacher
Râmânu*g*a. This completes the fourth adhyâya, and the whole work; and
the entire body of doctrine is thus brought to a conclusion.

<span id="page_773">p. 773</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Sanskrit Words](sbe48574)
