[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48110)  [Next](sbe48112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12\. On account of his being designated as the object of seeing, he
(i.e. the highest Self) (is that object).

The followers of the Atharva-veda, in the section containing the
question asked by Satyakâma, read as follows: 'He again who meditates
with this syllable Aum of three Mâtrâs on the highest Person, he comes
to light and to the sun. As a snake frees itself from its skin, so he
frees himself from evil. He is led up by the Sâman verses to the
Brahma-world; he sees the person dwelling in the castle who is higher
than the individual souls concreted

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

with bodies and higher (than those)' (Pra. Up. V, 2). Here the terms 'he
meditates' and 'he sees' have the same sense, 'seeing' being the result
of devout meditation; for according to the principle expressed in the
text (*Kh*. Up. III, 14) 'According as man's thought is in this world,'
what is reached by the devotee is the object of meditation; and moreover
the text exhibits the same object, viz. 'the highest Person' in
connexion with both verbs.

The doubt here presents itself whether the highest Person in this text
be the so-called four-faced Brahmâ, the Lord of the mundane egg who
represents the individual souls in their collective aspect, or the
supreme Person who is the Lord of all.--The Pûrvapakshin maintains the
former view. For, he argues, on the introductory question, 'He who here
among men should meditate until death on the syllable Om, what would he
obtain by it?' The text first declares that he who meditates on that
syllable as having one Mâtrâ, obtains the world of men; and next, that
he who meditates on it as having two Mâtrâs obtains the world of the
atmosphere. Hence the Brahma-world, which the text after that represents
as the object reached by him who meditates on Om as having three
syllables, must be the world of Brahmâ *K*aturmukha who is constituted
by the aggregate of the individual souls. What the soul having reached
that world sees, therefore is the same Brahmâ *K*aturmukha; and thus
only the attribute 'etasmâ*g*' *g*îvaghanât parât param' is suitable;
for the collective soul, i. e. Brahmâ *K*aturmukha, residing in the
Brahma-world is higher (para) than the distributive or discrete soul
(*g*îva) which is concreted (ghanî-bhûta) with the body and
sense-organs, and at the same time is higher (para) than these. The
highest Person mentioned in the text, therefore, is Brahmâa
*K*aturmukha; and the qualities mentioned further on, such as absence of
decay, &c., must be taken in such a way as to agree with that Brahmâ.

To this primâ facie view the Sûtra replies that the object of seeing is
He, i.e. the highest Self, on account of designation. The text clearly
designates the object of seeing as the highest Self. For the concluding
*s*loka,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

which refers to that object of seeing, declares that 'by means of the
O*m*kâra he who knows reaches that which is tranquil, free from decay,
immortal, fearless, the highest'--all which attributes properly belong
to the highest Self only, as we know from texts such as 'that is the
Immortal, that is the fearless, that is Brahman' (*Kh*. Up. IV, 15, i).
The qualification expressed in the clause 'etasmâ*g g*îva.--ghanât,' &c.
may also refer to the highest Self only, not to Brahmâ *K*aturmukha; for
the latter is himself comprehended by the term '*g*îvaghana.' For that
term denotes all souls which are embodied owing to karman; and that
*K*aturmukha is one of those we know from texts such as 'He who first
creates Brahmâ' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 18). Nor is there any strength in the
argument that, since the Brahma-world mentioned in the text is known to
be the world of *K*aturmukha, as it follows next on the world of the
atmosphere, the being abiding there must needs be *K*aturmukha. We
rather argue as follows--as from the concluding clause 'that which is
tranquil, free from decay,' &c., we ascertain that the object of
intuition is the highest Brahman, the Brahma-world spoken of as the
abode of the seeing devotee cannot be the perishable world of Brahmâ
*K*aturmukha. A further reason for this conclusion is supplied by what
the text says about 'him who is freed from all evil being led up by the
Sâman verses to the world of Brahman'; for the place reached by him who
is freed from all evil cannot be the mere abode of *K*aturmukha. Hence
also the concluding *s*loka says with reference to that Brahma-world
'that which the wise teach ': what the wise see and teach is the abode
of the highest, of Vish*n*u; cp. the text 'the wise ever see that
highest abode of Vish*n*u.' Nor is it even strictly true that the world
of Brahmâ follows on the atmosphere, for the svarga-world and several
others lie between the two.

We therefore shortly explain the drift of the whole chapter as follows.
At the outset of the reply given to Satyakâma there is mentioned, in
addition to the highest (para) Brahman, a lower (apara) Brahman. This
lower or effected (kârya) Brahman is distinguished as twofold, being
connected either with this terrestrial world or yonder, non-terrestrial,

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

world. Him who meditates on the Pra*n*ava as having one syllable, the
text declares to obtain a reward in this world--he reaches the world of
men. He, on the other hand, who meditates on the Pra*n*ava as having two
syllables is said to obtain his reward in a super-terrestrial sphere--he
reaches the world of the atmosphere. And he finally who, by means of the
trisyllabic Pra*n*ava which denotes the highest Brahman, meditates on
this very highest Brahman, is said to reach that Brahman, i. e. the
supreme Person.--The object of seeing is thus none other than the
highest Self.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of the 'object of
seeing.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. The small ether is Brahman...](sbe48112)
