[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48245)  [Next](sbe48247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

43\. And on account of contradiction.

The origination of the *g*îva is, moreover, distinctly controverted in
the books of the Bhâgavatas also. Thus in the Parama-sa*m*hitâ 'The
nature of Prak*ri*ti consists therein that she is non-sentient, for the
sake of another, eternal, ever-changing, comprising within herself the
three gu*n*as. and constituting the sphere of action and experience for
all agents. With her the soul (purusha) is connected in the way of
inseparable association; that soul is known to be truly without
beginning and without end.' And as all Sa*m*hitas make similar
statements as to the eternity of the soul, the Pa*ñk*arâtra doctrine
manifestly controverts the view of the essential nature of the *g*iva
being something that originates. How it is possible that in the Veda as
well as in common life the soul is spoken of as being born, dying, &c.,
will be explained under Sû. II, 3, 17. The conclusion, therefore, is
that the Bhâgavata system also denies the origination of the soul, and
that hence the objections raised on this ground against its
authoritativeness are without any force. Another objection is raised by
some. Sâ*nd*ilya, they argue, is said to have promulgated the
Pa*ñk*arâtra doctrine because he did not find a sure basis for the
highest welfare of man in the Veda and its auxiliary disciplines, and
this implies that the Pa*ñk*arâtra is opposed to the Veda.--his
objection, we reply, springs from nothing else but the mere unreasoning
faith of men who do not possess the faintest knowledge

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

of the teachings of the Veda, and have never considered the hosts of
arguments which confirm that teaching. When the Veda says, 'Morning
after morning those speak untruth who make the Agnihotra offering before
sunrise,' it is understood that the censure there passed on the offering
before sunrise is really meant to glorify the offering after sunrise. We
meet with a similar case in the 'bhûma-vidyâ' (*Kh*. Up. VII, 2). There
at the beginning Nârada says, 'I know the *Ri*g-veda, the Ya*g*ur-veda,
the Sâma-veda, the Âtharva*n*a as the fourth, the Itihâsa-purâ*n*a as
the fifth,' and so on, enumerating all the various branches of
knowledge, and finally summing up 'with all this I know the mantras
only, I do not know the Self.' Now this declaration of the knowledge of
the Self not being attainable through any branch of knowledge except the
knowledge of the Bhûman evidently has no other purpose but to glorify
this latter knowledge, which is about to be expounded. Or else Nârada's
words refer to the fact that from the Veda and its auxiliary disciplines
he had not obtained the knowledge of the highest Reality. Analogous to
this is the case of Sâ*nd*ilya's alleged objection to the Veda. That the
Bhâgavata doctrine is meant to facilitate the understanding of the sense
of the Veda which by itself is difficult of comprehension, is declared
in the Paramasa*m*hita,'I have read the Vedas at length, together with
all the various auxiliary branches of knowledge. But in all these I
cannot see a clear indication, raised above all doubt, of the way to
blessedness, whereby I might reach perfection'; and 'The wise Lord Hari,
animated by kindness for those devoted to him, extracted the essential
meaning of all the Vedânta-texts and condensed it in an easy form.' The
incontrovertible fact then is as follows. The Lord who is known from the
Vedânta-texts, i.e. Vâsudeva, called there the highest Brahman--who is
antagonistic to all evil, whose nature is of uniform excellence, who is
an ocean, as it were, of unlimited exalted qualities, such as infinite
intelligence, bliss, and so on, all whose purposes come true--perceiving
that those devoted to him, according as they are differently placed in
the four castes and the

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

four stages of life, are intent on the different ends of life, viz.
religious observances, wealth, pleasure, and final release; and
recognising that the Vedas--which teach the truth about his own nature,
his glorious manifestations, the means of rendering him propitious and
the fruits of such endeavour--are difficult to fathom by all beings
other than himself, whether gods or men, since those Vedas are divided
into *Ri*k, Ya*g*us, Sâman, and Atharvan; and being animated by infinite
pity, tenderness, and magnanimity; with a view to enable his devotees to
grasp the true meaning of the Vedas, himself composed the
Pa*ñk*arâtra-*s*âstra. The author of the Sûtras (Vyâsa)--who first
composed the Sûtras, the purport of which it is to set forth the
arguments establishing the Vedânta doctrine, and then the
Bhârata-sa*m*hitâ (i.e. the Mahâbhârata) in a hundred thousand *s*lokas
in order to support thereby the teaching of the Veda--himself says in
the chapter called Mokshadharma, which treats of knowledge, 'If a
householder, or a Brahma*k*ârin, or a hermit, or a mendicant wishes to
achieve success, what deity should he worship?' and so on; explains then
at great length the Pa*ñk*arâtra system, and then says, 'From the
lengthy Bhârata story, comprising one hundred thousand *s*lokas, this
body of doctrine has been extracted, with the churning-staff of mind, as
butter is churned from curds--as butter from milk, as the Brahma*n*a
from men, as the Âra*n*yaka from the Vedas, as Am*ri*ta from medicinal
herbs.--This great Upanishad, consistent with the four Vedas, in harmony
with Sâ<u>n</u>khya and Yoga, was called by him by the name of
Pa*ñk*arâtra. This is excellent, this is Brahman, this is supremely
beneficial. Fully agreeing with the *Ri*k, the Ya*g*us, the Sâman, and
the Atharvân-giras, this doctrine will be truly authoritative.' The
terms Sâ<u>n</u>khya and Yoga here denote the concentrated application
of knowledge and of works. As has been said, 'By the application of
knowledge on the part of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya, and of works on the part of
the Yogins.' And in the Bhîshmaparvan we read, 'By Brahma*n*as,
Kshattriyas, Vai*s*yas and *S*ûdras, Mâdhava is to be honoured, served
and worshipped--he who was proclaimed by Sa<u>n</u>karsha*n*a

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

in agreement with the Sâtvata law.'--How then could these utterances of
Bâdarâya*n*a, the foremost among all those who understand the teaching
of the Veda, be reconciled with the view that in the Sûtras he maintains
the non-authoritativeness of the Sâtvata doctrine, the purport of which
is to teach the worship of, and meditation on, Vâsudeva, who is none
other than the highest Brahman known from the Vedânta-texts?

But other passages in the Mahâbhârata, such as 'There is the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya, the Yoga, the Pa*ñk*arâtra, the Vedas, and the
Pa*s*upata doctrine; do all these rest on one and the same basis, or on
different ones?' and so on, declare that the Sâ<u>n</u>khya and other
doctrines also are worthy of regard, while yet in the *S*ârîraka Sûtras
those very same doctrines are formally refuted. Why, therefore, should
not the same hold good in the case of the Bhâgavata doctrine?--Not so,
we reply. In the Mahâbhârata also Bâdaraya*n*a applies to the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya and other doctrines the same style of reasoning as in the
Sûtras. The question, asked in the passage quoted, means 'Do the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya, the Yoga, the Pa*s*upata, and the Pa*ñk*arâtra set forth
one and the same reality, or different ones? If the former, what is that
reality? If the latter, they convey contradictory doctrines, and, as
reality is not something which may be optionally assumed to be either
such or such, one of those doctrines only can be acknowledged as
authoritative, and the question then arises which is to be so
acknowledged?'--The answer to the question is given in the passage
beginning, 'Know, O royal Sage, all those different views. The
promulgator of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya is Kapila,' &c. Here the human origin
of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya, Yoga, and Pâ*s*upata is established on the ground
of their having been produced by Kapila, Hira*n*yagarbha, and
Pa*s*upati. Next the clause 'Aparântatamas is said to be the teacher of
the Vedas' intimates the non-human character of the Vedas; and finally
the clause 'Of the whole Pa*ñk*arâtra, Nârâya*n*a himself is the
promulgator' declares that Nârâya*n*a himself revealed the Pa*ñk*arâtra
doctrine. The connected purport of these different clauses is as
follows. As the systems

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

of human origin set forth doctrines mutually contradictory, and,
moreover, teach what is in conflict with the matter known from the
Veda--which, on account of its non-human character, is raised above all
suspicion of error and other imperfections--they cannot be accepted as
authoritative with regard to anything not depending on human action and
choice. Now the matter to be known from the Veda is Nârâya*n*a, who is
none other than the highest Brahman. It hence follows that the entities
set forth in those different systems--the pradhâna, the soul (purusha),
Pa*s*upati, and so on--have to be viewed as real only in so far as
Nârâya*n*a, i.e. the highest Brahman, as known from the Vedânta-texts,
constitutes their Self. This the text directly declares in the passage,
'In all those doctrines it is seen, in accordance with tradition and
reasoning, that the lord Narayawa is the only basis.' This means--'To
him who considers the entities set forth in those systems with the help
of argumentation, it is evident that Nârâya*n*a alone is the basis of
all those entities.' In other words, as the entities set forth in those
systems are not Brahman, any one who remembers the teaching of texts
such as 'all this indeed is Brahman,' 'Nârâya*n*a is all,' which declare
Brahman to be the Self of all, comes to the conclusion that Nârâya*n*a
alone is the basis of those entities. As thus it is settled that the
highest Brahman, as known from the Vedânta-texts, or Nârâya*n*a, himself
is the promulgator of the entire Pa*ñk*arâtra, and that this system
teaches the nature of Nârâya*n*a and the proper way of worshipping him,
none can disestablish the view that in the Pa*ñk*arâtra all the other
doctrines are comprised. For this reason the Mahâbhârata says, 'Thus the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-yoga and the Veda and the Âra*n*yaka, being members of
one another, are called the Pa*ñk*arâtra,' i.e. the Sâ<u>n</u>khya, the
Yoga, the Vedas, and the Âra*n*yakas, which are members of one another
because they are one in so far as aiming at setting forth one Truth,
together are called the Pa*ñk*arâtra.--The Sâ<u>n</u>khya explains the
twenty-five principles, the Yoga teaches certain practices and means of
mental concentration, and the Âra*n*yakas teach that all the subordinate

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

principles have their true Self in Brahman, that the mental
concentration enjoined in the Yoga is a mode of meditation on Brahman,
and that the rites and works which are set forth in the Veda are means
to win the favour of Brahman--thus giving instruction as to Brahman's
nature. Now all these elements, in their inward connexion, are clearly
set forth in the Pa*ñk*arâtra by the highest Brahman, i.e. Nârâya*n*a,
himself. The *S*ârîraka *S*âstra (i.e. the Vedânta) does not disprove
the principles assumed by the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, but merely the view of
their not having Brahman for their Self; and similarly in its criticism
on the Yoga and Pâ*s*upata systems, it merely refutes the view of the
Lord being a mere instrumental cause, the erroneous assumptions as to
the relative position of higher and lower entities, and certain
practices not warranted by the Veda; but it does not reject the Yoga
itself, nor again the lord Pâ*s*upati. Hence Sm*ri*ti says,' The
Sâ<u>n</u>khya, the Yoga, the Pa*ñk*arâtra, the Vedas, and the P*s*upata
doctrine--all these having their proof in the Self may not be destroyed
by arguments.' The essential points in all these doctrines are to be
adopted, not to be rejected absolutely as the teaching of *G*ina. or
Sugata is to be rejected. For, as said in the Sm*ri*ti text quoted
above, in all those doctrines it is seen, according to tradition and
reasoning, that the lord Nârâya*n*a is the only basis.'--Here terminates
the adhikara*n*a of 'the impossibility of origination.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Pâda: 1. Not Ether...](sbe48247)
