[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48421)  [Next](sbe48423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

38\. Wishes and the rest, here and there; (as is known from the abode,
and so on).

We read in the *Kh*ândogya (VIII, I, 1), 'There is that city of Brahman,
and in it the palace, the small lotus, and in it that small ether,' &c.;
and in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, 'He is that great unborn Self who consists of
knowledge,' and so on. A doubt here arises whether the two texts
constitute one meditation or not.--The two meditations are separate, the
Pûrvapakshin maintains; for they have different characters. The
*Kh*ândogya represents as the object of meditation the ether as
distinguished by eight different attributes, viz. freedom from all evil
and the rest; while, according to the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, the being to be
meditated on is he who dwells within that ether, and is distinguished by
attributes such as lordship, and so on.--To this we reply that the
meditations are not distinct, since there is no difference of character.
For desires and so on constitute that character 'here and there,' i.e.
in both texts nothing else but Brahman distinguished by attributes, such
as having true wishes, and so on, forms the subject of meditation. This
is known 'from the abode and so on,'

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

i.e. the meditation is recognised as the same because in both texts
Brahman is referred to as abiding in the heart, being a bridge, and so
on. Lordship and the rest, which are stated in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, are
special aspects of the quality of being capable to realise all one's
purposes, which is one of the eight qualities declared in the
*Kh*ândogya, and as such prove that all the attributes going together
with that quality in the *Kh*ândogya are valid for the Vâ*g*asaneyaka
also. The character of the two vidyâs therefore does not differ. The
connexion with a reward also does not differ, for it consists in both
cases in attaining to Brahman; cp. *Kh.* Up. VIII, 12,3 'Having
approached the highest light he is manifested in his own form,' and
B*ri*. Up. V, 4, 24 'He becomes indeed the fearless Brahman.' That, in
the *Kh*ândogya-text, the term *ether* denotes the highest Brahman, has
already been determined under I, 3, 14. As in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka, on the
other hand, he who abides in the ether is recognised as the highest
Self, we infer that by the ether in which he abides must be understood
the ether within the heart, which in the text 'within there is a little
hollow space (sushira)' (Mahânâr. Up. XI, 9) is called sushira. The two
meditations are therefore one. Here an objection is raised. It cannot be
maintained that the attributes mentioned in the *Kh*ândogya have to be
combined with those stated in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka (lordship, rulership,
&c.), since even the latter are not truly valid for the meditation. For
the immediately preceding passage, 'By the mind it is to be perceived
that there is here no plurality: from death to death goes he who sees
here any plurality; as one only is to be seen that eternal being, not to
be proved by any means of proof,' as well as the subsequent text, 'that
Self is to be described by No, no,' shows that the Brahman to be
meditated upon is to be viewed as devoid of attributes; and from this we
infer that the attributes of lordship and so on, no less than the
qualities of grossness and the like, have to be denied of Brahman. From
this again we infer that in the *Kh*ândogya also the attributes of
satyakâmatva and so on are not meant to be declared as Brahman's true
qualities. All such qualities--

<span id="page_662">p. 662</span>

as not being real qualities of Brahman--have therefore to be omitted in
meditations aiming at final release.--This objection the next Sûtra
disposes of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39. On account of emphasis there is non-omission](sbe48423)
