[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48037)  [Next](sbe48039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. On account of seeing (i.e. thinking) that which is not founded on
Scripture (i.e. the Pradhâna) is not (what is taught by the texts
referring to the origination of the world).

We have maintained that what is taught by the texts relative to the
origination of the world is Brahman, omniscient, and so on. The present
Sûtra and the following Sûtras now add that those texts can in no way
refer to the Pradhâna and similar entities which rest on Inference only.

We read in the *Kh*ândogya, 'Being only was this in the beginning, one
only, without a second.--It thought, may I be many, may I grow
forth.--It sent forth fire' (VI, 2, 1 ff.)--Here a doubt arises whether
the cause of the world denoted by the term 'Being' is the Pradhâna.
assumed by others, which rests on Inference, or Brahman as defined by
us.

The Pûrvapakshin maintains that the Pradhâna is meant. For he says, the
*Kh*ândogya text quoted expresses the causal state of what is denoted by
the word 'this', viz. the aggregate of things comprising manifold
effects, such as ether. &c., consisting of the three elements of
Goodness,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Passion and Darkness, and forming the sphere of
fruition of intelligent beings. By the 'effected' state we understand
the assuming, on the part of the causal substance, of a different
condition; whatever therefore constitutes the essential nature of a
thing in its effected state the same constitutes its essential nature in
the causal state also. Now the effect, in our case, is made up of the
three elements Goodness, Passion and Darkness; hence the cause is the
Pradhâna which consists in an equipoise of those three elements. And as
in this Pradhâna all distinctions are merged, so that it is pure Being,
the *Kh*ândogya text refers to it as 'Being, one only, without a
second.' This establishes the non-difference of effect and cause, and in
this way the promise that through the knowledge of one thing all things
are to be known admits of being fulfilled. Otherwise, moreover, there
would be no analogy between the instance of the lump of clay and the
things made of it, and the matter to be illustrated thereby. The texts
speaking of the origination of the world therefore intimate the Pradhâna
taught by the great Sage Kapila. And as the *Kh*ândogya passage has,
owing to the presence of an initial statement (prati*gñ*â) and a proving
instance, the form of an inference, the term 'Being' means just that
which rests on inference, viz. the Pradhâna.

This primâ facie view is set aside by the words of the Sûtra. That which
does not rest on Scripture, i.e. the Pradhâna, which rests on Inference
only, is not what is intimated by the texts referring to the origination
of the world; for the text exhibits the root 'îksh '--which means 'to
think'--as denoting a special activity on the part of what is termed
'Being.' 'It thought, may I be many, may I grow forth.' 'Thinking'
cannot possibly belong to the non-sentient Pradhâna: the term 'Being'
can therefore denote only the all-knowing highest Person who is capable
of thought. In agreement with this we find that, in all sections which
refer to creation, the act of creation is stated to be preceded by
thought. 'He thought, shall I send forth worlds. He sent forth these
worlds' (Ait. Âr. II, 4, 1, 2); 'He thought he sent forth Prâ*n*a' (Pr.
Up. VI, 3);

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and others.--But it is a rule that as a cause we must assume only what
corresponds to the effect!--Just so; and what corresponds to the total
aggregate of effects is the highest Person, all-knowing, all-powerful,
whose purposes realise themselves, who has minds and matter in their
subtle state for his body. Compare the texts 'His high power is revealed
as manifold, as inherent, acting as force and knowledge' (*S*vet. Up.
VI, 8); 'He who is all-knowing, all-perceiving' (Mu. Up. I, 1, 9); 'He
of whom the Unevolved is the body, of whom the Imperishable is the body,
of whom Death is the body, he is the inner Self of all things' (Subâl.
Up. VII).--This point (viz. as to the body of the highest Person) will
be established under Sû. II, 1, 4. The present Sûtra declares that the
texts treating of creation cannot refer to the Pradhâna; the Sûtra just
mentioned will dispose of objections. Nor is the Pûrvapakshin right in
maintaining that the *Kh*ândogya passage is of the nature of an
Inference; for it does not state a reason (hetu--which is the essential
thing in an Inference). The illustrative instance (of the lump of clay)
is introduced merely in order to convince him who considers it
impossible that all things should be known through one thing--as
maintained in the passage 'through which that is heard which was not
heard,' &c.,--that this *is* possible after all. And the mention made in
the text of 'seeing' clearly shows that there is absolutely no intention
of setting forth an Inference.

Let us assume, then, the Pûrvapakshin resumes, that the 'seeing' of the
text denotes not 'seeing' in its primary, direct sense--such as belongs
to intelligent beings only; but 'seeing' in a secondary, figurative
sense which there is ascribed to the Pradhâna in the same way as in
passages immediately following it is ascribed to fire and water--'the
fire saw'; 'the water saw' (*Kh*. Up. VI, 2, 3). The transference, to
non-existent things, of attributes properly belonging to sentient beings
is quite common; as when we say 'the rice-fields look out for rain';
'the rain delighted the seeds.'--This view is set aside by the next
Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. ...the word 'seeing' has a secondary (figurative)
meaning](sbe48039)
