[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48360)  [Next](sbe48362) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17\. (This Scripture) also shows, and it is also stated in Sm*ri*ti.

That Brahman is a treasure as it were of all blessed qualities and free
from all imperfections, the whole body of Vedânta-texts clearly
declares: 'That highest great lord of lords, that highest deity of
deities'; 'He is the cause, the lord of the lords of the organs, and
there is of him neither parent nor lord '; 'There is no effect and no
cause known of him, no one is seen like unto him or higher. His high
power is revealed as manifold, as essential action of knowledge and
strength' (*S*vet. Up. VI, 7-9); 'He who is all-knowing, whose brooding
consists of knowledge' (Mu. I, 1,9); 'From fear of him the wind blows,
from fear of him the sun moves'; 'That is one bliss of Brahman' (Taitt.
Up. II, 8); 'That from which all speech with the mind turns away, not
having reached it, knowing the bliss of that Brahman man fears nothing'
(Taitt. Up. II, 9); 'He who is without parts, without action, tranquil,
without fault, without taint' (*S*vet. Up. VI, l9).--And Sm*ri*ti: 'He
who knows me to be unborn and without a beginning, the Supreme Lord of
the worlds'; 'Pervading this entire universe, by one part of mine I do
abide'; 'With me as supervisor Prak*ri*ti brings forth the universe of
the movable and the immovable, and for this reason the world does ever
move round'; 'But another is the Supreme Person, who is called the
Supreme Spirit, who pervading the three worlds supports them--the
eternal Lord' (Bha. Gî. X, 3; 42; IX, 10; XV, 17);

<span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'The all-working, all-powerful one, rich in
knowledge and strength, who becomes neither less nor more, who is
self-dependent, without beginning, master of all; who knows neither
weariness nor exhaustion, nor fear, wrath and desire; the blameless one,
raised above all, without support, imperishable.'--As thus Brahman in
whatever place it may abide has the 'twofold characteristics,' the
imperfections dependent on those places do not touch it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. For this very reason comparisons, such as reflected images of
the sun and the like](sbe48362)
