[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48126)  [Next](sbe48128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

28\. And for this very reason eternity (of the Veda).

As words such as Indra and Vasish*th*a, which denote gods and *Ri*shis,
denote (not individuals only, but) classes, and as the creation of those
beings is preceded by their being suggested to the creative mind through
those words; for this reason the eternity of the Veda admits of being
reconciled with what scripture says about the mantras and kâ*nd*as
(sections) of the sacred text having 'makers' and about *Ri*shis seeing
the hymns; cp. such passages as 'He chooses the makers of mantras';
'Reverence to the *Ri*shis who are the makers of mantras'; 'That is
Agni; this is a hymn of Vi*s*vâmitra.' For by means of these very texts
Pra*g*âpati presents to his own mind the characteristics and powers of
the different *Ri*shis who make the different sections, hymns, and
mantras, thereupon creates them endowed with those characteristics and
powers, and appoints

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

them to remember the very same sections, hymns, &c. The Rishis being
thus gifted by Pra*g*âpati with the requisite powers, undergo suitable
preparatory austerities and finally *see* the mantras, and so on,
proclaimed by the Vasish*th*as and other *Ri*shis of former ages of the
world, perfect in all their sounds and accents, without having learned
them from the recitation of a teacher. There is thus no conflict between
the eternity of the Veda and the fact that the *Ri*shis are the *makers*
of its sections, hymns, and so on. A further objection is raised. Let it
be admitted that after each pralaya of the kind called 'contingent'
(naimittika), Pra*g*âpati may proceed to create new Indras, and so on,
in the way of remembering on the basis of the Veda the Indras, and so
on, of preceding periods. In the case, on the other hand, of a pralaya
of the kind called elemental (prâk*ri*tika), in which the creator,
Pra*g*âpati himself, and words--which are the effects of the elemental
ahankâra--pass away, what possibility is there of Pra*g*âpati
undertaking a new creation on the basis of Vedic words, and how can we
speak of the permanency of a Veda which perishes? He who maintains the
eternity of the Veda and the corporeality of gods, and so on, is thus
really driven to the hypothesis of the course of mundane existence being
without a beginning (i.e. not preceded by a pralaya).--Of this
difficulty the next Sûtra disposes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. And on account of the equality of names and forms there is no
contradiction...](sbe48128)
