[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48467)  [Next](sbe48469) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

21\. If it be said that they are mere glorification, on account of their
reference; not so, on account of the newness.

The following point is next enquired into. Are texts such as 'That
Udgîtha is the best of all essences, the highest, holding the supreme
place, the eighth' (*Kh*. Up. I, 1, 3) meant to glorify the Udgîtha as a
constituent element of the sacrifice, or to enjoin a meditation on the
Udgîtha as the best of all essences, and so on? The Pûrvapakshin holds
the former view, on the ground that the text declares the Udgîtha to be
the best of all essences in so far as being a constituent element of the
sacrifice. The case is analogous to that of texts such as 'the ladle is
this earth, the âhavanîya is the heavenly world,' which are merely meant
to glorify the ladle and the rest as constituent members of the
sacrifice.--This view the latter part of the Sûtra sets aside 'on
account of newness.'

<span id="page_697">p. 697</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Texts, as the one referring to the Udgîtha,
cannot be mere glorifications; for the fact of the Udgîtha being the
best of essences is not established by any other means of proof, and the
text under discussion cannot therefore be understood as a mere anuvâda,
meant for glorification. Nor is there, in proximity, any injunction of
the Udgîtha on account of connexion with which the clause declaring the
Udgîtha to be the best of all essences could naturally be taken as an
anuvâda (glorifying the thing previously enjoined in the injunctive
text); while there is such an injunction in connexion with the (anuvâda)
text 'The ladle is this earth,' and so on. We thus cannot but arrive at
the conclusion that the text is meant to enjoin a meditation on the
Udgîtha as being the best of all essences, and so on--the fruit of such
meditation being an increase of vigour and efficacy on the part of the
sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. And on account of the words denoting becoming](sbe48469)
