[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48570)  [Next](sbe48572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

20\. And thus Perception and Inference show.

<span id="page_769">p. 769</span>

That the energies connected with the rule of the entire world are
exclusive attributes of the highest Person, Scripture and Sm*ri*ti alike
declare. Compare scriptural texts such as 'From fear of him the wind
blows,' &c. (Taitt. Up. II, 8, 1); 'By the command of that Imperishable
one sun and moon stand, held apart' (B*ri*. Up. III, 9); 'He is the lord
of all, the king of all beings, the protector of all beings' (B*ri*. Up.
IV, 4, 22). And Sm*ri*ti texts such as 'With me as Supervisor,
Prak*ri*ti brings forth the Universe of the movable and the immovable,
and for this reason the world ever moves round'; 'Pervading this entire
Universe by a portion of mine I do abide' (Bha. Gî. IX, 10; X, 42).
Scripture and Sm*ri*ti likewise declare that of the bliss which is
enjoyed by the released soul the highest Person alone is the cause--'For
he alone causes blessedness' (Taitt. Up. II, 7); 'He who serves me with
unswerving devotion, surpasses these qualities and is fitted for
becoming one with Brahman. For I am the abode of Brahman, of infinite
immortality, of everlasting virtue, and of absolute bliss' (Bha. Gî.
XIV, 26-27). The exalted qualities of the soul--freedom from evil and
sin and so on--which manifest themselves in the state of Release no
doubt belong to the soul's essential nature; but that the soul is of
such a nature fundamentally depends on the Supreme Person, and on him
also depends the permanency of those qualities; they are permanent in so
far as the Lord himself on whom they depend is permanent. It is in the
same way that all the things which constitute the means of enjoyment and
sport on the part of the Lord are permanent in so far as the Lord
himself is permanent. It thus appears that the equality to the Lord
which the released soul may claim does not extend to the world-ruling
energies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. And on account of the indication of the equality of enjoyment
only](sbe48572)
