[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48182)  [Next](sbe48184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

13\. Thereby also the remaining (theories) which are not comprised
(within the Veda) are explained.

Not comprised means those theories which are not known to be comprised
within (countenanced by) the Veda. The Sûtra means to say that by the
demolition given above of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine which is not
comprised within the Veda the remaining theories which are in the same
position, viz. the theories of Ka*n*âda, Akshapâda, *G*ina, and Buddha,
must likewise be considered as demolished.

Here, however, a new objection may be raised, on the ground namely that,
since all these theories agree in the view of atoms constituting the
general cause, it cannot be said that their reasoning as to the causal
substance is ill-founded.--They indeed, we reply, are agreed to that
extent, but they are all of them equally founded on Reasoning only, and
they are seen to disagree in many ways as to the nature of the atoms
which by different schools are held to be either fundamentally void or
non-void,

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

having either a merely cognitional or an objective existence, being
either momentary or permanent, either of a definite nature or the
reverse, either real or unreal, &c. This disagreement proves all those
theories to be ill-founded, and the objection is thus disposed of.--Here
finishes the section of 'the remaining (theories) non-comprised (within
the Veda).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. If it be said that from Brahman becoming an
enjoyer...](sbe48184)
