[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48205)  [Next](sbe48207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

# SECOND PÂDA.

1\. Not that which is inferred, on account of the impossibility of
construction, and on account of activity.

The Sûtras have so far set forth the doctrine that the highest Brahman
is the cause of the origination and so on of the world, and have refuted
the objections raised by others. They now, in order to safeguard their
own position, proceed to demolish the positions held by those very
adversaries. For otherwise it might happen that some slow-witted
persons, unaware of those other views resting on mere fallacious
arguments, would imagine them possibly to be authoritative, and hence
might be somewhat shaken in their belief in the Vedic doctrine. Another
pâda therefore is begun to the express end of refuting the theories of
others. The beginning is made with the theory of Kapila, because that
theory has several features, such as the view of the existence of the
effect in the cause, which are approved of by the followers of the Veda,
and hence is more likely, than others, to give rise to the erroneous
view of its being the true doctrine. The Sûtras I, 1, 5 and ff. have
proved only that the Vedic texts do not set forth the Sâ<u>n</u>khya
view, while the task of the present pâda is to demolish that view
itself: the Sûtras cannot therefore be charged with needless
reiteration.

The outline of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya doctrine is as follows. 'There is the
fundamental Prak*ri*ti, which is not an effect; there are the seven
effects of Prak*ri*ti, viz. the Mahat and so on, and the sixteen effects
of those effects; and there is the soul, which is neither Prak*ri*ti nor
effect'--such is the comprehensive statement of the principles. The
entity called 'fundamental Prak*ri*ti' is constituted by the three

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

substances called Sattva, Ra*g*as, and Tamas, (when) in a state of
complete equipoise, none of the three being either in defect or in
excess; the essential nature of those three consists respectively in
pleasure, pain, and dullness; they have for their respective effects
lightness and illumination, excitement and mobility, heaviness and
obstruction; they are absolutely non-perceivable by means of the senses,
and to be defined and distinguished through their effects only.
Prak*ri*ti, consisting in the equipoise of Sattva, Ra*g*as, and Tamas is
one, itself non-sentient but subserving the enjoyment and final release
of the many sentient beings, eternal, all-pervading, ever active, not
the effect of anything, but the one general cause. There are seven
Principles which are the effects of Prak*ri*ti and the causal substances
of everything else; these seven are the Mahat, the ahankâra, the subtle
matter (tanmâtra) of sound, the subtle matter of touch, the subtle
matter of colour, the subtle matter of taste, and the subtle matter of
smell. The ahankâra is threefold, being either modified (vaikârika), or
active (tai*g*asa), or the originator of the elements (bhûtâdi).

The vaikârika is of sattva-nature and the originator of the
sense--organs; the bhûtâdi is of tamas--nature. and the cause of those
subtle matters (tanmâtra) which in their turn are the cause of the gross
elements; the tai*g*asa is of the nature of ragas, and assists the other
two. The five gross elements are the ether and so on; the five
intellectual senses are hearing and so on; the five organs of action are
speech and so on. With the addition of the internal organ (manas) these
are the sixteen entities which are mere effects.--The soul, not being
capable of any change, is not either the causal matter or the effect of
anything. For the same reason it is without attributes, consisting of
mere intelligence, eternal, non-active, all-pervading, and different in
each body. Being incapable of change and non-active, it can neither be
an agent nor an enjoyer; but although this is so, men in their confusion
of mind, due to the closeness to each other of Prak*ri*ti and the soul,
erroneously attribute to Prak*ri*ti the intelligence of the soul, and to
the soul the activity of Prak*ri*ti--just as the redness of the rose

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

superimposes itself on the crystal near it,--and thus consider the soul
to be an 'I' and an enjoyer. Fruition thus results from ignorance, and
release from knowledge of the truth. This their theory the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas prove by means of perception, inference, and
authoritative tradition. Now with regard to those matters which are
proved by perception, we Vedântins have no very special reason for
dissenting from the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas; and what they say about their
authoritative tradition, claiming to be founded on the knowledge of
all-knowing persons such as Kapila, has been pretty well disproved by us
in the first adhyâya. If, now, we further manage to refute the inference
which leads them to assume the Pradhâna as the cause of the--world, we
shall have disestablished their whole theory. We therefore proceed to
give this refutation.

On this point the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas reason as follows. It must necessarily
be admitted that the entire world has one cause only; for if effects
were assumed to originate from several causes we should never arrive at
an ultimate cause. Assume that parts such as e.g. threads produce a
whole (i.e. in the case of threads, a piece of cloth) in the way of
their being joined together by means of their six sides, which are parts
of the threads. You must then further assume that the threads themselves
are in the same way produced by their parts, having a similar
constitution. And these parts again by their parts, until you reach the
atoms; these also must be assumed to produce their immediate effects by
being joined together with their six sides, for otherwise solid
extension (prathiman) could not be brought about. And then the atoms
also as being wholes, consisting of parts <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38), must be viewed as produced by their
parts, and these again by their parts and so on, so that we never arrive
at an ultimate cause. In order therefore to establish such an ultimate
cause we must have recourse to the hypothesis of the general cause being
constituted by one substance, which possesses the power of transforming
itself in various different ways, without at the

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

same time forfeiting its own essential nature, and which forms the
general substrate for an infinity of different effects, from the Mahat
downwards. This one general cause is the Pradhâna constituted by the
equipoise of the three gu*n*as. The reasons for the assumption of this
Pradhâna are as follows:--'On account of the limitedness of particular
things; of connexion (anvaya); of activity proceeding from special
power; and of the difference and non-difference of cause and effect--the
Non-evolved (Pradhâna) is the general cause of this many-natured
Universe' (vai*s*varûpya) (Sâ<u>n</u>khya Kâ. I, 15; 16).--The term
'vai*s*varûpya' denotes that which possesses all forms, i.e. the entire
world with its variously constituted parts--bodies, worlds, and so on.
This world, which on account of its variegated constitution must be held
to be an effect, has for its cause the Unevolved (avyakta = Prak*ri*ti),
which is of the same nature as the world. Why so? Because it is an
effect; for we perceive that every effect is different from its special
cause--which has the same nature as the effect--and at the same time is
non-different. Such effected things as e.g. a jar and a gold ornament
are different from their causes, i.e. clay and gold, which have the same
nature as the effects, and at the same time non-different. Hence the
manifold-natured world originates from the Pradhâna which has the same
nature, and is again merged in it: the world thus has the Pradhâna alone
for its cause. This Pradhâna is constituted by the equipoise of the
three gu*n*as, and thus is a cause possessing a nature equal to that of
its effect, i.e. the world; for the world is of the nature of pleasure,
pain, and dullness, which consist of sattva, ra*g*as, and tamas
respectively. The case is analogous to that of a jar consisting of clay;
of that also the cause is none other than the substance clay. For in
every case observation shows that only such causal substances as are of
the same nature as the effects possess that power which is called the
origination of the effect. That the general cause can be found only in
the unevolved Pradhâna, which consists of the three gu*n*as in a state
of equipoise and is unlimited with regard to space as well as time,
follows from the limitedness of the particular

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

things, viz. the Mahat, the ahankâra, and so on. These latter things are
limited like jars and so on, and hence incapable of originating the
entire world. Hence it follows that this world, consisting of the three
gu*n*as, has for its only cause the Pradhâna, which is constituted by
those three gu*n*as in a state of equipoise.

Against this argumentation the Sûtra says, 'Not that which is inferred,
on account of the impossibility of construction, and on account of
activity.'--'Inference' means 'that which is inferred,' i.e. the
Pradhâna. The Pradhâna postulated by you is not capable of constructing
this manifold-natured world, because while itself being non-intelligent
it is not guided by an intelligent being understanding its nature.
Whatever is of this latter kind is incapable of producing effects; as
e.g. wood and the like by themselves are not capable of constructing a
palace or a carriage. As it is matter of observation that
non-intelligent wood, not guided by an intelligent agent understanding
its nature, cannot produce effects; and as it is observed that if guided
by such an agent matter does enter on action so as to produce effects;
the Pradhâna, which is not ruled by an intelligent agent, cannot be the
general cause. The 'and' in the Sûtra is meant to add as a further
argument that 'presence' (anvaya) has no proving force. For whiteness
present in cows and so on is not invariably accompanied by the quality
of being the cause of the class characteristics of cows. Nor must it be
said that qualities such as whiteness, although present in the effect,
may not indeed be causes, but that substances such as gold and the like
which are present in certain effects are invariably accompanied by the
quality of being causes, and that hence also the substances called
sattva, ra*g*as, and tamas, which are found present in all effects, are
proved to be the causes of all those effects. For sattva and so on are
attributes of substances, but not themselves substances. Sattva and so
on are the causes of the lightness, light, &c.. belonging to substances
such as earth and the like, and hence distinctive attributes of the
essential nature of those substances, but they are not observed to be
present in any effects in

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

a substantial form, as clay, gold, and other substances are. It is for
this reason that they are known as 'gu*n*as.' You have further said that
the world's having one cause only must be postulated in order that an
ultimate cause may be reached. But as the sattva, ra*g*as, and tamas are
not one but three, you yourself do not assume one cause, and hence do
not manage to arrive at an ultimate cause. For your Pradhâna consists in
the equipoise of the three gu*n*as; there are thus several causes, and
you have no more an ultimate cause than others. Nor can you say that
this end is accomplished through the three gu*n*as being unlimited. For
if the three gu*n*as are all alike unlimited, and therefore omnipresent,
there is nowhere a plus or minus of any of them, and as thus no
inequality can result, effects cannot originate. In order to explain the
origination of results it is therefore necessary to assume limitation of
the gu*n*as.

Nor is our view confirmed by those cases only in which it is clearly
perceived that matter produces effects only when guided by an
intelligent principle; other cases also (where the fact is not perceived
with equal clearness) are in favour of our view. This the next Sûtra
declares.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[482:1](sbe48206.htm#fr_38) As follows from
their having six sides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. If it be said--like milk or water; there also intelligence
guides](sbe48207)
