[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48390)  [Next](sbe48392) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. Or not, on account of difference of subject-matter; as in the case
of the attribute of being higher than the high, and so on.

There is no unity of the two vidyâs, since the subject-matter of the two
differs. For the tale in the *Kh*ândogya-text, which begins 'when the
Devas and the Asuras struggled together,' connects itself with the
pra*n*ava (the syllable Om) which is introduced as the object of
meditation in *Kh*ánd. I, 1, 1, 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om
as the Udgîtha'; and the clause forming part of the tale,'they meditated
on that chief breath as Udgîtha.' therefore refers to a meditation on
the pra*n*ava which is a part only of the Udgîtha. In the text of the
Vâ*g*a-saneyins; on the other hand, there is nothing to correspond to
the introductory passage which in the *Kh*ândogya-text determines the
subject-matter, and the text clearly states that the meditation refers
to the whole Udgîtha (not only the pra*n*ava). And this difference of
leading subject-matter implies difference of matter enjoined, and this
again difference of the character of meditation, and hence there is no
unity of vidyâs. Thus the object of meditation for the *Kh*andogas is
the pra*n*ava viewed under the form of Prâ*n*a; while for the
Vâ*g*asaneyins it is the Udgâtri (who sings the Udgîtha), imaginatively
identified with Prâ*n*a. Nor does there arise, on this latter account, a
contradiction between the later and the earlier part of the story of the
Vâ*g*asaneyins. For as a meditation on the Udgât*ri* necessarily

<span id="page_635">p. 635</span>

extends to the Udgîtha, which is the object of the activity of singing,
the latter also helps to bring about the result, viz. the mastering of
enemies.--There is thus no unity of vidyâ, although there may be
non-difference of injunction, and so on.--'As in the case of the
attribute of being higher than the high,' &c. In one and the same
*s*âkhâ there are two meditations, in each of which the highest Self is
enjoined to be viewed under the form of the pra*n*ava (*Kh*. Up. I, 6;
I, 9), and in so far the two vidyâs are alike. But while the former text
enjoins that the pra*n*ava has to be viewed under the form of a golden
man, in the latter he has to be viewed as possessing the attributes of
being higher than the high, and owing to this difference of attributes
the two meditations must be held separate (*a fortiori*, then, those
meditations are separate which have different objects of meditation).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. If that be declared on account of name; we object](sbe48392)
