[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48415)  [Next](sbe48417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

32\. There is no restriction (since) all (have to go on that path).
(Thus) there is non-contradiction of sacred text and Sm*ri*ti.

The question here is whether Brahman is to be reached on the path of the
gods by those only who take their stand on those meditations which, like
the Upako*s*ala-vidyâ, describe that path, or by all who practise any of
the meditations on Brahman. The Pûrvapakshin holds the former view,
since there is no proof to show that in other vidyâs the going on that
path is not mentioned, and since those other vidyâs-such as the texts
'and those who in the forest meditate on faith and austerities,'and'
those who in the forest worship faith, the True' (*Kh*. Up. V, 10, 1;
B*ri*. Up. VI, 2, 15)--suggest to the mind the idea of the knowledge of
Brahman. This the Sûtra negatives.

<span id="page_652">p. 652</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There is no restriction to that limited class of
devotees, since all who carry on meditations have to go on that path.
For on this latter assumption only text and inference, i.e. scripture
and authoritative tradition, are not contradicted. As to scripture, the
*Kh*ândogya and the Vâ*g*asaneyaka alike, in the Pa*ñk*âgni-vidyâ,
declare that all those who practise meditation go on that path. In the
Vâ*g*asaneyaka the words 'who know this' refer to those who practise the
meditation on the five fires, while the following words 'those who in
the forest meditate on faith and the True' refer to those who meditate
on Brahman; and the text then goes on to say that all those devotees go
to Brahman, on the path of the gods. Texts such as 'the True, knowledge,
infinite is Brahman,' and 'the True must be enquired into,' prove that
the term 'the True' denotes Brahman; and as in the *Kh*ândogya the term
'tapas ' occurs in the corresponding place, we conclude that both these
terms, viz. *the True* and tapas, denote nothing else but Brahman.
Meditation on Brahman, preceded by faith, is mentioned elsewhere also;
in the text which begins 'The True must be enquired into' we read
further on 'Faith must be enquired into' (*Kh.* Up. VII, 18, 16; 19).
Sm*ri*ti also declares that all those who know Brahman proceed on the
path of the gods, 'Fire, the light, the day, the bright fortnight, the
six months of the sun's northern progress--proceeding by that road those
who know Brahman go to Brahman' (Bha. Gî. VIII, 24). And there are many
other *S*ruti and Sm*ri*ti passages of this kind. The conclusion
therefore is that the Upako*s*alavidyâ and similar texts merely refer to
that going of the soul which is common to all vidyâs.--Here terminates
the adhikara*n*a of 'non-restriction.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. But the conceptions of the Imperishable are to be comprised
in all meditations](sbe48417)
