[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48353)  [Next](sbe48355) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. In the swooning person there is half-combination; this being the
remaining (hypothesis).

With regard to a person lying in a swoon or stunned, the question arises
whether that state of swoon is one of the other states, viz. deep sleep
and so on, or whether it is a special condition of its own.--The former
alternative must be accepted. For the term 'swoon' may be explained as
denoting either deep sleep or some other acknowledged state, and there
is no authority for assuming an altogether different new state.--This
view the Sûtra sets aside. The condition of a swooning person consists
in reaching half, viz. of what leads to death; for this is the only
hypothesis remaining. A swoon cannot be either dreaming or being awake;
for in a swoon there is no consciousness. And as it is different in
character as well as in the occasions giving rise to it from deep sleep
and death, it cannot be either of those two states; for there are
special circumstances occasioning a swoon, such as a blow on the head.
The only possible alternative then is to view a swoon as a state in

<span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

which there is made a half-way approach to death. For while death
consists in the complete cessation of the soul's connexion with the body
or organs of any kind, a swoon consists in the soul's remaining
connected with the subtle body and organs only. Here terminates the
adhikara*n*a of 'the swooning person.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Not on account of place even is there any imperfection of the
Highest; for everywhere it is described as having twofold
characteristics](sbe48355)
