[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48555)  [Next](sbe48557) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. In (a nature like) that of Brahman, thus *G*aimini thinks; on
account of suggestion and the rest.

<span id="page_760">p. 760</span>

Owing to the fact that different texts give different accounts, the
question now arises of what character that essential nature of the Self
is in which it manifests itself on reaching Brahman. Is that nature
constituted by freedom from evil and sin and the rest (i.e. the
attributes enumerated *Kh*. Up. VIII, 7, 1); or by mere intelligence
(vi*gñ*âna); or by both, there being no opposition between intelligence
and those other attributes?--The teacher *G*aimini holds that the soul
manifests itself in its Brahman character, i.e. in a character
constituted by freedom from sin, and so on. These latter attributes are,
in the text of the 'small lotus,' mentioned as belonging to Brahman
(*Kh*. Up. VIII, 1, 5), and may hence be referred to as the 'Brahman'
character. And that this Brahman character is the character of the
released soul also follows from 'suggestion and the rest.' For freedom
from all evil and the rest are, in the teaching of Pra*g*âpati, referred
to as attributes of the soul (VIII, 7, 1). The 'and the rest' of the
Sûtra refers to the activities of the released soul--laughing, playing,
rejoicing, and so on (mentioned in VIII, 12, 3)--which depend on the
power belonging to the soul in that state to realise all its ideas and
wishes. It is for these reasons that *G*aimini holds that mere
intelligence does not constitute the true nature of the released soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. In the sole nature of intelligence; as that is its
Self...](sbe48557)
