[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48304)  [Next](sbe48306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. And the best.

By 'the best' we have to understand the chief vital air (mukhya
prâ*n*a), which, in the colloquy of the prâ*n*as, is determined to be
the best because it is the cause of the preservation of the body. This
chief vital air the Pûrvapakshin maintains to be something non-created,
since Scripture (*Ri*. Sa*m*h. V, 129, 2), 'By its own law the One was
breathing without wind,' shows that an effect of it, viz. the act of
breathing, existed even previously to creation, at the time of a great
pralaya; and because texts declaring it to have been created--such as
'from him is born breath' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3)--may be interpreted in the
same way as the texts declaring that the soul is something created (sec
p. 540 ff.).--To this the reply is that, since this view contradicts
scriptural statements as to the oneness of all, previous to creation;
and since the Mu*nd*aka-text declares the prâ*n*a to have been created
in the same way as earth and the other elements; and since there are no
texts plainly denying its createdness, the chief vital air also must

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

be held to have been created. The words 'the One was breathing without
wind' by no means refer to the vital breath of living creatures, but
intimate the existence of the highest Brahman, alone by itself; as
indeed appears from the qualification 'without wind.'--That the vital
breath, although really disposed of in the preceding Sûtras, is
specially mentioned in the present Sûtra, is with a view to the question
next raised for consideration.--Here terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'the
minuteness of the prâ*n*as.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Neither air nor function...](sbe48306)
