[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48393)  [Next](sbe48395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. On account of non-difference of everything, those elsewhere.

The *Kh*ândogya and the Va*g*asaneyaka alike record a meditation on
Pra*n*a; the object of meditation being Pra*n*a as possessing the
qualities of being the oldest and the best, and also as possessing
certain other qualities such as being the richest, and so on (*Kh*. Up.
V, 1; B*ri*. Up. VI, 1). In the text of the Kaushîtakins, on the other
hand, there is a meditation on Prâ*n*a which mentions the former
qualities ('being the best' and 'being the oldest'), but not the latter
('being the richest,' and so on). This,the Pûrvapakshin maintains,
constitutes a difference between the objects of meditation, and hence
between the meditations themselves.--This view the Sûtra sets aside 'on
account of non-difference of everything, those elsewhere.' There is no
difference of meditation. Those qualities, viz. being the richest, and
so on, are to be meditated upon in the other place also, viz. in the
meditation on Prâ*n*a of the Kaushîtakins; 'since there is
non-difference of everything,' i.e. since the text of the Kaushîtakins
also exhibits the very same method, in all its details, for proving what
it is undertaken to prove, viz. that Prâ*n*a is the oldest and best. And
for that proof it is required that Prâ*n*a should be viewed as
possessing also the quality of being the richest, and so on, and these
qualities therefore have to be comprised in the meditation of the
Kaushîtakins also. Hence there is no difference of meditation.--Here
terminates the adhikara*n*a of 'non-difference of everything.'

In the same way as the meditation on Prâ*n*a as the

<span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

oldest and best cannot be accomplished without Prâ*n*a being also
meditated upon as the richest, and so on. and as hence these latter
qualities have to be comprised in the meditation on Prâ*n*a of the
Kaushîtakins, although they are not expressly mentioned there; thus
those qualities of Brahman also, without which the meditation on Brahman
cannot be accomplished, must be included in all meditations on
Brahman--this is the point to be proved next.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Bliss and other qualities, as belonging to the subject of the
qualities](sbe48395)
