[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48384)  [Next](sbe48386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

# THIRD PÂDA.

1\. What is understood from all the Vedânta-texts (is one), on account
of the non-difference of injunction and the rest.

The Sûtras have stated whatever has to be stated to the end of rousing
the desire of meditation-concluding with the fact that Brahman bestows
rewards. Next the question is introduced whether the vidyâs (i.e. the
different forms of meditation on Brahman which the Vedânta-texts enjoin)
are different or non-different, on the decision of which question it
will depend whether the qualities attributed to Brahman in those vidyâs
are to be comprised in one act of meditation or not.--The first
subordinate question arising here is whether one and the same
meditation--as e.g. the vidyâ of Vai*s*vânara--which is met with in the
text of several *s*âkhâs, constitutes one vidyâ or several.--The vidyâs
are separate, the Pûrvapakshin maintains; for the fact that the same
matter is, without difference, imparted for a second time, and moreover
stands under a different heading--both which circumstances necessarily
attend the text's being met with in different *s*âkhâs--proves the
difference of the two meditations. It is for this reason only that a
restrictive injunction, such as the one conveyed in the text, 'Let a man
tell this science of Brahman to those only who have performed the rite
of carrying fire on their head' (Mu. Up. III, 2, 10)--which restricts
the impaiting of knowledge to the Âtharva*n*ikas, to whom that rite is
peculiar--has any sense; for if the vidyâs were one, then the rite
mentioned, which is a part of the vidyâ, would be valid for the members
of other *s*âkhâs also, and then the restriction enjoined by the text
would have no meaning.--This view is set aside by the Sûtra, 'What is
understood from all the Vedânta-texts' is one and the same meditation,
'because there is non-difference of injunction and the rest.' By
injunction is meant the

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

injunction of special activities denoted by different verbal roots--such
as upâsîta 'he should meditate,' vidyât 'he should know.' The and the
rest' of the Sûtra is meant to comprise as additional reasons the
circumstances mentioned in the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras (II, 4, 9). Owing
to all these circumstances, non-difference of injunction and the rest,
the same vidyâ is recognised in other *s*âkhâs also. In the *Kh*âandogya
(V, 12, 2) as well as in the Vâ*g*asaneyaka we meet with one and the
same injunction (viz. 'He should meditate on Vai*s*vânara'). The form
(character, rûpa) of the meditations also is the same, for the form of a
cognition solely depends on its object; and the object is in both cases
the same, viz. Vai*s*vânara. The name of the two vidyâs also is the
same, viz. the knowledge of Vai*s*vânara. And both vidyâs are declared
to have the same result, viz. attaining to Brahman. All these reasons
establish the identity of vidyâs even in different *s*âkhâs.--The next
Sûtra refers to the reasons set forth for his view by the Pûrvapakshin
and refutes them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. If it be said that the vidyâs are not one on account of
difference...](sbe48386)
