[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48438)  [Next](sbe48440) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

55\. There is pre-eminence of plenitude, as in the case of the
sacrifice; for thus Scripture shows.

The sacred text (*Kh*. Up. V, 12 ff.) enjoins a meditation on
Vai*s*vânara, the object of which is the highest Self, as having for its
body the entire threefold world, and for its limbs the heavenly world,
the sun, the wind, and so on. The doubt here arises whether separate
meditations have to be performed on the highest Being in its separate
aspects, or in its aggregate as well as in its distributed aspect, or in
its aggregate aspect only.--In its separate aspects, the Pûrvapakshin
maintains; since at the outset a meditation of that kind is declared.
For on the *Ri*shis in succession telling A*s*vapati the objects of
their meditation, viz. the sky, the sun, and so on, A*s*vapati explains
to them that these meditations refer to the head, eye, and so on, of the
highest Being, and mentions for each of these meditations a special
fruit. And the concluding explanation 'he who worships Vai*s*vânara as a
span long, &c.,' is merely meant to gather up into one, as it were, the
preceding meditations on the parts of Vai*s*vânara.--Another
Pûrvapakshin holds that this very concluding passage enjoins a further
meditation on Vai*s*vânara in his collective aspect, in addition to the
previously enjoined meditations

<span id="page_678">p. 678</span>

on his limbs; for that passage states a separate result, 'he eats food
in all worlds,' &c. Nor does this destroy the unity of the whole
section. The case is analogous to that of the meditation on 'plenitude'
(bhûman; *Kh*. Up. VII, 23). There, in the beginning, separate
meditations are enjoined on name, and so on, with special results of
their own; and after that a meditation is enjoined on bhûman, with a
result of its own, 'He becomes a Self-ruler,' &c. The entire section
really refers to the meditation on bhûman; but all the same there are
admitted subordinate meditations on name, and so on, and a special
result for each.--These views are set aside by the Sûtra, 'There is
pre-eminence of plenitude,' i.e. there is reason to assume that
Vai*s*vânara in his fulness, i.e. in his collective aspect, is meant;
since we apprehend unity of the entire section. From the beginning of
the section it is manifest that what the *Ri*shis desire to know is the
Vai*s*ânara Self; it is that Self which A*s*vapati expounds to them as
having the Universe for his body, and in agreement therewith the last
clause of his teaching intimates that the intuition of Brahman (which is
none other than the Vai*s*vânara Self)--which is there characterised as
the food of all worlds, all beings, all Selfs--is the fruit of the
meditation on Vai*s*vânara. This summing up proves the whole section to
deal with the same subject. And on the basis of this knowledge we
determine that what the text says as to meditations on the separate
members of the Vai*s*ânara Self and their special results is merely of
the nature of explanatory comment (anuvâda) on parts of the meditation
on the collective Self.--This decision is arrived at as in the case of
the sacrifice. For to the injunction of certain sacrifices--such as 'Let
a man, on the birth of a son, offer a cake on twelve potsherds to
Vai*s*vânara'--the text similarly adds remarks on parts of the oblation,
'there is an oblation on eight potsherds,' and so on.--The meditation
therefore has to be performed on the entire Vai*s*vânara Self only, not
on its parts. This, moreover, Scripture itself intimates, in so far,
namely, as declaring the evil consequences of meditation on parts of the
Self only, 'your head would have

<span id="page_679">p. 679</span>

fallen off if you had not come to me'; 'you would have become blind,'
and so on. This also shows that the reference to the text enjoining
meditations on name, &c., proves nothing as to our passage. For there
the text says nothing as to disadvantages connected with those special
meditations; it only says that the meditation on plenitude (bhûman) has
a more excellent result. The section, therefore, although really
concerned with enjoining the meditation on the bhûman, at the same time
means to declare that the special meditations also are fruitful;
otherwise the meditation on the bhûman could not be recommended, for the
reason that it has a more excellent result than the preceding
meditations.--The conclusion, therefore, is that the text enjoins a
meditation on the collective Vai*s*vânara Self only.--Here terminates
the adhikara*n*a of 'the pre-eminence of plenitude.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56. The meditations are separate, on account of the difference of
words, and so on](sbe48440)
