[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe48092)  [Next](sbe48094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

27\. Should it be said that it is not so, on account of the word, &c.,
and on account of the abiding within; we say, no; on account of
meditation being taught thus, on account of impossibility; and because
they read of him as person.

An objection is raised. Vai*s*vânara cannot be ascertained to be the
highest Self, because, on the account of the text and of the abiding
within, we can understand by the Vai*s*vânara in our text the intestinal
fire also. The text to which we refer occurs in the Vai*s*vânara-vidyâ
of the Vâ*g*asaneyins, 'This one is the Agni Vai*s*vânara,' where the
two words 'Agni' and 'Vai*s*vânara' are exhibited in

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

co-ordination. And in the section under discussion the passage, 'the
heart is the Gârhapatya fire, the mind the Anvâhârya-pa*k*ana fire, the
mouth the Âhavanîya fire' (*Kh*. Up. V, 18, 2), represents the
Vai*s*vânara in so far as abiding within the heart and so on as
constituting the triad of sacred fires. Moreover the text, 'The first
food which a man may take is in the place of Soma. And he who offers
that first oblation should offer it to Prâ*n*a' (V, 19, 1), intimates
that Vai*s*vânara is the abode of the offering to Prâ*n*a. In the same
way the Vâ*g*asaneyins declare that Vai*s*vânara abides within man, viz.
in the passage 'He who knows this Agni Vai*s*vânara shaped like a man
abiding within man.' As thus Vai*s*vânara appears in co-ordination with
the word 'Agni,' is represented as the triad of sacred fires, is said to
be the abode of the oblation to Breath, and to abide within man, he must
be viewed as the intestinal fire, and it is therefore not true that he
can be identified with the highest Self only.

This objection is set aside by the Sûtra. It is not so 'on account of
meditation (on the highest Self) being taught thus,' i.e. as the text
means to teach that the highest Brahman which, in the manner described
before, has the three worlds for its body should be meditated upon as
qualified by the intestinal fire which (like other beings) constitutes
Brahman's body. For the word 'Agni' denotes not only the intestinal
fire, but also the highest Self in so far as qualified by the intestinal
fire.--But how is this to be known?--'On account of impossibility;' i.e.
because it is impossible that the mere intestinal fire should have the
three worlds for its body. The true state of the case therefore is that
the word Agni, which is understood to denote the intestinal fire, when
appearing in co-ordination with the term Vai*s*vânara represented as
having the three worlds for his body, denotes (not the intestinal fire,
but) the highest Self as qualified by that fire viewed as forming the
body of the Self. Thus the Lord also says, 'As Vai*s*vânara fire I abide
in the body of living creatures and, being assisted by breath inspired
and expired, digest the fourfold food' (Bha Gî. XIV, 15). 'As
Vai*s*vânara fire' here

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

means 'embodied in the intestinal fire.'--The *Kh*ândogya text under
discussion enjoins meditation on the highest Self embodied in the
Vai*s*vânara fire.--Moreover the Vâ*g*asaneyins read of him, viz. the
Vai*s*vânara, as man or person, viz. in the passage 'That Agni
Vai*s*vânara is the person' (Sa. Brâ. X, 6, 1, 11). The intestinal fire
by itself cannot be called a person; unconditioned personality belongs
to the highest Self only. Compare 'the thousand-headed person' (*Ri*.
Sa*m*h.), and 'the Person is all this' (*S*ve. Up. III, 15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. For the same reasons not the divinity and the
element](sbe48094)
