[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spc08)  [Next](spc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sacred Places in China*, by Carl F. Kupfer, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### Lung-Hu Shan—The Dragon-Tiger Mountain.

<span class="smallcaps">Wherever</span> in China this mountain is
mentioned, whether in *Kiang-si* or in the most distant province, every
one knows what it stands for. Just as much as Rome is known to all
Catholics to be the home of the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church, so
all Chinese know that the Pope of the Taoist Religion has his residence
here. It was to this mountain retreat that *Chang Taoling*, the first
Pope of the Taoist Religion, was directed in the first century of the
Christian era. He had retired into seclusion in the mountains of Western
China, devoting himself wholly to meditation and the study of alchemy.
From the hands of *Laotze*, the founder of the Taoist Religion, who had
lived six hundred years before him, he supernaturally received a mystic
treatise by which he was enabled to compound the elixir of life. When
manipulating this elixir of the dragon and tiger he met a spirit who
said to him, "In the *Pesung* Mountain is a stone house where the
writings of the Three Emperors and a liturgical book may be found. By
getting these you can ascend to heaven, if you pass through the
discipline which they enjoin." He came. He dug and found them. By means
of these he was instructed how to discipline himself for a thousand
days, and was then able to leave his body and walk among the stars and
fight with the king of demons, divide mountains and seas, and command
storm and thunder to obey him. All the demons fled before him, leaving
not a trace of their retreating footsteps. On account of the prodigious
slaughter of demons by this hero, various divinities came with eager
haste to acknowledge their faults.

The *Pesung* Mountain is a harp-shaped section of the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

range that runs from northeast to southwest, separating the *Kiangsi*
province from *Fukien*. Between this mountain and *Shan Sing Kung*, the
Pope's resident town, a river as clear as crystal is clamoring for the
*Poyang* Lake, where its pure water is soon tainted with the impurities
of that body.

The latter years of the mystic earthly experience of *Chang Taoling*
were spent on the [Dragon](errata.htm#4)-Tiger Mountains, and it was
there, where at the age of 123 years, after having compounded and
swallowed the grand elixir, that he had gained power to ascend to heaven
to enjoy, the bliss of immortality.

Six hundred years before this (B.C. 604) *Laotsze*, the founder of the
Taoist Religion, was born in the province of Honan. *Lao Tsze* means Old
Boy, and doubtless was given him because at his birth his face is said
to have been wrinkled and his hair gray like an aged man of seventy.
Very little is known of his early life. He preferred solitude and quiet,
and early withdrew from the busy haunts of man. When Confucius was quite
a young man and in search of the *Tao*—the word—he came to the aged
philosopher and said, "I have sought for the *Tao* for twenty years."
*Laotsze* replied, "If the *Tao* could be offered to men, there is no
one who would not be willing to offer it to his prince; if it could be
presented to men, everybody would like to present it to his parents; if
it could be announced to men, each man would gladly announce it to his
brothers; if it could be handed down to men, who would not wish to
transmit it to his children? Why then can you not obtain it h This is
the reason. You are incapable of giving it a resting place in your
heart." The young philosopher may not have relished or fully understood
the instruction he received, for he came back to his disciples and said,
"To-day I have seen *Laotsze*, and I can only compare him with the
Dragon." Even to us he seems mysterious as the mystical animal; but we
can not read the sayings of this pagan philosopher without feeling that
there is a vital, restful

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span id="img_09400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LUNG HU SHAN—THE
DRAGON-TIGER MOUNTAIN.](tn/09400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09400.jpg)  
LUNG HU SHAN—THE DRAGON-TIGER MOUNTAIN.  
</span>

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="img_09500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CONTINUATION OF
LUNG HU SHAN.](tn/09500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09500.jpg)  
CONTINUATION OF LUNG HU SHAN.  
</span>

<span class="small">Here is where *Chang Taoling*, at the age of one
hundred and twenty-three, ascended to the heavens to enjoy the bliss of
immortality, and in this temple is his image in life size, where all the
popes have worshiped.</span>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

strength and wonderful spirit manifested here that does not exist in
other Chinese literature. Mystical and apt spiritual simplicity and
universal wisdom is here expressed. It seems to come from a heart that
has been touched by divine revelation. A few quotations from his
wonderful work, the *Tao Teh King*, convinces one that he must have been
not only a great and good man, but an inspired man. He doubtless had
some conception of Him who was promised by the Prophets. Note these
quotations, and compare them with what the beloved disciple of Christ
said of the Logos: "Its name may be named, but it is not an ordinary
name. Its nameless period preceded the birth of the universe. Having a
name it is the mother of all things. The *Tao* is full, yet it operates
as though not self-elated. In its origin it is, as it were, the ancestor
of all things. I know not whose offspring it is. Its form existed before
God was (by the term "God," as used in Chinese literature, is understood
the First Ruler, or the Highest Ruler). It is mysterious, recondite, and
penetrating. Pellucid as a spreading ocean, it yet has the semblance of
permanence. There was something formed from chaos which came into being
before heaven and earth. Silent and boundless it stands alone, and never
changes. It pervades everything, and may be called the mother of the
universe. I know not its name, but its designation is *Tao*. Heaven is
*Tao*, and *Tao* survives the death of him who is the embodiment of it,
living on unharmed forever. The *Tao* of heaven never strives, yet
excells in victory. The *Tao* of heaven resembles a drawn bow. It brings
down the high and exalts the lowly; it takes from those who have
superfluity, and gives to those who have not enough. The great *Tao* is
all-pervasive; it may be seen on the right and on the left. All things
depend upon it and are produced by it; it denies itself to none. With
tenderness it nourishes all things, yet claims no lordship over them."

The philosopher *Huai Nantsze*, an adherent of Lao Tsz's

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span id="img_09700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHANG TIENSZ LXII,
POPE OF THE TAOIST RELIGION, AND FAMILY.](tn/09700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09700.jpg)  
CHANG TIENSZ LXII, POPE OF THE TAOIST RELIGION, AND FAMILY.  
</span>

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

philosophy, commenting on the *Tao*, described it thus: "*Tao* is that
which covers heaven and supports earth; its height can not be measured,
nor its depth fathomed; it enfolds the universe in its embrace. The
*Tao* reaches upward to heaven and touches the earth beneath; it holds
together the universe and the ages, and supplies the three luminaries
with light. It is by the *Tao* that mountains are high and abysses deep;
that beasts walk and birds fly; that the sun and moon are bright and the
stars revealed in their courses; that the unicorn roams about and the
phoenix hovers in the air. *Tao* is the beginning and end of the visible
creation. *Tao*, in its sublimest aspect, regards itself as the author
of creation, the power which completes, transforms, and gives all things
their shape. All-pervading and everywhere revolving, yet can not be
sought out; subtle and impalpable, it yet can not be overlooked. If it
be piled up it will not be high; if it be added to it will not increase;
if it be deducted from it will not diminish. Shadowy and indistinct, it
has no form. Indistinct and shadowy, its resources have no limit. Hidden
and obscure, it reinforces all things out of formlessness. Penetrating
and permeating everywhere, it never acts in vain. Utterly non-existent,
*Tao* is yet ever ready to respond to those who seek it."

Let one more quotation of *Laotsze* suffice. It is his conception of the
ideal man, and I would pronounce it the brightest gem in pagan
philosophy. "The ideal man recompenses injury with kindness." This is
equal to the crowning glory of Christianity, return of good for evil.

That this great wizard chose this locality in those early days, and all
succeeding popes dwelt here, is not surprising. The scenery is
prodigiously picturesque, indeed, it is enchanting. Doubtless those
children of nature in their imagination saw the mountains leaping like
lambs. I have traveled in many lands, and have seen beautiful natural
scenery, but nowhere have I ever seen a place where nature has been so
lavish in bestowing her charms than in this mountain retreat. Nature

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

truly has done her part well. But what contrast do we find when we
inspect the works of man!

At the foot of the Dragon-Tiger Mountain, on the southeastern slope
stands a temple, at the place where *Chang Tao-ling* is supposed to have
ascended the throne on high. This temple, at one time doubtless a most
costly structure, and though housing the image of such an honored
personage and the place where the chief of a great world religion
worships, is in a most dilapidated condition, the rendezvous of beggars
and bats, in charge of a lonely old woman whose husband had died a year
before, but in his coffin was yet standing in her living room. A few
copper cash soon relaxed her stern attitude, and she freely permitted us
to visit the sacred shrine with the one reserve that we do not
photograph the altar and the image, lest we carry away his spirit. No
persuasion or offer of money would induce her to grant us that liberty.

To *Chang Taoling* is attributed the honor of having invented the charms
which in all parts of China are seen posted on door lintels, and are
believed to drive away demons and all invisible malevolent beings. A
proof of the dominating idea of popular Taoism throughout the land.

But the most renowned temple is about five miles northeast of this
mountain, near to *Shan-sing-kung*, the town where the pope has his
palace. Here, in a beautiful amphitheater-shaped valley, is a large
group of temples. In these temple grounds are numerous stone tablets
bearing inscriptions of ancient writers. These descriptions, however,
are so defaced by the tooth of time that the deciphering of them is
almost impossible. The center of this group is the Chief Hall,
containing a colossal image of *Yü Hwang-ti*—the Pearly Emperor. He is
emperor of all immortals. All the power of heaven and earth are supposed
to be in his hands. Nothing is said of the time when he was on earth.
His birthday and heaven's birthday are the same. To the Taoist worshiper
he is the Supreme Ruler of the Universe. Dethrone him and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Taoist image
worship is demolished. To him and before his altar all the popes of the
Taoist religion have prostrated and done homage.

In February, 1910, it was my privilege to visit this modern Wizard
*Chang Tientsze*, the Heavenly teacher, who is a direct descendant of
*Chang Taoling*, and who can boast of an unbroken lineage of sixty-two
generations. To reach this mountain retreat the *Poyang* Lake had to be
crossed as far as *Yao Chou-foo*, a distance of about ninety miles. This
was done in a little steam yacht. One of our theological students served
me as photographer. At *Hu Keo*, the Mouth of the Lake, an official
joined us in our little compartment. We soon became acquainted with each
other. When he had learned that we came from William Nast College, he
became interested in our object of traveling at this unfriendly season.
I told him because it was New Year's vacation, and that I had long since
had a desire to see the Pope of the Taoist Religion, the man who is
believed to have such magical power to exorcise demons and malevolent
spirits. A forced smile flit across his stoical face when he replied,
"In former years we did believe that he could do this, but very few
people believe this now." "However," he continued after a little
thought, "there is something remarkably strange about this man; he can
control the lightning and thunder." Strange combination of doubt and
faith. The only explanation seems that the educated official, as a
Confucianist, is a materialist, and as such does not want to admit
belief in the absurd popular idea of evil spirits wandering through the
air disturbing the public tranquillity, but does not hesitate to admit
his belief in the power of nature and the Pope's ability to subdue and
control it. His unbelief in the one and his belief in the other did not,
however, lessen my curiosity to meet the great Magician, the Chief of
one of the great religions of the world. Upon my arrival after four days
of traveling, on the evening before the last day of the year, I sent my
card to the Papal Residence,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TEMPLE OF THE
PEARLY EMPEROR,&lt;br&gt; To whom is entrusted the superintendency of
the world.](tn/10100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10100.jpg)  
TEMPLE OF THE PEARLY EMPEROR,  
To whom is entrusted the superintendency of the world.  
</span>

<span id="img_10101"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![STONE TABLETS WITH
INSCRIPTIONS OF ANCIENT TIMES.](tn/10101.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10101.jpg)  
STONE TABLETS WITH INSCRIPTIONS OF ANCIENT TIMES.  
</span>

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and asked for an interview the next day. Inquiry was made as to the
purpose of my visit and my official relation. I replied that I was
holding no official relation to my country, and had no official
business, but was a humble missionary and had come from a far country,
and it being the last day of the year I wished to see the great man and
offer him my New Year's congratulations. That seemed quite sufficient
reason to admit a stranger from a strange land, and arrangements were
made for the interview on the next morning. In due time I made my
appearance, when the center doors, dividing the departments, were thrown
open wide, the doorkeeper walking ahead holding my card in his
outstretched hand. Having passed through four divisions we reached the
official palace. Here we were ushered into a well-furnished reception
room where, in a few moments, his excellency appeared. He is a tall,
handsome middle-aged man, was dressed in the ordinary costume of a
high-class Chinese scholar, and most pleasant and congenial;
well-informed in all things that were of vital interest to the Asiatic
people; by no means a recluse. He is the husband of two wives, and
father of one daughter and three sons. By all the Taoist priests
throughout the land he is recognized as the Commander-in-chief of the
Taoist religion, wielding an immense spiritual power in the entire
Empire. His name is on every lip, and he is believed to be the
vicegerent on earth of the Pearly Emperor in heaven, and as such he has
power to expel demons from haunted houses. To accomplish this he wields
the sword that is said to have come down to him as a priceless heirloom
from his ancestors of the *Han* Dynasty. All demons fear this sword, and
when the great magician wields it he can catch them and put them into
jars which he seals with a charm. It is said that somewhere on the
Dragon-Tiger Mountain there are many rows of such jars, holding
incarcerated evil spirits. Personally I did not find these jars. The
efficacy of a charm is supposed to be greatly increased by the magical
gift of the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span id="img_10300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A BAMBOO GROVE
NEAR CHANG TAOLING'S TEMPLE.&lt;br&gt; ](tn/10300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10300.jpg)  
A BAMBOO GROVE NEAR CHANG TAOLING'S TEMPLE.  
  
</span>

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

pope from whom it is obtained, hence to secure his service is very
expensive. His title *Chen-ren*, that is "the, ideal," "the true," "the
perfect man," means a man who has the power to rule over himself and
over nature. Being the chief official on earth representing the Pearly
Emperor in heaven, he has the privilege to address memorials to him. His
dwelling is denominated as the *Chen-ren-foo*. The ideal man's home.

Having learned that I was a missionary, he seemed the more delighted to
see me. In speaking of our Church, he made a rather ambiguous remark. "I
do not see," said he, "why your people and our people should not live
together in pleasant harmony, for our aim is the same; we are working
for the same end." At the time I could not understand his remark, and
being his guest I did not pretend to question his well-meant assertion
of our common aim in life. When I returned to the Home of the China
Inland Mission, where a native Christian woman was doing effective
evangelistic work, I told her what *Chang Tientsze* had said about our
relation to each other. She immediately understood what influenced him
to make this remark, and told me the following story:

A few months before a rich Cantonese woman, accompanied by a great
retinue, came to the Pope for treatment. She was ailing of an incurable
malady, supposed to be demon possession. The Pope soon took in the
situation, and pronounced her case very difficult of treatment. So
serious did he claim it to be, that nothing less than Tls. 3,000, which
is equal to $1,100 United States currency, would suffice to undertake
the cure. When the bargain was concluded, the treatment was begun. In
the meantime a poor woman came to be treated who was suffering of
insomnia. When the Pope heard of her presence he sent word that he was
too busily engaged in fulfilling a contract with another person, he had
no time to spare. The poor woman, however, had entered the first door
and found shelter under a little roof by the side wall. The Christian
Evangelist woman, having heard of the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

pitiable condition of the poor woman, came to see her, but being known
as an evangelist worker, was not permitted to enter there and do that
kind of work. The poor woman receiving no help here under the roof of
the Perfect Man, went to the Temple where the Pearly Emperor had his
shrine. Having received no mercy from the Vicegerent, she hoped to move
the compassion of the Ruler of Heaven himself. The, evangelist woman
also found her there and saw her kneeling before the great image
worshiping. Approaching her with the tenderness of a mother, she said to
her, "What is your trouble, and why are you here in agony?" The poor
woman told the sad story of her life, her ailment, and her
disappointment at the Heavenly Teacher's palace. The evangelist woman
said, "Whatever you may ask of this renowned image, be assured you ask
in vain; it is only wood as other wood, and can not help you. We worship
the true God, the Creator of all, and His Son Christ our 'Savior, the
Redeemer of all. Believe in Him and you shall be saved. I know not your
ailment, but He is mighty to save and present everywhere." The woman
remained in the temple and began to pray to the unknown God, of whom she
had heard for the first time. That night she slept like a child, the
first sleep she had had for years, sleeplessness having been her
ailment. The following day the evangelist again went to the temple and
found the woman calm and at rest. She invited her to the chapel, where
she heard more of the Savior who had saved her and given her rest. She
was healed. The Pope heard of this, and was not a little discomfited,
thinking the evangelist woman had learned his art of exorcising the evil
spirits, and thus healed the woman who in vain appealed to him for help
because she had brought him no earthly goods. Hence he inferred that our
work and his must be the same. Now I understood his remarks.

In the conversation I told him of our educational work at William Nast
College in Kiukiang, and the advantage of

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

such a learning to the young men of China. When he heard that
non-adherents to the Christian religion were admitted, he concluded that
one of his boys must have a Western learning. Of course we can hardly
expect that the eldest son would be given this privilege, for he will be
the future Pope, and a Taoist Pope with a Christian education would be
like a combination of darkness and light. However, we shall consider it
as a divine guidance if we succeed in getting either of the younger
boys. Before we left the town a distant relative decided to go with us
as a student to the college. Thus a little beginning is made to break
into this stronghold of spiritual darkness. A little light ignited here
may work wonders to a benighted people.

According to Oriental custom, he returned my call on the following day.
Upon this occasion he was clad in the garment of a high official of
State. His Canonical robes, made of the finest gold and silver
embroidery, are only worn when engaged in the functions of his official
duties as the great Magician.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusions](spc10)
