[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spc00)  [Next](spc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sacred Places in China*, by Carl F. Kupfer, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> chief reason for producing this
little volume is to give to the thoughtful reader of China and the
Chinese a clearer conception of the readiness of the people to accept,
with full credence, such whimsical and mythological stories as are here
related, of their susceptibility of spiritual influences, and of the
decay of intellectual vigor among the Buddhist and Taoist priests, as
the inevitable result of monasticism. The intellectual vigor of the
Chinese is found among the Confucianists, who hold the controlling power
in the government, while Buddhism and Taoism seem past any hope of
resurrection to real life. They have had their age of faith. But no one
need to doubt the spiritual susceptibility, nor despair of the
intellectual progress of all classes. Christianity fosters mental growth
and science stimulates thought and is eminently fitted to drive out all
fear and superstition. Christian education is not failing in
accomplishing this. The response is abundantly gratifying. However, the
struggle with Buddhism and Taoism is not yet ended, it has scarcely
begun.

The reader finds himself here in the midst of the Asiatic world of
nearly two thousand years ago, when Buddhist priests had entered
actively upon their pilgrim life. To this day all foot-worn mountain
paths lead to some monastery or sacred shrine.

The information recorded in this little volume is the fruit of hard
labor. The writer traveled to distant mountains in the Mid-China hot
summer months, visiting monasteries, and living with monks in the hope
of gaining some knowledge of their inner life and hope of the future.
Most of this information was obtained verbally, some through Chinese
reading.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](spc02)
