[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spc05)  [Next](spc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sacred Places in China*, by Carl F. Kupfer, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="img_map"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP OF
POOT'OO.](tn/map.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map.jpg)  
MAP OF POOT'OO.  
</span>

### Poot’oo: China's Sacred Island.

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> islet is one of the Chusan
Archipelago, situated in the 30° North latitude and 122° 25´ East
longitude. This archipelago includes over one hundred islands and takes
its name from Chusan, the longest of the group, which is over twenty
miles long and six to ten miles wide. Poot’oo lies a little over one
mile east of the Whang Head, is irregular and curiously shaped, about
four miles long and very narrow at some places. The ceaseless march of
the ocean tide has washed away all arable soil until the bare granite
rocks along the shore resisted their incursion, except in a few small
sheltered bays, where sandy beaches offer delightful sea bathing. Above
the jaggy beach, however, enough soil remains, covering the coarse
granite, to produce a rich foliage to the summit. The view from Lookout
House, the highest point, about 970 feet above the sea-level, athwart
the ridges and down the valleys upon the bestudded main, is highly
picturesque and extremely delightful.

On approaching the island the visitor is landed at the southern point
upon a well-built stone jetty, from which a broad, well-paved road leads
to the three main temples. The front is called Universal Salvation
Temple. The rear is called Rain-Producing Temple, and there is another
called Wisdom's Salvation Temple. Smaller roads branch off in all
directions, leading to grottoes, temples, and shrines of all sizes and
shapes. As of ancient Judah, it can indeed be said that "in the high
places and on the hills and under every green tree" the gods are
worshiped, and even in the rocks images are hewn. These walks are lined
with large, shady trees, and aromatic shrubs diffuse the air with a
pleasant fragrance.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

The numerous inscriptions chiseled into rocks along the pathways are an
evidence that the whole island is devoted to the propagation of the
doctrine of the Goddess of Mercy. Here are a few specimens:

"With a reverent heart take a look. The Law of Buddha has sacred
affinity. The Goddess regards all men with kindness. Even the stupid
stones bow their heads. The Buddhist kingdom together ascends. Ascend
and enter the region of formlessness. Ascend and behold the
Bodhi—supreme wisdom. Illusory light rises in the East."

On a stone tablet set on the top of a hill are the following
inscriptions:

"There is a sacred island on the sea. Over the sea there is a Buddhist
kingdom. I put my trust in Amida Buddha. There is another world."

On the opposite side of the tablet is the following:

"Only virtue is original. There is also Wisdom's Salvation Temple. With
reverence be cautious not to kill living creatures. Do not pour hot
water upon the ground, lest living creatures be injured, and when
walking, be careful not to step on anything living. Such is the heart of
the Great Conveyance and of Supreme Wisdom, necessary to the
enlightenment of Buddha. With uprightness of heart cultivate the body.
Be most careful to guard against avariciousness. If these worldly
desires are not entirely exhausted the sacred fruit is not complete. Let
all under heaven give reverence, and ascend to the other shore. Read
good books and speak good words. Do good deeds and be good men. Imitate
good examples and retain a good heart. Read the Buddhist ritual and
worship Buddha. Abstain from meat with a reverent purpose, and do good
in abundance."

In a conspicuous place the following exhortation is inscribed:

"In a Buddhist Classic there is a law in which it is said, 'kill not.'
In explanation of this observe: above there are

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span id="img_04500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE HARBOR AT HIGH
TIDE.](tn/04500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04500.jpg)  
THE HARBOR AT HIGH TIDE.  
</span>

<span id="img_04501"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LANDING OF THE
PILGRIMS.](tn/04501.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04501.jpg)  
LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.  
</span>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

all kinds of gods, holy men, teachers, monks, and parents; below there
are four footed beasts, birds, wriggling worms, and small insects. All
that has life should not intentionally be killed. In this classic it is
also said: \`The winter months breed lice, take them and put them into a
bamboo joint, keep them warm with cotton, and give them oily food to eat
lest they might freeze or starve.' Such is the doctrine of the Goddess
of Mercy."

Following the path that leads eastward along the shore until the
northeastern point is reached, a place of unusual interest is seen,
called the *Fan Yin Tung* (Buddhist Echo Cave). In an almost
perpendicular rock, over one hundred feet high, is a wide cleft
extending back into the rock so far that the end can not be seen from
the temple bridge built across the chasm about midway. When the waves
dash. against the rocks at the bottom of this cliff, and the sun shines
upon the spray and mist rising up into the clefted rock, a natural
phenomenon appears, the colors similar to those produced by the sun's
rays falling upon raindrops are seen. The devout Buddhists firmly
believe that this natural appearance is a living Buddha. A priest said
to us, "Only believers can see him." When visiting this place, two
elderly women were worshiping upon this temple bridge. After making
their prostrations facing the cleft, the old Taoist recluse in charge of
this shrine directed their attention to the place where the Buddha would
appear. They looked, and they looked, until nature was in their favor,
and the sun broke through the clouds, and they saw their heart's
desire—the Living Buddha —a fraction of the rainbow.

Because of this belief, in the early days of Buddhism, many devout
believers cast themselves down over this precipice in the hope of thus
attaining to Buddhahood. A magistrate of *Ting-hai*, hearing of this,
wrote a proclamation in which he exhorted the people not to act so
foolishly. He assured them that all who cast [themselves](errata.htm#2)
down over this precipice

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="img_04700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![KIOSK CONTAINING
STONE TABLETS WITH INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY KANG HSI.](tn/04700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04700.jpg)  
KIOSK CONTAINING STONE TABLETS WITH INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY KANG HSI.  
</span>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

would not be protected by the goddess, and would obtain no benefit; but
the people did as before. Then he wrote a book and called the attention
of the public to the moral nature of this abuse. "They who injure their
bodies," said he, "injure their parents, and can not be considered
filial. Think of the harm to yourselves in throwing your bodies among
those rocks, where they will be dashed in pieces by the waves and eaten
by the fish. And think of your families, your fathers and mothers, your
wives and children. You came here to worship the Goddess of Mercy, to
obtain blessings for your home, and word comes that you have destroyed
yourselves. What grief! What sorrow! The goddess does not want such
offerings; she herself will be distressed. If any want to sacrifice
their lives, let them do so upon the altar of their country, and all
will know that some good has come to the world through their devotion.
As your official, I consider it my duty thus to exhort you." This book
had its desired effect.

Since then the government of this island has become independent of civil
jurisdiction, being ruled by the abbots of the chief monasteries. The
abbot of the Rear Temple seems to possess more than ordinary business
ability, judging from the clean and orderly condition of this temple. He
is said to be an ex-compradore of Ningpo and Shanghai. Their mode of
government is much the same as the civil government. A priest at
*Futing-san* told us that even the power of administering capital
punishment was in their hands, but the island being the home of
supernatural beings and so many gods spreading spiritual light,
corporeal punishment was seldom required. This priest had an exalted
opinion of the deep spiritual enlightenment of their fraternity. When he
was asked whether the older priests admonished and exhorted the younger,
he indignantly replied: "How can we be exhorted when we have once
comprehended the doctrine!"

The next point of interest was the many miraculous legends told and
believed by the people. The most of them

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

have the coloring of historical authenticity, giving names and dates,
but they lack in credibility. The oldest reach back as far as the T’ang
Dynasty. We can only give a few:

The Emperor *Tai Ho*, who reigned near the middle of the ninth century,
827–836, was said to be passionately fond of *holi*, a species of clam.
So the people of these isles yearly sent him all they could gather, even
greatly overtaxing themselves for their Emperor. One day, as he was
eating of his favorite dish, he found one with a hard shell which he
could not open. He cleaved it with a knife and found within an image of
the Goddess of Mercy. When he saw this he was frightened, and commanded
that the image be incased in a sandalwood casket, overlaid with gold,
and placed in the Imperial palace. Then he asked a priest named Wei Chen
what this meant. The priest replied: "The goddess desires to open thy
heart that thou mayest be temperate in all thy desires." Whereupon the
Emperor no longer pressed the people to send him clams, and issued a
proclamation that an image of the goddess should be placed in every
temple.

Another story is told of the same period, that a priest burned his
fingers to show his zeal for the goddess. When his fingers were almost
burned off, she appeared to him and comforted him for his faith and
devotion.

During the Posterior Liang Dynasty, in the reign of *Chen Ming*, 915, a
Japanese priest named *Hui Ngo* brought an image of the goddess from
*Wutai*, and was going with it to his home in Japan. When his boat came
into the sea of the water lilies, near Poot’oo, it was in danger of
being wrecked. So the priest prayed to her and said: "If it is thy
pleasure to go with me to my country, I am willing to go with thee
wheresoever thou wilt have me to go." After this the boat smoothly
glided on its way, and soon came to the landing in front of the *Chao
Yin Tung*, the Tidal Echo Cave. Below the cave lived a man named
*Chang*, who gave his own house to the priest for a temple, and the
temple was named "The Unwilling

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

to Depart Goddess of Mercy Temple." It is not now in existence.

In the *Sung* Dynasty, the Emperor *Yüan Fêng*, in the third year of his
reign, 1081, sent a minister named Wang *Shun-fung* to Corea. On his way
he encountered a terrific storm, and a large sea monster came to
overthrow his boat. Terrified he prayed; as he was looking intently
toward the cave in the distant island he saw the goddess coming out of
the cave, dressed in gold apparel and adorned with rich jewels.
Immediately the monster left him and the sea was calm. He returned in
peace and informed the Emperor of his experience, who ordered the place
to be called the "Precious Declivity."

In the *Sung* Dynasty, the Emperor *Ch’ung Ning*, in the year 1102, sent
two Ministers of State to Corea, named *Lin* and *Wu*. On their return
they passed through the Chusan Archipelago. When sailing among the
islands, a dense darkness came upon them, and for four days they did not
see either sun or moon. In their distress they remembered the goodness
of Goddess of Mercy on Poot’oo, and they worshiped, when suddenly the
surface of the sea was illuminated with a brilliant light, and they
proceeded rejoicingly on their way, and soon saw *Chao pao san*, the
Hill of Precious Beckoning, near *Ningpo*, from which they went to the
mainland.

During the Southern *Sung* Dynasty, the Emperor *Lung Hsin*, in the year
1163, dreamed that he was in Poot’oo, where he saw many wonderful signs
of the greatness of the Goddess of Mercy. After this he composed an ode
in which he praised her greatness, ascribing to her the ability of
accommodating all persons, and of being able to reveal all mysterious
doctrine. And he called upon all his subjects to do her homage, for no
other god was equal to her in wisdom and goodness, promising to all men
what they prayed for. "Her mystery man can never understand," he
exclaimed.

In connection with the image which refused to go with

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="img_05100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE SACRED CAMPHOR
TREE AND KIOSK CONTAINING INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY K’ANG
HSI.](tn/05100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05100.jpg)  
THE SACRED CAMPHOR TREE AND KIOSK CONTAINING INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY
K’ANG HSI.  
</span>

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Hui Ngo* to Japan
another story is told. This image was continually working miracles, so
that the people of other places and cities also desired her patronage.
Whereupon a certain priest came to Poot’oo, bought a good piece of
sandalwood, entered the temple and closed the door. He worked for one
month, carving a facsimile image and disappeared with his newly-carved
goddess. In the Southern *Sung* Dynasty, during the first year of the
Emperor *Chia Ting*, 1208, the image which the priest had carved lost a
finger. When the priest in whose temple the image was at this time saw
the mutilated limb he was terrified. In his agony, as he was looking
towards Poot’oo, behold a flower came floating along from the shore
below the cave, bearing the missing member. This image is now in *Chao
ying tung*.

In the Southern Sung Dynasty the Emperor *Hsien Shun*, during the year
1265, had a high official named *Fan*, who had diseased eyes. He sent
his son to Poot’oo to pray. The prince brought some water from a spring
below *Chao ying tung*, with which the statesman washed himself and was
cured. Again the Emperor sent his son to offer thanks to the goddess.
Having discharged his obligations, he was sitting by the cave when the
goddess revealed herself in a cloud of smoke in which she was veiled.
When the young prince came to another cave he saw the servants of the
goddess standing face to face by his side. They were dressed in white
garments with crowns upon their heads, both looking towards him as if
they wished to speak.

The following two legends are assigned to the *Yuan* Dynasty. In the
thirteenth year of the emperor *Chih Yüan*, A.D. 1264, a high official
was sent with a Lama priest to the Southern isles to restore order. Upon
his arrival he expected to see the goddess as others had seen her, and
when no vision appeared he was angry and shot an arrow into the cave and
took his departure. On his homeward way he was surrounded by water
lilies so dense that all progress was impossible. Fear

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="img_05300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![REST HOUSE OVER
THE POND AT THE CHIEN-SZ.&lt;br&gt; THE TIDAL WAVE
TEMPLE.](tn/05300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05300.jpg)  
REST HOUSE OVER THE POND AT THE CHIEN-SZ.  
THE TIDAL WAVE TEMPLE.  
</span>

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

fell upon the warrior, and he repented of his unbelief and hasty action.
Returning to the cave, the goddess revealed herself to him, dressed in
white and attended by her maid servant; whereupon he ordered a temple to
be built over the cave.

In the fifth year of the Emperor *Ta Tê*, A.D. 1302, a man of literary
distinction, named *Chu san fung san*, was sent to worship on the *Li*
Mountain. On his way hither he passed *Chao ying tong*, where the
goddess appeared to him, wearing a crown and necklace of precious
jewels, holding in one hand a willow branch and in the other a blue
glass cup. During her visible presence the cave was filled with light.

The *Ming* Dynasty was specially fruitful in producing interesting
legends. In the twenty-second year of the Emperor *Yung Loh*, A.D. 1424,
on the tenth month and nineteenth day, the goddess revealed herself in
the Tidal Echo Cave, dressed in white and attended by a dragon king and
his daughter, who were accompanied by a host of servants. From ten to
eleven o'clock they opened wide their eyes and made a sorrowful
countenance. By twelve o'clock their countenance had changed to purple
and they stood facing the wall. At six P. M. they were seen at the
Archer's Cave, and a god dressed in white, wearing a golden crown, was
seen sitting in the midst of the sun, and *Bodhisattoa* was standing
under the sun, while the *Lohans* were walking upon the sea. On the
following morning at six o'clock a god with a purple gold body was seen
in the cave.

In the second year of *Hsüan Tê*, A.D. 1428, and the fourth month, *Yen
Loh Wang*, the Ruler of Purgatory (the Chinese Pluto), with his two
daughters were seen in the cave.

In the year 1575, the second year of *Wan Li*, a priest, named *Pieh
Chuan*, was on his way upon the sea to Poot’oo, when he saw in the sky a
goddess dressed in white, flying westward, while another priest, named
*Tsai Fung*, saw her passing over Chêntu, the capital of Szechuan.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Six years after this a priest named *Ta Szyung* came to this island and
found the conditions very favorable. The desire of his heart was to
build a temple, and he came to the cave where the Goddess of Mercy
dwelt, and prayed, "If I should build a temple here, give me a sign." In
the evening of the same day he saw the tide bring in a large bamboo.
"There," said he, "is the sign," and he built a Tidal Wave Temple.

In the fourteenth year of the Emperor *Wan Li* there lived a Hangchow
priest at Poot’oo, whose mother was a most ardent worshiper of the gods.
She was also a vegetarian, and went about collecting subscriptions for
temples. One day as she was soliciting gifts an idol was given her. The
neck of this idol was of gold, and she gave it to her son, the priest.
When he saw that the neck was of gold, he coveted the valuable metal and
engaged a workman to peel it off; but no sooner had the workman begun
his sacrilegious work than he dropped dead. Soon after this the mother
came in her wanderings to Poot’oo. When the priestly son saw her he
began to curse and said, "The one who injured me has come," and he dealt
her a slap with the hand. After rushing over the hills in his madness he
cut his throat, but before dying he said to his colleagues, "Follow not
my example, for if you do, you will come to the world of misery."

Four years after this, on the tenth month, the priests of the island had
an altercation which they could not settle among themselves. So the case
was submitted to the magistrate at *Tinghai*. When he came to the island
to settle their trouble, his faith in Buddhism and the pretensions of
the priests was thoroughly shaken, and he took a set of the standard
Classics of the Lotus School and burned them and made the priests walk
over the ashes. That night he had a dream. In his dream he saw a sacred
man coming to him, who explained to him the meaning of the Buddhist
doctrine, and then said: "Heretofore you believed this doctrine, and now
you

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

persecute it; for this you can not obtain forgiveness. In the spiritual
world you will have to become a herdsman." Hearing this he was deeply
grieved, and he begged the idol to forgive him; also a priest named *Ta
Chih* prayed to the idol for him. Soon after this he had another dream,
when Buddha appeared to him and said, "Forgiveness may be granted if you
replace one hundred volumes for every volume you have destroyed." With
this the magistrate gladly complied and returned to his island city,
where he had one hundred sets of the Classics printed and sent to
Poot’oo.

The following are of the Ch'ing Dynasty. In the reign of the Emperor
*Shun Chih*, about the middle of the seventeenth century, there was a
pirate chief named *Nü Chin*, who consulted with a Japanese priest to
take to Japan all the Buddhist books which the Emperors of the Ming
Dynasty had presented to the monasteries of Poot’oo. When a priest named
*Chao Chung* came with several hundred priests and begged the chief not
to rob them of their books, he became angry and said, "If you want these
books, you will have to descend into the depth of the sea and confer
with the dragon king in his yamên," and forthwith he set sail for Japan.
When far out upon the ocean, behold, a great fish prevented his boat
from going any further. All skill was baffled, and he was in great
despair. He repented of his evil and returned, when a fair wind brought
him to Poot’oo in less than half a day. The priests all rejoiced and
replaced the books in their respective libraries.

In the third year of *K’ang Hi*, the first month and the first day, the
priests at Poot’oo saw a crescent-shaped white light resting with one
end upon the top of a temple and with the other upon a hill not far
distant. And they saw the goddess dressed in white walking from the
temple over this arch to the adjoining hilltop. From this they concluded
that evil would soon befall this temple. One year later foreigners came
to this island and took all the idols, banners and curtains, and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="img_05700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TA TIEN OF THE
CH'IEN SZ. THE MAIN HALL WITH ITS GLORIOUS GOLDEN TILE
ROOF.](tn/05700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05700.jpg)  
TA TIEN OF THE CH'IEN SZ. THE MAIN HALL WITH ITS GLORIOUS GOLDEN TILE
ROOF.  
</span>

<span id="img_05701"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE ECHO
CAVE.](tn/05701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05701.jpg)  
THE ECHO CAVE.  
</span>

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

carried them off to Japan, where they were sold for Tls. 200,000. On
their return to their native land their ship was destroyed by fire, and
they all perished in the sea. The same year pirates made a raid upon the
island, burning the temple and smelting the copper images. When they
came to the Rear Temple, the robbers, eager to plunder, pressed into the
inner parts, while the front was set on fire, and thus they perished by
their own hands.

Some years after this, in the Spring, when the tide was high, a fleet of
gunboats passed this island. The sailors went ashore and found the
temple all destroyed and the place clean, as if no one had lived there.
Upon their return they were pursued by numerous poisonous snakes, also
many vicious dogs came out of the jungle. Many of the sailors were
bitten and perished. All because the god had been ill-treated and the
temple destroyed. During the latter part of this year the *Ningpo*
admiral came to this island with his ship, and his soldiers found a
bronze image which they took with them. When they were on their way, the
ship became so heavy by the weight of the god that it began to sink. The
admiral, suspecting that something was wrong, searched the ship. When he
found the god he ordered him to be returned, and his ship regained its
buoyancy.

In the twenty-first year of *K’ang Hi* a literary man named *Kao-Sz-chi*
wrote the book of Rewards and Punishments, a kind of commentary of
modern Taoism. His wife embraced the Buddhist religion and also read the
*Chin Kang Chin*, the *Diamond Sütra*—the *Sutra of the Pradjna*, which
is able to crush diamonds. In the fourth month of this year she became
ill and knew herself that she could not recover from her illness. On the
twenty-seventh day she became unconscious, but soon revived, when she
repeated the Sutra and said: "If I can but re-establish a temple on
Poot’oo Isle, I shall live two years more." But on the fourth day of the
following month she died. Before her death her husband

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

requested of her a petition. "If in the Kingdom of Shades you really do
not suffer agony, I want you to let me know through a dream." She nodded
with her head and departed. On the second month and the seventh day of
the following year her eldest son had a dream. In this dream he met
seven or eight aged priests walking in a forest. Said one of them to
him: "Would you like to see your mother? If so, come into my sleeve, and
I will take you to Poot’oo." Immediately they were on the island, where
he saw many large temples, and in one, named the All Pervading Majestic
Temple, a number of priests were chanting prayers. One of their number
said: "If any one will repair this temple his merit will last through
all generations, and neither in this life nor in the life to come will
he be exposed to the turning of the wheel and subject to transmigration,
but in heaven and among men he will have all kinds of blessings." This
promise spoken, he saw his mother dressed in a yellow and pink coat and
a white skirt, folding her hands, as if in prayer. She said: "The
doctrine of the *Sûtra* fills all space, its grace reaches to all, and
all men under heaven should honor it. Through the help of Buddha I have
learned all this doctrine and have not forgotten a word. My heart is
fixed. I have attained supreme intelligence; in all eternity I can never
be changed. Tell this to your father, that he may not be concerned about
me." While thus dreaming, he heard the rushing of water, and awoke. When
the father heard this, he said: "This, my son, is honest, and would not
tell a lie, hence I will write what he has seen and heard in his dream
upon my garments." On the first day of the tenth month he burned these
clothes in sacrifice, that his departed wife might see his devotion.

In the year 1691, the twenty-ninth year of *K’ang Hsi*, the spirit of
miracles seems to have departed from Poot’oo. It was during this year
that the *Chentai* (General) of *Tinghai* came to the Buddhist Echo
Cave, where a god appeared to him. His face was red, eyebrows heavy,
beard long, eyes

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

white and brilliant, and his nose a mere white speck. He wore a crown
which shone like a flame of fire, and his garments were yellow and black
with a broad collar, all loose and flowing, with one arm bare. Upon his
head stood a little bare-footed *Bodhisattoa*. When the general made
prostrations before this goddess, he (the god) disappeared. The god
mentioned here is a metamorphosis of the Goddess of Mercy, which may be
male or female.

No description of Poot’oo could give satisfaction without trying to
describe at least one of the many temples. All sizes included, there are
doubtless nearly one hundred. We choose the Universal Salvation Temple,
also called the Front Temple from its location, being the first large
temple the pilgrims see when coming from the landing. Like most temples
in China, it faces the south, lying in a quiet valley, basking in the
noonday sun. All that nature and Chinese art have done has rendered it
quite an enchanting scene. The main buildings are covered with green and
yellow tiles, indicative of imperial distinction, and are kept in a
remarkably good condition. But an indisputable characteristic of the
Chinese is here also clearly seen. The buildings, which cost them
nothing, are very much neglected and in a dilapidated condition. The two
pavilions housing the Imperial Tablets of *K’ang Hsi*, standing in the
most prominent places of the two largest temples, are not only
neglected, but subjected to a most sacrilegious use, having practically
become the rendezvous of barbers and beggars, with all their belongings.
We would not attempt a minute description of this temple, but only give
an outline of its arrangement. We may say here that the Chinese seem to
have great liberty in arranging the position of certain gods. It would
be difficult to find two temples exactly alike.

Approaching this monastery, the visitors enter a shady avenue, where
stands a stone arch of considerable age. It much resembles the ordinary
arches which perpetuate the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="img_06100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TEMPLE OF
ATTRACTIONS.](tn/06100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06100.jpg)  
THE TEMPLE OF ATTRACTIONS.  
</span>

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

memory of virtuous widows, of whom China seems to have had many. Upon
this arch are Tibetan inscriptions, a conclusive proof that Lama priests
from Tibet or Mongolia have made pilgrimages to these shrines. Between
this arch and the temple ground proper is a large lotus pond, spanned by
a moss and ivy covered bridge. This pond teems with fish, and is the
receptacle of much that might seem distasteful to these sacred
vertebrate animals, but they leisurely seem to enjoy it. Beyond the
bridge stands the pavilion, which contains three tablets. The center
tablet is of a dark blue marble, fifteen feet high, five feet wide, and
one foot thick. It stands upon a pedestal two and a half feet high. The
inscription upon it was written by the Emperor *K’ang Hsi* in the
forty-third year of his reign, the eleventh month and the fifteenth day.
The following is a free translation:

"Studying the Buddhist religion, I learned that there were sacred
mountains. One of these is located in the Southern sea. These books,
however, did not give much accurate information. During the change of
dynasties front the *Ming* to the *Tsing*, we were tossed in revolution
all around; the island was overthrown by pirates, and all the temples
were destroyed by fire. After the twenty-second year of my reign peace
and order were established. Priests returned from the mainland, looked
up the old foundations, cleaned away the weeds and debris, and began to
build anew. When I came to the *Cheh-kiang* province, I sent an official
to reverentially rebuild the temples and worship, and I myself prayed,
saying, "May the temples forever keep (the sea) in subjection." Having
prayed thus, I also sent gold for the repairs of the temples. The
corridors and windows I ordered to be embellished with red and green,
and all the beams beautified. Every beam and every stone was given by
the Government, and all the artisans and laborers were paid by the
Government. This I did for my parents above me and my people below me.

"When I was young I read historical classics, in which

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I learned how to
cultivate the body, the home, and to execute government affairs in
important matters. At that time I had no leisure to read the litanies,
and they seemed to me as empty shadows, for I did not know the meaning
of the mysterious Buddhist doctrine. Now I have learned that heaven is
the greatest good, and the goddess rests upon this good, hence there can
be no difference between the two. Heaven delights to create and give
life to all creatures. The goddess is of great mercy in saving all that
has life, hence she is not second to heaven. I have prayed for the
Government to be active on behalf of the people for over forty years.
And although there is no more rebellion in the land, yet the people are
not fully at rest. The people are not yet pure-minded, and the ignorant
are easily moved upon. In times of floods, droughts, and failure of
crops, unseemly depredations are committed. These things never left me,
even though I was asleep. I trusted to the great mercy of the goddess. I
prayed that clouds of mercy, showers of rain, sweet dew and favorable
winds might come to give a plentiful year to the people, and benevolence
and longevity might prevail. If thus the goddess could save the nation
and gain great merit, great good would also come to the world. This is
my honest wish. Therefore I have written it to be cut into a stone
tablet, that men may read it for all ages to come."

One month later he wrote an eulogy on the Goddess of Mercy, which is
inscribed on a tablet at the Rear Temple. In this he says:

"I have heard that the goddess is all wise and has a wonderful
appearance, that she is the origin of all truth and has opened a way to
experience, giving evidence of the wisdom of the gods. Coming to this
island, the moaning of the waves and the chanting of prayers can be
heard, the deep purple temples can be seen, and peace can be had as
expansive as the wide sea. But the goddess has other temples on Poot’oo
besides this rain-producing temple. This renowned island

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

has become a kingdom of the gods. It is like a ship of mercy upon the
great sea; hills blue as the fleecy sky, and high as the heavens of
Brahma; upon this lucky, clean place the waves dash up to bathe the sun.
Its reputation stands as a pillar, supporting the sky. From its summits
all places are connected.

"But when a time of trouble came, the priests scattered, as the morning
clouds and the ashes of the burning temples were driven by the wind.
Now, since happiness and peace have been restored, and the waves of the
troubled sea cease to roar, the priests longingly looking to this place
have returned. Special imperial grants were bestowed to aid in
rebuilding the temples, to accomplish which it took much time, but they
wearied not. When laying the foundations they beat a drum to stimulate
the workmen to activity. In building, they did not erect pearl halls
with precious doors, but used the huge turtle for the base of the
pillars and the *iguana* for beams, that they might know how to cross
the stream of error, that leads astray. The precious image of the
goddess they seated in a natural colored lotus flower. Having furnished
all, they placed a shining wheel of the Buddhist law on the building,
and planted the purple bamboo in the forests. When majestic images were
arranged in all the halls, then clouds of mercy spread over the earth,
and the Emperor gave the temple the beautiful name *Fa Yü* (Law of
Rain). Heaven can boast of protecting the doctrine of the gods; for they
are established high, like a beacon cloud, and ships will come from all
kingdoms to do them homage. Thus all can cross the stream upon the raft
(Buddhist doctrine), and ascend the other shore.

"Now, since the great temple is completed, I pray that my mother may be
blessed with long life; for this I borrow mercy. May my people also
obtain many blessings! And may benevolence and longevity abound, and all
under the brightness of the moon be filled with mercy. Let this be

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="img_06500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FA YÜ—THE LAW OF
RAIN, OR RAIN-PRODUCING TEMPLE.](tn/06500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06500.jpg)  
FA YÜ—THE LAW OF RAIN, OR RAIN-PRODUCING TEMPLE.  
</span>

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

carved into a good stone tablet that all who come may read it."

Leaving this pavilion, we see to the right and left two little
three-storied kiosks, half hidden in the shady grove. In the one to the
right is an image of a patron saint, in the other an image of *Ti Tien
Wang*, the ruler of the Ten Halls in Hades. The first temple building we
enter might be denominated the Protection Hall. Like most regularly
constituted Chinese monasteries, it contains images of the four great
kings, standing near the east and west wall, facing each other,
*Milehfu* sitting on an elevated altar in the middle of the hall, and
*Weit’o* standing on the opposite side looking north.

These four kings were brothers, and lived about 1100 B.C. They are
supposed to be protectors of *Milehfu*, governing the center of the
universe. Their faces are red, green, white, and black. The one with the
red face holds an umbrella in his hand, with which he overshadows the
universe. If he opens it, all is turned into chaos, sun and moon refuse
to shine, and darkness covers the earth. The one with a green face holds
a zither in his hands, and when he strikes upon it fire and wind come
forth. The black faced one looks ferocious, and is supposed to be the
eldest of the brothers. He holds in his hands an animal, which he has
charmed into submission to do his will. The white faced one seems less
ferocious, and holds in his hands a sword. When he brandishes it myriads
of arrows fly in all directions, destroying all that would injure Buddha
and his doctrine.

Between the four kings, in the midst of the hall, sits, in a glass
encasement, "Laughing Buddha," the Merciful One, who is expected to
appear and open a new era about three thousand years hence, when he will
take the place of Shakyamuni. He is the Coming Buddha, the Messiah. His
friendly mien invites the worshipers to come to him with all petitions.
His devotees are chiefly women, who beseech him that in

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the next world they may be born men and not despised women.

*Weit’o* has a sword in hand, entwined with a gilt dragon. His stately
bearing well becomes him as celestial protector. All the gods in this
hall are still in the "wheel of the metempsychosis."

The space between this hall and the principal building is about one
hundred feet wide. In it stand two miniature iron pagodas and a huge
bronze incense-burner. This building is one hundred and fifty feet long
and seventy feet wide. Two rows of pillars, six in each row, support the
imperial yellow and green tile roof. Upon entering this lofty hall we
see in the corner to the right an image of the celestial protector,
Weit’o; to the left, a large drum over ten feet in diameter, and in the
midst of the hall the main altar. At the front door, and over the altar,
are curtains beautifully embroidered after patterns evidently very
antique. In front of the altar are two brass incense holders, urns for
flowers, and eight candle supporters. The tinsel and ornamental
accessories upon the altar and images can not be described. Instead of
the Three Pure Ones, *Shakyamuni*, *Kaskiapa*, and *Ananda*, upon the
raised altar, as in the other Buddhist monasteries, there are here four
images of the Goddess of Mercy. The temple being dedicated to this
deity, she naturally occupies the most conspicuous place. The four stand
in a row from the front of the altar to the rear. The first is the
goddess standing. Directly back of her is a large gilt image sitting
cross-legged upon a lotus flower. This image was sent from Tibet by the
Emperor *K’ang Hsi*. She is beautifully draped with yellow silk, and
wears the crown of the *Boddhisattoas*. The third stands in sacred
reverence with a halo over her masculine head. Behind her is a monstrous
male god, supposed to represent the ruler of the monastery, and who is
denominated by *K’ang Hsi* as "The Savior of all Living Beings." All of
these images have servants, except the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

male gods. To the right and to the left of this altar are images of *Kuo
Hai* and *Sung Tsz*, that is, the goddess that crossed the sea, and the
giver of children. In place of the Eighteen Lohans (disciples of Buddha)
along the east and west walls, there are thirty-two metamorphoses of the
goddess, the Lohans being relegated to side chapels.

In a little room adjoining this building a scene of the lower world is
represented. A Lohan is sitting upon a one horned sacred ox, which is
standing upon a jagged rock. Under the rock is a cave. In the cave an
official is holding court. Before him a man is kneeling. The executioner
is near with his ax. To the left stands *Weit’o*, and to the right *Ming
Wang*, the ruler of Hades.

The third building, directly back of the main hall, is exceedingly
plain. In the northeast corner is a drum, in the southwest hangs a bell,
in the northwest stands a *Fu*, holding a little pagoda in his hand; on
the center altar are the Three Buddhas, all in perfect keeping with the
plainness of the whole building. Upstairs, in a hall almost void of
furniture, sits a goddess hewn from a precious white stone, found in
Southern Tibet, called by the priests *pehtsz yü*, or white jade. She is
loosely draped with a red silk cape, and were it not for the cynical
smile playing upon her face, she might be considered a rare beauty. This
room also contains the library.

The fourth and last of the temple buildings is even more plainly
furnished than the third, but it contains, beyond all doubt,
sculpturally, the finest work of art we have seen in China. It is a
small image of the goddess, about three feet long, of like material as
the one in the library building, a white, watery-looking jade. The image
is modestly lying down within a glass case, gracefully resting her head
upon her right arm, and is covered with beautifully embroidered red
silk—a speaking likeness of the goddess of beauty. Visitors should not
fail to look into this hidden compartment.

Near the monastery is a small stone pagoda four stories

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

high. It dates from the *Ming* Dynasty, being dedicated to the Emperor
*Wang Li*, who reigned during the latter part of the sixteenth century,
and it is probably the only structure on the island which survived the
change of dynasties. The architecture is quite unlike modern Chinese,
rather resembling Hindoo art. Twelve images are hewn in the four sides,
which are supposed to have control of the elements of nature.

But what interested us more than the beautiful scenery, works of art,
and strange legends was, in the first place, to observe the unmistakable
keen sense of chastity in their idolatrous worship. Free from all
vulgarism and meretricious ornaments, there was not even the suggestion
of what might be offensive to the moral sense. However much we may pity
the Chinese in their ignorance in worshiping the workmanship of their
own hands, we can not help but admire their belief in the purity of
their gods. The next point of supreme interest to us was the people who
visit these shrines. To see something of their devotion we took passage
from *Ningpo* on a regular pilgrims’ sailing boat. Forty-odd persons
crowded on to the little barque. The room was quite insufficient for
that number to lie down, but for one day and two nights they patiently
sat without a murmur or complaint. They had come from various provinces,
*Chih* in the north, *Szechuan* in the far west, and a goodly number
from *Hunan*. Stoic resignation and privation seemed impressed upon
every face, not because of a lack of vitality, but on account of the
vows they had taken.

The earliest mention made of this island reaches back to the *Liang*
Dynasty, A.D. 502–556. During the *Sung* and *Yuan* Dynasties reports
are recorded of building and repairing temples. During the present
dynasty special efforts have been put forth, both to beautify the
temples and to increase their number, in the belief that the gods may
spread great spiritual light. Let all who believe that the worship of
the Goddess of Mercy is on the decline visit Poot’oo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The White Deer Grotto University](spc07)
