[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spc03)  [Next](spc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sacred Places in China*, by Carl F. Kupfer, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### Ngn Ren Tsz—The Monastery of Benevolence.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> premises of this temple are in close
proximity to the campus of the Woman's Foreign Missionary Society at
Kiukiang, only a narrow lane intervening. The temple facing south and
the girls’ high school north brings the two institutions face to face.
Like many other renowned places in China this temple developed from a
very humble beginning, a little shrine, until the virtue proceeding from
it reached distant places, even to far-away Tibet. During the golden age
of Buddhism, when the faith of that religion had a deep hold upon all
classes, having even many officials among its devotees, an Abbot had a
dream. In this dream Buddha appeared to him and informed him that on a
certain day an incarnate being would be coming down the Yangtse River
from Tibet. The Abbot at once notified the officials of the city of his
wonderful dream, and elaborate preparations were made for the reception
of this divinity. Upon the appointed time the officials all appeared in
their official attire and together went to the north gate of the city,
where they waited for the coming of the promised deity. Soon they saw,
to their amazement, a stone boat floating down the river, and in it
stood a majestic being. At the gate the boat drew ashore, and the man of
the West, after a dangerous voyage and much fatigued, stepped off, and
asked for Ngn Ren Tsz. With due ceremony and in great pomp he was
escorted to the sought-for sacred shrine. The news of this strange
visitor to this humble place spread throughout the provinces. Pilgrims
came from all parts seeking the blessing which this divinity had brought
to this temple. To assure the perpetuation of

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

his favors, a life-sized metal image was made and enshrined as the
patron of benevolence, and the temple flourished beyond all expectation.

The granite stone boat which brought this deity from the far West is
lying in the temple grounds, and is proudly shown to this day by the
credulous priests as the instrument that brought the once enjoyed fame
to their temple. It is of one solid granite block about fifteen feet
long and three feet wide, hollowed out like a trough. All admit that of
itself it could not float, but the buoyant divinity bore it up, and it
bore the divinity down through the gorges to his desired destination.

During the *Taiping* Rebellion this temple shared the same fate to which
all pagan temples in Mid-China were doomed; all were destroyed. After
the rebellion was over, and the Abbot returned to his sacred home, he
found nothing but desolation and ruins. Out of the broken débris he
constructed a little shed for his home and a shrine; but the former fame
and virtue did not seem to return. No pilgrim worshipers sought his aid.
Every effort to re-establish the past glory seemed in vain. Direst
poverty stared him in the face. One day, as he was walking across the
once beautiful grounds, he struck his foot against an object. With the
usual epithet that always falls from the lips of a Chinese when
something untoward happens, he was about to pass on, when, unlike his
countrymen, he concluded to return and remove this obstacle, that no one
else should henceforth be so unfortunate. When he began to dig with his
mattock to remove the contemptible object, to his unspeakable surprise
and joy he found it to be the image of the once famous iron Buddha, who
had been the means of prosperity and fame in former times. The mutilated
god was in a sad plight. One arm was entirely missing, and other serious
defects were discovered. He handled him with great care. The missing
hand was soon replaced, and all blemishes repaired. Newly gilded over
and an altar extemporized, he was soon reinstated. When this

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

was known the former reputation of the temple began to return. An
Imperial grant was made for the erection of substantial buildings, and a
new era for the once famous monastery seemed assured.

Twenty years ago it was doubtless one of the best kept pagan
institutions in this part of China. It contained all of the departments
necessary to constitute a fully equipped monastery. In a lofty building
at the main entrance stand the four imposing images known as the
Guardians. Then follows an artificially constructed pool over which is
built the Bridge of Fate, leading to the Chief Hall, where the Buddha of
the Past, Present, and Future, and the Eighteen Lohan are enshrined. On
the north side of the center altar the Goddess of Mercy is represented
as standing at the seashore upon the back of a great sea monster. Here,
as in other parts of China, she is the most highly revered deity in the
Buddhist pantheon. She is to the Buddhist what the Holy Mother Mary is
to the Catholic. In the northeast corner of this building hangs a large
bronze bell, whose melodious sound is not supposed to die out. Every
stroke upon this bell with a horizontally suspended piece of wood drawn
by a priest is believed to send a flash of light into the darkness of
Buddhist hades, and illuminates the path for a struggling soul to escape
from the torturing demons. The vibrations of this bell seem to continue
long enough to allow the faithful priest to take a little nap between
the strokes. For many years a blind priest sat there day and night
performing this meritorious service.

In this spacious hall many priests meet to hold annual gatherings during
the month of September. These meetings might be denominated Liturgical
conventions, or high mass. They are sometimes continued two or three
weeks, and at the close young priests, having taken their vows, are
consecrated to the priesthood by the Abbot, who, with a burning incense
stick, brands them on top of their shaven heads.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="img_02500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![NGN REN TSZ—THE
MONASTERY OF BENEVOLENCE.](tn/02500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02500.jpg.md)  
NGN REN TSZ—THE MONASTERY OF BENEVOLENCE.  
</span>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

In the extreme rear of these grounds is a modest little structure within
which stands the once famous iron Buddha in a glass case, testifying of
the fame of his past days. To the right and left of this building the
monks have their living compartments.

To the east, close by the temple grounds, stands a pagoda for which
unusual merit is claimed. Many years ago when the literati of Kiukiang
had failed for successive years in their effort to pass in the
competitive examination for degrees, one of their number, a *savant*
above the average, advised that a pagoda be erected to regulate the
*Fung shui*, that fortune might again return to the wise men of
Kiukiang. All who had faith in this prophecy contributed freely, and
enough energy was set in motion to so stimulate the sluggish literati
that the very next examination, after the completion of the pagoda,
brought brilliant success to a number of competitors. The merit of the
pagoda was established beyond doubt, and every year thereafter students
of *Teh Hwa-hsien* Township have been successful. At the last
examination, given under the old régime, two of the students of William
Nast College were among those who gained the enviable distinction. The
competitive examination has been abolished, but the pagoda will
doubtless stand as a monument of past superstition for ages to come.

The last effort to fan the dying embers of this decaying monastery by a
sister religion was the erection of a Confucian Ancestorial Hall at the
southwest corner, between the Home of the Woman's Foreign Missionary
Society and the temple. The purpose of this effort is easily seen, even
though Confucianists and Buddhists are not close friends. They are
allied state religions, and will doubtless assist each other when the
death knell of either is heard ringing. He who hath ears to hear can
hear them ringing even now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kiu Hua Shan—Or The Nine-Lotus-Flower Mountain](spc05.md)
