[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140103)  [Next](1140105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.x"></span> <span id="v.x-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.x-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="v.x-p2"></span> <span id="v.x-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.x-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews iii.
7-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)<span id="v.x-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.x-p3"></span> *“Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day
if ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation
in the day of temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers tempted
Me, proved Me, and saw My works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved
with that generation, and said, They do alway err in their heart, and
they have not known My ways. So*  <span
id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810) *I sware in My wrath they shall not
enter into My rest.”*

<span id="v.x-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.x-p5.1"></span>Paul</span> , having treated of hope, and having
said that “We are His house, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end” ( [Heb.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006)<span id="v.x-p5.2"></span> ); next
shows that we ought to look forward with firmness, and he proves this
from the Scriptures. But be attentive, because he has expressed this in
a manner somewhat difficult and not readily to be comprehended. And
therefore we must first make our own statements, and after we have
briefly explained the whole argument, then make clear the words of the
Epistle. For you will no longer need us, if you have understood the
scope of the Apostle.

<span id="v.x-p6"></span> His discourse was concerning Hope, and that it
behooves us to hope for the things to come, and that for those who have
toiled here there will assuredly be some reward and fruit and
refreshment. This then he shows from the prophet; and what says he?
“Wherefore as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye will hear His voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation
in the wilderness: when your fathers tempted Me, proved Me, and saw My
works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and
said, they do alway err in their heart, and they have not known My ways.
So  <span id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811) I sware in My wrath, they
shall not enter into My rest.”

<span id="v.x-p8"></span>He says that there are “three” rests: one, that
of the Sabbath, in which God rested from His works; the second, that of
Palestine, into which when the Jews had entered they would be at rest
from their hardships and labors; the third, that which is Rest indeed,
the kingdom of Heaven; which those who obtain, do indeed rest from their
labors and troubles. Of these three then he makes mention here.

<span id="v.x-p9"></span>And why did he mention the three, when he is
treating of the one only? That he might show that the prophet is
speaking concerning this one. For he did not speak (he says) concerning
the first. For how could he, when that had taken place long before? Nor
yet again concerning the second, that in Palestine. For how could he?
For he says, “They shall not enter into My rest.” It remains therefore
that it is this third.

<span id="v.x-p10"></span>\[2.\] But it is necessary also to unfold the
<span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span id="v.x-Page_394"></span>
history, to make the argument more clear. For when they had come forth
out of Egypt, and had accomplished a long journey, and had received
innumerable proofs of the power of God, both in Egypt, and in the Red
Sea (cf. [Acts vii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#036) <span
id="v.x-p10.1"></span> ), and in the wilderness, they determined to send
spies to search out the nature of the land; and these went and returned,
admiring indeed the country, and saying that it abounded in noble
fruits, nevertheless it was a country of strong and invincible men: and
the ungrateful and senseless Jews, when they ought to have called to
mind the former blessings of God, and how when they were hemmed in the
midst of the armies of so many Egyptians, He rescued them from their
perils, and made them masters of their enemies’ spoils; and again, in
the wilderness He clave the rock, and bestowed on them abundance of
waters, and gave them the manna, and the other wonderful things which He
wrought; \[when they ought, I say, to have remembered this,\] and to
have trusted in God, they considered none of these things, but being
struck with terror, just as if nothing had been done, they said, we wish
to go back again into Egypt, “for God hath brought us out thither” (it
is said) “to slay us, with our children and wives.” (Cf. [Num. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#003) <span id="v.x-p10.2"></span> .) God
therefore being angry that they had so quickly cast off the memory of
what had been done, sware that generation, which had said these things,
should not enter into the Rest; and they all perished in the wilderness.
When David then, he says, speaking at a later period, and after these
events, after that generation of men, said, “To-day, if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your hearts,” that ye may not suffer the same things
which your forefathers did, and be deprived of the Rest; he evidently
\[said this\] as of some \[future\] rest. For if they had received their
Rest (he says) why does He again say to them, “To-day if ye will hear
His voice harden not your hearts,” as your fathers did? What other rest
then is there, except the kingdom of Heaven, of which the Sabbath was an
image and type?

<span id="v.x-p11"></span>\[3.\] Next having set down the whole
testimony (and this is, “To-day if ye will hear His voice, harden not
your hearts, as in the provocation in the day of temptation in the
wilderness, when your fathers tempted Me, proved Me, and saw My works
forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said,
They do alway err in their heart, and they have not known My ways. So I
sware in My wrath, they shall not enter into My rest”), he then adds:

<span id="v.x-p12"></span> [Heb.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012)<span id="v.x-p12.1"></span> .
“Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God.” For from hardness unbelief
ariseth: and as in bodies, the parts that have become callous and hard
do not yield to the hands of the physicians, so also souls that are
hardened yield not to the word of God. For it is probable besides that
some even disbelieved as though the things which had been done were not
true.

<span id="v.x-p13"></span>Therefore he says, “Take heed lest there be in
any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.”
For since the argument from the future is not so persuasive as from the
past, he reminds them of the history, in which they had wanted faith.
For if your fathers (he says) because they did not hope as they ought to
have hoped, suffered these things, much more will you. Since to them
also is this word addressed: for, “To-day” (he says) is “ever,” so long
as the world lasts.

<span id="v.x-p14"></span>\[4.\] [Heb.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span id="v.x-p14.1"></span> .
Wherefore “exhort ye one another daily, while it is called to-day.” That
is, edify one another, raise yourselves up: lest the same things should
befall you. “Lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin.” Seest thou that sin produces unbelief? For as unbelief brings
forth an evil life, so also a soul, “when it is come into a depth of
evils, becometh contemptuous”  <span
id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) ( [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003) <span id="v.x-p15.2"></span> ), and
having become contemptuous it endures not even to believe, in order
thereby to free itself from fear. For “they said” (one says), “The Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard.” ( [Ps. xciv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007) <span id="v.x-p15.3"></span> .) And
again, “Our lips are our own: who is Lord over us?” ( [Ps. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004) <span id="v.x-p15.4"></span> ); and
again “Wherefore hath the wicked man provoked God to wrath?” ( [Ps. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013) <span id="v.x-p15.5"></span> ); and
again, “The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God; they are
corrupt and become abominable in their doings.” ( [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) <span id="v.x-p15.6"></span> .)
“There is no fear of God before his eyes, for he was deceitful before
Him, to find out  <span id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) his
iniquity and to hate.” ( [Ps. 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002)<span id="v.x-p16.2"></span> .) Yea
and Christ also says this same thing, “Every one that doeth evil, hateth
the light and cometh not to the light.” ( [John iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020) <span id="v.x-p16.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.x-p17"></span>Then he adds ( [Heb.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)<span id="v.x-p17.1"></span> ),
“For we have been made partakers of Christ.” What is this, “We have been
made partakers of Christ”? We partake of Him (he means); we were made
One, we and He—since He is the Head and we the body, “fellow-heirs and
of the same body; we are one body, of His flesh and of His bones.” (
[Eph. 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006), [Rom.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005), [Eph.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030)<span id="v.x-p17.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.x-p18"></span> “If we hold fast the beginning of our
confidence \[or, the principle of our subsistence  <span
id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) \] steadfast unto the end.” What is
“the principle of our subsistence”? The faith by which we stand, and
have been brought into being and were made to exist, as one may say.

<span id="v.x-p20"></span>\[5.\] Then he adds ( [Heb.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#015)<span id="v.x-p20.1"></span> ),
“When it is <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="v.x-Page_395"></span> said,  <span
id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) To-day if ye hear His voice, harden
not your hearts, as in the provocation.” This is a transposition,  <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) “when it is said, To-day if ye hear
His voice, harden not your hearts.” \[It must be read thus:\]

<span id="v.x-p23"></span>( [Heb. 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)<span id="v.x-p23.1"></span> .) “Let
us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it; for to us was the Gospel preached
 <span id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) as well as unto them when it
is said, To-day if ye hear His voice” (for “To-day” is “at every time”
 <span id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) ).

<span id="v.x-p26"></span> Then \[he adds\] “but the word of hearing did
not profit them, as they were not mixed  <span
id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819) by faith with them that heard.” How
did it not profit? Then wishing to alarm them, he shows the same thing
by what he says:

<span id="v.x-p28"></span>( [Heb.
3.16-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#016)<span id="v.x-p28.1"></span> .)
“For some when they had heard did provoke, howbeit not all that came out
of Egypt by Moses: And with whom was He grieved forty years? Was it not
with them that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness? And
to whom swear He that they should not enter into His rest, but to them
that believed not? So  <span id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820) we
see, that they could not enter in because of unbelief.” After again
repeating the testimony, he adds also the question, which makes the
argument clear. For he said (he repeats), “To-day if ye hear His voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.” Of whom does he speak
(he says) \[as\] having been hardened? Of whom \[as\] not believing? Is
it not of the Jews?

<span id="v.x-p30"></span>Now what he says is to this effect. They also
heard, as we hear: but no profit came to them. Do not suppose then that
by “hearing” what is proclaimed ye will be profited; seeing that they
also heard, but derived no benefit because they did not believe.

<span id="v.x-p31"></span> Caleb then and Joshua, because they agreed
not with those who did not believe, escaped the vengeance that was sent
forth against them. And see how admirably he said, not, They did not
agree, but, “they were not mixed”—that is, they stood apart, but not
factiously when all the others had one and the same mind. Here it seems
to me that a faction too is hinted at.  <span
id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821)

<span id="v.x-p33"></span>\[6.\] ( [Heb.
4.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003)<span id="v.x-p33.1"></span> .) For
“we who have believed,” he says, “do enter into rest.” From what this is
evident, he adds: “as He said, as I have sworn in My wrath, if they
shall enter into My rest: although the works were finished from the
foundation of the world.” This indeed, is not evidence that we shall
enter in, but that they did not enter in. What then? Thus far he aims to
show that as that rest does not hinder the speaking of another rest, so
neither does this \[exclude\] that of Heaven. Up to this point then, he
wishes to show that they \[the Israelites\] did not attain to the rest.
For because he means this, he says ( [Heb.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#005)<span id="v.x-p33.2"></span> ), “For
he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God did
rest the seventh day from all His works. And in this place again, If
they shall enter into My rest.” Thou seest how that doth not hinder this
from being a rest?

<span id="v.x-p34"></span> [Heb. 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)<span id="v.x-p34.1"></span> .
“Seeing therefore it remaineth” (he says) “that some must enter therein,
and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of
unbelief: again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To-day,
after so long a time; as it has been said before.”  <span
id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822) But what is it that he means?
“Seeing then” (he means) that “some must” certainly “enter in,” and
“they did not enter in.” And that an entrance is proclaimed, and that
“some must enter in,” let us hear from what this is clear. Because after
so many years (he says) David again says: “To-day if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your hearts” ( [Heb.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008)<span id="v.x-p35.13"></span> ),
“For if Joshua had given them rest he would not afterward have spoken of
another day.” It is evident, that he says these things, as of persons
who are to attain some recompense.

<span id="v.x-p36"></span>\[7.\] [Heb.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)<span id="v.x-p36.1"></span> .
“There remaineth therefore a rest  <span
id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) for the people of God.” Whence
\[does this appear\]? From the exhortation, “Harden not your hearts”:
 for if there were no rest, these exhortations would not have been
given. Neither would they have been exhorted not to do the same things
\[with the Jews\] lest they should suffer the same things, unless they
were about to suffer the same. But how were they who were in possession
of Palestine about to suffer the same things \[i.e. exclusion from the
rest\] unless there were some other rest?

<span id="v.x-p38"></span>And well did he conclude the argument. For he
said not rest but “Sabbath-keeping”; calling the kingdom
“Sabbath-keeping,” by the appropriate name, and that which they rejoiced
in and were attracted by. For as, on the Sabbath He commands to abstain
from all evil things; and that those things only which relate to the
Service of God should be done, which things the Priests were wont to
accomplish, and whatsoever profits the soul, and nothing else; so also
\[will it be\] then. However it is not he <span id="page_396">p.
396</span> <span id="v.x-Page_396"></span> who spoke thus, but what? (
[Heb. 4.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010)<span id="v.x-p38.1"></span>
), “For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his
own works, as God \[did\] from His.” As God ceased from His works, he
says, so he that hath entered into His rest \[hath ceased\]. For since
his discourse to them was concerning rest, and they were desirous to
hear when this would be, he concluded the argument with this.

<span id="v.x-p39"></span> \[8.\] And \[he said\] “To-day,”  <span
id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824) that they might never be without
hope. “Exhort one another daily,” he says, \[“while it is called
today,”\] that is, even if a man have sinned, as long as it is “To-day,”
he has hope: let no man then despair so long as he lives. Above all
things indeed, he says, “let there not be an evil heart of unbelief.” (
[Heb. 3.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012)<span
id="v.x-p40.10"></span> .) But even suppose there should be, let no man
despair, but let him recover himself; for as long as we are in this
world, the “To-day” is in season. But here he means not unbelief only,
but also murmurings: “whose carcasses,” he says, “fell’ in the
wilderness.”  <span id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825)

<span id="v.x-p42"></span>Then, lest any think that they will simply be
deprived of rest only, he adds also the punishment, saying ( [Heb.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="v.x-p42.1"></span> ),
“For the Word of God is quick, and powerful; and sharper than any
two-edged sword, and pierceth even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow: and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart.” Here he is speaking of Hell and of
punishment. “It pierceth” (he says) into the secrets of our heart, and
cutteth asunder the soul. Here it is not the falling of carcasses nor,
as there, the being deprived of a country, but of a heavenly kingdom;
and being delivered to an everlasting hell, and to undying punishment
and vengeance.

<span id="v.x-p43"></span>( [Heb.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span id="v.x-p43.1"></span> .)
“But exhort  <span id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826) one another.”
Observe the gentleness and mildness \[of the expression\]: he said not
“Rebuke,” but “Exhort.” Thus we are required to bear ourselves towards
those who are straightened by affliction. This he says also in writing
to the Thessalonians, “Warn them that are unruly” ( [1 Thess. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014) <span id="v.x-p44.3"></span> ), but
in speaking of the feeble-minded, not so, but what? “Comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men”; that is, do
not cease to hope; do not despair. For he that does not encourage one
who is straightened by affliction, makes him more hardened.

<span id="v.x-p45"></span>\[9.\] “Lest any of you,” he says, “be
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.” He means either the deceit of the
devil (for it is indeed a deceit, not to look for the things to come, to
think that we are without responsibility, and that we shall not pay the
penalty for our deeds here, neither will there be a resurrection); or in
another sense insensibility \[or\] despairing is deceit. For to say,
‘What is there left? I have sinned once for all, I have no hope of
recovering myself,’ is deceit.

<span id="v.x-p46"></span>Then he suggests hopes to them, saying ( [Heb.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)<span id="v.x-p46.1"></span> ),
“We are made partakers of Christ”; All but saying, He that so loved us,
He that counted us worthy of so great things, as to make us His Body,
will not suffer us to perish. Let us consider (he says) of what we have
been thought worthy: we and Christ are One: let us not then distrust
Him. And again, he hints at that which had been said in another place,
that “If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him.” ( [2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012) <span id="v.x-p46.2"></span> .) For
this is \[implied in\] “We are made partakers,” we partake of the same
things whereof Christ also partakes.

<span id="v.x-p47"></span>He urges them on from the good things; “for we
are,” he says, “partakers of Christ.” Then, again, from gloomy ones (
[Heb. 4.1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)<span id="v.x-p47.1"></span>
), “Let us fear, lest at any time a promise being left us of entering
into His rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.” For that is
manifest and confessed.

<span id="v.x-p48"></span>( [Heb.
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#009)<span id="v.x-p48.1"></span> .)
“They proved Me,” He says, “and saw My works forty years.” Seest thou
that it is not right to call God to account, but whether He defend \[our
cause\] or not, to trust Him? For against those \[of old\] he now brings
this charge, that “they tempted God.” For he that will have proof either
of His power, or of His providence, or of His tender care, does not yet
believe, either that He is powerful or kind to man. This he hints also
in writing to these \[Hebrews\] who probably already wished, in their
trials, to obtain experience and positive evidence of His power and His
providential care for them. Thou seest that in all cases the provocation
and the angering arises from unbelief.

<span id="v.x-p49"></span>What then does he say? ( [Heb.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)<span id="v.x-p49.1"></span> .)
“There remaineth therefore a rest for the people of God.” And see how he
has summed up the whole argument. “He sware,” saith he, to those former
ones, “that they should not enter into” the “rest,” and they did not
enter in. Then long after their time discoursing to the Jews, he says,
“Harden not your hearts,” as your fathers, showing that there is another
rest. For of Palestine we have not to speak: for they were already in
possession of it. Nor can he be speaking of the seventh \[day\]; for
surely he was not discoursing about that which had taken place long
before. It follows therefore that he hints at some other, that which is
rest indeed.

<span id="v.x-p50"></span>\[10.\] For that is indeed rest, where “pain,
sorrow and sighing are fled away” ( [Isa. xxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010) <span id="v.x-p50.1"></span> ):
where there are neither cares, nor labors, <span id="page_397">p.
397</span> <span id="v.x-Page_397"></span> nor struggle, nor fear
stunning and shaking the soul; but only that fear of God which is full
of delight. There is not, “In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy
bread,” nor “thorns and thistles” ( [Gen.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018)<span id="v.x-p50.2"></span> ); no
longer, “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children, and to thy husband
shall be thy desire and he shall rule over thee.” ( [Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016) <span id="v.x-p50.3"></span> .) All
is peace, joy, gladness, pleasure, goodness, gentleness. There is no
jealousy, nor envy, no sickness, no death whether of the body, or that
of the soul. There is no darkness nor night; all \[is\] day, all light,
all things are bright. It is not possible to be weary, it is not
possible to be satiated: we shall always persevere in the desire of good
things.  <span id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827)

<span id="v.x-p54"></span>Would you that I should also give you some
image of the condition there? It is impossible. But yet, so far as it is
possible, I will try to give you some image. Let us look up into the
heaven when without any intervening cloud it shows forth its crown \[of
stars\]. Then when we have dwelt long on the beauty of its appearance,
let us think that we too shall have a pavement, not indeed such \[as
this\], but as much more beautiful as the gold is than the clay, and
\[let us think\] on the higher roof which is again beyond; then on the
Angels, the Archangels, the infinite multitude of unbodied powers, the
very palace of God itself, the Throne of the Father.

<span id="v.x-p55"></span>But language is too weak (as I said) to set
forth the whole. Experience is necessary, and the knowledge which
\[cometh\] by experience. Tell me, how was it (think you) with Adam in
Paradise? This course of life is far better than that, as much as heaven
\[is better\] than earth.

<span id="v.x-p56"></span>\[11.\] But however let us search after
another image still. If it happened that he who now reigns was master of
the whole world, and then was troubled neither by wars nor by cares, but
was honored only and lived delicately; and had large tributes, and on
every side gold flowed in to him, and he was looked up to, what feelings
do you think he would have, if he saw that all the wars in all parts of
the world had ceased? Something such as this will it be. But rather I
have not even yet arrived at that image \[which I seek\]; therefore I
must search after another too.

<span id="v.x-p57"></span>Consider then, I pray you: for as some royal
child, so long as he is in the womb, has no sense of anything, but
should it happen that he suddenly came forth from thence, and ascended
the royal throne, not gradually, but all at once received possession of
all things; so is it as regards this \[present\] and that \[future\]
state. Or, if some captive, having suffered innumerable evils, should be
caught up at once to the royal throne.

<span id="v.x-p58"></span>But not even thus have I attained to the image
exactly. For here indeed whatever good things a person may obtain, even
shouldst thou say the kingdom itself, during the first day indeed his
desires are in full vigor, and for the second too, and the third, but as
time goes on, he continues indeed to have pleasure, but not so great.
For whatever it be, it always ceases from familiarity with it. But
yonder it not only does not diminish, but even increases. For consider
how great a thing it is, that a soul after departing thither, should no
longer look for an end of those good things, nor yet change, but
increase, and life that has no end, and life set free from all danger,
and from all despondency and care, full of cheerfulness and blessings
innumerable.

<span id="v.x-p59"></span>For if when we go out into a plain, and there
see the soldiers’ tents fixed with curtains, and the spears, and
helmets, and bosses of the bucklers glittering, we are lifted up with
wonder; but if we also chance to see the king himself running in the
midst or even riding with golden armor, we think we have everything;
what thinkest thou \[it will be\] when thou seest the everlasting
tabernacles of the saints pitched in heaven? (For it is said, “They
shall receive you into their everlasting tabernacles”— [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009) <span id="v.x-p59.1"></span> ) when
thou seest each one of them beaming with light above the rays of the
sun, not from brass and steel, but from that glory whose gleamings the
eye of man cannot look upon? And this indeed with respect to the men.
But what, if one were to speak of the thousands of Angels, of
Archangels, of Cherubim, of Seraphim, of thrones, of dominions, of
principalities, of powers, whose beauty is inimitable, passing all
understanding?

<span id="v.x-p60"></span>But how far shall I go in pursuing what cannot
be overtaken? “For eye hath not seen,” it is said, “nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him.” ( [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009) <span id="v.x-p60.1"></span> .)
Therefore nothing is more pitiable than those who miss, nor anything
more blessed than those who attain. Let us then be of the blessed, that
we may attain to the everlasting good things that are in Christ Jesus
our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost be glory,
might, honor, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[393:2811](1140104.htm#fr_2810) <span
id="v.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p4.1"></span>as.</span>

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[393:2812](1140104.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="v.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p7.1"></span>as.</span>

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[394:2813](1140104.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="v.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p15.1"></span>καταφρονεῖ</span>

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[394:2814](1140104.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="v.x-p15.7"></span>

<span id="v.x-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p16.1"></span>τοῦ εδρεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[394:2815](1140104.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="v.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p19.2"></span>ρχὴν τῆς ὑποστάσεως</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p19.3"></span>. St. Chrys.
understands</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p19.4"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p19.5"></span>πόστασις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p19.6"></span>in its prior sense, as</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p19.7"></span>subsistence,</span> ” “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p19.8"></span>subsisting,</span> ” “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p19.9"></span>being brought into real
existence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[395:2816](1140104.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="v.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p21.2"></span>ν τῷ λέγεσθαι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p21.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p21.4"></span>in its being said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[395:2817](1140104.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="v.x-p21.5"></span>

<span id="v.x-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p22.1"></span>καθ̓ ὑπέρβατον</span>

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[395:2818](1140104.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="v.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p24.1"></span>That is, these words are addressed to us as well
as to them.</span>

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[395:2819](1140104.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="v.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p25.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p25.2"></span>εὶ</span>

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[395:2820](1140104.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="v.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.1"></span>συγκεκραμένους</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.2"></span>. Sav. and Ben. have</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.3"></span>συγκεκραμένης</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.4"></span>(i.e.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.5"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.6"></span>κοῆς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.7"></span>). The received text of the
New Testament has</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.8"></span>συγκεκραμένος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.9"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.10"></span>the word not being mixed.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p27.11"></span> \[This is also given in the
margin of W. H. and of the Revisers.\] Lachmann \[and Tisch., W. H., and
the Revisers\] read</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.12"></span>συγκεκερασμένους</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p27.13"></span>, which is the reading of some <span
class="c11"><span id="v.x-p27.14"></span>mss.</span> of St.
Chrys.</span>

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[395:2821](1140104.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="v.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p29.1"></span>And.</span>

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[395:2822](1140104.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="v.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p32.1"></span>αἰνίττεσθαι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p32.2"></span>. That is, is indirectly condemned, by the
contrast of the conduct of Caleb and Joshua. St. Chrys. reverses the
expression of the Epistle, and says,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p32.3"></span>Caleb and Joshua were not mixed with the
unbelievers,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p32.4"></span>when the Apostle had said,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p32.5"></span>the unbelievers were not mixed
with them.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[395:2823](1140104.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="v.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.1"></span>προείρηται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.2"></span>. This is the correct reading of the sacred
text</span> <span id="v.x-p35.3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.4"></span>[Heb. iv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)<span
id="v.x-p35.5"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.6"></span>: for which the common editions \[i.e. the</span>
*Textus Receptus* <span class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p35.7"></span>. All
critical editors have</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.8"></span>προείρ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.9"></span>.—F.G.\] have</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.10"></span>εἴρηται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.11"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p35.12"></span>it is said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[395:2824](1140104.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="v.x-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p37.1"></span>σαββατισμὸς</span>

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[396:2825](1140104.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="v.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p40.1"></span>St. Chrys. returns here to</span> [Heb.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span id="v.x-p40.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p40.3"></span></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p40.4"></span>, connecting the</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p40.5"></span>To-day if ye hear His
voice, harden not your heart,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p40.6"></span>with</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p40.7"></span>Exhort one another daily while it is called
To-day</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p40.8"></span>: as he
had said,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p40.9"></span>to-day is at every time.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[396:2826](1140104.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="v.x-p40.11"></span>

<span id="v.x-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p41.1"></span>The words of the Apostle,</span> [Heb.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#017)<span id="v.x-p41.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p41.3"></span></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p41.4"></span>, are those of</span> <span
id="v.x-p41.5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p41.6"></span>[Num. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029)<span id="v.x-p41.7"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p41.8"></span>, &c., where murmuring
is the sin specified.</span>

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[396:2827](1140104.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="v.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p44.1"></span>παρακαλεῖτε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p44.2"></span>. The word includes the idea of comforting and
encouraging as well as of exhorting.</span>

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[397:2828](1140104.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="v.x-p50.4"></span>

<span id="v.x-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p51.1"></span>\[The insatiate yet satisfied;</span>

<span id="v.x-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p52.1"></span>The full yet craving still.</span>

<span id="v.x-p53"></span> *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.x-p53.1"></span>Rhythm of Bernard de Morlaix</span>* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.x-p53.2"></span>, translated by Dr. Neale, p.
15.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VII](1140105)
