[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140099)  [Next](1140101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi"></span> <span id="v.vi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_370"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span> <span id="v.vi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.vi-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="v.vi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>“Who being the brightness of His Glory and the
express Image of His person, and upholding all things by the word of His
power, when He had by Himself purged our sins.”

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vi-p4.1"></span>Everywhere</span> indeed a reverential mind is
requisite, but especially when we say or hear anything of God: Since
neither can tongue speak nor thought  <span
id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734) hear anything suitable to our God.
And why speak I of tongue or thought?  <span
id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735) For not even the understanding
 <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) which far excels these, will
be able to comprehend anything accurately, when we desire to utter aught
concerning God. For if “the peace of God surpasseth all understanding” (
[Philip. iv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007) <span
id="v.vi-p7.3"></span> ), and “the things which are prepared for them
that love Him have not entered into the heart of man” ( [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009) <span id="v.vi-p7.4"></span> ); much
more He Himself, the God of peace, the Creator of all things, doth by a
wide measure exceed our reasoning. We ought therefore to receive all
things with faith and reverence, and when our discourse  <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) fails through weakness, and is not
able to set forth accurately the things which are spoken, then
especially to glorify God, for that we have such a God, surpassing both
our thought and our conception.  <span
id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) For many of our conceptions  <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739) about God, we are unable to
express, as also many things we express, but have not strength to
conceive of them. As for instance:—That God is everywhere, we know; but
how, we no longer understand.  <span
id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) That there is a certain incorporeal
power the cause of all our good things, we know: but how it is, or what
it is, we know not. Lo! we speak, and do not understand. I said, That He
is everywhere, but I do not understand it. I said, That He is without
beginning, but I do not understand it. I said, That He begat from
Himself, and again I know not how I shall understand it. And some things
there are which we may not even speak—as for instance, thought conceives
 <span id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) but cannot utter.

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>And to show thee that even Paul is weak and
doth not put out his illustrations with exactness; and to make thee
tremble and refrain from searching too far, hear what he says, having
called Him Son and named Him Creator, “Who being the brightness of His
Glory, and the express image of His person.”

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span> This we must receive with reverence and
clear of all incongruities. “The brightness of His glory,” saith he. But
observe in what reference he understands this, and so do thou receive
it:—that He is of Him:  <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742)
without passion: that He is neither greater, nor less; since there are
some, who derive certain strange things from the illustration. For, say
they, “the brightness” is not substantial,  <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) but hath its being in another. Now
do not thou, O man, so receive it, neither be thou sick of the disease
of Marcellus  <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) and Photinus.
 <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) For he hath a remedy for
thee close at hand, that thou fall not into that imagination, nor doth
he leave thee to be hurried down into that fatal malady. And what saith
he? “And the express image of His person” \[or “subsistence”  <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746) \]: that is, just as He \[the
Father\] is personally subsisting, being in need of nothing,  <span
id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) so also the Son. For he saith this
here, showing the undeviating similitude  <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) and the peculiar image of the
Prototype, that He \[the Son\] is in subsistence by Himself.

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span>For he who said above, that “by Him He made
all things” here assigns to Him absolute authority. For what doth he
add? “And upholding all things by the word of His power”; that we might
hence infer not merely His being the express image of His Person, but
also His governing all things with absolute authority.

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span>See then, how he applies to the Son that
which is proper to the Father. For on this account he did not say
simply, “and upholding all things,” nor did he say, “by His power,” but,
“by the word of His power.” For much as just now we saw him gradually
ascend and descend; so also now, as by steps, he goes up on high, then
again descends, and saith, “by whom also He made the worlds.”

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span>Behold how here also he goes on two paths, by
the one leading us away from Sabellius, by the other from Arius, yea and
on another, that He \[Christ\] should not be accounted un <span
id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_371"></span> originated,
 <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) which he does also
throughout, nor yet alien from God. For if, even after so much, there
are some who assert that He is alien, and assign to Him another father,
and say that He is at variance with Him;—had \[Paul\] not declared these
things, what would they not have uttered?

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span> How then does he this? When he is compelled
to heal, then is he compelled also to utter lowly things: as for
instance, “He appointed Him” (saith he) “heir of all things,” and “by
Him He made the worlds.” ( *Supra* , [Heb.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="v.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span>[Heb.
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="v.vi-p28.1"></span> .)
Nowhere is there the saying “by whom,” or that “by Him He made the
worlds.” What then? Were they not made by Him? Yes, but not, as thou
sayest or imaginest, “as by an instrument”: nor as though He would not
have made them unless the Father had reached out a hand to Him. For as
He “judgeth no man” ( [John v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)
<span id="v.vi-p28.2"></span> ), and is said to judge by the Son, in
that He begat Him a judge; so also, to create by Him, in that He begat
Him a Creator. And if the Father be the original cause of Him, in that
He is Father, much more of the things which have been made by Him. When
therefore he would show that He is of Him, he speaks of necessity lowly
things. But when he would utter high things, Marcellus takes a handle,
and Sabellius; avoiding however the excess of both, he holds a middle
\[way\]. For neither does he dwell on the humiliation, lest Paul of
Samosata should obtain a standing place, nor yet does he for ever abide
in the high sayings; but shows on the contrary His abundant nearness,
lest Sabellius rush in upon him. He names Him “Son,” and immediately
Paul of Samosata comes on him, saying that He is a son, as the many are.
But he gives him a fatal wound, calling Him “Heir.” But yet, with Arius,
he is shameless. For the saying, “He appointed Him heir,” they both
hold: the former one saying, it comes of weakness; the other still
presses objections, endeavoring to support himself by the clause which
follows. For by saying, “by whom also He made the worlds,” he strikes
backwards the impudent Samosatene: while Arius still seems to be strong.
Nevertheless see how he smites him likewise, saying again, “who being
the brightness of His glory.” But behold! Sabellius again springs on us,
with Marcellus, and Photinus: but on all these also he inflicts one
blow, saying, “and the express image of His person and upholding all
things by the word of His power.” Here again he wounds Marcion too;
 <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) not very severely, but
however he doth wound him. For through the whole of this Epistle he is
fighting against them.

<span id="v.vi-p30"></span>But the very thing which he said, “the
brightness of the glory,” hear also Christ Himself saying, “I am the
Light of the world.” ( [John viii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)
<span id="v.vi-p30.1"></span> .) Therefore he \[the Apostle\] uses the
word “brightness,” showing that this was said in the sense of “Light of
Light.” Nor is it this alone which he shows, but also that He hath
enlightened our souls; and He hath Himself manifested the Father, and by
“the brightness” he has indicated the nearness of the Being \[of the
Father and the Son  <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) \].
Observe the subtlety of his expressions. He hath taken one essence and
subsistence to indicate two subsistences. Which he also doth in regard
to the knowledge of the Spirit  <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) ; for as he saith that the
knowledge of the Father is one with that of the Spirit, as being indeed
one, and in nought varying from itself ( [1 Cor. ii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010) <span id="v.vi-p32.2"></span> ):
so also here he hath taken hold of one certain \[thing\] whereby to
express the subsistence of the Two.  <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753)

<span id="v.vi-p34"></span>And he adds that He is “the express Image.”
<span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_372"></span> For
the “express Image” is something other  <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754) than its Prototype: yet not Another
in all respects, but as to having real subsistence. Since here also the
term, “express image,” indicates there is no variation from that whereof
it is the “express image”: its similarity in all respects. When
therefore he calls Him both Form,  <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755) and express Image, what can they
say? “Yea,” saith he, “man is also called an Image of God.”  <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756) What then! is he so \[an image of
Him\] as the Son is? No (saith he) but because the term, image, doth not
show resemblance. And yet, in that man is called an Image, it showeth
resemblance, as in man. For what God is in Heaven, that man is on earth,
I mean as to dominion. And as he hath power over all things on earth, so
also hath God power over all things which are in heaven and which are on
earth. But otherwise, man is not called “Express image,” he is not
called Form: which phrase declares the substance, or rather both
substance and similarity in substance. Therefore just as “the form of a
slave” ( [Phil. 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="v.vi-p37.5"></span> )
expresses no other thing than a man without variation  <span
id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) \[from human nature\], so also “the
form of God” expresses no other thing than God.

<span id="v.vi-p39"></span>“Who being” (saith he) “the brightness of His
glory.” See what Paul is doing. Having said, “Who being the brightness
of His glory,” he added again, “He sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty”: what names he hath used, nowhere finding a name for the
Substance. For neither “the Majesty,” nor “the Glory” setteth forth the
Name, which he wishes to say, but is not able to find a name. For this
is what I said at the beginning, that oftentimes we think something, and
are not able to express \[it\]: since not even the word God is a name of
substance, nor is it at all possible to find a name of that Substance.

<span id="v.vi-p40"></span>And what marvel, if it be so in respect of
God, since not even in respect of an Angel, could one find a name
expressive of his substance? Perhaps too, neither in respect of the
soul. For this name \[soul\] doth not seem to me to be significative of
the substance thereof, but of breathing. For one may see that the same
\[thing\] is called both Soul and Heart and Mind: for, saith he, “Create
in me a clean heart, O God” ( [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010) <span id="v.vi-p40.1"></span> ),
and one may often see that it \[the soul\] is called spirit.

<span id="v.vi-p41"></span>“And upholding all things by the word of His
power.” Tell me, “God said” (it is written), “Let there be light” (
[Gen. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003) <span
id="v.vi-p41.1"></span> ): “the Father, saith one,  <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) commanded, and the Son obeyed”? But
behold here He also \[the Son\] acts by word. For (saith he), “And
upholding all things”—that is, governing; He holds together what would
fall to pieces; For, to hold the world together, is no less than to make
it, but even greater (if one must say a strange thing). For the one is
to bring forward something out of things which are not: but the other,
when things which have been made are about to fill back into
non-existence, to hold and fasten them together, utterly at variance as
they are with each other: this is indeed great and wonderful, and a
certain proof of exceeding power.

<span id="v.vi-p43"></span> Then showing the easiness, he said,
“upholding”: (he did not say, governing,  <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) from the figure of those who simply
with their finger move anything, and cause it to go round.) Here he
shows both the mass of the creation to be great, and that this greatness
is nothing to Him. Then again he shows the freedom from the labor,
saying, “By the word of His power.” Well said he, “By the word.” For
since, with us, a word is accounted to be a bare thing, he shows that it
is not bare with God. But, how “He upholdeth by the word,” he hath not
further added: for neither is it possible to know. Then he added
concerning His majesty: for thus John also did: having said that “He is
God” ( [John i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001) <span
id="v.vi-p44.2"></span> ), he brought in the handiwork of the Creation.
For the same thing which the one indirectly expressed, saying, “In the
beginning was the Word,” and “All things were made by Him” ( [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003) <span id="v.vi-p44.3"></span> ),
this did the other also openly declare by “the Word,” and by saying “by
whom also He made the worlds.” For thus he shows Him to be both a
Creator, and before all ages. What then? when the prophet saith,
concerning the Father, “Thou art from everlasting and to everlasting” (
[Ps. xc. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002) <span
id="v.vi-p44.4"></span> ), and concerning the Son, that He is before all
ages, and the maker of all things—what can they say? Nay rather, when
the very thing which was spoken of the Father,—“He which was before the
worlds,”—this one may see spoken of the Son also? And that which one
saith, “He was life” ( [John i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)
<span id="v.vi-p44.5"></span> ), pointing out the preservation of the
creation, that Himself is the Life of all things,—so also saith this
other, “and upholding all things by the word of His power”: not as the
Greeks who defraud Him, as much as in them lies, both of Creation
itself, and of Providence, shutting up His power, to reach only as far
as to the Moon.

<span id="v.vi-p45"></span>“By Himself” (saith he) “having purged our
sins.” Having spoken concerning those marvelous and great matters, which
are most above us, he proceeds to speak also afterwards concerning His
care for men. For indeed the former expression, “and upholding all
things,” also was universal: nevertheless this is far greater, for it
<span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_373"></span> also
is universal: for, for His part, “all” men believed.  <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) As John also, having said, “He was
life,” and so pointed out His providence, saith again, and “He was
light.”

<span id="v.vi-p47"></span>“By Himself,” saith he, “having purged our
sins, He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.” He here
setteth down two very great proofs of His care: first the “purifying us
from our sins,” then the doing it “by Himself.” And in many places, thou
seest him making very much of this,—not only of our reconciliation with
God, but also of this being accomplished through the Son. For the gift
being truly great, was made even greater by the fact that it was through
the Son.

<span id="v.vi-p48"></span> For  <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) in saying, “He sat on the right
hand,” and, “having by Himself purged our sins,”—though he had put us in
mind of the Cross, he quickly added the mention of the resurrection and
ascension. And see his unspeakable wisdom: he said not, “He was
commanded to sit down,” but “He sat down.” Then again, lest thou
shouldest think that He standeth, he subjoins, “For to which of the
angels said He at any time, Sit thou on My right hand.”

<span id="v.vi-p50"></span>“He sat” (saith he) “on the right hand of the
Majesty on high.” What is this “on high”? Doth he enclose God in place?
Away with such a thought! but just as, when he saith, “on the right
hand,” he did not describe Him as having figure, but showed His equal
dignity with the Father; so, in saying “on high,” he did not enclose Him
there, but expressed the being higher than all things, and having
ascended up above all things. That is, He attained even unto the very
throne of the Father: as therefore the Father is on high, so also is He.
For the “sitting together” implies nothing else than equal dignity. But
if they say, that He said, “Sit Thou,” we may ask them, What then? did
He speak to Him standing? Moreover, he said not that He commanded, not
that He enjoined, but that “He said”: for no other reason, than that
thou mightest not think Him without origin and without cause. For that
this is why he said it, is evident from the place of His sitting. For
had he intended to signify inferiority, he would not have said, “on the
right hand,” but on the left hand.

<span id="v.vi-p51"></span> [Heb.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="v.vi-p51.1"></span> .
“Being made,” saith he, “so much better than the angels, as He hath by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they.” The “being made,”
here, is instead of “being shown forth,” as one may say. Then also from
what does he reason confidently? From the Name. Seest thou that the name
Son is wont to declare true relationship? And indeed if He were not a
true Son (and “true” is nothing else than “of Him”), how does he reason
confidently from this? For if He be Son only by grace, He not only is
not “more excellent than the angels,” but is even less than they. How?
Because righteous men too were called sons; and the name son, if it be
not a genuine son, doth not avail to show the “excellency.” When too he
would point out that there is a certain difference between creatures and
their maker, hear what he saith:

<span id="v.vi-p52"></span> [Heb.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span id="v.vi-p52.1"></span> .
“For to which of the Angels said He at any time, Thou art My Son, this
day have I begotten Thee. And again, I will be to Him a Father, and He
shall be to Me a Son”? For these things indeed are spoken with reference
also to the flesh: “I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me a
Son”—while this,  <span id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) “Thou art
My Son, this day have I begotten Thee,” expresses nothing else than
“from \[the time\] that God is.” For as He is said to be,  <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) from the time present (for this
befits Him more than any other), so also the \[word\] “To-day” seems to
me to be spoken here with reference to the flesh. For when He hath taken
hold of it, thenceforth he speaks out all boldly. For indeed the flesh
partakes of the high things, just as the Godhead of the lowly. For He
who disdained not to become man, and did not decline the reality, how
should He have declined the expressions?

<span id="v.vi-p55"></span>Seeing then that we know these things, let us
be ashamed of nothing, nor have any high thoughts. For if He Himself
being God and Lord and Son of God, did not decline to take the form of a
slave, much more ought we to do all things, though they be lowly. For
tell me, O man, whence hast thou high thoughts? from things of this
life? but these or ever they appear, run by. Or, from things spiritual?
nay, this is itself one spiritual excellency,—to have no high thoughts.

<span id="v.vi-p56"></span>Wherefore then dost thou cherish high
thoughts? because thou goest on aright? hear Christ saying, “When ye
have done all things, say, we are unprofitable servants, for we have
done that which was our duty to do.” ( [Luke xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010) <span id="v.vi-p56.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.vi-p57"></span>Or because of thy wealth hast thou high
thoughts? Dost thou not see those before thee, how they departed naked
and desolate? did we not come naked into life, and naked also shall
depart? who hath high thoughts on having what is another’s? for they who
will use it to their own enjoyment alone, are deprived of it how <span
id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_374"></span> ever
unwillingly, often before death, and at death certainly. But (saith one)
while we live we use them as we will. First of all, one doth not lightly
see any man using what he hath as he will. Next, if a man do even use
things as he will, neither is this a great matter: for the present time
is short compared with the ages without end. Art thou high-minded, O
man, because thou art rich? on what account? for what cause? for this
befalleth also robbers, and thieves, and man-slayers, and effeminate,
and whoremongers, and all sorts of wicked men. Wherefore then art thou
high-minded? Since if thou hast made meet use of it, thou must not be
high-minded, lest thou profane the commandment: but if unmeet, by this
indeed \[it has come to pass that\] thou art become a slave of money,
and goods, and art overcome by them. For tell me, if any man sick of a
fever should drink much water, which for a short space indeed quencheth
his thirst, but afterwards kindleth the flame, ought he to be
high-minded? And what, if any man have many cares without cause, ought
he therefore to be high-minded? tell me, wherefore? because thou hast
many masters? because thou hast ten thousand cares? because many will
flatter thee? \[Surely not.\] For thou art even their slave. And to
prove that to thee, hear plainly. The other affections which are within
us, are in some cases useful. For instance, Anger is often useful. For
(saith he) “unjust wrath shall not be innocent” ( [Ecclesiasticus
1.22](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#022)<span id="v.vi-p57.1"></span> ):
wherefore it is possible for one to be justly in wrath. And again, “He
that is angry with his brother without cause,  <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) shall be in danger of hell.” (
[Matt. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022) <span
id="v.vi-p58.4"></span> .) Again for instance, emulation, desire, \[are
useful\]: the one when it hath reference to the procreation of children,
the other when he directs his emulation to excellent things. As Paul
also saith, “It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing”
( [Gal. iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018) <span
id="v.vi-p58.5"></span> ) and, “Covet earnestly the best gifts.” ( [1
Cor. xii. 31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031) <span
id="v.vi-p58.6"></span> .) Both therefore are useful: but an insolent
spirit is in no case good, but is always unprofitable and hurtful.

<span id="v.vi-p59"></span>However, if a man must be proud, \[let it
be\] for poverty, not for wealth. Wherefore? Because he who can live
upon a little, is far greater and better than he who cannot. For tell
me, supposing certain persons called to the Imperial City, if some of
them should need neither beasts, nor slaves, nor umbrellas, nor
lodging-places, nor sandals, nor vessels, but it should suffice them to
have bread, and to take water from the wells,—while others of them
should say, “unless ye give us conveyances, and a soft bed, we cannot
come; unless also we have many followers, unless we may be allowed
continually to rest ourselves, we cannot come, nor unless we have the
use of beasts, unless too we may travel but a small portion of the
day—and we have need of many other things also”: whom should we admire?
those or these? plainly, these who require nothing. So also here: some
need many things for the journey through this life; others, nothing. So
that it would be more fitting to be proud, for poverty if it were
fitting at all.

<span id="v.vi-p60"></span>“But the poor man,” they say, “is
contemptible.” Not he, but those who despise him. For why do not I
despise those who know not how to admire what they ought? Why, if a
person be a painter, he will laugh to scorn all who jeer at him, so long
as they are uninstructed; nor doth he regard the things which they say,
but is content with his own testimony. And shall we depend on the
opinion of the many? Therefore, we are worthy of contempt when men
despise us for our poverty, and we do not despise them nor call them
miserable.

<span id="v.vi-p61"></span>And I say not how many sins are produced by
wealth, and how many good things by poverty. But rather, neither wealth
nor poverty is excellent in itself, but through those who use it. The
Christian shines out in poverty rather than in riches. How? He will be
less arrogant, more sober-minded, graver, more equitable, more
considerate: but he that is in wealth, hath many impediments to these
things. Let us see then what the rich man does, or rather, he who useth
his wealth amiss. Such an one practiceth rapine, fraud, violence. Men’s
unseemly loves, unholy unions, witchcrafts, poisonings, all their other
horrors,—wilt thou not find them produced by wealth? Seest thou, that in
poverty rather than in wealth the pursuit of virtue is less laborious?
For do not, I beseech thee, think that because rich men do not suffer
punishment here, neither do they sin. Since if it were easy for a rich
man to suffer punishment, thou wouldest surely have found the prisons
filled with them. But among its other evils, wealth hath this also, that
he who possesseth it, transgressing in evil with impunity, will never be
stayed from doing so, but will receive wounds without remedies, and no
man will put a bridle on him.

<span id="v.vi-p62"></span>And if a man choose, he will find that
poverty affords us more resources even for pleasure. How? Because it is
freed from cares, hatred, fighting, contention, strife, from evils out
of number.

<span id="v.vi-p63"></span>Therefore let us not follow after wealth, nor
be forever envying those who possess much. But let those of us who have
wealth, use it aright; and those who have not, let us not grieve for
this, but give thanks for all things unto God, because He enableth us to
receive with little labor the same reward with the rich, or even (if we
will) a greater: and from small means we shall <span id="page_375">p.
375</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_375"></span> have great gains. For so he
that brought the two talents, was admired and honored equally with him
who brought the five. Now why? Because he was entrusted with \[but\] two
talents, yet he accomplished all that in him lay, and brought in what
was entrusted to him, doubled. Why then are we eager to have much
entrusted to us, when we may by a little reap the same fruits, or even
greater? when the labor indeed is less, but the reward much more? For
more easily will a poor man part with his own, than a rich man who hath
many and great possessions. What, know ye not, that the more things a
man hath, the more he setteth his love upon? Therefore, lest this befall
us, let us not seek after wealth, nor let us be impatient of poverty,
nor make haste to be rich: and let those of us who have \[riches\] so
use them as Paul commanded. (“They that have,” saith he, “as though they
had not, and they that use this world as not abusing it”— [1 Cor.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="v.vi-p63.1"></span> ):
that we may obtain the good things promised. And may it be granted to us
all to obtain them, by the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor,
now, and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[370:2735](1140100.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="v.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p5.1"></span>διάνοια οὖς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p5.2"></span>, Sav. Ben. in both places.</span>

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[370:2736](1140100.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="v.vi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p6.1"></span>διάνοια οὖς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p6.2"></span>, Sav. Ben. in both places.</span>

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[370:2737](1140100.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="v.vi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p7.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p7.2"></span>νοῦς</span>

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[370:2738](1140100.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="v.vi-p7.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p8.1"></span>λόγος</span>

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[370:2739](1140100.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="v.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>τὴν ἔννοιαν, τὸν λόγον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p9.2"></span>, Sav. Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[370:2740](1140100.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="v.vi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p10.1"></span>ὧ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p10.2"></span>ν νοοῦμεν</span>

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[370:2741](1140100.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="v.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p11.1"></span>νοοῦμεν</span>

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[370:2742](1140100.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="v.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p12.1"></span>νοεῖ ἡ διάνοια</span>

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[370:2743](1140100.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="v.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p15.1"></span>ὅ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p15.2"></span>τι ἐξ αὐτοῦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p15.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p15.4"></span>that He \[Christ\] is of Him \[the
Father\].</span> ”

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[370:2744](1140100.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="v.vi-p15.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p16.2"></span>νυπόστατον</span>

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[370:2745](1140100.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="v.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p17.1"></span>Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra lapsed towards
Sabellianism, holding, as it seems, virtually at least, that our Lord is
not a Person eternally distinct from the Father, but, a Manifestation of
the Father, lasting from the Incarnation to the Judgment. His views are
anathematized in 1 Conc. Constantinop. Canon 1.</span>

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[370:2746](1140100.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="v.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p18.1"></span>Photinus Bishop of Sirmium, who had been Deacon
under Marcellus, and carried his theory out, maintaining our Lord to
have had no distinct existence before His Birth of Mary. Socr. *E. H.*
2. 29. His doctrine too was condemned at Constantinople,</span> ubi sup

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[370:2747](1140100.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="v.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.2"></span>ποστάσεως</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.3"></span>. St. Chrys. understands the word to mean here
neither</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.4"></span>substance</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.5"></span>nor</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.6"></span>Person,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.7"></span>but, if we may use such a word,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.8"></span>substantiality,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.9"></span>or</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.10"></span>substantive
existence,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p19.11"></span>which in speaking</span> *de Divinis* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.12"></span>we call</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.13"></span>Personality.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p19.14"></span> See below, page 371, note
5.</span>

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[370:2748](1140100.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="v.vi-p19.15"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p20.1"></span>Sav. Ben. add</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p20.2"></span>πρὸς ὑπόστασιν</span>

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[370:2749](1140100.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="v.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p21.2"></span>παράλλακτον</span>

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[371:2750](1140100.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="v.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p25.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p25.2"></span>ναρχον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p25.3"></span>. On this third heresy respecting the Holy
Trinity, see St. Greg. Naz. *Orat* . ii. 37; xx. 6; in both which places
it is, as here, mentioned as the third form of error with Sabellianism
and Arianism. See also Bp. Bull, *Def. Fid. N.* iv. i. 8. The mention of
this is not found in the Common text, in which the whole passage is
recast.</span>

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[371:2751](1140100.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="v.vi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p29.1"></span>Because Marcion, holding the Creation to be evil,
denied the Son’s preserving Power.</span>

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[371:2752](1140100.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="v.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p31.1"></span>καὶ διὰ τοῦ ἀπαυγάσματος τῆς οὐσίας τὴν ἐγγύτητα
ἔδειξεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p31.2"></span>. Sav.
and Ben. read</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p31.3"></span>διὰ δὲ τοῦ ἀ. τὸ ἴσον ἐσήμανε τῆς οὐσίας, καὶ τὴν
πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ἐγγύτητα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p31.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p31.5"></span>By &c. he indicated the equality of His Substance
and His nearness to the Father.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[371:2753](1140100.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="v.vi-p31.6"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p32.1"></span>Cf.</span> *forsitan.*

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[371:2754](1140100.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="v.vi-p32.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p33.1"></span>εἰς τὴν τῶν δυὸ ὑπόστασιν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.2"></span>. Sav. and Ben. read</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.4"></span>. τ. τ. δ. ὑποστάσεων
δήλωσιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.5"></span>,</span>
“ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.6"></span>whereby to show the
two Subsistencies.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p33.7"></span> Mr. Field says that the old translation of
Mutianus in some degree confirms this latter reading, which is easier.
The word</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p33.8"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p33.9"></span>πόστασιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p33.10"></span>in the singular is used in the sense of</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.11"></span>Personality,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p33.12"></span>as above, p. 370, note
12.</span>

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[372:2755](1140100.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="v.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p35.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p35.2"></span>λλος τις</span>

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[372:2756](1140100.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="v.vi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p36"></span> <span id="v.vi-p36.1"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p36.2"></span>[Philip. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="v.vi-p36.3"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p36.4"></span>, see below.</span>

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[372:2757](1140100.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="v.vi-p36.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p37.1"></span>εἰκόνος εἰκὼν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p37.2"></span>, Ben.: </span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p37.3"></span>εἰκών</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p37.4"></span>(only), Sav.</span>

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[372:2758](1140100.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="v.vi-p37.6"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p38.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p38.2"></span>παράλλακτον</span>

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[372:2759](1140100.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="v.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p42.1"></span>This is an heretical objection, as is expressed
by the reading in the editions of Sav. and Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[372:2760](1140100.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="v.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p44.1"></span>κυβερνῶν</span>

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[373:2761](1140100.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="v.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p46.1"></span>\[i.e. so far as Christ’s work for men was
concerned, it was universal. He put it in the power of all to
believe.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[373:2762](1140100.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="v.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p49.1"></span>γὰρ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p49.2"></span>, om. S.</span>

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[373:2763](1140100.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="v.vi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.1"></span>Sav. and Ben. omit the words</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.2"></span>σήμερον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.3"></span>…</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.4"></span>σε</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.5"></span>, and for</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.6"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.7"></span>ξ οὗ ἐστιν ὁ θεός</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.8"></span>ὥσπερ γὰρ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.9"></span>have</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.10"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.11"></span>ξ αὐτοῦ ἐστιν· ὥσπερ
δὲ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.12"></span>, so that
the passage runs;</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.13"></span>but this,</span> ‘ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.14"></span>thou art My Son,</span> ’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vi-p53.15"></span>expresses nothing else than
that He is of Him. And just as,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.16"></span>&c…The corrector seems to have misapprehended
the meaning of</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.17"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.18"></span>ξ οὗ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p53.19"></span>in this place.</span>

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[373:2764](1140100.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="v.vi-p53.20"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p54.1"></span>ὢ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p54.2"></span>ν</span>

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[374:2765](1140100.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="v.vi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p58.1"></span>\[St. Chrys. here follows a text having the
gloss</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p58.2"></span>εἰκῆ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p58.3"></span>now rejected by nearly all critical
editors.—F.G.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily III](1140101)
