[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140026)  [Next](1140028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxiv"></span> <span id="iv.xxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxiv-p2.2"></span>[John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xxiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p3"></span>“Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine
hour is not yet come.”

<span id="iv.xxiv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p4.1"></span>In</span> preaching the word there is some
toil, and this Paul declares when he says, “Let the elders that rule
well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the
word and doctrine.” ( [1 Tim. v. 17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)
<span id="iv.xxiv-p4.2"></span> .) Yet it is in your power to make this
labor light or heavy; for if you reject our words, or if without
actually rejecting them you do not show them forth in your works, our
toil will be heavy, because we labor uselessly and in vain: while if ye
heed them and give proof of it by your works, we shall not even feel the
toil, because the fruit produced by our labor will not suffer the
greatness of that labor to appear. So that if you would rouse our zeal,
and not quench or weaken it, show us, I beseech you, your fruit, that we
may behold the fields waving  <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556)
with corn, and being supported by hopes of an abundant crop, and
reckoning up your  <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) riches, may
not be slothful  <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) in carrying on
this good traffic.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p8"></span>It is no slight question which is proposed
to us also to-day. For first, when the mother of Jesus says, “They have
no wine,” Christ replies, “Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine,
hour is not yet come.” And then, having thus spoken, He did as His
mother had said; an action which needs enquiry no less than the words.
Let us then, after calling upon Him who wrought the miracle, proceed to
the explanation.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p9"></span> The words are not used in this place only,
but in others also; for the same Evangelist says, “They could not lay
hands on Him,  <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) because His hour
was not yet come” ( [John 8.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xxiv-p10.2"></span> ); and again, “No man laid hands on Him,
because His hour was not yet come” ( [John
7.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)<span id="iv.xxiv-p10.3"></span>
); and again, “The hour is come, glorify Thy Son.” ( [John
17.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxiv-p10.4"></span>
.) What then do the words mean? I have brought together more instances,
that I may give one explanation of all. And what is that explanation?
Christ did not say, “Mine hour is not yet come,” as being subject to the
necessity of seasons, or the observance of an “hour”; how can He be so,
who is Maker of seasons, and Creator of the times and the ages? To what
else then did He allude? He desires to show  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) this; that He works all things at
their convenient season, not doing all at once; because a kind of
confusion and disorder would have ensued, if, instead of working all at
their proper seasons, He had mixed all together, His Birth, His
Resurrection, and His coming to Judgment. Observe this; creation was to
be, yet not all at once; man and woman were to be created, yet not even
these together; mankind were to be condemned to death, and there was to
be a resurrection, yet the interval between the two was to be great; the
law was to be given, but not grace with it, each was to be dispensed at
its proper time. Now Christ was not subject to the necessity of seasons,
but rather settled their order, since He is their Creator; and therefore
He saith in this place, “Mine hour is not yet come.” And His meaning is,
that as yet He was not manifest  <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561)
to the many, nor had He even His whole company of disciples; Andrew
followed Him, and next to  <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) him
Philip, but no one else. And moreover, none of these, not even His
mother nor His brethren, knew Him as they ought; for after His many
miracles, the Evangelist says of His brethren, “For neither did His
brethren believe in Him.” ( [John
7.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxiv-p13.1"></span> .)
And those at the wedding did not know Him either, for in their need they
would certainly have come to and entreated Him. Therefore He saith,
“Mine hour is not yet come”; that is, “I am not yet known to the
company, nor are they even aware that the wine has failed; let them
first be sensible of this. I ought not to have been told it from thee;
thou art My mother, and renderest the miracle suspicious. They who
wanted the wine should have come and besought Me, not that I need this,
but that they might with an entire assent accept the miracle. For one
who knows that he is in need, is very grateful when he obtains
assistance; but one who has not a sense <span id="page_76">p. 76</span>
<span id="iv.xxiv-Page_76"></span> of his need, will never have a plain
and clear sense of the benefit.”

<span id="iv.xxiv-p14"></span> Why then after He had said, “Mine hour is
not yet come,” and given her a denial, did He what His mother desired?
Chiefly it was, that they who opposed Him, and thought that He was
subject to the “hour,” might have sufficient proof that He was subject
to no hour; for had He been so, how could He, before the proper “hour”
was come, have done what He did? And in the next place, He did it to
honor His mother, that He might not seem entirely to contradict and
shame her that bare Him in the presence of so many; and also, that He
might not be thought to want power,  <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) for she brought the servants to Him.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p16"></span> Besides, even while saying to the
Canaanitish woman, “It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to
give  <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) it unto dogs” ( [Matt. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026) <span id="iv.xxiv-p17.2"></span> ),
He still gave the bread, as considering her perseverance; and though
after his first reply, He said, “I am not sent save unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel,” yet even after saying this, He healed the
woman’s daughter. Hence we learn, that although we be unworthy, we often
by perseverance make ourselves worthy to receive. And for this reason
His mother remained by, and openly  <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) brought to Him the servants, that the
request might be made by a greater number; and therefore she added,

<span id="iv.xxiv-p19"></span> [John
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p20"></span> For she knew that His refusal proceeded
not from want of power, but from humility, and that He might not seem
without cause  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) to hurry to
 <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) the miracle; and therefore she
brought the servants.  <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568)

<span id="iv.xxiv-p24"></span> [John
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#007)<span id="iv.xxiv-p24.1"></span> .
“And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of
the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus
said unto them, Fill the waterpots with water; and they filled them up
to the brim.”

<span id="iv.xxiv-p25"></span>It is not without a reason that the
Evangelist says, “After the manner of the purifying of the Jews,” but in
order that none of the unbelievers might suspect that lees having been
left in the vessels, and water having been poured upon and mixed with
them, a very weak wine had been made. Therefore he says, “after the
manner of the purifying of the Jews,” to show that those vessels were
never receptacles for wine. For because Palestine is a country with but
little water, and brooks and fountains were not everywhere to be found,
they always used to fill waterpots with water, so that they might not
have to hasten to the rivers if at any time they were defiled, but might
have the means of purification at hand.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p26"></span> “And why was it, that He did not the
miracle before they filled them, which would have been more marvelous by
far? for it is one thing to change given matter to a different quality,
and another to create matter out of nothing.” The latter would indeed
have been more wonderful, but would not have seemed so credible to the
many. And therefore He often purposely lessens  <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) the greatness of His miracles, that it
may be the more readily received.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p28"></span> “But why,” says one, “did not He Himself
produce the water which He afterwards showed to be wine, instead of
bidding the servants bring it?” For the very same reason; and also, that
He might have those who drew it out to witness that what had been
effected was no delusion since if any had been inclined to be shameless,
those who ministered might have said to them, “We drew the water, we
filled the vessels.” And besides what we have mentioned, He thus
overthrows those doctrines which spring up against the Church. For since
there are some who say that the Creator of the world is another, and
that the things which are seen are not His works, but those of a certain
other opposing god, to curb these men’s madness He doth most of His
miracles on matter found at hand.  <span
id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) Because, had the creator of these been
opposed to Him, He would not have used what was another’s to set forth
His own power. But now to show that it is He who transmutes water in the
vine plants, and who converts the rain by its passage through the root
into wine, He effected that in a moment at the wedding which in the
plant is long in doing. When they had filled the waterpots, He said,

<span id="iv.xxiv-p30"></span> [John
2.8-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxiv-p30.1"></span>
. “Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast; and they bare
it. When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water
knew,) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, and saith unto
him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine, and when men
have well drunk, then that which is worst; but thou hast kept the good
wine until now.”

<span id="iv.xxiv-p31"></span> Here again some mock,  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) saying, “this was an assembly of
drunken men, the sense of the judges was spoilt, and not able to taste
 <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) what was made, or to decide on
what was done, so that they did not know whether what was made was water
or wine: for that they were drunk,” it is alleged, “the ruler himself
has shown by what he said.”  <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="iv.xxiv-Page_77"></span> Now this is most ridiculous, yet even this
suspicion the Evangelist has removed. For he does not say that the
guests gave their opinion on the matter, but “the ruler of the feast,”
who was sober, and had not as yet tasted anything. For of course you are
aware, that those who are entrusted with the management  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) of such banquets are the most sober,
as having this one business, to dispose all things in order and
regularity; and therefore the Lord called such a man’s sober senses to
testify to what was done. For He did not say, “Pour forth to them that
sit at meat,” but, “Bear unto the governor of the feast.”

<span id="iv.xxiv-p35"></span> “And when the ruler of the feast had
tasted the water that was made wine, and knew not whence it was, (but
the servants knew,) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom.”
“And why did he not call the servants? for so the miracle would have
been revealed.” Because Jesus had not Himself revealed what had been
done, but desired that the power of His miracles should be known gently,
little by little. And suppose that it had then been mentioned,  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) the servants who related it would
never have been believed, but would have been thought mad to bear such
testimony to one who at that time seemed to the many a mere man; and
although they knew the certainty of the thing by experience, (for they
were not likely to disbelieve their own hands,) yet they were not
sufficient to convince others. And so He did not reveal it to all, but
to him who was best able to understand what was done, reserving the
clearer knowledge of it for a future time; since after the manifestation
of other miracles this also would be credible. Thus when he was about to
heal the nobleman’s son, the Evangelist has shown that it had already
become more clearly known; for it was chiefly because the nobleman had
become acquainted with the miracle that he called upon Him, as John
incidentally shows when he says, “Jesus came into Cana of Galilee, where
He made the water wine.” ( [John
4.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)<span id="iv.xxiv-p36.1"></span>
.)  And not wine simply, but the best.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p37"></span> \[3.\] For such are the miraculous works
of Christ, they are far more perfect and better than the operations of
nature. This is seen also in other instances; when He restored any
infirm member of the body, He made  <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) it better than the sound.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p39"></span>That it was wine then, and the best of
wine, that had been made, not the servants only, but the bridegroom and
the ruler of the feast would testify; and that it was made by Christ,
those who drew the water; so that although the miracle were not then
revealed, yet it could not in the end be passed in silence, so many and
constraining testimonies had He provided for the future. That He had
made the water wine, He had the servants for witnesses; that the wine
was good that had been made, the ruler of the feast and the bridegroom.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p40"></span>It might be expected that the bridegroom
would reply to this, (the ruler’s speech,) and say something, but the
Evangelist, hastening to more pressing matters, has only touched upon
this miracle, and passed on. For what we needed to learn was, that
Christ made the water wine, and that good wine; but what the bridegroom
said to the governor he did not think it necessary to add. And many
miracles, at first somewhat obscure, have in process of time become more
plain, when reported more exactly by those who knew them from the
beginning.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p41"></span> At that time, then, Jesus made of water
wine, and both then and now He ceases not to change our weak and
unstable  <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) wills. For there are,
yes, there are men who in nothing differ from water, so cold, and weak,
and unsettled. But let us bring those of such disposition to the Lord,
that He may change their will to the quality of wine, so that they be no
longer washy,  <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) but have body,
 <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) and be the cause of gladness in
themselves and others. But who can these cold ones be? They are those
who give their minds to the fleeting things of this present life, who
despise not this world’s luxury, who are lovers of glory and dominion:
for all these things are flowing waters, never stable, but ever rushing
violently down the steep. The rich to-day is poor tomorrow, he who one
day appears with herald, and girdle, and chariot, and numerous
attendants, is often on the next the inhabitant of a dungeon, having
unwillingly quitted all that show to make room for another. Again, the
gluttonous and dissipated  <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) man,
when he has filled himself to bursting,  <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) cannot retain even for a single day
the supply  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) conveyed by his
delicacies, but when that is dispersed, in order to renew it he is
obliged to put in more, differing in nothing from a torrent. For as in
the torrent when the first body of water is gone, others in turn
succeed; so in gluttony, when one repast is removed, we again require
another. And such is the nature and the lot of earthly things, never to
be stable, but to be always pouring and hurrying by; but in the case of
luxury, it is not merely the flowing and hastening by; but many other
things that trouble us. By the violence of its course it wears away
 <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) the strength of the body, and
strips the soul of its manliness, and the strongest currents of rivers
do not so easily eat away their banks and make them sink down, as do
luxury and wantonness sweep away <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="iv.xxiv-Page_78"></span> all the bulwarks of our health; and if you
enter a physician’s house and ask him, you will find that almost all the
causes of diseases arise from this. For frugality and a plain  <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) table is the mother of health, and
therefore physicians  <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) have thus
named it; for they have called the not being satisfied “health,”
(because not to be satisfied with food is health,) and they have spoken
of sparing diet as the “mother of health.” Now if the condition of want
 <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) is the mother of health, it is
clear that fullness is the mother of sickness and debility, and produces
attacks which are beyond the skill even of physicians. For gout in the
feet, apoplexy, dimness of sight, pains in the hands, tremors, paralytic
attacks, jaundice, lingering and inflammatory fevers, and other diseases
many more than these, (for we have not time to go over them all,) are
the natural offspring, not of abstinence and moderate  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) diet, but of gluttony and repletion.
And if you will look to the diseases of the soul that arise from them,
you will see that feelings of coveting, sloth, melancholy, dullness,
impurity, and folly of all kinds, have their origin here. For after such
banquets the souls of the luxurious become no better than asses, being
torn to pieces by such wild beasts as these (passions). Shall I say also
how many pains and displeasures they have who wait upon luxury? I could
not enumerate them all, but by a single principal point I will make the
whole clear. At a table such as I speak of, that is, a sumptuous one,
men never eat with pleasure; for abstinence is the mother of pleasure as
well as health, while repletion is the source and root not only of
diseases, but of displeasure. For where there is satiety there desire
cannot be, and where there is no desire, how can there be pleasure? And
therefore we should find that the poor are not only of better
understanding and healthier than the rich, but also that they enjoy a
greater degree of pleasure. Let us, when we reflect on this, flee
drunkenness and luxury, not that of the table alone, but all other which
is found in the things of this life, and let us take in exchange for it
the pleasure arising from spiritual things, and, as the Prophet says,
delight ourselves in the Lord; “Delight thyself in the Lord, and He
shall give thee the desires of thine heart” ( [Ps. xxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004) <span id="iv.xxiv-p52.1"></span> );
that so that we may enjoy the good things both here and hereafter,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_556"></span>[75:557](1140027.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>κομῶντα</span> .

<span id="fn_557"></span>[75:558](1140027.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p6"></span> al. “our.”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[75:559](1140027.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p7"></span> lit. “numb,” al. “be weary.”

<span id="fn_559"></span>[75:560](1140027.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>οὐδεὶς ἐπίασεν αὐτόν</span> , G. T.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[75:561](1140027.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p11"></span> Ben. Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. read:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxiv-p11.2"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxiv-p11.3"></span>λλὰ διὰ τῶν οὕτως
εἰρημένων τοῦτο δηλῶσαι κ.τ.λ</span> .

<span id="fn_561"></span>[75:562](1140027.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p12"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p12.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. read:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxiv-p12.2"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxiv-p12.3"></span>λλὰ ̓Ιωάννης ἐνταῦθα τὸ
Οὔπω ἤκει ἡ ὥρα μου εἰσάγει τὸν Χριστὸν λέγοντα δεικνὺς ὅτι κ.τ.λ</span>
.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[75:563](1140027.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p13"></span> al. “beside.”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[76:564](1140027.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p15"></span> This passage is wanting in the <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xxiv-p15.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[76:565](1140027.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p17.1"></span>βαλεῖν</span> , G. T.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[76:566](1140027.htm#fr_565) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p18"></span> al. “wisely.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[76:567](1140027.htm#fr_566) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p21.1"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p21.2"></span>πλῶς</span> .

<span id="fn_567"></span>[76:568](1140027.htm#fr_567) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p22.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p22.2"></span>πιῤῥίπτειν</span> .

<span id="fn_568"></span>[76:569](1140027.htm#fr_568) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p23"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p23.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. read:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxiv-p23.2"></span>δἰ ὁ καὶ τὴν ὑπακοὴν
ἀναβάλλεται</span> .

<span id="fn_569"></span>[76:570](1140027.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p27"></span> lit. “clips round.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[76:571](1140027.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p29.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p29.2"></span>ποκειμένων</span> .

<span id="fn_571"></span>[76:572](1140027.htm#fr_571) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p32"></span> al. “impeach.”

<span id="fn_572"></span>[76:573](1140027.htm#fr_572) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p33.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p33.2"></span>ντιλάβεσθαι</span> .

<span id="fn_573"></span>[77:574](1140027.htm#fr_573) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p34.1"></span>διακονίαν</span> .

<span id="fn_574"></span>[77:575](1140027.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p36"></span> al. “examined.”

<span id="fn_575"></span>[77:576](1140027.htm#fr_575) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p38"></span> lit. “showed.”

<span id="fn_576"></span>[77:577](1140027.htm#fr_576) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p42"></span> lit. “flowing away.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[77:578](1140027.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p43.1"></span>διαῤῥεῖν</span> .

<span id="fn_578"></span>[77:579](1140027.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p44.1"></span>τὸ ἐπεστυμμένον</span> , “astringency.”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[77:580](1140027.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p45.1"></span>διασπώμενος</span> .

<span id="fn_580"></span>[77:581](1140027.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p46"></span> lit. “has burst his stomach.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[77:582](1140027.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p47.1"></span>χορηγίαν</span> .

<span id="fn_582"></span>[77:583](1140027.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p48.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p48.2"></span>ποξύει</span> , “abrades.”

<span id="fn_583"></span>[78:584](1140027.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p49.1"></span>λιτὴ</span> .

<span id="fn_584"></span>[78:585](1140027.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p50"></span> lit. “children of phys.”

<span id="fn_585"></span>[78:586](1140027.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxiv-p51.2"></span>νδεία</span> .

<span id="fn_586"></span>[78:587](1140027.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iv.xxiv-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p52"></span> φιλοσόφου .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 2.11](1140028)
