[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140087)  [Next](1140089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxv"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p2.2"></span>[John xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p3"></span>“When Jesus had spoken these words, He
went forth with His disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden,
into the which He entered, and His disciples.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p4.1"></span>An</span> awful thing is death, and very full
of terror, but not to those who have learnt the true wisdom which is
above. For he that knows nothing certain concerning things to come, but
deems it  <span id="fr_2384"></span>[2385](#fn_2384) to be a certain
dissolution and end of life, with reason shudders and is afraid, as
though he were passing into non-existence. But we who, by the grace of
God, have learnt the hidden and secret things of His wisdom, and deem
the action to be a departure to another place, should have no reason to
tremble, but rather to rejoice and be glad, that leaving this perishable
life we go to one far better and brighter, and which hath no end. Which
Christ teaching by His actions, goeth to His Passion, not by constraint
and necessity, but willingly. “These things,” it saith, “Jesus spake,
and departed ‘beyond the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the
which He entered, and His disciples.’”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p6"></span> [John
18.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#002)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p6.1"></span> .
“Judas also, which betrayed Him, knew the place; for Jesus ofttimes
resorted thither with His disciples.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p7"></span>He journeyeth at midnight, and crosseth a
<span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span id="iv.lxxxv-Page_305"></span>
river, and hasteth to come to a place known to the traitor, lessening
the labor to those who plotted against Him, and freeing them from all
trouble; and showeth to the disciples that He came willingly to the
action, (a thing which was most of all sufficient to comfort them,) and
placeth Himself in the garden as in a prison.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p8"></span> “These things spake Jesus unto them.”
“What sayest thou?  <span id="fr_2385"></span>[2386](#fn_2385) Surely He
was speaking with the Father, surely He was praying. Why then dost thou
not say that, ‘having ceased from the prayer,’ He came there?” Because
it was not prayer, but a speech made on account of the disciples. “And
the disciples entered into the garden.” He had so freed them from fear
that they no longer resisted, but entered with Him into the garden. But
how came Judas there, or whence had he gained his information when he
came? It is evident from this circumstance, that Jesus generally  <span
id="fr_2386"></span>[2387](#fn_2386) passed the night out of doors.
 <span id="fr_2387"></span>[2388](#fn_2387) For had He been in the habit
of spending it at home, Judas would not have come to the desert, but to
the house, expecting there to find Him asleep. And lest, hearing of a
“garden,” thou shouldest think that Jesus hid Himself, it addeth, that
“Judas knew the place”; and not simply so,  <span
id="fr_2388"></span>[2389](#fn_2388) but that He “often resorted thither
with His disciples.” For ofttimes He was with them apart, conversing on
necessary matters, and such as it was not permitted to others to hear.
And He did this especially in mountains and gardens, seeking a place
free from disturbance, that their attention might not be distracted from
listening.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p13"></span> [John
18.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#003)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p13.1"></span>
. “Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the Chief
Priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns, and torches, and
weapons.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p14"></span> And these men had often at other times
sent to seize Him, but had not been able; whence it is plain, that at
this time He voluntarily surrendered Himself. And how did they persuade
the band? They were soldiers,  <span
id="fr_2389"></span>[2390](#fn_2389) who had made it their practice to
do anything for money.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p16"></span> [John
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#004)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p16.1"></span>
. “Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon Him, went
forth, and said, Whom seek ye?”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p17"></span>That is, He did not wait to learn this
from their coming, but spake and acted without confusion, as knowing all
these things. “But why come they with weapons, when about to seize Him?”
They feared His followers, and for this reason they came upon Him late
at night. “And He went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p18"></span> [John
18.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p18.1"></span>
. “They answered Him, Jesus of Nazareth.”  <span
id="fr_2390"></span>[2391](#fn_2390)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p20"></span>Seest thou His invincible power, how
being in the midst of them He disabled their eyes? for that the darkness
was not the cause of their not knowing Him, the Evangelist hath shown,
by saying, that they had torches also. And even had there been no
torches, they ought at least to have known Him by His voice; or if they
did not know it, how could Judas be ignorant, who had been so
continually with Him? for he too stood with them, and knew Him no more
than they, but with them fell backward. And Jesus did this to show, that
not only they could not seize Him, but could not even see Him when in
the midst, unless He gave permission.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p21"></span> [John
18.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#007)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p21.1"></span>
. “He saith again, Whom seek ye?”  <span
id="fr_2391"></span>[2392](#fn_2391) What madness! His word threw them
backward, yet not even so did they turn, when they had learnt that His
power was so great, but again set themselves to the same attempt. When
therefore He had fulfilled all that was His, then He gave Himself up.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p23"></span> [John
18.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#008)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p23.1"></span>
. “He answered, I told you that I Am.” ( [John
18.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p23.2"></span>
. “And Judas also which betrayed Him stood with them.”)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p24"></span> See the forbearance  <span
id="fr_2392"></span>[2393](#fn_2392) of the Evangelist, how he doth not
insult over the traitor, but relates what took place, only desiring to
prove one thing, that the whole took place with His own consent. Then,
lest any one should say that He Himself brought them to this, by having
placed Himself into their hands, and revealed Himself to them; after
having shown to them all things which should have been sufficient to
repulse them, when they persevered in their wickedness, and had no
excuse, He put Himself in their hands, saying,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p26"></span>“If therefore ye seek Me, let these go
their way.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p27"></span>Manifesting until the last hour His
lovingkindness towards them. “If,” He saith, “ye want Me, have nothing
to do with these, for, behold, I give Myself up.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p28"></span> [John
18.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#009)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p28.1"></span>
. “That the saying might be fulfilled which He spake, Of those which
Thou gavest Me have I lost none.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p29"></span> By “loss”  <span
id="fr_2393"></span>[2394](#fn_2393) He doth not here mean that which is
of death, but that which is eternal; though the Evangelist in the
present case includes the former also. And one might wonder why they did
not seize them with Him, and cut them to pieces, especially when Peter
had exasperated them by what he did to the servant. Who then restrained
them? No other than that Power which cast them backward. And so the
Evangelist, to show that it did not come to pass through their
intention, but by the power and <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxv-Page_306"></span> decree of Him whom they had seized, has
added, “That the saying might be fulfilled which He spake,” that “not
one, &c.” ( [John 17.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p30.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p31"></span> \[2.\] Peter, therefore, taking courage
from His voice, and from what had already happened, arms himself against
the assailants,  <span id="fr_2394"></span>[2395](#fn_2394) “And how,”
saith some one, “doth he who was bidden not to have a scrip, not to have
two coats, possess a sword?” Methinks he had prepared it long before, as
fearing this very thing which came to pass. But if thou sayest, “How
doth he, who was forbidden even to strike a blow with the hand, become a
manslayer?” He certainly had been commanded not to defend himself, but
here he did not defend himself, but his Master. And besides, they were
not as yet perfect or complete. But if thou desirest to see Peter endued
with heavenly wisdom, thou shalt after this behold him wounded, and
bearing it meekly, suffering ten thousand dreadful things, and not moved
to anger. But Jesus here also worketh a miracle, both showing that we
ought to do good to those who do evil to us, and revealing His own
power. He therefore restored the servant’s ear, and said to Peter, that
“All they that take the sword shall perish by the sword” ( [Matt. xxvi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052) <span id="iv.lxxxv-p32.5"></span>
); and as He did in the case of the basin, when He relaxed his vehemence
 <span id="fr_2395"></span>[2396](#fn_2395) by a threat, so also here.
The Evangelist adds the name of the servant, because the thing done was
very great, not only because He healed him, but because He healed one
who had come against Him, and who shortly after would buffet Him, and
because He stayed the war which was like to have been kindled from this
circumstance against the disciples. For this cause the Evangelist hath
put the name, so that the men of that time might search and enquire
diligently whether these things had really come to pass. And not without
a cause doth he mention the “right ear,” but as I think desiring to show
the impetuosity of the Apostle, that he almost aimed at the head itself.
Yet Jesus not only restraineth him by a threat, but also calmeth him by
other words, saying,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p34"></span> [John
18.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p34.1"></span>
. “The cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not drink it?”  <span
id="fr_2396"></span>[2397](#fn_2396)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p36"></span>Showing, that what was done proceeded not
from their power, but from His consent, and declaring that He was not
one opposed to God but obedient to the Father even unto death.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p37"></span> [John
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p37.1"></span> .
“Then Jesus was taken; and they bound Him, and led Him away to Annas.”
 <span id="fr_2397"></span>[2398](#fn_2397)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p39"></span> Why to Annas? In their pleasure they
made a show of  <span id="fr_2398"></span>[2399](#fn_2398) what had been
done, as though forsooth they had set up a trophy.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p41"></span>“And he was father-in-law to Caiaphas.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p42"></span> [John
18.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#014)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p42.1"></span>
. “Now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p43"></span>Why doth the Evangelist again remind us
of his prophecy? To show that these things were done for our salvation.
And such is the exceeding force of truth, that even enemies proclaimed
these things beforehand. For lest the listener, hearing of bonds, should
be confounded, he reminds him of that prophecy, that the death of Jesus
was the salvation of the world.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p44"></span> [John
18.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p44.1"></span>
. “And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple.”  <span
id="fr_2399"></span>[2400](#fn_2399)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p46"></span> Who is that other disciple? It is the
writer himself. “And wherefore doth he not name himself? When he lay on
the bosom of Jesus, he with reason concealed his name; but now why doth
he this?” For the same reason, for here too he mentions a great good
deed, that when all had started away,  <span
id="fr_2400"></span>[2401](#fn_2400) he followed. Therefore he conceals
himself, and puts Peter before him. He was obliged to mention himself,
that thou mightest understand that he narrates more exactly than the
rest what took place in the hall, as having been himself within. But
observe how he detracts from his own praise; for, lest any one should
ask, “How, when all had retreated, did this man enter in farther than
Simon?” he saith, that he “was known to the high priest.” So that no one
should wonder that he followed, or cry him up for his manliness. But the
wonder was that matter of Peter, that being in such fear, he came even
as far as the hall, when the others had retreated. His coming thither
was caused by love, his not entering within by distress and fear. For
the Evangelist hath recorded these things, to clear a way for excusing
his denial; with regard to himself, he doth not set it down as any great
matter that he was known to the high priest, but since he had said that
he alone with Jesus went in, lest thou shouldest suppose that the action
proceeded from any exalted feelings, he puts also the cause. And that
Peter would have also entered had he been permitted, he shows by the
sequel; for when he went out, and bade the damsel who kept the door
bring in Peter, he straightway came in. But why did he not bring him in
himself? He clung to Christ, and followed Him; on this <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span id="iv.lxxxv-Page_307"></span> account
he bade  <span id="fr_2401"></span>[2402](#fn_2401) the woman bring him
in. What then saith the woman?

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p49"></span> [John
18.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p49.1"></span>
. “Art not thou also one of this man’s disciples? And he saith, I am
not.”  <span id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p51"></span> What sayest thou, Peter? Didst thou not
declare but now, “If need be that I lay down my life for Thee, I will
lay it down”? What hath happened then, that thou canst not even endure
the questioning of a door-keeper? Is it a soldier who questions thee? Is
it one of those who seized Him? No, it is a mean and abject door-keeper,
nor is the questioning of a rough kind.  <span
id="fr_2403"></span>[2404](#fn_2403) She saith not, “Art thou a disciple
of that cheat and corrupter,” but, “of that man,” which was the
expression rather of one pitying and relenting.  <span
id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404) But Peter could not bear any of
these words. The, “Art not thou also,” is said on this account, that
John was within. So mildly did the woman speak. But he perceived none of
this, nor took it into his mind, neither the first time, nor the second,
nor the third, but when the cock crew; nor did this even bring him to
his senses, till Jesus gave him the bitter look. And he stood warming
himself  <span id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405) with the servants of
the high priest, but Christ was kept bound within. This we say not as
accusing Peter, but showing the truth of what had been said by Christ.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p55"></span> [John
18.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p55.1"></span>
. “The high priest then asked Jesus of His disciples, and of His
doctrine.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p56"></span>\[3.\] O the wickedness! Though he had
continually heard Him speaking in the temple and teaching openly, he now
desires to be informed. For since they had no charge to bring, they
enquired concerning His disciples, perhaps where they were, and why He
had collected them, and with what intention, and on what terms. And this
he said, as desiring to prove Him to be a seditious person and an
innovator, since no one gave heed to Him, except them alone, as though
His were some factory of wickedness. What then saith Christ? To
overthrow this, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p57"></span> [John
18.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p57.1"></span>
. “I spake openly to the world, (not to the disciples privately,) I
taught openly in the temple.”  <span
id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p59"></span>“What then, said He nothing in secret?”
He did, but not, as they thought, from fear, and to make conspiracies,
but if at any time His sayings were too high for the hearing of the
many.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p60"></span> [John
18.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#021)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p60.1"></span>
. “Why askest thou Me? Ask them which heard Me.”  <span
id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p62"></span>These are not the words of one speaking
arrogantly, but of one confiding in the truth of what He had said. What
therefore He said at the beginning, “If I bear witness of Myself, My
witness is not true” ( [John 5.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p62.1"></span> ), this He now implieth, desiring to render
His testimony abundantly credible. For when Annas mentioned the
disciples,  <span id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408) what saith He?
“Dost thou ask Me concerning Mine? Ask Mine enemies, ask those who have
plotted against Me, who have bound Me; let them speak.” This is an
unquestionable proof of truth, when one calls his enemies to be
witnesses to what he saith. What then doth the high priest? When it
would have been right thus to have made the enquiry, that person did not
so.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p64"></span> [John
18.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p64.1"></span>
. “And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by smote
Him with the palm of his hand.”  <span
id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p66"></span>What could be more audacious than this?
Shudder, O heaven, be astounded, O earth, at the long-suffering of the
Lord, and the senselessness of the servants! Yet what was it that He
said? He said not, “Why askest thou Me,” as if refusing to speak, but
wishing to remove every pretext for senseless behavior; and being upon
this buffeted, though He was able to shake, to annihilate, or to remove
all things, He doth not any one of these, but speaketh words able to
relax any brutality.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p67"></span> [John
18.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p67.1"></span>
. “And He saith, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil.”
 <span id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p69"></span> That is, “If thou canst lay hold on My
words, declare it; but if thou canst not, why strikest thou Me?” Seest
thou that the judgment-hall is full of tumult, and trouble, and passion,
and confusion? The high priest asked deceitfully and treacherously,
Christ answered in a straightforward manner, and as was meet. What then
was next to be done? Either to refute, or to accept what He said. This
however is not done, but a servant buffets Him. So far was this from
being a court of justice, and the proceedings those of a conspiracy, and
a deed of tyranny. Then not having even so made any farther discovery,
they send Him bound to Caiaphas.  <span
id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p71"></span> [John
18.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p71.1"></span>
. “And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p72"></span> Wonderful, by what a lethargy  <span
id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) that hot and furious one was
possessed, when Jesus was being led away! After such things as had taken
place, he doth not move, but still warms himself, that thou mayest learn
how great is the weakness of <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxv-Page_308"></span> our nature if God abandoneth. And, being
questioned, he denies again.  <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p75"></span> [John
18.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#026)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p75.1"></span>
. Then saith “the kinsman  <span id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414) of
him whose ear Peter cut off, (grieving at what had taken place,) Did I
not see thee in the garden?”  <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p78"></span> But neither did the garden bring him to
remember what had taken place,  <span
id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416) nor the great affection which Jesus
there had shown by those words, but all these from pressure of anxiety
he banished from his mind. But why have the Evangelists with one accord
written concerning him? Not as accusing the disciple, but as desiring to
teach us, how great an evil it is not to commit all to God, but to trust
to one’s self. But do thou admire the tender care of his Master, who,
though a prisoner and bound, took great forethought for His disciple,
raising Peter up, when he was down, by His look, and launching him into
a sea of tears.  <span id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p81"></span> “They lead Him therefore from Caiaphas
to Pilate.”  <span id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p83"></span> This was done, in order that the number
of His judges might show, even against their will, how fully tested was
His truth. “And it was early.” Before cock crow He was brought to
Caiaphas, early in the morning to Pilate; whence the Evangelist shows,
that being questioned by Caiaphas during an entire half of the night, He
was in nothing proved guilty; wherefore Caiaphas sent Him on to Pilate.
But leaving these things for the others to relate, John speaks of what
follows next. And observe the ridiculous conduct of the Jews. They who
had seized the innocent, and taken up arms, do not enter into the hall
of judgment, “lest they should be polluted.” And tell me, what kind of
pollution was it to set foot in a judgment-hall, where wrong-doers
suffer justice? They who paid tithes of mint and anise, did not think
they were polluted when bent on killing unjustly, but thought that they
polluted themselves by even treading in a court of justice. “And why did
they not kill Him, instead of bringing Him to Pilate?” In the first
place, the greater part of their rule and authority had been cut away,
when their affairs were placed under the power of the Romans; and
besides, they feared lest they should afterwards be accused and punished
by Him. “But what is, ‘That they might eat the Passover?’ For He had
done this on the first day of unleavened bread.” Either he calls the
whole feast “the Passover,” or means, that they were then keeping the
Passover, while He delivered it to His followers one day sooner,
reserving His own Sacrifice for  <span
id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419) the Preparation-day, when also of
old the Passover was celebrated. But they, though they had taken up
arms, which was unlawful, and were shedding blood, are scrupulous about
the place, and bring forth Pilate to them.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p85"></span> [John
18.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#029)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p85.1"></span>
. “And having gone out, he said, What accusation bring ye against this
man?”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p86"></span> \[4.\] Seest thou that he was free from
 <span id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420) fondness for rule and from
malice? For seeing Jesus bound, and led by so many persons, he did not
think that they had unquestionable proof of their accusation, but
questions them, thinking it a strange thing that they should take for
themselves the judgment, and then commit the punishment without any
judgment to him. What then say they?

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p88"></span> [John
18.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#030)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p88.1"></span>
. “If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto
thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p89"></span> O madness! for why do ye not mention His
evil deeds, instead of concealing them? Why do ye not prove the evil?
Seest thou that they everywhere avoid a direct accusation, and that they
can say nothing? That Annas questioned Him about His doctrine, and
having heard Him, sent Him to Caiaphas; and he having in his turn
questioned Him, and discovered, nothing, sent Him to Pilate. Pilate
saith, “What accusation bring ye against this man?” Nor here have they
anything to say, but again employ certain  <span
id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421) conjectures. At which Pilate being
perplexed saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p91"></span> [John
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p91.1"></span> .
“Take ye him and judge him according to your law. They therefore said,
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death.” But this they said,
“that the saying of the Lord might be fulfilled, which He spake,
signifying by what death He should die.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p92"></span> “And how did the expression, ‘It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death,’ declare this?” Either the
Evangelist means that He was about to be slain not by the Jews only, but
by  <span id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422) the Gentiles also, or
that it was not lawful for them to crucify. But if they say, “It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death,” they say it with reference to
that season. For that they did slay men, and that they slew them in a
different way, Stephen shows, being stoned. But they desired to crucify
Him, that they might make a display of the manner of His death. Pilate,
wishing to be freed from trouble, doth not dismiss Him for a long trial,
but,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p94"></span> [John
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#034)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p94.1"></span> .
“Having entered in, he asked Jesus, and said,  <span
id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423) Art thou the King of the Jews? 
<span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span id="iv.lxxxv-Page_309"></span>
Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others
tell it thee of Me?”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p96"></span> Wherefore did Christ ask this? Because
He desired to expose the evil intentions of the Jews. Pilate had heard
this saying from many, and, since the accusers had nothing to say, in
order that the enquiry might not be a long one, he desires to bring
forward that which was continually reported. But when he said to them,
“Judge him according to your law,” wishing to show that His offense was
not a Jewish one, they replied, “It is not lawful for us.”  “He hath not
sinned against our law, but the indictment is general.”  <span
id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424) Pilate then, having perceived this,
saith, as being (himself) likely to be endangered, “Art thou the King of
the Jews?” Then Jesus, not from ignorance, but from a desire that the
Jews should be accused even by him, asked him, saying, “Did others tell
it thee?”  <span id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425) On this point then
declaring himself, Pilate replied,

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p99"></span> [John
18.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#035)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p99.1"></span>
. “Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered
thee unto me; what hast thou done?”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p100"></span> Here desiring to clear himself of the
matter. Then because he had said, “Art thou the King?” Jesus reproving
him answereth, “This thou hast heard from the Jews. Why dost thou not
make accurate enquiry? They have said that I am a malefactor; ask them
what evil I have done. But this thou doest not, but art simply framing
charges against Me.” “Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of
thyself,” or from others? Pilate then cannot at once say that he had
heard it, but simply goes along with  <span
id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426) the people, saying, “They have
delivered thee unto me.” “I must needs therefore ask thee what thou hast
done.” What then saith Christ?

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p102"></span> [John
18.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p102.1"></span> . “My Kingdom is not of this world.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p103"></span>He leadeth upwards Pilate who was not a
very wicked man, nor after their fashion, and desireth to show that He
is not a mere man, but God and the Son of God. And what saith He?

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p104"></span> “If My Kingdom were of this world, then
would My servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews.”
 <span id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427)

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p106"></span> He undoeth that which Pilate for a
while had feared, namely, the suspicion of seizing kingly power, “Is
then His kingdom not of this world also?”  <span
id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428) Certainly it is. “How then saith He
it ‘is not’?” Not because He doth not rule here, but because He hath his
empire from above, and because it is not human, but far greater than
this and more splendid. “If then it be greater, how was He made captive
by the other?” By consenting, and giving Himself up. But He doth not at
present reveal  <span id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429) this, but
what saith He? “If I had been of this world, ‘My servants would fight,
that I should not be delivered.’” Here He showeth the weakness of
kingship among us, that its strength lies in servants; but that which is
above is sufficient for itself, needing nothing. From this the heretics
taking occasion say, that He is different from the Creator. What then,
when it saith, “He came to His own”? ( [John
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p108.3"></span>
.) What, when Himself saith, “They are not of this world, as I am not of
this world”? ( [John 17.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p108.4"></span> .) So also He saith that His kingdom is not
from hence, not depriving the world of His providence and
superintendence, but showing, as I said, that His power was not human or
perishable. What then said Pilate?

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p109"></span> [John
18.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p109.1"></span> . “Art thou a king then? Jesus answered,
Thou sayest that I am a King. To this end was I born.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p110"></span>If then He was born a king, all His
other attributes are by Generation, and He hath nothing which He
received in addition. So that when thou hearest that, “As the Father
hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son also to have life” (
[John 5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p110.1"></span> ), deem of nothing else but His generation,
and so of the rest.

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p111"></span> “And for this cause came I,  <span
id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430) that I should bear witness unto the
truth.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p113"></span>That is, “that I should speak this very
thing, and teach it, and persuade all men.”

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p114"></span> \[5.\] But do thou, O man, when thou
hearest these things, and seest thy Lord bound and led about, deem
present things to be nought. For how can it be otherwise than strange,
if Christ bore such things for thy sake, and thou often canst not endure
even words? He is spit upon, and dost thou deck thyself with garments
and rings, and, if thou gain not good report from all, think life
unbearable? He is insulted, beareth mockings, and scornful blows upon
the cheek; and dost thou wish everywhere to be honored, and bearest thou
not the reproaching of Christ? Hearest thou not Paul saying, “Be ye
imitators  <span id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431) of me, even as I
also am of Christ”? ( [1 Cor. xi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)
<span id="iv.lxxxv-p115.2"></span> .) When therefore any one makes a
jest of thee, remember thy Lord, that in mockery they bowed the knee
before Him, and worried  <span id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432) Him
both by words and deeds, and treated Him with much irony; but He not
only did not defend Himself, but even repaid them with the contraries,
with mildness and gentleness. Him now let us emulate; so shall we be
enabled even to be delivered from all insult. For it is not the insulter
that gives effect to acts of insult, and makes them biting, but he who
is little of soul, <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxv-Page_310"></span> and is pained by them. If thou art not
pained, thou hast not been insulted; for the suffering from injuries
depends not on those who inflict, but on those who undergo them. Why
dost thou grieve at all? If a man hath insulted thee unjustly, in this
case surely thou oughtest not to grieve at all, but to pity him; if
justly, much more oughtest thou to keep quiet. For should any one
address thee, a poor man, as though thou wert rich, the praise contained
in his words is nothing to thee, but his encomium is rather mockery; and
so if one insulting thee utter things that are untrue, the reproach is
nothing to thee either. But if conscience takes hold of what hath been
said, be not grieved at the words, but make correction in deeds. This I
say with regard to what really are insults. For if one reproach thee
with poverty or low birth, laugh at him.  <span
id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433) These things are a reproach not to
the hearer, but to the speaker, as not knowing true wisdom. “But,” saith
some one, “when these things are said in the presence of many who are
ignorant of the truth, the wound becomes unbearable.” Nay, it is most
bearable, when you have an audience present of witnesses praising and
applauding you, scoffing at and making a jest of him. For not he that
defends himself, but he that saith nothing, is applauded by sensible
persons. And if none of those present be a sensible person, then laugh
at him most of all, and delight thyself in the audience of heaven. For
there all will praise and applaud and welcome thee. For one Angel is as
good as all the world. But why speak I of Angels, when the Lord Himself
proclaimeth  <span id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434) thee? Let us
exercise ourselves with these reasonings. For it is no loss to be silent
when insulted, but it is, on the contrary, to defend one’s self when
insulted. Since were it a fault silently to bear what is said, Christ
would never have told us, “If one smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also.” ( [Matt. v. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)
<span id="iv.lxxxv-p118.3"></span> .)  <span
id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435) If then our enemy say what is not
true, let us on this account even pity him, because he draws down upon
him the punishment and vengeance of the accusers,  <span
id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) being unworthy even to read the
Scriptures. For to the sinner God saith, “Why declarest thou My
statutes, and takest My covenant in thy mouth? Thou satest and spakest
against thy brother.” ( [Ps. 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020)<span id="iv.lxxxv-p120.3"></span>
, LXX.) And if he speak the truth, so also he is to be pitied; since
even the Pharisee spake the truth; yet he did no harm to him who heard
him, but rather good, while he deprived himself of ten thousand
blessings, enduring shipwreck by this accusation. So that either way it
is he that suffers injury, not thou; but thou, if thou art sober, wilt
have double gain; both the propitiating God by thy silence, and the
becoming yet more discreet, the gaining an opportunity from what hath
been said to correct what has been done, and the despising mortal glory.
For this is the source of our pain, that many gape upon the opinion of
men. If we are minded to be thus truly wise, we shall know well that
human things are nothing. Let us learn then, and having reckoned up our
faults, let us accomplish their correction in time, and let us determine
to correct one this month, another next month, and a third in that which
follows. And so mounting as it were by steps, let us get to heaven by a
Jacob’s ladder. For the ladder seems to me to signify in a riddle by
that vision the gradual ascent by means of virtue, by which it is
possible for us to ascend from earth to heaven, not using material
steps, but improvement and correction of manners. Let us then lay hold
on this means of departure and ascent, that having obtained heaven, we
may also enjoy all the blessings there, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2384"></span>[304:2385](1140088.htm#fr_2384) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p5.1"></span>i.e. death, lit.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p5.2"></span>the action.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2385"></span>[305:2386](1140088.htm#fr_2385) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p9.1"></span>addressed to St. John.</span>

<span id="fn_2386"></span>[305:2387](1140088.htm#fr_2386) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p10.1"></span>τὰ πολλὰ</span>

<span id="fn_2387"></span>[305:2388](1140088.htm#fr_2387) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p11.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p11.2"></span>ξω</span>

<span id="fn_2388"></span>[305:2389](1140088.htm#fr_2388) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p12.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p12.2"></span>not once, but often,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p12.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2389"></span>[305:2390](1140088.htm#fr_2389) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p15.1"></span>στρατιῶται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p15.2"></span>, mercenaries.</span>

<span id="fn_2390"></span>[305:2391](1140088.htm#fr_2390) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p19"></span> [John
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p19.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p19.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p19.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p19.4"></span>They answered Him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
saith unto them, I Am. And Judas also which betrayed Him stood with
them. As soon then as He had said unto them, I Am, they went backward,
and fell to the ground.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p19.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2391"></span>[305:2392](1140088.htm#fr_2391) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p22"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p22.1"></span>Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of
Nazareth.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p22.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2392"></span>[305:2393](1140088.htm#fr_2392) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p25.1"></span>τὸ ἀνεπαχθὲς</span>

<span id="fn_2393"></span>[305:2394](1140088.htm#fr_2393) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p30.1"></span>more exactly,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p30.2"></span>perdition.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2394"></span>[306:2395](1140088.htm#fr_2394) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p32"></span> [John
18.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p32.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p32.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p32.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p32.4"></span>Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it,
and smote the high priest’s servant, and cut off his right ear. The
servant’s name was Malchus.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2395"></span>[306:2396](1140088.htm#fr_2395) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p32.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p33.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p33.2"></span>tension.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2396"></span>[306:2397](1140088.htm#fr_2396) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p35"></span> [John
18.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p35.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p35.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p35.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p35.4"></span>Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword
into the sheath; the cup,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p35.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2397"></span>[306:2398](1140088.htm#fr_2397) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p38"></span> [John
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p38.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p38.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p38.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p38.4"></span>Then the band and the captain and officers of
the Jews took Jesus, and bound Him, and led Him away to Annas first; for
he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same
year.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p38.5"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2398"></span>[306:2399](1140088.htm#fr_2398) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p40.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p40.2"></span>made a show of Him in.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2399"></span>[306:2400](1140088.htm#fr_2399) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p45"></span> [John
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#016)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p45.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p45.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p45.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p45.4"></span>And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did
that other disciple; that disciple was known unto the high priest, and
went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. But Peter stood
at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known
unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought
in Peter.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p45.5"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2400"></span>[306:2401](1140088.htm#fr_2400) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p47.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p47.2"></span>retired.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2401"></span>[307:2402](1140088.htm#fr_2401) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p48.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p48.2"></span>gave in charge.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[307:2403](1140088.htm#fr_2402) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p50"></span> [John
18.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p50.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p50.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p50.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p50.4"></span>Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto
Peter, Art not,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p50.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2403"></span>[307:2404](1140088.htm#fr_2403) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p52.1"></span>θρασεῖα</span>

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[307:2405](1140088.htm#fr_2404) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p53.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p53.2"></span>bent,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p53.3"></span>κατακαμπτομένης</span>

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[307:2406](1140088.htm#fr_2405) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p53.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p54"></span> [John
18.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#018)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p54.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p54.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p54.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p54.4"></span>And the servants and officers stood there,
who had made a fire of coals; and they warmed themselves; and Peter
stood with them, and warmed himself.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[307:2407](1140088.htm#fr_2406) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p58"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p58.1"></span>Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the
world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the
Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p58.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[307:2408](1140088.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p61"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p61.1"></span>which heard Me, what I have said unto them;
behold, they know what I said.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p61.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[307:2409](1140088.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p63.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p63.2"></span>the disciples as disciples.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[307:2410](1140088.htm#fr_2409) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p65"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p65.1"></span>Of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high
priest so?</span> ” N.T.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[307:2411](1140088.htm#fr_2410) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p68"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p68.1"></span>of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou
Me?</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p68.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[307:2412](1140088.htm#fr_2411) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p70"></span> [John
18.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.4"></span>Annas sent (</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.5"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.6"></span>πέστειλεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p70.7"></span>) Him bound to Caiaphas the high
priest.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p70.8"></span>
St. C. makes this the order of the narrative, but most commentators
refer the words to an earlier period.</span>

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[307:2413](1140088.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p73.1"></span>κάρῳ</span>

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[308:2414](1140088.htm#fr_2413) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p74.1"></span>Part of</span> [John
18.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p74.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p74.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p74.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p74.5"></span>They said therefore unto him, Art not thou
also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[308:2415](1140088.htm#fr_2414) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p76"></span> [John
18.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.4"></span>one of the servants of the high priest, being
his kinsman,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.5"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.6"></span>saith.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.7"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[308:2416](1140088.htm#fr_2415) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p76.8"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p77"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.1"></span>in the garden with him?</span> ” [John
18.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#027)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.5"></span>Peter then denied again; and immediately the
cock crew.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p77.6"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[308:2417](1140088.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p79.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p79.2"></span>had been said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[308:2418](1140088.htm#fr_2417) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p79.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p80.1"></span>εἰς δάκρυα καθέλκων</span>

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[308:2419](1140088.htm#fr_2418) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p82"></span> [John
18.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p82.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p82.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p82.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p82.4"></span>Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the
hall of judgment; and it was early; and they themselves went not into
the judgment-hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat
the Passover.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p82.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[308:2420](1140088.htm#fr_2419) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p84.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p84.2"></span>waiting for His,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p84.3"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p84.4"></span>on.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[308:2421](1140088.htm#fr_2420) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p87.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p87.2"></span>from their.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[308:2422](1140088.htm#fr_2421) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p90"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p90.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p90.2"></span>but in certain.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[308:2423](1140088.htm#fr_2422) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p93"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p93.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p93.2"></span>not for,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p93.3"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p93.4"></span>but for.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[308:2424](1140088.htm#fr_2423) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p95"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p95.1"></span>Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall
again, and called Jesus, and said unto Him.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p95.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[309:2425](1140088.htm#fr_2424) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p97"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p97.1"></span>i.e. against heathen law also.</span>

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[309:2426](1140088.htm#fr_2425) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p98"></span> [John
18.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#030)<span
id="iv.lxxxv-p98.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p98.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p98.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p98.4"></span>Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of
thyself or did others tell it thee of Me?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p98.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[309:2427](1140088.htm#fr_2426) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p101"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p101.1"></span>ἕ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p101.2"></span>πεται</span>

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[309:2428](1140088.htm#fr_2427) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p104.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p105"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p105.1"></span>to the Jews; but now in My kingdom not from
hence,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p105.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[309:2429](1140088.htm#fr_2428) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p107"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p107.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p107.2"></span>also.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[309:2430](1140088.htm#fr_2429) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p107.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p108"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p108.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p108.2"></span>hide.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[309:2431](1140088.htm#fr_2430) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p112"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p112.1"></span>came I into the world,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p112.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[309:2432](1140088.htm#fr_2431) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p115"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p115.1"></span>μιμηταὶ</span>

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[309:2433](1140088.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p115.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p116"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p116.1"></span>διέσυρον</span>

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[310:2434](1140088.htm#fr_2433) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p117"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p117.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p117.2"></span>this is to be laughed at.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[310:2435](1140088.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p117.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p118"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p118.1"></span>Sav. conj.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p118.2"></span>shall proclaim.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[310:2436](1140088.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p118.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p119"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p119.1"></span>whosoever shall,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p119.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[310:2437](1140088.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="iv.lxxxv-p119.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxv-p120"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxv-p120.1"></span>Sav. conj.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxv-p120.2"></span>evil speaking.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 18.37](1140089)
