[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140095)  [Next](1140097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_337"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>This</span> volume completes the series of St.
Chrysostom’s Homilies on the New Testament. Translated a quarter of a
century ago by the Rev. T. Keble, Vicar of Bisley, and revised with
great labor in the use of the then existing editions by his brother, the
Vicar of Hursley, it was thought best to delay the publication until Dr.
Field had completed the long-delayed publication of the Greek Text. This
appeared in 1862.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> The editing of the text of St. Chrysostom’s
Homilies is attended with peculiar difficulties. Written sermons,  <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645) if ever preached in those days,
were the exception. Those which have been preserved to us have been
generally taken down by some hearer. St. Augustine afterwards revised
his, when brought to him for the purpose. In the case of St.
Chrysostom’s Homilies on the Acts of the Apostles, as well as of the
present volume, there are two distinct text still extant: that
originally taken down by the short-hand writer, and another, when this
had been polished and made neat at a subsequent time. Dr. Field’s great
labor then in the Greek Text of the present volume had been to restore
the older form of these Homilies. He had ample material, both in Greek
<span class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p5.2"></span>mss</span> ., in a Catena
published not many years ago by our Dr. <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p5.3"></span>Cramer</span> , Principal of New Inn Hall, which
exhibit the older text (the former half of a second Catena, compiled by
Niketas,  <span id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) Archbishop of
Heraclea in Thrace in the eleventh century, and published by the same
Dr. Cramer, appears to use both); and, of yet more importance, in Latin
versions.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span> Cassiodorus, an Italian, who lived about 150
years after St. Chrysostom, in the earlier part of his treatise, *de
Institutione Divinarum Litterarum* , cap. 8 (opp. t. ii. p. 543, ed.
Rotom. 1679) in describing a volume of St. Paul’s Epistles, in which 13
of the Epistles had a good commentary, goes on, “But in regard to the
Epistle to the Hebrews which St. John Bishop of Constantinople treated
of in Greek in 34 homilies, we have caused Mutianus, a most eloquent
man, to translate them into Latin, that the order of the Epistles might
not be unduly broken off.”

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>To Cassiodorus then we own the Latin version
of Mutianus which has come down to us, and which, translated from the
older form of text, has been a great assistance in the editing. It is
often quoted in the foot-notes. In p. 167 there is also given an extract
from the 13th Homily by Facundus, an African Bishop, who lived about the
same time with Mutianus, but who apparently translated the passage into
Latin for himself.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span> The short-hand writer, who took down these
Homilies and thus preserved them to us, is not unknown to us. It is St.
Chrysostom’s dearly-loved friend the Priest Constantine or Constantius.
 <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) For the title is, “Homilies
of St. John Chrysostom Archbishop of Constantinople on the Epistle to
the Hebrews, published after his decease, from notes by Constantine,
Presbyter of Antioch.”

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span> <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_338"></span> At the beginning of St. Chrysostom’s exile in
404, when he was in Nicæa, in a Letter which he wrote to Constantius
about a mission which he had set on foot at Phœnicia (Ep. 121<span
id="v.ii-p12.1"></span> t. iii. pp. 721, 722, ed. Montf.), he begs him
“not to cease having a care for the Churches of Phœnicia and Arabia and
the east, and to write to” St. Chrysostom “quite often, and tell him how
many Churches had been built in a year and what holy men had gone into
Phœnicia.” Soon after, Constantius seems to have asked leave of St.
Chrysostom to join him; for in his 13th letter to Olympias on arriving
at Cocussus or Cucusus in Cappadocia, now Goksyn, his bitter place of
exile, St. Chrysostom says (ib. p. 594), “My Lord, the most pious priest
Constantius, would fain have been here long ago, for he wrote to me
begging that I would let him come.” About this time, perhaps while
Constantius was on his actual journey to Cucusus, St. Chrysostom writes
to him (Ep. 225<span id="v.ii-p12.2"></span>, p. 724), grieved at not
having heard from him, and speaks of their great love for each other and
of Constantius’ goodness to the poor, the fatherless and widows: soon
after he writes from Cucusus to Elpidius bishop of Laodicea (Ep.
114<span id="v.ii-p12.3"></span>, p. 656), “the most reverend priests
Constantius and Euethius are here with us.” There are extant two Letters
of Constantius, one of them to his mother, written while he was
companion of St. Chrysostom there (pp. 731 and 734). In the course of
this banishment St. Chrysostom writes (Ep. 123<span
id="v.ii-p12.4"></span>, pp. 663, 664) about this Phœnician mission to
“the priests and monks in Phœnicia, who were instructing the Gentiles
there,” encouraging them in their work, and saying that he had given
orders that all their expenses “in clothing, shoes, and support of the
brethren should be bountifully supplied,” and adds that they will know
about his affairs from Constantius’ letter. In a letter to Gerontius
(Ep. 54<span id="v.ii-p12.5"></span>, p. 623) written during this exile
about the mission in Phœnicia, St. Chrysostom says that he had intrusted
Constantius to give Gerontius all he needed whether “for building or for
the needs of the brethren.”

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span> To Constantius’ piety we owe the
preservation of these Homilies. One very special value of them lies in
the pious fervent exhortation at the end of each, on Penitence,
Almsgiving, or whatever St. Chrysostom had at the time chiefly in mind,
breathing forth words from a heart, filled with the love of <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>God</span> and that longed for
his flock to partake it.

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>Hom</span> . 1  on sin and Almsgiving

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>         2  on high thoughts and on poverty
and wealth

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span>         3  on God’s gifts to each

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span>         4 on heathen practices at funerals

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>         5  on temptation

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span>         6  on Heaven

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span>         7 on old age

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span>         8  on study of Scriptures

<span id="v.ii-p23"></span>         9  on Penitence and confession of
our sins

<span id="v.ii-p24"></span>       10  on relieving distress

<span id="v.ii-p25"></span>       11  on Almsgiving and giving to
beggars

<span id="v.ii-p26"></span>       12  on free-will and Penitence

<span id="v.ii-p27"></span>       13  on not postponing Baptism and on a
right life

<span id="v.ii-p28"></span>        14  on Thought of <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p28.1"></span>God</span> and earnest prayer

<span id="v.ii-p29"></span>       15  on sin-enslavement and on untimely
laughter

<span id="v.ii-p30"></span>       16  on dwelling in Heaven

<span id="v.ii-p31"></span>       17  on worthily receiving Holy
Communion

<span id="v.ii-p32"></span>       18  on the Might of Poverty

<span id="v.ii-p33"></span>       19  on the great Gain of loving one’s
neighbor

<span id="v.ii-p34"></span>       20  on slavery to possessions and on
Thankfulness

<span id="v.ii-p35"></span>       21  on gossip

<span id="v.ii-p36"></span>        22  on seeking <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p36.1"></span>God</span> , on His protection
and enduring Temptation

<span id="v.ii-p37"></span>        23  on the loss of <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p37.1"></span>God</span>

<span id="v.ii-p38"></span>       24  on the acquirement of Virtue

<span id="v.ii-p39"></span> <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_339"></span>        25  on not caring for things of the
world nor partaking with the covetous

<span id="v.ii-p40"></span>        26  on loyalty to <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p40.1"></span>God</span>

<span id="v.ii-p41"></span>       27  on the might of Prayer and on
minding us that we are sinners

<span id="v.ii-p42"></span>       28  value of Affliction and on
simplicity of life and adornment of the soul

<span id="v.ii-p43"></span>       29  on the Peril of Luxury

<span id="v.ii-p44"></span>       30  on helping each other in way of
salvation

<span id="v.ii-p45"></span>       31  on Penitence and keeping in mind
our sins

<span id="v.ii-p46"></span>       32  on the Might of mercifulness to
others

<span id="v.ii-p47"></span>       33  on the value of affliction, trial,
poverty, and on Thankfulness

<span id="v.ii-p48"></span>        34  on using with intensity of mind
and purpose, the Grace of the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p48.1"></span>Spirit</span> .

<span id="v.ii-p49"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p50"></span> After the publication of Dr. Field’s text (
*Bibliotheca Patrum Ecclesiae Catholicae Qui ante Orientis et Occidentis
schisma floruerunt* , tom. vii. Oxonii 1862) the translation was again
very carefully revised by that text by the Rev. Dr. <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p50.1"></span>Barrow</span> , Principal of
St. Edmund Hall: he also wrote heads for the present Preface. The
headings were given (as far as could be done) in the <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p50.2"></span>ms</span> . and many of them
have been retained; others, fitting in less well with the printed page,
seemed to need a little modification. For an occasional note enclosed in
brackets, the son of the one remaining Editor of the Library is
responsible.

<span id="v.ii-p51"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p52"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p52.1"></span>                                             
                                                                    P.
E. Pusey.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p53"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ii-p53.1"></span>Oxford</span> , May, 1877.

<span id="v.ii-p54"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p55"></span> \[It has seemed better in this edition to
conform the translation of the Scripture texts to some one standard. St.
Chrysostom used the current text of his day, which, on the whole, was
more like the *Textus Receptus* , the basis of the A.V., than the more
critical text followed by the R.V. It has therefore seemed best to take
the A.V. as the standard (except where St. Chrysostom has followed a
different text), but note has been made of any variations of the R.V.
materially affecting the sense. There remain a number of loose
quotations and combinations of different texts, and in these the English
translation is retained.

<span id="v.ii-p56"></span>Effort has been made to simplify the language
and remove involved constructions in the translation of the Homilies.
The English translation was originally made from the Benedictine, and
afterwards revised from Field’s more accurate text, and the differences
between these have sometimes been overlooked. Besides this, it has often
been possible to give St. Chrysostom’s meaning more
accurately,—sometimes even reversing the sense. There are, however, many
very felicitous translations in the English edition which have been
retained. It is a revision, and not a new translation.

<span id="v.ii-p57"></span>All the notes in the English edition have
been scrupulously retained, additions being enclosed in square brackets,
with the initials of the reviser. An introduction on the authorship of
this Epistle has been inserted.—F.G.\]

<span id="v.ii-p58"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p59"></span>\[Published after his decease.—F.G., jr.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[337:2646](1140096.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>See an animadversion of St. Cyril Alex. on those
who committed to writing other people’s sermons and thus preserved what
might have been less deliberately uttered as though it had been
thoroughly well weighed. *De Ador* . viii. t. i. 267. See also the
constantly occurring expressions in St. Augustine, which belong to the
natural extemporaneous delivery, but which would be untrue in the
delivery of written sermons. The Preface to the first volume of St.
Augustin on St. John, in this Library, written by the Rev. H. Browne,
contains interesting details of St. Augustine’s preaching. Fleury
remarks of Atticus, Archbishop of Constantinople, in the beginning of
the fifth century, just after St. Chrysostom’s decease, “His sermons
were indifferent, so that no one took the trouble to take them down in
writing.” Fleury, *Eccles. Hist* . xxii. 9, p. 133, Oxford translation.
The extract, however, which St. Cyril has preserved of Atticus ( *de
recta fide ad Arcadiam Marinamque* , repeated in his *Apol. adv.
Episcopos Orientales* , cap. 4) is eloquent and pious.</span>

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[337:2647](1140096.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="v.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii-p6.1"></span>Dr. Cramer had published this from the Paris <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ii-p6.2"></span>ms</span> . Cod. Reg. 238, which
contains the first half only: but the whole catena is extant in the
Library of St. Ambrose at Milan (E. 63 part inf.).</span>

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[337:2648](1140096.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>Montfaucon observes that the Manuscripts
frequently interchange the name.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction.](1140097)
