[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140036)  [Next](1140038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxiv"></span> <span id="iv.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>[John
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>“Jesus answered and said unto her,
Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever
drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the
water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing
up into everlasting Life.”

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Scripture</span> calls the grace of the Spirit
sometimes “Fire,” sometimes “Water,” showing that these names are not
descriptive of its essence, but of its operation; for the Spirit, being
Invisible and Simple, cannot be made up of different substances. Now the
one John declares, speaking thus, “He shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire” ( [Matt. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)
<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.2"></span> ): the other, Christ, “Out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.” ( [John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038) <span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.3"></span> .)
“But this,” saith John, “spake He of the Spirit, which they should
receive.” So also conversing with the woman, He calleth the Spirit
water;  <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) for, “Whosoever shall
drink of the water which I shall give him, shall never thirst.” So also
He calleth the Spirit by the name of “fire,” alluding to the rousing and
warming property of grace, and its power of destroying transgressions;
but by that of “water,” to declare the cleansing wrought by it, and the
great refreshment which it affordeth to those minds which receive it.
And with good reason; for it makes the willing soul like some  <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) garden thick with all manner of trees
fruitful and ever-flourishing, allowing it neither to feel despondency
nor the plots of Satan, and quenches  <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) all the fiery darts of the wicked one.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p8"></span> And observe, I pray you, the wisdom of
Christ,  <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) how gently He leads on
 <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) the woman; for He did not say
at first, “If thou knewest who it is that saith to thee, Give Me to
drink,” but when He had given her an occasion of calling Him “a Jew,”
and brought her beneath the charge of having done so, repelling the
accusation He saith, “If thou knewest who it is that saith to thee, Give
Me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him”; and having compelled her
by His great promises to make mention  <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) of the Patriarch, He thus alloweth the
woman to look through,  <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) and then
when she objects, “Art thou greater than our father Jacob?” He saith
not, <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiv-Page_111"></span> “Yea, I am greater,” (for He would have
seemed but to boast, since the proof did not as yet appear,) but by what
He saith He effecteth this. For He said not simply, “I will give thee
water,” but having first set that given by Jacob aside, He exalteth that
given by Himself, desiring to show from the nature of the things given,
how great is the interval and difference between the persons of the
givers,  <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) and His own superiority
to the Patriarch. “If,” saith He, “thou admirest Jacob because he gave
thee this water, what wilt thou say if I give thee Water far better than
this? Thou hast thyself been first to confess that I am greater than
Jacob, by arguing against Me, and asking, ‘Art thou greater than Jacob,
that thou promisest to give me better water?’ If thou receivest that
Water, certainly thou wilt confess that I am greater.” Seest thou the
upright judgment of the woman, giving her decision from facts, both as
to the Patriarch, and as to Christ? The Jews acted not thus; when they
even saw Him casting out devils, they not only did not call Him greater
than the Patriarch but even said that He had a devil. Not so the woman,
she draws her opinion whence Christ would have her, from the
demonstration afforded by His works. For by these He justifieth Himself,
saying, “If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not; but if I
do, if ye believe not Me, believe the works.” ( [John
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p13.3"></span>
.) And thus the woman is brought over to the faith.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p14"></span>Wherefore also He, having heard, “Art
thou greater than our father Jacob,” leaveth Jacob, and speaketh
concerning the water, saying, “Whosoever shall drink of this water,
shall thirst again”; and He maketh His comparison, not by depreciating
one, but by showing the excellence of the other; for He saith not, that
“this water is naught,” nor “that it is inferior and contemptible,” but
what even nature testifies that He saith: “Whosoever shall drink of this
water shall thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the Water which I
shall give him, shall never thirst.” The woman before this had heard of
“living Water” ( [John 4.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p14.1"></span> ), but had not known its meaning. Since
because that water is called “living” which is perennial and bubbles up
unceasingly from uninterrupted springs, she thought that this was the
water meant. Wherefore He points out this more clearly by speaking thus,
and establishing by a comparison the superiority (of the water which He
would give). What then saith He? “Whosoever shall drink of the Water
that I shall give him, shall never thirst.” This and what was said next
especially showed the superiority, for material water possesses none of
these qualities. And what is it that follows? “It shall be in him a well
of water springing up into everlasting life.” For as one that hath a
well within him could never be seized by thirst, so neither can he that
hath this Water.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p15"></span>The woman straightway believed, showing
herself much wiser than Nicodemus, and not only wiser, but more manly.
For he when he heard ten thousand such things neither invited any others
to this hearing, nor himself spake forth openly; but she exhibited the
actions of an Apostle, preaching the Gospel to all, and calling them to
Jesus, and drawing a whole city forth to Him. Nicodemus when he had
heard said, “How can these things be?” And when Christ set before him a
clear illustration, that of “the wind,” he did not even so receive the
Word. But the woman not so; at first she doubted, but afterwards
receiving the Word not by any regular demonstration, but in the form of
an assertion, she straightway hastened to embrace it. For when Christ
said, “It shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
Life,” immediately the woman saith,

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p16"></span> [John
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>
. “Give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.”

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p17"></span> Seest thou how little by little she is
led up to the highest doctrines? First she thought Him some Jew who was
transgressing the Law; then when He had repelled that accusation, (for
it was necessary that the person who was to teach  <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) her such things should not be
suspected,) having heard of “living water,” she supposed that this was
spoken of material water; afterwards, having learnt that the words were
spiritual, she believed that the water could remove the necessity caused
by thirst, but knew not yet what this could be; she still doubted,
deeming it indeed to be above material things, but not being exactly
informed. But here having gained a clearer insight, but not yet fully
perceiving the whole, (for she saith, “Give me this water, that I thirst
not, neither come hither to draw,”) she for the time preferreth Him to
Jacob. “For” (saith she) “I need not this well if I receive from thee
that water.” Seest thou how she setteth Him before the Patriarch? This
is the act of a fairly-judging  <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)
soul. She had shown how great an opinion she had of Jacob, she saw One
better than he, and was not held back by her prepossession. Thus this
woman was neither of an easy temper, (she did not carelessly receive
what was said, how can she have done so when she enquired with so great
exactness?  <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) ) nor yet
disobedient, nor disputatious, and this she showed by her petition. Yet
to the Jews once He said, “Whosoever shall eat of My flesh  <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) shall never hunger, and he that
believeth on Me shall never thirst” ( [John
6.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p21.4"></span>
); but they not only did not believe, but were offended at <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="iv.xxxiv-Page_112"></span> Him.
The woman had no such feeling, she remains and petitions. To the Jews He
said, “He that believeth on Me shall never thirst”; not so to the woman,
but more grossly, “He that drinketh of this Water shall never thirst.”
For the promise referred to spiritual and unseen  <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) things. Wherefore having raised her
mind by His promises, He still lingers among expressions relating to
sense, because she could not as yet comprehend the exact expression of
spiritual things. Since had He said, “If thou believest in Me thou shalt
not thirst,” she would not have understood His saying, not knowing who
it could be that spake to her, nor concerning what kind of thirst He
spake. Wherefore then did He not this in the case of the Jews? Because
they had seen many signs, while she had seen no sign, but heard these
words first. For which reason He afterwards reveals His power by
prophecy, and does not directly introduce His reproof,  <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) but what saith He?

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p24"></span> [John
4.16-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxxiv-p24.1"></span> . “Go, call thy husband, and come thither.
The woman answered and said I have no husband. Jesus saith unto her,
Thou hast well said, I have no husband: for thou hast had five husbands,
and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly.
The woman saith unto Him, Sir, I perceive that Thou art a Prophet.”

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p25"></span> \[2.\] O how great the wisdom of the
woman! how meekly doth she receive the reproof! “How should she not,”
saith some one? Tell me, why should she? Did He not often reprove the
Jews also, and with greater reproofs than these? (for it is not the same
to bring forward the hidden thoughts of the heart, as to make manifest a
thing that was done in secret; the first are known to  <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) God alone, and none other knoweth them
but he who hath them in his heart; the second, all who were sharers in
it know;) but still when reproved did not bear it patiently. When He
said, “Why seek ye to kill me?” ( [John
7.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p26.3"></span>
), they not only did not admire as the woman did but even mocked at and
insulted Him; yet they had a demonstration from other miracles, she had
only heard this speech. Still they not only did not admire, but even
insulted Him, saying, “Thou hast a demon, who seeketh to kill thee?”
While she not only doth not insult but admires, and is astonished at
Him, and supposes Him to be a Prophet. Yet truly this rebuke touched the
woman more than the other touched them; for her fault was hers alone,
theirs was a general one; and we are not so much stung by what is
general as by what is particular. Besides they thought they should be
gaining a great object if they could slay Christ, but that which the
woman had done was allowed by all to be wicked; yet was she not
indignant, but was astonished and wondered. And Christ did this very
same thing in the case of Nathanael. He did not at first introduce the
prophecy, nor say, “I saw thee under the fig-tree,” but when Nathanael
said, “Whence knowest thou me?” then He introduced this. For He desired
to take the beginnings of His signs and prophecies from the very persons
who came near to Him, so that they might be more attached  <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) by what was done, and He might escape
the suspicion of vainglory. Now this He doth here also; for to have
charged her first of all that, “Thou hast no husband,” would have seemed
burdensome and superfluous, but to take the reason (for speaking) from
herself, and then to set right all these points, was very consistent,
and softened the disposition of the hearer.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p28"></span> “And what kind of connection,” saith
some one, “is there in the saying, ‘Go, call thy husband’?” The
discourse was concerning a gift and grace surpassing mortal nature: the
woman was urgent in seeking to receive it. Christ saith, “Call thy
husband,” showing that he also must share in these things; but she,
eager to receive  <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) (the gift),
and concealing the shamefulness of the circumstances, and supposing that
she was conversing with a man, said, “I have no husband.” Christ having
heard this, now seasonably introduces His reproof, mentioning accurately
both points; for He enumerated all her former husbands, and reproved her
for him whom  <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) she now would
hide. What then did the woman? she was not annoyed, nor did she leave
Him and fly, nor deem the thing an insult, but rather admired Him, and
persevered the more. “I perceive,” saith she, “that Thou art a Prophet.”
Observe her prudence; she did not straightway run to Him, but still
considers Him, and marvels at Him. For, “I perceive,” means, “Thou
appearest to me to be a Prophet.” Then when she suspected this, she asks
Him nothing concerning this life, not concerning bodily health, or
possessions, or wealth, but at once concerning doctrines. For what saith
she?

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p31"></span> [John
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p31.1"></span>
. “Our fathers worshiped in this mountain,” (meaning Abraham and his
family, for thither they say that he led up his son,) “and how say ye
 <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship?”

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p33"></span> \[3.\] Seest thou how much more elevated
in mind she has become? She who was anxious that she might not be
troubled for thirst, now questions concerning doctrines. What then doth
Christ? He doth not resolve the question, (for to answer simply to men’s
words was not His care, for it was needless,  <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) ) but leads the woman on to the
greater height, and doth not <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiv-Page_113"></span> converse with her on these matters, until
she has confessed that He was a Prophet, so that afterwards she might
hear His Word with abundant belief; for having been persuaded of this,
she could no longer doubt concerning what should be said to her.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p35"></span> Let us now after this be ashamed, and
blush. A woman who had had five husbands, and who was of Samaria, was so
eager concerning doctrines, that neither the time of day, nor her having
come for another purpose, nor anything else, led her away from enquiring
on such matters; but we not only do not enquire concerning doctrines,
but towards them all our dispositions are careless and indifferent.
Therefore everything is neglected. For which of you when in his house
takes some Christian book  <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) in
hand and goes over its contents, and searches the Scriptures? None can
say that he does so, but with most we shall find draughts and dice, but
books nowhere, except among a few. And even these few have the same
dispositions as the many; for they tie up their books, and keep them
always put away in cases, and all their care is for the fineness of the
parchments, and the beauty of the letters, not for reading them. For
they have not bought them to obtain advantage and benefit from them, but
take pains about such matters to show their wealth and pride. Such is
the excess of vainglory. I do not hear any one glory that he knows the
contents, but that he hath a book written in letters of gold. And what
gain, tell me, is this? The Scriptures were not given us for this only,
that we might have them in books, but that we might engrave them on our
hearts. For this kind of possession, the keeping the commandments merely
in letter, belongs to Jewish ambition; but to us the Law was not so
given  <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) at all, but in the fleshy
tables of our hearts.  <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) And this
I say, not to prevent you from procuring Bibles, on the contrary, I
exhort and earnestly pray that you do this, but I desire that from those
books you convey the letters and sense into your understanding, that so
it may be purified when it receiveth the meaning of the writing.  <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) For if the devil will not dare to
approach a house where a Gospel is lying, much less will any evil
spirit, or any sinful nature,  <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848)
ever touch or enter a soul which bears about with it such sentiments as
it contains. Sanctify then thy soul, sanctify thy body, by having these
ever in thy heart, and on thy tongue. For if foul speech defiles and
invites devils, it is clear that spiritual reading sanctifies and draws
down the grace of the Spirit. The Scriptures  <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) are divine charms, let us then apply
to ourselves and  <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) to the
passions of our souls the remedies to be derived from them. For if we
understand what it is that is read, we shall hear it with much
readiness. I am always saying this, and will not cease to say it. Is it
not strange that those who sit by the market can tell the names, and
families, and cities of charioteers, and dancers, and the kinds of power
possessed by each, and can give exact account of the good or bad
qualities of the very horses, but that those who come hither should know
nothing of what is done here, but should be ignorant of the number even
of the sacred Books? If thou pursuest those worldly things for pleasure,
I will show thee that here is greater pleasure. Which is sweeter, tell
me, which more marvelous, to see a man wrestling with a man, or a man
buffering with a devil, a body closing with an incorporeal power, and
him who is of thy race victorious? These wrestlings let us look on,
these, which also it is seemly and profitable to imitate, and which
imitating, we may be  <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) crowned;
but not those in which emulation brings shame to him who imitates them.
If thou beholdest the one kind of contest, thou beholdest it with
devils; the other, with Angels and Archangels, and the Lord of
Archangels. Say now, if thou wert allowed to sit with governors and
kings, and to see and enjoy the spectacle, wouldest thou not deem it to
be a very great honor? And here when thou art a spectator in company
with the King of Angels, when thou seest the devil grasped by the middle
of the back,  <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) striving much to
have the better, but powerless, dost thou not run and pursue after such
a sight as this? “And how can this be?” saith some one. If thou keep the
Bible in thy hands; for in it thou shalt see the lists, and the long
races, and his grasps,  <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) and the
skill of the righteous one. For by beholding these things thou shalt
learn also how to wrestle so thyself, and shalt escape clear of devils;
the performances of the heathen are assemblies of devils, not theaters
of men. Wherefore I exhort you to abstain from these Satanic assemblies;
 <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) for if it is not lawful to
enter into an idol’s house, much less to Satan’s festival. I shall not
cease to say these things and weary you, until I see some change; for to
say these things, as saith Paul, “to me indeed is not grievous, but for
you it is safe.” ( [Phil. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p46.2"></span> .) Be not then offended at my exhortation.
If any one ought to be offended, it is I who often speak and am not
heard, not you who are always <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiv-Page_114"></span> hearing and always disobeying. God grant
that you be not always liable to this charge, but that freed from this
shame you be deemed worthy to enjoy the spiritual spectacle,  <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) and the glory which is to come,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_824"></span>[110:825](1140037.htm#fr_824) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>saith the same now.</span> ”

<span id="fn_825"></span>[110:826](1140037.htm#fr_825) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>some flourishing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_826"></span>[110:827](1140037.htm#fr_826) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>as quenching easily.</span> ”

<span id="fn_827"></span>[110:828](1140037.htm#fr_827) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>of God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_828"></span>[110:829](1140037.htm#fr_828) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>leads up.</span> ”

<span id="fn_829"></span>[110:830](1140037.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p11.2"></span>to remember.</span> ”

<span id="fn_830"></span>[110:831](1140037.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>see clearly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_831"></span>[111:832](1140037.htm#fr_831) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>things given.</span> ”

<span id="fn_832"></span>[111:833](1140037.htm#fr_832) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>κατηχεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_833"></span>[111:834](1140037.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>εὐγνώμονος</span>

<span id="fn_834"></span>[111:835](1140037.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p20.2"></span>readiness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_835"></span>[111:836](1140037.htm#fr_835) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p21.2"></span>ἐρχόμενος πρός με</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p21.3"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_836"></span>[112:837](1140037.htm#fr_836) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p21.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p22.2"></span>not finite.</span> ”

<span id="fn_837"></span>[112:838](1140037.htm#fr_837) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p23.2"></span>λεγχον</span>

<span id="fn_838"></span>[112:839](1140037.htm#fr_838) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p26.2"></span>is the work of.</span> ”

<span id="fn_839"></span>[112:840](1140037.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>οἰκειοῦσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_840"></span>[112:841](1140037.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p29.2"></span>to be hidden.</span> ”

<span id="fn_841"></span>[112:842](1140037.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p30.2"></span>the thing which.</span> ”

<span id="fn_842"></span>[112:843](1140037.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>καὶ ὑμ. λέγετε</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p32.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_843"></span>[112:844](1140037.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>παρέλκον</span>

<span id="fn_844"></span>[113:845](1140037.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p36.1"></span>πυκτίον</span>

<span id="fn_845"></span>[113:846](1140037.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p37.2"></span>this Law was not given.</span> ”

<span id="fn_846"></span>[113:847](1140037.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p38.1"></span>i.e. on the Day of Pentecost.</span>

<span id="fn_847"></span>[113:848](1140037.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p39.2"></span>the reality of the matters.</span> ”

<span id="fn_848"></span>[113:849](1140037.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p40.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p40.2"></span>nature of sin.</span> ”

<span id="fn_849"></span>[113:850](1140037.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p41.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p41.2"></span>the actions,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p41.3"></span>i.e. of the
Gospel.</span>

<span id="fn_850"></span>[113:851](1140037.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p42.1"></span>Morel. \[let us prepare\].</span>

<span id="fn_851"></span>[113:852](1140037.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p43.1"></span>al,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p43.2"></span>it were meet to be.</span> ”

<span id="fn_852"></span>[113:853](1140037.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p44.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p44.2"></span>beholding the devil shamed by means of the
Divine oracles, and greatly striving.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p44.3"></span> Below Morel. reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p44.4"></span>run to such a
sight.</span> ”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[113:854](1140037.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p44.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.1"></span>σκάμματα, διαύλους, λαβὰς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p45.2"></span>, terms of the wrestling
school. </span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.3"></span>σκάμμα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.4"></span>, the place dug out for the exercise, hence
the exercise itself. </span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.5"></span>δίαυλος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.6"></span>, the double course. </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p45.7"></span>λαβὴ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxiv-p45.8"></span>, the gripe of the
wrestler. Thus of Job, on Stat. Hom. i. 16; of the Three Children, ib.
Hom. iv. 8, &c.</span>

<span id="fn_854"></span>[113:855](1140037.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p45.9"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p46.1"></span>This clause is not found in Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_855"></span>[114:856](1140037.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p47.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiv-p47.2"></span>of the Eternal Goods.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 4.21,22](1140038)
