[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140105)  [Next](1140107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xii"></span> <span id="v.xii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span id="v.xii-Page_403"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews v.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)<span
id="v.xii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span> *“For every high priest taken from among
men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer
both gifts and sacrifices for sins: who can have compassion on*  <span
id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) *the ignorant and on them that are
out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity;
and by reason hereof he ought, as for the people so also for himself to
offer for sins.”*

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xii-p5.1"></span>The</span> blessed Paul wishes to show in the
next place that this covenant is far better than the old. This then he
does by first laying down remote considerations. For inasmuch as there
was nothing bodily or that made a show,  <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846) no temple for instance, nor Holy of
Holies, nor Priest with so great apparel, no legal observances, but all
things higher and more perfect, and there was nothing of bodily things,
but all was in things spiritual, and things spiritual did not attract
the weak, as things bodily; he thoroughly sifts this whole matter.

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>And observe his wisdom: he makes his
beginning from the priest first, and continually calls Him an High
Priest, and from this first \[point\] shows the difference \[of the two
Dispensations\]. On this account he first of all defines what a Priest
is, and shows whether He has any things proper to a Priest, and whether
there are any signs of priesthood. It was however an objection in his
way that He \[Christ\] was not even well-born, nor was He of the
sacerdotal tribe, nor a priest on earth. How then was He a Priest? some
one may say.

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span> And just as in the Epistle to the Romans
having taken up an argument of which they were not easily persuaded,
that Faith effects that which the labor of the Law could not, nor the
sweat of the daily life, he betook himself to the Patriarch and referred
the whole \[question\] to that time: so now here also he opens out the
other path of the Priesthood, showing its superiority from the things
which happened before. And as, in \[the matter of\] punishment, he
brings before them not Hell alone, but also what happened to their
fathers,  <span id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847) so now here also,
he first establishes this position from things present. For it were
right indeed that earthly things should be proved from heavenly, but
when the hearers are weak, the opposite course is taken.

<span id="v.xii-p10"></span> \[2.\] Up to a certain point he lays down
first the things which are common \[to Christ and their High Priests\],
and then shows that He is superior. For comparative  <span
id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848) excellence arises thus, when in
some respects there is community, in others superiority; otherwise it is
no longer comparative.

<span id="v.xii-p12"></span> “For every High Priest taken from among
men,” this is common to Christ; “is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God,” and this also; “that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for the people,” and this too, \[yet\] not entirely: what
follows however is no longer so: “who can have compassion  <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849) on the ignorant, and on them that
are out of the way,” from this point forward is the superiority,
“inasmuch as himself also is encompassed with infirmity; and by reason
hereof he ought as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for
sins.”

<span id="v.xii-p14"></span>Then also \[there are\] other \[points\]: He
is made \[Priest\] (he says) by Another and does not of Himself intrude
into \[the office\]. This too is common ( [Heb.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="v.xii-p14.1"></span> ),
“And no man taketh this honor to himself, but he that is called of God
as was Aaron.”

<span id="v.xii-p15"></span> Here again he conciliates  <span
id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850) them in another point, because He
was sent from God: which Christ was wont to say throughout to the Jews.
“He that sent Me is greater than I,” and, “I came not of Myself.” (
[John 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049), [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028), [John
8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042)<span id="v.xii-p16.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xii-p17"></span>He appears to me in these words also to hint
at the priests of the Jews, as being no longer priests, \[but\]
intruders and corrupters of the law of the priesthood; ( [Heb.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span id="v.xii-p17.1"></span> )
“So Christ also glorified not Himself to be made an High Priest.”

<span id="v.xii-p18"></span>How then was He appointed (one says)? For
Aaron was many times appointed as by the Rod, and when the fire came
down and destroyed those who wished to intrude into the priesthood. But
in this instance, on the contrary, they \[the Jewish Priests\] not only
suffered nothing, but even are in high esteem. Whence then \[His
appointment\]? He shows it from the prophecy. He has nothing \[to
allege\] perceptible by sense, nothing visible. For this cause he
affirms it from prophecy, from things future; “But He that said unto Him
Thou art My Son, to-day have I begotten Thee.” What has this to do with
the Son? Yea (he says) it is a preparation for His being appointed by
God.

<span id="v.xii-p19"></span> <span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_404"></span>[Heb.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006)<span id="v.xii-p19.1"></span> .
“As He saith also in another place, Thou art a Priest forever after the
order of Melchisedech.” Unto whom now was this spoken?

<span id="v.xii-p20"></span>Who is “after the order of Melchisedech”? No
other \[than He\]. For they all were under the Law, they all kept
sabbaths, they all were circumcised; one could not point out any other
\[than Him\].

<span id="v.xii-p21"></span>\[3.\] [Heb.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)<span id="v.xii-p21.1"></span> .
“Who in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, to Him that was able to save
Him from death, and was heard in that He feared; though He were a <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xii-p21.2"></span>Son</span> , yet learned He
obedience by the things which He suffered.” Seest thou that he sets
forth nothing else than His care and the exceeding greatness of His
love? For what means the \[expression\] “with strong crying”? The Gospel
nowhere says this, nor that He wept when He prayed, nor yet that He
uttered a cry. Seest thou that it was a condescension? For he could not
\[merely\] say that He prayed, but also “with strong crying.”

<span id="v.xii-p22"></span> “And was heard,” (he says), “in that He
feared; though He were a <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xii-p22.1"></span>Son</span> , yet learned He obedience by the
things which He suffered.” ( [Heb.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)<span id="v.xii-p22.2"></span> ),
“And being made perfect He became the Author of eternal salvation unto
all them that obey Him: called of God an High Priest after the order of
Melchisedech.”

<span id="v.xii-p23"></span>Be it with “crying,” why also “strong
\[crying\] and tears”?

<span id="v.xii-p24"></span> “Having offered,” (he says), “and having
been heard in that He feared.” What sayest thou? Let the Heretics  <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) be ashamed. The Son of God “was
heard in that He feared.” And what more could any man say concerning the
prophets? And what sort of connection is there, in saying, “He was heard
in that He feared, though He were Son, yet learned He obedience by the
things which He suffered”? Would any man say these things concerning
God? Why, who was ever so mad? And who, even if he were beside himself,
would have uttered these things? “Having been heard,” (he says), “in
that He feared, He learned obedience by the things which He suffered.”
What obedience? He that before this had been obedient even unto death,
as a Son to His Father, how did He afterwards learn? Seest thou that
this is spoken concerning the Incarnation?

<span id="v.xii-p26"></span>Tell me now, did He pray the Father that He
might be saved from death? And was it for this cause that He was
“exceeding sorrowful, and said, If it be possible, let this cup pass
from Me”? ( [Matt. 26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="v.xii-p26.1"></span> .)
Yet He nowhere prayed the Father concerning His resurrection, but on the
contrary He openly declares, “Destroy this temple and within three days
I will raise it up.” ( [John. ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)
<span id="v.xii-p26.2"></span> .) And, “I have power to lay down My
life, and I have power to take it again. No man taketh it from Me, I lay
it down of Myself.” ( [John x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)
<span id="v.xii-p26.3"></span> .) What then is it; why did He pray? (And
again He said, “Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall
be betrayed unto the chief priests and scribes, and they shall condemn
Him to death. And they shall deliver Him to the Gentiles, to mock, and
to scourge, and to crucify Him; and the third day He shall rise again” (
[Matt. 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019)<span id="v.xii-p26.4"></span> ),
and said not, “My Father shall raise Me up again.”) How then did He pray
concerning this? But for whom did He pray? For those who believed on
Him.

<span id="v.xii-p27"></span>And what he means is this, ‘He is readily
listened to.’ For since they had not yet the right opinion concerning
Him, he said that He was heard. Just as He Himself also when consoling
His disciples said, “If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice, because I go to
My Father” ( [John xiv. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028) <span
id="v.xii-p27.1"></span> ), and “My Father is greater than I.” But how
did He not glorify Himself, He who “made Himself of no reputation” (
[Philip. ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007) <span
id="v.xii-p27.2"></span> ), He who gave Himself up? For, it is said, “He
gave Himself” up “for our sins.” (See [Gal. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004) <span id="v.xii-p27.3"></span> .)
And again, “Who gave Himself a ransom for us all.” ( [1 Tim. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006) <span id="v.xii-p27.4"></span> .)
What is it then? Thou seest that it is in reference to the flesh that
lowly things are spoken concerning Himself: So also here, “Although He
were Son, He was heard in that He feared,” it is said. He wishes to
show, that the success was of Himself, rather than of God’s favor. So
great (he says) was His reverence, that even on account thereof God had
respect unto Him.

<span id="v.xii-p28"></span> “He learned,” he saith, to obey God. Here
again he shows how great is the gain of sufferings. “And having been
made perfect,” he says, “He became the Author of salvation to them that
obey Him.” (Cf. *supra* , pp. 384, 391.) But if He, being the <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xii-p28.1"></span>Son</span> , gained obedience
from His sufferings, much more shall we. Dost thou see how many things
he discourses about obedience, that they might be persuaded to it? For
it seems to me that they would not be restrained. “From the things,” he
says, “which He suffered He” continually “learned” to obey <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xii-p28.2"></span>God</span> . And being “made
perfect” through sufferings. This then is perfection, and by this means
must we arrive at perfection. For not only was He Himself saved, but
became to others also an abundant supply of salvation. For “being made
perfect He became the Author of salvation to them that obey Him.”

<span id="v.xii-p29"></span>\[4.\] “Being called,” he says, “of God an
High Priest after the order of Melchisedech”: ( [Heb.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)<span id="v.xii-p29.1"></span> )
“Of whom we have many things to say and hard to be uttered \[or
explained\].” <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_405"></span> When he was about to proceed to the
difference of the Priesthood, he first reproves them, pointing out both
that such great condescension was “milk,” and that it was because they
were children that he dwelt longer on the lowly subject, relating to the
flesh, and speaks \[about Him\] as about any righteous man. And see, he
neither kept silence as to the doctrine altogether, nor did he utter it;
that on the one hand, he might raise their thoughts, and persuade them
to be perfect, and that they might not be deprived of the great
doctrines; and on the other, that he might not overwhelm their minds.

<span id="v.xii-p30"></span>“Of whom,” he says, “we have many things to
say and hard to be explained, seeing ye are dull of hearing.” Because
they do not hear, the doctrine is “hard to be explained.” For when one
has to do with men who do not go along with him nor mind the things that
are spoken, he cannot well explain the subject to them.

<span id="v.xii-p31"></span>But perhaps some one of you that stand here,
is puzzled, and thinks it a hard case, that owing to the Hebrews, he
himself is hindered from hearing the more perfect doctrines. Nay rather,
I think that perhaps here also except a few, there are many such \[as
they\], so that this may be said concerning yourselves also: but for the
sake of those few I will speak.

<span id="v.xii-p32"></span>Did he then keep entire silence, or did he
resume the subject again in what follows; and do the same as in the
Epistle to the Romans? For there too, when he had first stopped the
mouths of the gainsayers, and said, “Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God?” ( [Rom. ix. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)
<span id="v.xii-p32.1"></span> ), he then subjoined the solution. And
for my own part I think that he was not even altogether silent, and yet
did not speak it out, in order to lead the hearers to a longing \[for
the knowledge\]. For having mentioned \[the subject\], and said that
certain great things were stored up in the doctrine, see how he frames
his reproof in combination with panegyric.

<span id="v.xii-p33"></span>For this is ever a part of Paul’s wisdom, to
mix painful things with kind ones. Which he also does in the Epistle to
the Galatians, saying, “Ye did run well; who did hinder you?” ( [Gal. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007) <span id="v.xii-p33.1"></span> .)
And, “Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain” (
[Gal. iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004) <span
id="v.xii-p33.2"></span> ), and, “I have confidence in you in the Lord.”
( [Gal. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010) <span
id="v.xii-p33.3"></span> .) Which he says also to these \[Hebrews\],
“But we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation.” ( [Heb. 6.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#009)<span
id="v.xii-p33.4"></span> .) For these two things he effects, he does not
overstrain them, nor suffer them to fall back; for if the examples of
others are sufficient to arouse the hearer, and to lead him to
emulation; when a man has himself for an example and is bidden to
emulate himself, the possibility follows at the same time. He therefore
shows this also, and does not suffer them to fall back as men utterly
condemned, nor as being alway evil, but \[says\] that they were once
even good; ( [Heb. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xii-p33.5"></span> ) for “when for the time ye ought to be
teachers,” he says. Here he shows that they had been believers a long
while, and he shows also that they ought to instruct others.

<span id="v.xii-p34"></span>\[5.\] At all events observe him continually
travailing to introduce the discourse concerning the High Priest, and
still putting it off. For hear how he began: “Having a great High Priest
that is passed into the heavens” ( [Heb.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)<span id="v.xii-p34.1"></span> );
and omitting to say how He was great, he says again, “For every High
Priest taken from among men, is appointed for men in things pertaining
to God.” ( [Heb. 5.1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)<span
id="v.xii-p34.2"></span> .) And again, “So Christ also glorified not
Himself to be made an High Priest.” ( [Heb.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span id="v.xii-p34.3"></span> )
And again after saying, “Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech” ( [Heb. 5.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006)<span
id="v.xii-p34.4"></span> ), he again puts off \[the subject\], saying,
“Who in the days of His Flesh offered prayers and supplications.” (
[Heb. 5.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span
id="v.xii-p34.5"></span> .) When therefore he had been so many times
repulsed, he says, as if excusing himself, The blame is with you. Alas!
how great a difference! When they ought to be teaching others, they are
not even simply learners, but the last of learners. ( [Heb.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="v.xii-p34.6"></span> ),
“For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need again that
some one  <span id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852) teach you again
which be the first principles  <span
id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) of the oracles of God.” Here he
means the Human Nature \[of Christ\]. For as in external literature it
is necessary to learn the elements first, so also here they were first
taught concerning the human nature.

<span id="v.xii-p37"></span>Thou seest what is the cause of his uttering
lowly things. So Paul did to the Athenians also, discoursing and saying,
“The times of this ignorance God winked at: but now commandeth all men
everywhere to repent, because He hath appointed a day in the which He
will judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained,
whereof He hath given assurance unto all men, in that He hath raised Him
from the dead.” ( [Acts 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="v.xii-p37.1"></span> .)
Therefore, if he says anything lofty, he expresses it briefly, while the
lowly statements are scattered about in many parts of the Epistle. And
thus too he shows the lofty; since the very lowliness \[of what is
said\] forbids the suspicion that these things relate to the Divine
Nature. So here also the safe ground was kept.  <span
id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854)

<span id="v.xii-p39"></span>But what produces this dullness? This he
pointed out especially in the Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, “For
whereas there is <span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_406"></span> among you envy and strife and divisions, are
ye not carnal?” ( [1 Cor. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003) <span
id="v.xii-p39.1"></span> .) But observe, I beseech you, his great
wisdom, how he always deals according to the distempers before him. For
there the weakness arose more from ignorance, or rather from sin; but
here not from sins only, but also from continual afflictions. Wherefore
he also uses expressions calculated to show the difference, not saying,
“ye are become carnal,” but “dull”: in that case “carnal,” but in this
the pain is greater. For they \[the Corinthians\] indeed were not able
to endure \[his reproof\], because they were carnal: but these were
able. For in saying, “Seeing ye are become dull of hearing” ( [Heb.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)<span id="v.xii-p39.2"></span> ),
he shows that formerly they were sound in health, and were strong,
fervent in zeal, which he also afterwards testifies respecting them.

<span id="v.xii-p40"></span> \[6.\] “And are become such as have need of
milk, not of strong meat.” He always calls the lowly doctrine “milk,”
both in this place and in the other. “When,” he says, “for \[i.e.
“because of”\] the time ye ought to be teachers”: because of that very
thing, namely the time, for which ye ought especially to be strong, for
this especially ye are become backsliding. Now he calls it “milk,” on
account of its being suited to the more simple. But to the more perfect
it is injurious, and the dwelling on these things is hurtful. So that it
is not fitting that matters of the Law should be introduced  <span
id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) now or the comparison made from
them, \[such as\] that He was an High Priest, and offered sacrifice, and
needed crying and supplication. Wherefore see how these things are
unhealthful  <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) to “us”; but at
that time they nourished them being by no means unhealthful to them.

<span id="v.xii-p43"></span>So then the oracles of God are true
nourishment. “For I will give unto them,” he saith, “not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst of water, but a famine of hearing the word of the
Lord.” ( [Amos viii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011) <span
id="v.xii-p43.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xii-p44"></span>“I gave you milk to drink, and not meat” (
[1 Cor. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002) <span
id="v.xii-p44.1"></span> ); He did not say, I fed you, showing that such
\[nourishment\] as this is not food, but that \[the case is\] like that
of little children who cannot be fed with bread. For such have not drink
given them, but their food is to them instead of drink.

<span id="v.xii-p45"></span>Moreover he did not say, “ye have need,” but
“ye are become such as have need of milk and not of strong meat.” That
is, ye willed \[it\]; ye have reduced yourselves to this, to this need.

<span id="v.xii-p46"></span> [Heb.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013)<span id="v.xii-p46.1"></span> .
“For every one that partaketh of milk is unskilled in the word of
righteousness: for he is a babe.” What is “the Word \[doctrine\] of
righteousness”? He seems to me here to hint at conduct also. That which
Christ also said, “Except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees” ( [Matt. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020) <span id="v.xii-p46.2"></span> ),
this he says likewise, “unskilled in the word of righteousness,” that
is, he that is unskilled in the philosophy that is above, is unable to
embrace a perfect and exact life.  <span
id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) Or else by “righteousness” he here
means Christ, and the high doctrine concerning Him.

<span id="v.xii-p48"></span>That they then were “become dull,” he said;
but from what cause, he did not add, leaving it to themselves to know
it, and not wishing to make his discourse hard to bear. But in the case
of the Galatians he both “marveled” ( [Gal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006) <span id="v.xii-p48.1"></span> ) and
“stood in doubt” ( [Gal. iv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020) <span
id="v.xii-p48.2"></span> ), which tends much more to encourage, as \[it
is the language\] of one who would never have expected that this should
happen. For this is \[what\] the doubting \[implies\].

<span id="v.xii-p49"></span> Thou seest that there is another infancy,
Thou seest that there is another full age.  <span
id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) Let us become of “full age” in this
sense: It is in the power even of those who are children, and the young
to come to that “full age”: for it is not of nature, but of virtue.

<span id="v.xii-p51"></span>\[7.\] [Heb.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span id="v.xii-p51.1"></span> .
“But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age \[perfect\],
even them who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern
both good and evil.” Those had not “their senses exercised,” nor did
they “know good and evil.” He is not speaking now concerning life
\[conduct\], when he says “to discern good and evil,” for this is
possible and easy for every man to know, but concerning doctrines that
are wholesome and sublime, and those that are corrupted and low. The
babe knows not how to distinguish bad and good food. Oftentimes at least
it even puts dirt into its mouth, and takes what is hurtful; and it does
all things without judgment; but not \[so\] the full grown man. Such
\[babes\] are they who lightly listen to everything, and give up their
ears indiscriminately: which seems to me to blame these \[Hebrews\]
also, as being lightly “carried about,” and now giving themselves to
these, now to those. Which he also hinted near the end \[of the
Epistle\], saying, “Be not carried aside by divers and strange
doctrines.” ( [Heb. 13.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009)<span
id="v.xii-p51.2"></span> .) This is the meaning of “to discern good and
evil.” “For the mouth tasteth meat, but the soul trieth words.” ( [Job
xxxiv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#003) <span
id="v.xii-p51.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.xii-p52"></span>\[8.\] Let us then learn this lesson. Do
not, when thou hearest that a man is not a Heathen nor a Jew,
straightway believe him to be a Christian; but examine also into all the
other points; for even Manichæans, and all the heresies, have <span
id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span id="v.xii-Page_407"></span> put on
this mask, in order thus to deceive the more simple. But if we “have the
senses” of the soul “exercised to discern both good and evil,” we are
able to discern such \[teachers\].

<span id="v.xii-p53"></span>But how do our “senses” become “exercised”?
By continual hearing; by experience of the Scriptures. For when we set
forth the error of those \[Heretics\], and thou hearest today and
to-morrow; and provest that it is not right, thou hast learnt the whole,
thou hast known the whole: and even if thou shouldest not comprehend
to-day, thou wilt comprehend to-morrow.

<span id="v.xii-p54"></span>“That have,” he says, their “senses
exercised.” Thou seest that it is needful to exercise our hearing by
divine studies, so that they may not sound strangely. “Exercised,” saith
he, “for discerning,” that is, to be skilled.

<span id="v.xii-p55"></span> One man says, that there is no
Resurrection; and another looks for none of the things to come; another
says there is a different God; another that He has His beginning from
Mary. And see at once how they have all fallen away from want of
moderation,  <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) some by excess,
others by defect. As for instance, the first Heresy of all was that of
Marcion; this introduced another different God, who has no existence.
 <span id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) See the excess. After this
that of Sabellius, saying that the Son and the Spirit and the Father are
One.  <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861) Next that of Marcellus
and Photinus, setting forth the same things. Moreover that of Paul of
Samosata, saying that He had His beginning from Mary. Afterwards that of
the Manichæans; for this is the most modern of all. After these the
heresy of Arius. And there are others too.

<span id="v.xii-p59"></span>And on this account have we received the
Faith, that we might not be compelled to attack innumerable heresies,
and to deal with them, but whatever any man might have endeavored either
to add or take away, that we might consider spurious. For as those who
give the standards do not oblige \[people\] to busy themselves about
measures innumerable, but bid them keep to what is given them; so also
in the case of doctrines.

<span id="v.xii-p60"></span>\[9.\] But no man is willing to give heed to
the Scriptures. For if we did give heed, not only should we not be
ourselves entangled by deceit, but we should also set others free who
are deceived, and should draw them out of dangers. For the strong
soldier is not only able to help himself, but also to protect his
comrade, and to free him from the malice of the enemy. But as it is,
some do not even know that there are any Scriptures. Yet the Holy Spirit
indeed made so many wise provisions in order that they might be safely
kept.

<span id="v.xii-p61"></span>And look at it from the first, that ye may
learn the unspeakable love of God. He inspired the blessed Moses; He
engraved the tables, He detained him on the mount forty days; and again
as many \[more\] to give the Law. And after this He sent prophets who
suffered woes innumerable. War came on; they slew them all, they cut
them to pieces, the books were burned. Again, He inspired another
admirable man to publish them, Ezra I mean, and caused them to be put
together from the remains. And after this He arranged that they should
be translated by the seventy. They did translate them. Christ came, He
receives them; the Apostles disperse them among men. Christ wrought
signs and wonders.

<span id="v.xii-p62"></span>What then after so great painstaking? The
Apostles also wrote, even as Paul likewise said, “they were written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.” ( [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011) <span id="v.xii-p62.1"></span> .)
And again Christ said, “Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures” ( [Matt.
xxii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029) <span
id="v.xii-p62.2"></span> ): and again Paul said, “That through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope.” ( [Rom. xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004) <span id="v.xii-p62.3"></span> .)
And again, “All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable.” ( [2 Tim. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016) <span
id="v.xii-p62.4"></span> .) And “let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly.” ( [Col. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016) <span
id="v.xii-p62.5"></span> .) And the prophet, “he shall meditate in His
Law day and night” ( [Ps. i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002) <span
id="v.xii-p62.6"></span> ), and again in another place, “Let all thy
communication be in the law of the Most High.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
9.15](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#015)<span id="v.xii-p62.7"></span> .)
And again, “How sweet are Thy words unto my throat.” (He said not to my
hearing, but to my “throat”); “more than honey and the honeycomb to my
mouth.” ( [Ps. cxix. 103](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#103) <span
id="v.xii-p62.8"></span> .) And Moses says, “Thou shalt meditate in them
continually, when thou risest up, when thou sittest, when thou liest
down.” ( [Deut. vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007) <span
id="v.xii-p62.9"></span> .) “Be in them” ( [1 Tim. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015) <span id="v.xii-p62.10"></span> ),
saith he. And innumerable things one might say concerning them. But
notwithstanding, after so many things there are some who do not even
know that there are Scriptures at all. For this cause, believe me,
nothing sound, nothing profitable comes from us.

<span id="v.xii-p63"></span>\[10.\] Yet, if any one wished to learn
military affairs, of necessity he must learn the military laws. And if
any one sought to learn navigation or carpentry or anything else, of
necessity he must learn the \[principles\] of the art. But in this case
they will not do anything of the kind, although this is a science which
needs much wakeful attention. For that it too is an art which needs
teaching, hear the prophet saying, “Come, ye children, hearken unto me,
I will teach you the fear of the Lord.” ( [Ps. xxxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011) <span id="v.xii-p63.1"></span> .)
It follows therefore certainly that the fear of God needs teaching. Then
he says, “What man is he that desireth life?” ( [Ps. xxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012) <span id="v.xii-p63.2"></span> .)
He means the life yonder; and again, “Keep thy tongue from evil and thy
lips from speaking guile; de <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_408"></span> part from evil and do good, seek peace and
pursue it.” ( [Ps. 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span id="v.xii-p63.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.xii-p64"></span>Do you know indeed who said these things, a
prophet or a historian, or an apostle, or an evangelist? For my own part
I do not think you do, except a few. Yea and these themselves again, if
we bring forward a testimony from some other place, will be in the same
case as the rest of you. For see, I repeat the same statement expressed
in other words. “Wash ye, make you clean, put away your wickedness from
your souls before Mine eyes, learn to do well, seek out judgment. Keep
thy tongue from evil, and do good: learn to do well.” ( [Isa.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span id="v.xii-p64.1"></span> .)
Thou seest that virtue needs to be taught? For this one says, “I will
teach you the fear of the Lord,” and the other, “Learn to do well.”

<span id="v.xii-p65"></span>Now then do you know where these words are?
For myself I do not think you do, except a few. And yet every week these
things are read to you twice or even three times: and the reader when he
goes up \[to the desk\] first says whose the book is, \[the book\] of
such a prophet, and then says what he says, so that it shall be more
intelligible to you and you may not only know the contents of the Book,
but also the reason of the writings, and who spake these things. But all
in vain; all to no purpose. For your zeal is spent on things of this
life, and of things spiritual no account is made. Therefore not even
those matters turn out according to your wishes, but there also are many
difficulties. For Christ says, “Seek ye the Kingdom of God, and all
these things shall be added unto you.” ( [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033) <span id="v.xii-p65.1"></span> .)
These things He said, shall also be given in the way of addition: but we
have inverted the order and seek the earth and the good things which are
in the earth, as if those other \[heavenly\] things were to be given us
in addition. Therefore we have neither the one nor the other. Let us
then at last wake up and become coveters of the things which shall be
hereafter; for so these also will follow. For it is not possible that he
who seeks the things that relate to God, should not also attain human
\[blessings\]. It is the declaration of the Truth itself which says
this. Let us not then act otherwise, but let us hold fast to the counsel
of Christ, lest we fail of all. But God is able to give you compunction
and to make you better, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the
Father together with the Holy Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and for
ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[403:2846](1140106.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="v.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p4.1"></span>μετριοπαθεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[403:2847](1140106.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="v.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p6.1"></span>φανταστικὸν</span>

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[403:2848](1140106.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="v.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p9"></span> [Heb.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)<span id="v.xii-p9.1"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p9.2"></span></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p9.3"></span>, &c.</span>

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[403:2849](1140106.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="v.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p11.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p11.2"></span>κατὰ σύγκρισιν</span>

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[403:2850](1140106.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="v.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.1"></span>\[St. Chrys. has not drawn attention to the nice
distinction between</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.2"></span>μετριοπαθεῖν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.3"></span>equal</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.4"></span>to bear reasonably with,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p13.5"></span>applied to the earthly High
Priest, and</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.6"></span>συμπαθεῖν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.7"></span>equal</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p13.8"></span>to sympathize with,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p13.9"></span>applied to
Christ.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[403:2851](1140106.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="v.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p16.1"></span>θεραπεύει</span>

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[404:2852](1140106.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="v.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p25.1"></span>Heretics who denied the reality of our Lord’s
human nature.</span>

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[405:2853](1140106.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="v.xii-p34.7"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p35.1"></span>τινα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p35.2"></span>. The common editions have</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p35.3"></span>τίνα</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p35.4"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p35.5"></span>that one teach you which
be,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p35.6"></span>&c., as
is read in the received version of the Epistle, where Lachman adopts the
reading</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p35.7"></span>τίνα</span>

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[405:2854](1140106.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="v.xii-p35.8"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p36"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p36.1"></span>the elements of the beginning.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[405:2855](1140106.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="v.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p38.1"></span>That is, he took care to provide against being
understood to refer to His Divine Nature, when he said lowly things
concerning Christ.</span>

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[406:2856](1140106.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="v.xii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p41.1"></span>The allowing the observances of the law, as well
as the dwelling thus on the human characteristics of our Lord, were
suited for the beginners, but would be injurious to us.</span>

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[406:2857](1140106.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="v.xii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p42.1"></span>προσίσταται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p42.2"></span>. Said of that which cannot be digested or
causes nausea.</span>

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[406:2858](1140106.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="v.xii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p47.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p47.2"></span>κρον καὶ ἠκριβωμένον</span>

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[406:2859](1140106.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="v.xii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p50.1"></span>τελειότης</span>

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[407:2860](1140106.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="v.xii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p56.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p56.2"></span>ξ ἀμετρίας</span>

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[407:2861](1140106.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="v.xii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p57.1"></span>Cf. St. Irenæus, iv. 33. 2, p. 405, O.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[407:2862](1140106.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="v.xii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p58.1"></span>ἕ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p58.2"></span>ν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xii-p58.3"></span>. The common texts add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p58.4"></span>πρόσωπον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p58.5"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xii-p58.6"></span>one person.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IX](1140107)
