[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140073)  [Next](1140075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxi"></span> <span id="iv.lxxi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span id="iv.lxxi-Page_252"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p1.1"></span>Homily LXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxi-p2.2"></span>[John
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span
id="iv.lxxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p3"></span>“Nevertheless among the chief rulers also
many believed on Him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess
Him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p4.1"></span>It</span> is necessary for us to avoid alike
all the passions which corrupt the soul, but most especially those,
which from themselves generate numerous sins. I mean such as the love of
money. It is in truth of itself a dreadful malady, but it becomes much
more grievous, because it is the root and mother of all mischiefs. Such
also is vainglory. See, for instance, how these men were broken off from
the faith through their love of honor. “Many,” it saith, “of the chief
rulers also believed on Him, but because of the Jews  <span
id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928) they did not confess Him, lest they
should be put out of the synagogue.” As He said also to them before,
“How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that cometh from God only?” ( [John
5.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)<span id="iv.lxxi-p5.3"></span> .)
So then they were not rulers, but slaves in the utmost slavery. However,
this fear was afterwards done away, for nowhere during the time of the
Apostles do we find them possessed by this feeling, since in their time
both rulers and priests believed. The grace of the Spirit having come,
made them all firmer than adamant. Since therefore this was what
hindered them from believing at this time, hear what He saith.

<span id="iv.lxxi-p6"></span> [John
12.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044)<span id="iv.lxxi-p6.1"></span> .
“He that believeth on Me, believeth not on Me, but on Him that sent Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p7"></span> As though He had said, “Why fear ye to
believe on Me? Faith passeth to the Father through Me, as doth also
unbelief.” See how in every way He showeth the unvaryingness of His
Essence.  <span id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929) He said not, He
that believeth “Me,” lest any should assert that He spake concerning His
words; this might have been said in the case of mere men, for he that
believeth the Apostles, believeth not them, but God. But that thou
mightest learn that He speaketh here of the belief on His Essence, He
said not, “He that believeth My words,” but, “He that believeth on Me.”
“And wherefore,” saith some one, “hath He nowhere said conversely, He
that believeth on the Father, believeth not on the Father but on Me?”
Because they would have replied, “Lo, we believe on the Father, but we
believe not on thee.” Their disposition was as yet too infirm. Anyhow,
conversing with the disciples, He did speak thus: “Ye believe on the
Father,  <span id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930) believe also on Me”
( [John 14.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span
id="iv.lxxi-p9.3"></span> ); but seeing that these then were too weak to
hear such words, He leadeth them in another way, showing  <span
id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931) that it is not possible to believe
on the Father, without believing on Him. And that thou mayest not deem
that the words are spoken as of man, He addeth,

<span id="iv.lxxi-p11"></span> [John
12.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#045)<span id="iv.lxxi-p11.1"></span>
. “He that seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p12"></span>What then! Is God a body? By no means. The
“seeing” of which He here speaketh is that of the mind, thence showing
the Consubstantiality. And what is, “He that believeth on Me”? It is as
though one should say, “He that taketh water from the river, taketh it
not from the river but from the fountain”; or rather this image is too
weak, when compared with the matter before us.

<span id="iv.lxxi-p13"></span> [John
12.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046)<span id="iv.lxxi-p13.1"></span>
. “I am come a light into the world.”  <span
id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932)

<span id="iv.lxxi-p15"></span>For since the Father is called by this
name everywhere both in the Old (Testament) and in the New, Christ useth
the same name also; therefore Paul also calleth Him, “Brightness” (
[Heb. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p15.1"></span> ), having learnt to do so from this source.
And He showeth here His close relationship with the Father, and that
there is no separation  <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933)
between them, if so be that He saith that faith on Him is not on Him,
but passeth on to the Father. And He called Himself “light,” because He
delivereth from error, and dissolveth mental darkness.

<span id="iv.lxxi-p17"></span> [John
12.47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)<span id="iv.lxxi-p17.1"></span>
. “If any man hear not Me, and believe not, I judge him not, for I came
not to judge the world, but to save the world.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p18"></span> \[2.\] For lest they should think, that
for want of power He passed by the despisers, therefore spake He the, “I
came not to judge the world.” Then, in order that they might not in this
way be made more negligent, when they had learned that “he that
believeth is saved, and he that disbelieveth is punished,”  <span
id="fr_1934"></span>[1935](#fn_1934) see how He hath also set before
them a fearful court of judgment, by going on to say,

<span id="iv.lxxi-p20"></span> [John
12.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)<span id="iv.lxxi-p20.1"></span>
. “He that rejecteth Me, and receiveth not My words, hath One to judge
him.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p21"></span>“If the Father judgeth no man, and thou
art not come to judge the world, who judgeth him?” “The word that I have
spoken, the <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="iv.lxxi-Page_253"></span> same shall judge him.”  <span
id="fr_1935"></span>[1936](#fn_1935) For since they said, “He is not
from God,” He saith this,  <span id="fr_1936"></span>[1937](#fn_1936)
that, “they shall not then be able to say these things, but the words
which I have spoken now, shall be in place of an accuser, convicting
them, and cutting off all excuse.” “And the word which I have spoken.”
What manner of word?

<span id="iv.lxxi-p24"></span> [John
12.49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049)<span id="iv.lxxi-p24.1"></span>
. “For I have not spoken of Myself, but the Father which sent Me, He
gave Me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.” And
other such like.  <span id="fr_1937"></span>[1938](#fn_1937)

<span id="iv.lxxi-p26"></span>Surely these things were said for their
sakes, that they might have no pretense of excuse. Since if this were
not the case, what shall He have more than Isaiah? for he too saith the
very same thing, “The Lord God giveth me the tongue of the learned, that
I should know when I ought to speak a word.” ( [Isa. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004) <span id="iv.lxxi-p26.1"></span> ,
LXX.) What more than Jeremiah? for he too when he was sent was inspired.
( [Jer. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p26.2"></span> .) What then Ezekiel? for he too, after
eating the roll, so spake. ( [Ezek. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001) <span id="iv.lxxi-p26.3"></span> .)
Otherwise also, they who were about to hear what He said shall be found
to be causes of His knowledge. For if when He was sent, He then received
commandment what He should say, thou wilt then argue that before He was
sent He knew not. And what more impious than these assertions? if (that
is) one take the words of Christ in this sense, and understand not the
cause  <span id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938) of their lowliness?
Yet Paul saith, that both he and those who were made disciples knew
“what was that good and acceptable and perfect will of God” ( [Rom. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002) <span id="iv.lxxi-p27.3"></span> ),
and did the Son not know until He had received commandment? How can this
be reasonable? Seest thou not that He bringeth His expressions to an
excess of humility, that He may both draw those men over, and silence
those who should come after. This is why He uttereth words befitting a
mere man, that even so He may force us to fly the meanness of the
sayings, as being conscious that the words belong not to His Nature, but
are suited to the infirmity of the hearers.

<span id="iv.lxxi-p28"></span> [John
12.50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#050)<span id="iv.lxxi-p28.1"></span>
. “And I know that His commandment is life everlasting; whatsoever I
speak therefore, even as the Father said unto Me, so I speak.”

<span id="iv.lxxi-p29"></span>Seest thou the humility of the words? For
he that hath received a commandment is not his own master. Yet He saith,
“As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will.” ( [John
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="iv.lxxi-p29.1"></span>
.) Hath He then power to quicken whom He will, and to say what He will
hath He not power? What He intendeth then by the words is this;  <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) “The action hath not natural
possibility,  <span id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) that He should
speak one set of words, and I should utter another.” “And I know that
His commandment is life everlasting.” He said this to those that called
Him a deceiver, and asserted that He had come to do hurt. But when He
saith, “I judge not,” He showeth that He is not the cause of the
perdition of these men.  <span id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) By
this He all but plainly testifies, when about to remove from, and to be
no more with, them, that “I converse with you, speaking nothing as of
Myself, but all as from the Father.” And for this cause He confined His
discourse to them to humble expressions, that He might say, “Even until
the end did I utter this, My last word, to them.” What word was that?
“As the Father said unto Me, so I speak.” “Had I been opposed to God I
should have said the contrary, that I speak nothing of what is pleasing
to God, so as to attract the honor to Myself, but now I have so referred
all things to Him, as to call nothing My own.  <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) Why then do ye not believe Me when
I say that ‘I have received a commandment,’ and when I so vehemently
remove your evil suspicion respecting rivalry? For as it is impossible
for those who have received a commandment to do or say anything but what
their senders wish, as long as they fulfill the commandment, and do not
forge  <span id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) anything; so neither
is it possible for Me to say or do anything except as My Father willeth.
For what I do He doeth, because He is with Me, and ‘the Father hath not
left Me alone.’” ( [John 8.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)<span
id="iv.lxxi-p34.2"></span> .) Seest thou how everywhere He showeth
Himself connected with Him who begat Him, and that there is no
separation?  <span id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) For when He
saith, “I am not come of Myself,” He saith it not, as depriving Himself
of power, but as taking away all alienation or opposition.  <span
id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) For if men are masters of
themselves, much more the Only-begotten Son. And to show that this is
true, hear what Paul saith,  <span id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946)
“He emptied Himself, and gave Himself for us.” ( [Philip. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007) <span id="iv.lxxi-p37.3"></span> .)
But, as I said, a terrible thing is vainglory, very terrible ( [Eph. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002) <span id="iv.lxxi-p37.4"></span> );
for this made these men not to believe, and others to believe ill, so
that the things which were said for the sake of those men, through
lovingkindness, they turned to  <span
id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947) impiety.

<span id="iv.lxxi-p39"></span> \[3.\] Let us then ever flee this
monster: various and manifold it is, and everywhere sheds its peculiar
venom, in wealth, in luxury, in beauty of person. Through this we
everywhere go beyond needful use;  <span
id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) through this arises extravagance in
garments, and a great swarm of domestics; through this the needful use
is every <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iv.lxxi-Page_254"></span> where despised, in our houses, our
garments, our table; and extravagance prevails. Wilt thou enjoy glory?
Do alms-deeds, then shall Angels praise thee, then shall God receive
thee. Now the admiration goes no farther than the goldsmiths and
weavers, and thou  <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) departest
without a crown, often seeing that thou receivest curses. But if thou
put not these things about thy body, but expend them in feeding the
poor, great will be the applause from all sides, great the praise. Then
shalt thou have them, when thou givest them to others; when thou keepest
them to thyself, then thou hast them not. For a house is a faithless
treasury, but a sure treasury are the hands of the poor. Why adornest
thou thy body, while thy soul is neglected, possessed by uncleanness?
Why bestowest thou not so much thought on thy soul, as thy body? Thou
oughtest to bestow greater; but anyhow, beloved,  <span
id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) we ought to bestow equal care upon
it. For tell me, if any one asked thee which thou wouldest choose, that
thy body should be fresh and of good habit and surpassing in beauty, and
wear mean raiment, or having the body deformed and full of diseases, to
wear gold and finery; wouldest thou not much prefer to have beauty
depending on the nature of thy person, than on the raiment with which
thou art clothed? And wilt thou choose this in the case of thy body, but
the contrary in the case of thy soul; and, when thou hast that ugly and
unsightly and black, dost thou think to gain anything from golden
ornaments? What madness is this! Shift this adorning within, put these
necklaces about thy soul. The things that are put about thy body help
neither to its health nor to its beauty, for it will not make black
white, nor what is ugly either beautiful or good looking. But if thou
put them about thy soul, thou shalt soon make it white instead of black,
instead of ugly and unsightly, thou shalt make it beautiful and
well-favored. The words are not mine, but those of the Lord Himself, who
saith, “Though thy sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as snow” (
[Isa. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p42.3"></span> , LXX.); and, “Give alms—and all things shall
be clean unto you” ( [Luke xi. 41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#041)
<span id="iv.lxxi-p42.4"></span> ); and by such a disposition thou shalt
beautify not thyself only, but thy husband. For they if they see you
putting off these outward ornaments, will have no great need of expense,
and not having it, they will abstain from all covetousness, and will be
more inclined to give alms, and ye too will be able boldly to give them
fitting counsel. At present ye are deprived of all such authority. For
with what mouth will ye speak of these things? with what eyes will ye
look your husbands in the face, asking money for alms, when ye spend
most upon the covering of your bodies? Then wilt thou be able boldly to
speak with thy husband concerning alms-giving, when thou layest aside
thine ornaments of gold. Even if thou accomplish nothing, thou hast
fulfilled all thy part; but I should rather say, that it is impossible
that the wife should not gain the husband, when she speaks by the very
actions.  <span id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) “For what knowest
thou, O woman, whether thou shalt save thy husband?” ( [1 Cor. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016) <span id="iv.lxxi-p43.3"></span> .)
As then now thou shalt give account both for thyself and for him, so if
thou put off all this vanity thou shalt have a double crown, wearing thy
crown and triumphing  <span id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) with
thy husband through those unalloyed  <span
id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) ages, and enjoying the everlasting
good things, which may we all obtain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[252:1929](1140074.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p5.1"></span>Pharisees,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p5.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[252:1930](1140074.htm#fr_1929) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p8.1"></span>i.e. in respect of that of the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[252:1931](1140074.htm#fr_1930) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p9"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p9.1"></span>on God,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p9.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[252:1932](1140074.htm#fr_1931) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p10.2"></span>He showeth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[252:1933](1140074.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p14"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p14.1"></span>that whosoever believeth on Me should not
abide in darkness,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p14.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[252:1934](1140074.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p16.1"></span>οὐδὲν τὸ μέσον</span>

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[252:1935](1140074.htm#fr_1934) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p19.1"></span>The sense seems to require,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxi-p19.2"></span>is not punished,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxi-p19.3"></span>and so Sav. and Ben.
conjecture.</span>

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[253:1936](1140074.htm#fr_1935) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p22.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p22.2"></span>in the last day.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxi-p22.3"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1936"></span>[253:1937](1140074.htm#fr_1936) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p22.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p23.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p23.2"></span>thus showing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1937"></span>[253:1938](1140074.htm#fr_1937) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p25.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p25.2"></span>such like works.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[253:1939](1140074.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p27.2"></span>pretext.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[253:1940](1140074.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p30.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p30.2"></span>what then, saith one, meaneth this saying,
that he hath not?</span> ”

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[253:1941](1140074.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p31.1"></span>οὐκ ἔχει φύσιν τὸ πρᾶγμα</span>

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[253:1942](1140074.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p32"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p32.1"></span>I am not, &c. He saith, but themselves.</span>
”

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[253:1943](1140074.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p33.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p33.2"></span>a thing peculiar (to Myself).</span> ”

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[253:1944](1140074.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p34.1"></span>παραχαράττωσι</span>

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[253:1945](1140074.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p35.1"></span>οὐδὲν τὸ μέσον</span>

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[253:1946](1140074.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p36.1"></span>i.e. between Himself and the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[253:1947](1140074.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p37.2"></span>yet this is true, for Paul showeth by what he
saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[253:1948](1140074.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p37.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p38.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p38.2"></span>drew to.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[253:1949](1140074.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p40.1"></span>χρείαν</span>

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[254:1950](1140074.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p41.1"></span>addressed to women.</span>

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[254:1951](1140074.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p42.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p42.2"></span>we might be content if ye did but.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[254:1952](1140074.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p42.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p43.2"></span>with him by actions.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[254:1953](1140074.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p43.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p44.1"></span>πομπεύουσα</span>

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[254:1954](1140074.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="iv.lxxi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p45.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxi-p45.2"></span>κηράτους</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 13.1](1140075)
