[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140115)  [Next](1140117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxii"></span> <span id="v.xxii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span id="v.xxii-Page_451"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="v.xxii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews x.
8-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#008)<span
id="v.xxii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p3"></span> *“Above when He said, Sacrifice and
offering, and burnt-offerings, and \[offering\] for sin, Thou wouldest
not, neither hadst pleasure \[therein\], which are offered by*  <span
id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133) *the Law, then said He, Lo! I come
to do Thy will, O God. He taketh away the first, that He may establish
the second. By the which will we are*  <span
id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) *sanctified, by the offering of the
body of* <span class="c11"><span id="v.xxii-p5.2"></span>Jesus</span>
*Christ, once for all.*  <span id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135) *And
every Priest standeth daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the
same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. But this \[man\] after
He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right
hand of God, from henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His
footstool.”*  <span id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136)

<span id="v.xxii-p8"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxii-p8.1"></span>In</span> what has gone before he had shown that
the sacrifices were unavailing for perfect purification, and were a
type, and greatly defective. Since then there was this objection to his
argument, If they are types, how is it that, after the truth is come,
they have not ceased, nor given place, but are still performed? he here
accordingly labors at this very point, showing that they are no longer
performed, even as a figure, for God does not accept them. And this
again he shows not from the New \[Testament\], but from the prophets,
bringing forward from times of old the strongest testimony, that it
\[the old system\] comes to an end, and ceases, and that they do all in
vain, “alway resisting the Holy Ghost.” ( [Acts vii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051) <span id="v.xxii-p8.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxii-p9"></span>And he shows over and above that they cease
not now \[only\], but at the very coming of the Messiah, nay rather,
even before His coming: and how it was that Christ did not abolish them
at the last, but they were abolished first, and then He came; first they
were made to cease, and then He appeared. That they might not say, Even
without this sacrifice, and by means of those, we could have been well
pleasing unto God, He waited for these sacrifices to be convicted \[of
weakness\], and then He appeared; for (He says) “sacrifice and offering
Thou wouldest not.” Hereby He took all away; and having spoken
generally, He says also particularly, “In burnt-offerings and
\[sacrifice\] for sin Thou hadst no pleasure.” But “the offering” was
everything except the sacrifice. “Then said I, Lo! I come.” Of whom was
this spoken? of none other than the Christ.

<span id="v.xxii-p10"></span> Here he does not blame those who offer,
showing that it is not because of their wickednesses that He does not
accept them, as He says elsewhere, but because the thing itself has been
convicted for the future and shown to have no strength, nor any
suitableness to the times.  <span id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137)
What then has this to do with the “sacrifices” being offered
“oftentimes”? Not only from their being “oftentimes” \[offered\] (he
means) is it manifest that they are weak, and that they effected
nothing; but also from God’s not accepting them, as being unprofitable
and useless. And in another place it is said, “If Thou hadst desired
sacrifice I would have given it.” ( [Ps. li.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016) <span id="v.xxii-p11.2"></span> .)
Therefore by this also he makes it plain that He does not desire it.
Therefore sacrifices are not God’s will, but the abolition of
sacrifices. Wherefore they sacrifice contrary to His will.

<span id="v.xxii-p12"></span>What is “To do Thy will”? To give up
Myself, He means: This is the will of God. “By which Will we are
sanctified.” Or he even means something still further, that the
sacrifices do not make men clean, but the Will of God. Therefore to
offer sacrifice is not the will of God.

<span id="v.xxii-p13"></span>\[2.\] And why dost thou wonder that it is
not the will of God now, when it was not His will even from the
beginning? For “who,” saith He, “hath required this at your hands?” (
[Isa. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012) <span
id="v.xxii-p13.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxii-p14"></span> How then did He Himself enjoin it? In
condescension. For as Paul says, “I would  <span
id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) that all men were even as I myself”
( [1 Cor. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007) <span
id="v.xxii-p15.2"></span> ), in respect of continence, and again says,
“I will  <span id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) that the younger
women marry, bear children” ( [1 Tim. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014) <span id="v.xxii-p16.2"></span> );
and lays down two wills, yet the two are not his own, although he
commands; but the one indeed is his own, and therefore he lays it down
without reasons; while the other is not his own, though he wishes it,
and therefore it is added with a reason. For having previously accused
them, because “they had waxed wanton against Christ” ( [1 Tim. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011) <span id="v.xxii-p16.3"></span> ),
he then says, “I will that the younger women marry, bear children.” ( [1
Tim. v. 14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014) <span
id="v.xxii-p16.4"></span> .) So in this place also it was not His
leading will that the sacrifices should be offered. For, as He says, “I
wish not the death of the sinner, as that he should turn unto \[Me\] and
live” ( [Ezek. xxxiii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011) <span
id="v.xxii-p16.5"></span> ): and in another place He says that He not
only wished, but even desired  <span
id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) this: and yet these are contrary to
each other: for intense <span id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="v.xxii-Page_452"></span> wishing is desire. How then dost Thou “not
wish”? how dost Thou in another place “desire,” which is a sign of
vehement wishing? So is it in this case also.

<span id="v.xxii-p18"></span> “By the which will we are sanctified,” he
says. How sanctified? “by the offering of the Body of <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xxii-p18.1"></span>Jesus</span> Christ once for
all.”

<span id="v.xxii-p19"></span>\[3.\] “And every priest standeth daily
ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifice.” (To stand
therefore is a sign of ministering; accordingly to sit, is a sign of
being ministered unto.) “But this \[man\] after He had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, from
henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His footstool.” ( [Heb.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015)<span id="v.xxii-p19.1"></span> )
“For by one offering He hath perfected forever them that are sanctified.
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us.” He had said that those
\[sacrifices\] are not offered; he reasoned from what is written,
\[and\] from what is not written;  <span
id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) moreover also he put forward the
prophetic word which says, “sacrifice and offering Thou wouldest not.”
He had said that He had forgiven their sins. Again this also He proves
from the testimony of what is written, for “the Holy Ghost” (he says)
“is a witness to us: for after that He had said,” ( [Heb.
10.16-18](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#016)<span
id="v.xxii-p20.2"></span> ) “This is the covenant, that I will make with
them, after those days, saith the Lord: I will put My laws into their
hearts, and in their minds will I write them, and their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these is
there is no more offering for sin.” So then He forgave their sins, when
He gave the Covenant, and He gave the Covenant by sacrifice. If
therefore He forgave the sins through the one sacrifice, there is no
longer need of a second.

<span id="v.xxii-p21"></span>“He sat down on the right hand of God, from
henceforth expecting.” Why the delay? “that His enemies be put under His
feet. For by one offering He hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.” But perhaps some one might say; Wherefore did He not put
them under at once? For the sake of the faithful who should afterwards
be brought forth and born. Whence then \[does it appear\] that they
shall be put under? By the saying “He sat down.” He called to mind again
that testimony which saith, “until I put the enemies under His feet.”
(See above, [Heb. 1.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)<span
id="v.xxii-p21.1"></span> .) But His enemies are the Jews. Then since he
had said, “Till His enemies be put under His feet,” and they \[these
enemies  <span id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) \] were vehemently
urgent, therefore he introduces all his discourse concerning faith after
this. But who are the enemies? All unbelievers: the dæmons. And
intimating the greatness of their subjection, he said not “are
subjected,” but “are put under His feet.”

<span id="v.xxii-p23"></span>\[4.\] Let us not therefore be of \[the
number of\] His enemies. For not they alone are enemies, the unbelievers
and Jews, but those also who are full of unclean living. “For the carnal
mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, for
neither can it be.” ( [Rom. viii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)
<span id="v.xxii-p23.1"></span> .) What then (you say)? this is not a
ground of blame. Nay rather, it is very much a ground of blame. For the
wicked man as long as he is wicked, cannot be subject \[to God’s law\];
he can however change and become good.

<span id="v.xxii-p24"></span>Let us then cast out carnal minds. But what
are carnal? Whatever makes the body flourish and do well, but injures
the soul: as for instance, wealth, luxury, glory (all these things are
of the flesh), carnal love. Let us not then love gain, but ever follow
after poverty: for this is a great good.

<span id="v.xxii-p25"></span>But (you say) it makes one humble and of
little account. \[True:\] for we have need of this, for it benefits us
much. “Poverty” (it is said) “humbles a man.” ( [Prov. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004) <span id="v.xxii-p25.1"></span> ,
LXX.) And again Christ \[says\], “Blessed are the poor in spirit.” (
[Matt. v. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003) <span
id="v.xxii-p25.2"></span> .) Dost thou then grieve because thou art upon
a path leading to virtue? Dost thou not know that this gives us great
confidence?

<span id="v.xxii-p26"></span>But, one says, “the wisdom of the poor man
is despised.” ( [Eccles. ix. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#016) <span
id="v.xxii-p26.1"></span> .) And again another says, “Give me neither
riches nor poverty” ( [Prov. xxx. 8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008)
<span id="v.xxii-p26.2"></span> ), and, “Deliver me from the furnace of
poverty.”  <span id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143) (See [Isa. xlviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010) <span id="v.xxii-p27.3"></span> .)
And again, if riches and poverty are from the Lord, how can either
poverty or riches be an evil? Why then were these things said? They were
said under  <span id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) the Old
\[Covenant\], where there was much account made of wealth, where there
was great contempt of poverty, where the one was a curse and the other a
blessing. But now it is no longer so.

<span id="v.xxii-p29"></span>But wilt thou hear the praises of poverty?
Christ sought after it, and saith, “But the Son of Man hath not where to
lay His head.” ( [Matt. viii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020) <span
id="v.xxii-p29.1"></span> .) And again He said to His disciples,
“Provide  <span id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145) neither gold, nor
silver, nor two coats.” ( [Matt. 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="v.xxii-p30.3"></span> .)
And Paul in writing said, “As having nothing and yet possessing all
things.” ( [2 Cor. vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010) <span
id="v.xxii-p30.4"></span> .) And Peter said to him who was lame from his
birth, “Silver and gold have I none.” ( [Acts iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006) <span id="v.xxii-p30.5"></span> .)
Yea and under the Old \[Covenant\] itself, where wealth was held in
admiration, who were the admired? <span id="page_453">p. 453</span>
<span id="v.xxii-Page_453"></span> Was not Elijah, who had nothing save
the sheepskin? Was not Elisha? Was not John?

<span id="v.xxii-p31"></span>Let no man then be humiliated on account of
his poverty: It is not poverty which humiliates, but wealth, which
compels us to have need of many, and forces us to be under obligations
to many?

<span id="v.xxii-p32"></span>And what could be poorer than Jacob (tell
me), who said, “If the Lord give me bread to eat, and raiment to put
on”? ( [Gen. xxviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020) <span
id="v.xxii-p32.1"></span> .) Were Elijah and John then wanting in
boldness?  <span id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146) Did not the one
reprove Ahab, and the other Herod? The latter said, “It is not lawful
for thee to have thy brother Philip’s wife.” ( [Mark vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#018) <span id="v.xxii-p33.3"></span> .)
And Elias said to Ahab with boldness, “It is not I that trouble Israel,
but thou and thy father’s house.” ( [1 Kings xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018) <span id="v.xxii-p33.4"></span> .)
Thou seest that this especially produces boldness; poverty \[I mean\]?
For while the rich man is a slave, being subject to loss, and in the
power of every one wishing to do him hurt, he who has nothing, fears not
confiscation, nor fine. So, if poverty had made men wanting in boldness
Christ would not have sent His disciples with poverty to a work
requiring great boldness. For the poor man is very strong, and has
nothing wherefrom he may be wronged or evil entreated. But the rich man
is assailable on every side: just in the same way as one would easily
catch a man who was dragging many long ropes after him, whereas one
could not readily lay hold on a naked man. So here also it falls out in
the case of the rich man: slaves, gold, lands, affairs innumerable,
innumerable cares, difficult circumstances, necessities, make him an
easy prey to all.

<span id="v.xxii-p34"></span>\[5.\] Let no man then henceforth esteem
poverty a cause of disgrace. For if virtue be there, all the wealth of
the world is neither clay, nor even a mote in comparison of it. This
then let us follow after, if we would enter into the kingdom of heaven.
For, He saith, “Sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in Heaven.” ( [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021) <span id="v.xxii-p34.1"></span> .)
And again, “It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.” ( [Matt. xix. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023) <span
id="v.xxii-p34.2"></span> .) Dost thou see that even if we have it not,
we ought to draw it to us? So great a good is Poverty. For it guides us
by the hand, as it were, on the path which leads to Heaven, it is an
anointing for the combat, an exercise great and admirable, a tranquil
haven.

<span id="v.xxii-p35"></span>But (you say) I have need of many
\[things\], and am unwilling to receive a favor from any. Nevertheless,
even in this respect the rich man is inferior to thee; for thou perhaps
askest the favor for thy support, but he shamelessly \[asks\] for ten
thousand things for covetousness’ sake. So that it is the rich that are
in need of many \[persons\], yea oftentimes those who are unworthy of
them. For instance, they often stand in need of those who are in the
rank of soldiers, or of slaves: but the poor man has no need even of the
Emperor himself, and if he should need him, he is admired because he has
brought himself down to this, when he might have been rich.

<span id="v.xxii-p36"></span>Let no man then accuse poverty as being the
cause of innumerable evils, nor let him contradict Christ, who declared
it to be the perfection of virtue, saying, “If thou wilt be perfect.” (
[Matt. xix. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021) <span
id="v.xxii-p36.1"></span> .) For this He both uttered in His words, and
showed by His acts, and taught by His disciples. Let us therefore follow
after poverty, it is the greatest good to the sober-minded.

<span id="v.xxii-p37"></span> Perhaps some of those who hear me, avoid
it as a thing of ill omen. I do not doubt it.  <span
id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147) For this disease is great among
most men, and such is the tyranny of wealth, that they cannot even as
far as words endure the renunciation of it, but avoid it as of ill omen.
Far be this from the Christian’s soul: for nothing is richer than he who
chooses poverty of his own accord, and with a ready mind.

<span id="v.xxii-p39"></span>\[6.\] How? I will tell you, and if you
please, I will prove that he who chooses poverty of his own accord is
richer even than the king himself. For he indeed needs many \[things\],
and is in anxiety, and fears lest the supplies for the army should fail
him; but the other has enough of everything, and fears about nothing,
and if he fears, it is not about so great matters. Who then, tell me, is
the rich man? he who is daily asking, and earnestly laboring to gather
much together, and fears lest at any time he should fall short, or he
who gathers nothing together, and is in great abundance and hath need of
no one? For it is virtue and the fear of God, and not possessions which
give confidence. For these even enslave. For it is said, “Gifts and
presents blind the eyes of the wise, and like a muzzle on the mouth turn
away reproofs.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
20.29](../../../bib/apo/sir020.htm#029)<span id="v.xxii-p39.1"></span>
.)

<span id="v.xxii-p40"></span>Consider how the poor man Peter chastised
the rich Ananias. Was not the one rich and the other poor? But behold
the one speaking with authority and saying, “Tell me whether ye sold the
land for so much” ( [Acts v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#008) <span
id="v.xxii-p40.1"></span> ), and the other saying with submission, “Yea,
for so much.” And who (you say) will grant to me to be as Peter? It is
open to thee to be as Peter if thou wilt; cast away what thou hast.
“Disperse, give to the poor” ( [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009) <span id="v.xxii-p40.2"></span> ),
follow Christ, and thou shalt be such as he. How? he (you say) wrought
miracles. Is it this then, tell me, <span id="page_454">p. 454</span>
<span id="v.xxii-Page_454"></span> which made Peter an object of
admiration, or the boldness which arose from his manner of life? Dost
thou not hear Christ saying, “Rejoice not because the devils are subject
unto you; If thou wilt be perfect \[&c\].” ( [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020) <span id="v.xxii-p40.3"></span> .)
Hear what Peter says: “Silver and gold have I none, but what I have I
give thee.” ( [Acts iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006) <span
id="v.xxii-p40.4"></span> .) If any man have silver and gold, he hath
not those other gifts.

<span id="v.xxii-p41"></span>Why is it then, you say, that many have
neither the one nor the other? Because they are not voluntarily poor:
since they who are voluntarily poor have all good things. For although
they do not raise up the dead nor the lame, yet, what is greater than
all; they have confidence towards God. They will hear in that day that
blessed voice, “Come, ye blessed of My Father,” (what can be better than
this?) “inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world: for I was an hungered and ye gave Me meat: I was thirsty and ye
gave Me drink: I was a stranger and ye took Me in: I was naked and ye
clothed Me: I was sick and in prison and ye visited Me. Inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” ( [Matt.
xxv. 34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034) <span
id="v.xxii-p41.1"></span> .) Let us then flee from covetousness, that we
may attain to the kingdom \[of Heaven\]. Let us feed the poor, that we
may feed Christ: that we may become fellow-heirs with Him in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, power, honor, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[451:3134](1140116.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="v.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p4.1"></span>according to.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[451:3135](1140116.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="v.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p5.1"></span>have been.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[451:3136](1140116.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="v.xxii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p6.2"></span>φάπαξ</span>

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[451:3137](1140116.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="v.xxii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p7"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p7.1"></span>a footstool for His feet.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[451:3138](1140116.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="v.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p11.1"></span>προσήκοντα καιρὸν</span>

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[451:3139](1140116.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="v.xxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p15.1"></span>θέλω</span>

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[451:3140](1140116.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="v.xxii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p16.1"></span>βούλομαι</span>

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[451:3141](1140116.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="v.xxii-p16.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p17.1"></span>St. Chrys. seems to refer to some place where
it is said that God desired (</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p17.2"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p17.3"></span>πεθύμησε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p17.4"></span>) the death of the wicked. It does not appear
what passage he had in view.</span>

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[452:3142](1140116.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="v.xxii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p20.1"></span>That is from other arguments than the words of
the Old Testament.</span>

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[452:3143](1140116.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="v.xxii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p22.1"></span>\[The English editor supplies this ellipsis
with the words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p22.2"></span>to whom he wrote.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxii-p22.3"></span> The reference seems rather
to be to</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxii-p22.4"></span>the
enemies,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxii-p22.5"></span>and
such was apparently the understanding of Mutianus and of the Benedictine
editor.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[452:3144](1140116.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="v.xxii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p27.1"></span>The words of the LXX. are</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxii-p27.2"></span>He took me out of the
furnace of poverty.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[452:3145](1140116.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="v.xxii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p28.1"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p28.2"></span>in,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p28.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p28.4"></span>ν</span>

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[452:3146](1140116.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="v.xxii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p30.1"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p30.2"></span>get.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[453:3147](1140116.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="v.xxii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p33.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p33.2"></span>παρρησίαστοι</span>

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[453:3148](1140116.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="v.xxii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxii-p38.1"></span>οὐκ ἀπιστῶ</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIX](1140117)
