[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140109)  [Next](1140111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xvi"></span> <span id="v.xvi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span id="v.xvi-Page_423"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XII.</span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span> <span id="v.xvi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xvi-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews vii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)<span
id="v.xvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>“For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest
of the most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of
the Kings, and blessed him: to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of
all; first being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that
also King of Salem, which is, King of Peace, without father, without
mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days, nor end of
life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest continually.”

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvi-p4.1"></span>Paul</span> wishing to show the difference
between the New and Old \[Covenant\], scatters it everywhere; and shoots
from afar, and noises it abroad,  <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) and prepares beforehand. For at
once even from the introduction, he laid down this saying, that “to them
indeed He spake by prophets, but to us by the Son” ( [Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="v.xvi-p5.2"></span> ), and
to them “at sundry times and in divers manners,” but to us through the
Son. Afterwards, having discoursed concerning the Son, who He was and
what He had wrought, and given an exhortation to obey Him, lest we
should suffer the same things as the Jews; and having said that He is
“High Priest after the order of Melchisedec” ( [Heb.
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020)<span id="v.xvi-p5.3"></span> ),
and having oftentimes wished to enter into \[the subject of\] this
difference, and having used much preparatory management; and having
rebuked them as weak, and again soothed and restored them to confidence;
then at last he introduces the discussion on the difference \[of the two
dispensations\] to ears in their full vigor. For he who is depressed in
spirits would not be a ready hearer. And that you may understand this,
hear the Scripture saying, “They hearkened not to Moses for anguish of
spirit.”  <span id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) ( [Ex. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009) <span id="v.xvi-p6.5"></span> .)
Therefore having first cleared away their despondency by many
considerations, some fearful, some more gentle, he then from this point
enters upon the discussion of the difference \[of the dispensations\].

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span> \[2.\] And what does he say? “For this
Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the Most High God.” And, what is
especially noteworthy, he shows the difference to be great by the Type
itself. For as I said, he continually confirms the truth from the Type,
from things past, on account of the weakness of the hearers. “For” (he
says) “this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the Most High God, who
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him,
to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all.” Having concisely set
down the whole narrative, he looked at  <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) it mystically.

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>And first from the name. “First” (he says)
“being by interpretation King of righteousness”: for Sedec means
“righteousness”; and Melchi, “King”: Melchisedec, “King of
righteousness.” Seest thou his exactness even in the names? But who is
“King of righteousness,” save our Lord Jesus Christ? “King of
righteousness. And after that also King of Salem,” from his city, “that
is, King of Peace,” which again is \[characteristic\] of Christ. For He
has made us righteous, and has “made peace” for “things in Heaven and
things on earth.” ( [Col. i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020) <span
id="v.xvi-p9.1"></span> .) What man is “King of Righteousness and of
Peace”? None, save only our Lord <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvi-p9.2"></span>Jesus</span> Christ.

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span>\[3.\] He then adds another distinction,
“Without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God,
abideth a Priest continually.” Since then there lay in his way \[as an
objection\] the \[words\] “Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedec,” whereas he \[Melchisedec\] was dead, and was not
“Priest for ever,” see how he explained it mystically.

<span id="v.xvi-p11"></span> ‘And who can say this concerning a man?’ I
do not assert this in fact (he says); the meaning is, we do not know
when  <span id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) \[or\] what father he
had, nor what mother, nor when he received his beginning, nor when he
died. And what of this (one says)? For does it follow, because we do not
know it, that he did not die, \[or\] had no parents? Thou sayest well:
he both died and had parents. How then \[was he\] “without father,
without mother”? How “having neither beginning of days nor end of life”?
How? \[Why\] from its not being expressed.  <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) And what of this? That as this man
is so, from his genealogy not being given, so is Christ from the very
nature of the reality.

<span id="v.xvi-p14"></span> See the “without beginning”; see the
“without end.” As in case of this man, we know not either “beginning of
days,” or “end of life,” because they have not been written; so we know
\[them\] not in the case of <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvi-p14.1"></span>Jesus</span> , not because they have not been
written, but because <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="v.xvi-Page_424"></span> they do not exist. For that indeed is a
type,  <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929) and therefore \[we
say\] ‘because it is not written,’ but this is the reality,  <span
id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) and therefore \[we say\] ‘because
it does not exist.’ For as in regard to the names also (for there “King
of Righteousness” and “of Peace” are appellations, but here the reality)
so these too are appellations in that case, in this the reality. How
then hath He a beginning? Thou seest that the Son is “without
beginning,”  <span id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) not in respect
of His not having a cause;  <span id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932)
(for this is impossible: for He has a Father, otherwise how is He Son?)
but in respect of His “not having beginning or end of life.”

<span id="v.xvi-p19"></span> “But made like unto the Son of God.” Where
is the likeness? That we know not of the one or of the other either the
end or the beginning. Of the one because they are not written; of the
other, because they do not exist. Here is the likeness. But if the
likeness were to exist in all respects, there would no longer be type
and reality; but both would be type. \[Here\] then just as in
representations  <span id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) \[by
painting or drawing\], there is somewhat that is like and somewhat that
is unlike. By means of the lines indeed there is a likeness of features,
 <span id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) but when the colors are put
on, then the difference is plainly shown, both the likeness and the
unlikeness.

<span id="v.xvi-p22"></span>\[4.\] [Heb.
7.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)<span id="v.xvi-p22.1"></span> .
“Now consider” (saith he) “how great this man is to whom even the
Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.”  <span
id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) Up to this point he has been
applying the type: henceforward he boldly shows him \[Melchisedec\] to
be more glorious than the Jewish realities. But if he who bears a type
of Christ is so much better not merely than the priests, but even than
the forefather himself of the priests, what should one say of the
reality? Thou seest how super-abundantly he shows the superiority.

<span id="v.xvi-p24"></span> “Now consider” (he says) “how great this
man is to whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave a tenth out of the choice
portions.” Spoils taken in battle are called “choice portions.”  <span
id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936) And it cannot be said that he gave
them to him as having a part in the war, because (he said) he met him
“returning from the slaughter of the kings,” for he had staid at home
(he means), yet \[Abraham\] gave him the first-fruits of his labors.

<span id="v.xvi-p26"></span> [Heb.
7.5](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#005)<span id="v.xvi-p26.1"></span> .
“And verily they that are of the sons of Levi who receive the office of
Priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to
the law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins
of Abraham.” So great (he would say) is the superiority of the
priesthood, that they who from their ancestors are of the same dignity,
and have the same forefather, are yet far better than the rest.  At all
events they “receive tithes” from them. When then one is found, who
receives tithes from these very persons, are not they indeed in the rank
of laymen, and he among the Priests?

<span id="v.xvi-p27"></span>And not only this; but neither was he of the
same dignity with them, but of another race: so that he would not have
given tithes to a stranger unless his dignity had been great.
Astonishing! What has he accomplished? He has made quite clear a greater
point than those relating to faith which he treated in the Epistle to
the Romans. For there indeed he declares Abraham to be the forefather
both of our polity and also of the Jewish. But here he is exceeding bold
against him, and shows that the uncircumcised person is far superior.
 How then did he show that Levi paid tithes? Abraham (he says) paid
them. ‘And how does this concern us?’ It especially concerns you: for
you will not contend that the Levites are superior to Abraham. ( [Heb.
7.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006)<span id="v.xvi-p27.1"></span> )
“But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of
Abraham.”

<span id="v.xvi-p28"></span>And after that he did not simply pass on,
but added, “and blessed him that had the promises.” Inasmuch as
throughout, this was regarded with reverence, he shows that
\[Melchisedec\] was to be reverenced more than Abraham, from the common
judgment of all men. ( [Heb. 7.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)<span
id="v.xvi-p28.1"></span> ) “And without all contradiction,” he says,
“the less is blessed of the better,” i.e. in the opinion of all men it
is the inferior that is blessed by the superior. So then the type of
Christ is superior even to “him that had the promises.”

<span id="v.xvi-p29"></span>( [Heb.
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#008)<span id="v.xvi-p29.1"></span> )
“And here men that die receive tithes: but there he of whom it is
testified that he liveth.” But lest we should say, Tell us, why goest
thou so far back? He says, ( [Heb.
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009)<span id="v.xvi-p29.2"></span> )
“And as I may so say” (and he did well in softening it) “Levi also who
receiveth tithes payed tithes in Abraham.” How? ( [Heb.
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#010)<span id="v.xvi-p29.3"></span> )
“For he was yet in his loins when Melchisedec met him,” i.e. Levi was in
him, although he was not yet born. And he said not the Levites but Levi.

<span id="v.xvi-p30"></span>Hast thou seen the superiority? Hast thou
seen how great is the interval between Abraham and Melchisedec, who
bears the type of our High Priest? And he shows that the superiority had
been caused by authority, not necessity. For the one paid the tithe,
which indicates the priest: the other gave the blessing, which indicates
the superior. This superiority passes on also to the descendants.

<span id="v.xvi-p31"></span>In a marvelous and triumphant way he cast
out the Jewish \[system\]. On this account he <span id="page_425">p.
425</span> <span id="v.xvi-Page_425"></span> said, “Ye are become dull,”
( [Heb. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xvi-p31.1"></span> ), because he wished to lay these foundations,
that they might not start away. Such is the wisdom of Paul, first
preparing them well, he so leads  <span
id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937) them into what he wishes. For the
human race is hard to persuade, and needs much attention, even more than
plants. Since in that case there is \[only\] the nature of material
bodies, and earth, which yields to the hands of the husbandmen: but in
this there is will, which is liable to many alterations, and now prefers
this, now that. For it quickly turns to evil.

<span id="v.xvi-p33"></span>\[5.\] Wherefore we ought always to “guard”
ourselves, lest at any time we should fall asleep. For “Lo” (it is said)
“he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep” ( [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004) <span id="v.xvi-p33.1"></span> ),
and “Do not suffer  <span id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) thy foot
to be moved.” ( [Ps. cxxi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003) <span
id="v.xvi-p34.33"></span> .) He did not say, ‘be not moved’ but “do not
thou suffer,” &c. The suffering depends then on ourselves, and not on
any other. For if we will stand “steadfast and unmoveable” ( [1 Cor. xv.
58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058) <span id="v.xvi-p34.34"></span> ),
we shall not be shaken.

<span id="v.xvi-p35"></span> What then? Does nothing depend on God? All
indeed depends on God, but not so that our free-will is hindered. ‘If
then it depend on God,’ (one says), ‘why does He blame us?’ On this
account I said, ‘so that our free-will is not hindered.’ It depends then
on us, and on Him. For we must first choose the good; and then He leads
us to His own.  <span id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939) He does not
anticipate our choice,  <span id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) lest
our free-will should be outraged. But when we have chosen, then great is
the assistance he brings to us.

<span id="v.xvi-p38"></span>How is it then that Paul says, “not of him
that willeth,” if it depend on ourselves also “nor of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy.” ( [Rom. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016) <span id="v.xvi-p38.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvi-p39"></span> In the first place, he did not introduce it
as his own opinion, but inferred it from what was before him and from
what had been put forward  <span id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941)
\[in the discussion\]. For after saying, “It is written, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion” ( [Rom. ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)
<span id="v.xvi-p40.5"></span> ), he says, “It follows then  <span
id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942) that it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy.” “Thou wilt say
then unto me, why doth He yet find fault?” ( [Rom.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)<span id="v.xvi-p41.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvi-p42"></span> And secondly the other explanation may be
given, that he speaks of all as His, whose the greater part is. For it
is ours to choose  <span id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943) and to
wish; but God’s to complete and to bring to an end. Since therefore the
greater part is of Him, he says all is of Him, speaking according to the
custom of men.  For so we ourselves also do. I mean for instance: we see
a house well built, and we say the whole is the Architect’s \[doing\],
and yet certainly it is not all his, but the workmen’s also, and the
owner’s, who supplies the materials, and many others’, but nevertheless
since he contributed the greatest share, we call the whole his. So then
\[it is\] in this case also. Again, with respect to a number of people,
where the many are, we say All are: where few, nobody. So also Paul
says, “not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy.”

<span id="v.xvi-p44"></span> And herein he establishes two great truths:
one, that we should not be lifted up:  <span
id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) even shouldst thou run (he would
say), even shouldst thou be very earnest, do not consider that the well
doing  <span id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945) is thine own. For if
thou obtain not the impulse  <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946)
that is from above, all is to no purpose. Nevertheless that thou wilt
attain that which thou earnestly strivest after is very evident; so long
as thou runnest, so long as thou willest.

<span id="v.xvi-p48"></span>He did not then assert this, that we run in
vain, but that, if we think the whole to be our own, if we do not assign
the greater part to God, we run in vain. For neither hath God willed
that the whole should be His, lest He should appear to be crowning us
without cause: nor again our’s, lest we should fall away to pride. For
if when we have the smaller \[share\], we think much of ourselves, what
should we do if the whole depended on us?

<span id="v.xvi-p49"></span> \[6.\] Indeed God hath done away many
things for the purpose of cutting away our boastfulness, and still there
is the  <span id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947) high hand. With how
many afflictions hath He encompassed us, so as to cut away our proud
spirit! With how many wild beasts hath He encircled us! For indeed when
some say, ‘why is this?’ ‘Of what use is this?’ They utter these things
against the will of God. He hath placed thee in the midst of so <span
id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span id="v.xvi-Page_426"></span> great
fear, and yet not even so art thou lowly-minded; but if thou ever attain
a little success, thou reachest to Heaven itself in pride.

<span id="v.xvi-p51"></span> For this cause \[come\] rapid changes and
reverses; and yet not even so are we instructed. For this cause are
there continual and untimely deaths, but are minded as if we were
immortal, as if we should never die. We plunder, we over-reach, as
though we were never to give account. We build as if we were to abide
here always. And not even the word of God daily sounded into our ears,
nor the events themselves instruct us. Not a day, not an hour can be
mentioned, in which we may not see continual funerals. But all in vain:
and nothing reaches our hardness \[of heart\]: nor are we even able to
become better by the calamities of others; or rather, we are not
willing. When we ourselves only are afflicted, then we are subdued, and
yet if God take off His hand, we again lift up our hand: no one
considers what is proper for man,  <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948) no one despises the things on
earth; no one looks to Heaven. But as swine turn their heads downwards,
stooping towards their belly, wallowing in the mire; so too the great
body of mankind defile themselves with the most intolerable filth,
without being conscious of it.

<span id="v.xvi-p53"></span>\[7.\] For better were it to be defiled with
unclean mud than with sins; for he who is defiled with the one, washes
it off in a little time, and becomes like one who had never from the
first fallen into that slough; but he who has fallen into the deep pit
of sin has contracted a defilement that is not cleansed by water, but
needs long time, and strict repentance, and tears and lamentations, and
more wailing, and that more fervent, than we show over the dearest
friends.  For this defilement attaches to us from without, wherefore we
also speedily put it away; but the other is generated from within,
wherefore also we wash it off with difficulty, and cleanse ourselves
from it. “For from the heart” (it is said) “proceed evil thoughts,
fornications, adulteries, thefts, false witnesses.” ( [Matt. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019) <span id="v.xvi-p53.1"></span> .)
Wherefore also the Prophet said, “Create in me a clean heart, O God.” (
[Ps. li. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010) <span
id="v.xvi-p53.2"></span> .) And another, “Wash thine heart from
wickedness, O Jerusalem.” ( [Jer. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014) <span id="v.xvi-p53.3"></span> .)
(Thou seest that it is both our \[work\] and God’s.) And again, “Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” ( [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008) <span id="v.xvi-p53.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvi-p54"></span>Let us become clean to the utmost of our
power. Let us wipe away our sins. And how to wipe them away, the prophet
teaches, saying, “Wash you, make you clean, put away your wickedness
from your souls, before Mine eyes.” ( [Isa. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016) <span id="v.xvi-p54.1"></span> .)
What is “before Mine eyes”? Because some seem to be free from
wickedness, but only to men, while to God they are manifest as being
“whited sepulchers.” Therefore He says, so put them away as I see.
“Learn to do well, seek judgment, do justice for the poor and lowly.”
“Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: and though your
sins be as scarlet, I will make you white as snow, and if they be as
crimson, I will make you white as wool.” ( [Isa.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="v.xvi-p54.2"></span> .)
Thou seest that we must first cleanse ourselves, and then God cleanses
us. For having said first, “Wash you, make you clean,” He then added “I
will make you white.”

<span id="v.xvi-p55"></span>Let no one then, \[even\] of those who are
come to the extremest wickedness, despair of himself. For (He says) even
if thou hast passed into the habit, yea and almost into the nature of
wickedness itself, be not afraid. Therefore taking \[the instance of\]
colors that are not superficial but almost of the substance of the
materials, He said that He would bring them into the opposite state. For
He did not simply say that He would “wash” us, but that He would “make”
us “white, as snow and as wool,” in order to hold out good hopes before
us. Great then is the power of repentance, at least if it makes us as
snow, and whitens us as wool, even if sin have first got possession and
dyed our souls.

<span id="v.xvi-p56"></span>Let us labor earnestly then to become clean;
He has enjoined nothing burdensome. “Judge the fatherless, and do
justice for the widow.” ( [Isa. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)
<span id="v.xvi-p56.1"></span> .) Thou seest everywhere how great
account God makes of mercy, and of standing forward in behalf of those
that are wronged. These good deeds let us pursue after, and we shall be
able also, by the grace of God, to attain to the blessings to come:
which may we all be counted worthy of, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor,
now and for ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[423:2925](1140110.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="v.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p5.1"></span>διακωδωνίζει</span>

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[423:2926](1140110.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="v.xvi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p6.1"></span>ὀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p6.2"></span>λιγοψυχίαν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p6.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p6.4"></span>faint-heartedness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[423:2927](1140110.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="v.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p8.2"></span>θεώρησε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p8.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p8.4"></span>drew out the mystical senses.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[423:2928](1140110.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="v.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.1"></span>Mr. Field reads</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.2"></span>πότε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.3"></span>, making a double question. The other editions
have</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.4"></span>ποτε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.5"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p12.6"></span>at all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[423:2929](1140110.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="v.xvi-p12.7"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p13.2"></span>μφέρεσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[424:2930](1140110.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="v.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p15.1"></span>τύπος</span>

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[424:2931](1140110.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="v.xvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p16.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p16.2"></span>λήθεια</span>

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[424:2932](1140110.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="v.xvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p17.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p17.2"></span>ναρχον</span>

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[424:2933](1140110.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="v.xvi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p18.1"></span>αἴτιον</span>

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[424:2934](1140110.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="v.xvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.1"></span>εἰκόσιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.2"></span>. The comparison is not between the living
object and the picture, but between representations in drawing and in
painting; the word</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.3"></span>εἴκων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.4"></span>, as our</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.5"></span>likeness,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p20.6"></span>being applicable to both. The passage is
considerably altered in the common editions so as to avoid an apparent
difficulty.</span>

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[424:2935](1140110.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="v.xvi-p20.7"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p21.1"></span>χαρακτήρων</span>

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[424:2936](1140110.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="v.xvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p23"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p23.1"></span>choice portions.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[424:2937](1140110.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="v.xvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p25.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p25.2"></span>κροθίνια</span>

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[425:2938](1140110.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="v.xvi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p32.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p32.2"></span>μβάλλει</span>

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[425:2939](1140110.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="v.xvi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.1"></span>In</span> <span id="v.xvi-p34.2"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.3"></span>[Psalm cxxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)<span id="v.xvi-p34.4"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.5"></span>(cxx. 3, LXX.) where
we have</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.6"></span>He
shall not suffer,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.7"></span>&c., the LXX. have,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.8"></span>μὴ δῴης εἰς σάλον τὸν πόδα
σον, μηδὲ νυστάξῃ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.9"></span>(Vat.)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.10"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.11"></span>φυλάσσων σε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.12"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.13"></span>Lest thou suffer,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.14"></span>&c., and</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.15"></span>lest he that keepeth thee
slumber.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.16"></span>
St. Chrys. substitutes</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.17"></span>δῷς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.18"></span>for</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.19"></span>δῴης</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.20"></span>, making the sense,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.21"></span>Do not suffer,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.22"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p34.23"></span>and let not him that
keepeth thee slumber.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.24"></span> This he applies to the Christian keeping guard
over himself (his words are</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.25"></span>χρὴ πάντοτε φυλάττειν ἑαυτοὺς, μήποτε
ἀπονυστάξωμεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.26"></span>): and so he seems to have understood</span>
[Psa. 121.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)<span
id="v.xvi-p34.27"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.28"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.29"></span>, of the Christian: that a watchman of Israel
ought not to slumber or sleep. The Alex. <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.30"></span>ms.</span> has</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.31"></span>νυστάξει</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p34.32"></span>in the third verse.</span>

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[425:2940](1140110.htm#fr_2939) <span
id="v.xvi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p36.1"></span>εἰσάγει τὰ παῤ ἑαυτοῦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p36.2"></span>, His part.</span>

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[425:2941](1140110.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="v.xvi-p36.3"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p37.1"></span>βουλήσεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p37.2"></span>. Those acts of the soul whereby we desire and
aim at what is good.</span>

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[425:2942](1140110.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="v.xvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p40.1"></span>προκειμένου</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p40.2"></span>…</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p40.3"></span>προβληθέντος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p40.4"></span>. The former word is used by St. Chrys. to
express the portion of Scripture on which he is treating: the latter is
a received term in the dialectical method of the Greeks to express a
proposition put forward to be argued from, to see what consequences
follow from it, with a view of showing it to be untrue, or determining
the sense in which it is true. St. Chrys. means to say that this
proposition was only thus argumentatively inferred by St. Paul.</span>

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[425:2943](1140110.htm#fr_2942) <span
id="v.xvi-p40.6"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p41.1"></span>῎</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p41.2"></span>Αρα οὖν</span>

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[425:2944](1140110.htm#fr_2943) <span
id="v.xvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p43.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p43.2"></span>purpose and will,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p43.3"></span>προελέσθαι καὶ
βουληθῆναι</span>

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[425:2945](1140110.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="v.xvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p45.1"></span>In the genuine text here as in some other
places, there is no mention of the second point. The longer text
has</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p45.2"></span>one that
we should not be lifted up by what we do well: the other that when we do
well, we should attribute to God the cause of our well-doing.
Therefore,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p45.3"></span>&c. Mr. Field thinks that either the thread of
the discourse is broken, and the second point not mentioned, or (which
seems more probable) that it is contained in the words</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p45.4"></span>Nevertheless,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p45.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[425:2946](1140110.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="v.xvi-p45.6"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p46.1"></span>κατόρθωμα</span>

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[425:2947](1140110.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="v.xvi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p47.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p47.2"></span>οπὴ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p47.3"></span>: </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p47.4"></span>The inclining of the balance</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p47.5"></span>; or,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p47.6"></span>the weight which makes it
turn.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[425:2948](1140110.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="v.xvi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p50.1"></span>Sav. and Ben. add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p50.2"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p50.3"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p50.4"></span>His hand is high</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p50.5"></span>; but the reference is
to our sinning</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p50.6"></span>with a high hand,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p50.7"></span>as appears from what follows
in the next paragraph.</span>

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[426:2949](1140110.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="v.xvi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.1"></span>οὐδεὶς ἀνθρώπινα φρονεῖ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.2"></span>. This is the reading also
of Savile and Morell. It is supported by one <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.3"></span>ms.</span> and the pr. m. of another: which had
been corrected to</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.4"></span>οὐδ. οὐράνια φ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.5"></span>., the reading of the Verona edition. Mutianus
has</span> *nemo divina sapit* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.6"></span>; and the later translator</span> *cælestia*
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.7"></span>. The other <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xvi-p52.8"></span>mss.</span> have</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.9"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.10"></span>νθρώπινα περιφρονεῖ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.11"></span>. </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.12"></span>ταπεινὰ φρονεῖ,
ταπεινοφρονεῖ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvi-p52.13"></span>. Montfaucon conjectured</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvi-p52.14"></span>τὰ ἄνω φρονεῖ</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIII](1140111)
