[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140118)  [Next](1140120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxv"></span> <span id="v.xxv-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span id="v.xxv-Page_461"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXI.</span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxv-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews x.
32-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span
id="v.xxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span> *“But call to remembrance the former days,
in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions;*  <span id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) *partly,
whilst ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and afflictions,*
 <span id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) *and partly whilst ye became
companions of them that were so used. For ye had compassion on those who
were in bonds,*  <span id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) *and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing that ye have for
yourselves*  <span id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) *in heaven a
better and an enduring substance.”*

<span id="v.xxv-p8"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxv-p8.1"></span>The</span> best Physicians after they have made a
deep incision, and have increased the pains by the wound, soothing the
afflicted part, and giving rest and refreshment to the disturbed soul,
proceed not to make a second incision, but rather soothe that which has
been made with gentle remedies, and such as are suited to remove the
violence of the pain. This Paul also did after he had shaken their
souls, and pierced them with the recollection of Hell, and convinced
then, that he must certainly perish, who does despite to the grace of
God, and after he had shown from the laws of Moses, that they also shall
perish, and the more \[fearfully\], and confirm it by other testimonies,
and had said, “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
Living God” ( [Heb. 10.31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span
id="v.xxv-p8.2"></span> ): then, lest the soul desponding through
excessive fear, should be swallowed up with grief, he soothes them by
commendations and exhortation, and gives them zeal derived from their
own conduct. For, he says, “call to remembrance the former days, in
which after ye had been enlightened, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions.” Powerful is the exhortation from deeds \[already done\]:
for he who begins a work ought to go forward and add to it. As if he had
said, when ye were brought in  <span
id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178) \[to the Church\], when ye were in
the rank of learners, ye displayed so great readiness, so great
nobleness; but now it is no longer so. And he who encourages, does thus
especially encourage them from their own example.

<span id="v.xxv-p10"></span> And he did not simply say, “ye endured a
fight”  <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) but a “great”
\[fight\]. Moreover he did not say “temptations” but “fight,” which is
an expression of commendation and of very great praise.

<span id="v.xxv-p12"></span> Then he also enumerates them particularly,
amplifying his discourse, and multiplying his praise. How? “Partly” (he
says) “whilst ye were made a gazing-stock by reproaches and
afflictions”; for reproach is a great thing, and calculated to pervert
the soul, and to darken the judgment. For hear what the prophet says:
 <span id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180) “While they daily say unto
me, Where is thy God?” ( [Ps. xlii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010)
<span id="v.xxv-p13.4"></span> .) And again, “If the enemy had
reproached me, I would have borne it.” ( [Ps. lv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012) <span id="v.xxv-p13.5"></span> .)
For since the human race is exceedingly vainglorious, therefore it is
easily overcome by this.

<span id="v.xxv-p14"></span> And he did not simply say “by reproaches,”
but that even with great intensity, being “made a gazing-stock.”  <span
id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) For when a person is reproached
alone, it is indeed painful, but far more so when in presence of all.
For tell me how great the evil was when men who had left the meanness of
Judaism, and gone over, as it were, to the best course of life, and
despised the customs of their fathers, were ill treated by their own
people, and had no help.

<span id="v.xxv-p16"></span>\[2.\] I cannot say (he says) that ye
suffered these things indeed and were grieved, but ye even rejoiced
exceedingly. And this he expressed by saying, “Whilst ye became
companions of them that were so used,” and he brings forward the
Apostles themselves. Not only (he means) were ye not ashamed of your own
sufferings, but ye even shared with others who were suffering the same
things. This too is the language of one who is encouraging them. He said
not, ‘Bear my afflictions, share with me,’ but respect your own.

<span id="v.xxv-p17"></span> “Ye had compassion on them that were in
bonds.”  <span id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) Thou seest that he
is speaking concerning himself and the rest who were in prison. Thus ye
did not account “bonds” to be bonds: but as noble wrestlers so stood ye:
for not only ye needed no consolation in your own \[distresses\], but
even became a consolation to others.

<span id="v.xxv-p19"></span>And “ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods.” O! what “full assurance of faith”! ( [Heb.
10.22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022)<span id="v.xxv-p19.1"></span> .)
Then he also sets forth the motive, not only consoling them for their
struggles, but also that they might not be shaken from the Faith. When
ye saw your property <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="v.xxv-Page_462"></span> plundered (he means) ye endured; for already
ye saw Him who is invisible, as visible: which was the effect of genuine
faith, and ye showed it forth by your deeds themselves.

<span id="v.xxv-p20"></span> Well then, the plundering was perhaps from
the force of the plunderers, and no man could prevent it; so that as yet
it is not clear, that ye endured the plundering for the faith’s sake.
(Although this too is clear. For it was in your power if you chose, not
to be plundered, by not believing.) But ye did what is far greater than
this; the enduring such things even “with joy”; which was altogether
apostolical, and worthy of those noble souls, who rejoiced when
scourged. For, it says, “they departed from the presence of the council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name.”
 <span id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) ( [Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041) <span id="v.xxv-p21.8"></span> .)
But he that endures “with joy,” shows that he has some reward, and that
the affair is no loss but a gain.

<span id="v.xxv-p22"></span> Moreover the expression “ye took”  <span
id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) shows their willing endurance,
because, he means, ye chose and accepted.

<span id="v.xxv-p24"></span>“Knowing” (he says) “that ye have for
yourselves in heaven a better and an enduring substance”; instead of
saying, firm, not perishing like this.

<span id="v.xxv-p25"></span>\[3.\] In the next place, having praised
them, he says, ( [Heb. 10.35](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#035)<span
id="v.xxv-p25.1"></span> ) “Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which hath great recompense of reward.” What meanest thou? He did not
say, ‘ye have cast it away, and recover it’: but, which tended more to
strengthen them, “ye have it,” he says. For to recover again that which
has been cast away, requires more labor: but not to lose that which is
held fast does not. But to the Galatians he says the very opposite: “My
children of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in you”
( [Gal. iv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019) <span
id="v.xxv-p25.2"></span> ); and with reason; for they were more supine,
whence they needed a sharper word; but these were more faint-hearted, so
that they rather needed what was more soothing.

<span id="v.xxv-p26"></span>“Cast not away therefore” (he says) “your
confidence,” so that they were in great confidence towards God. “Which
hath” (he says) “great recompense of reward.” “And when shall we receive
them (some one might say)? Behold! All things on our part have been
done.” Therefore he anticipated them on their own supposition, saying in
effect, If ye know that ye have in heaven a better substance, seek
nothing here.

<span id="v.xxv-p27"></span>“For ye have need of patience,” not of any
addition \[to your labors\], that ye may continue in the same state,
that ye may not cast away what has been put into your hands. Ye need
nothing else, but so to stand as ye have stood, that when ye come to the
end, ye may receive the promise.

<span id="v.xxv-p28"></span>( [Heb.
10.36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)<span id="v.xxv-p28.1"></span> )
“For” (he says) “ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the
will of God, ye might receive the promise.” Ye have need of one thing
only, to bear with the delay; not that ye should fight again. Ye are at
the very crown (he means); ye have borne all the combats of bonds, of
afflictions; your goods have been spoiled. What then? Henceforward ye
are standing to be crowned: endure this only, the delay of the crown. O
the greatness of the consolation! It is as if one should speak to an
athlete who had overthrown all, and had no antagonist, and then was to
be crowned, and yet endured not that time, during which the president of
the games comes, and places the crown \[upon him\]; and he impatient,
should wish to go out, and escape as though he could not bear the thirst
and the heat.

<span id="v.xxv-p29"></span>He then also hinting this, what does he say?
( [Heb. 10.37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037)<span
id="v.xxv-p29.1"></span> ) “Yet a little while and He that shall come
will come, and will not tarry.” For lest they should say, And when will
He come? He comforts them from the Scriptures. For thus also when he
says in another place, “Now is our salvation nearer” ( [Rom. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011) <span id="v.xxv-p29.2"></span> ),
he comforts them because the remaining time is short. And this he says
not of himself but from the Scriptures.  <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) But if from that time it was said,
“Yet a little while, and He that shall come will come, and will not
tarry,” it is plain that now He is nearer. Wherefore also waiting is no
small reward.

<span id="v.xxv-p31"></span>( [Heb.
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span id="v.xxv-p31.1"></span> )
“Now the just” (he says) “shall live by faith, but if any man draw back,
My soul shall have no pleasure in him.” This is a great encouragement
when one shows that they have succeeded in the whole matter and are
losing it through a little indolence. ( [Heb.
10.39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039)<span id="v.xxv-p31.2"></span> )
“But we are not of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that
believe to the saving of the soul.”

<span id="v.xxv-p32"></span>\[4.\] ( [Heb.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#002)<span id="v.xxv-p32.1"></span> )
“Now faith is the substance  <span id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186)
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. For by it the
elders obtained a good report.” O what an expression has he used, in
saying, “an evidence of things not seen.” For \[we say\] there is
“evidence,” in the case of things that are very plain.  <span
id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) Faith then is the seeing things not
plain (he means), and brings what are not seen to the same full <span
id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span id="v.xxv-Page_463"></span> assurance
with what are seen. So then neither is it possible to disbelieve in
things which are seen, nor, on the other hand can there be faith unless
a man be more fully assured with respect to things invisible, than he is
with respect to things that are most clearly seen. For since the objects
of hope seem to be unsubstantial, Faith gives them substantiality,
 <span id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) or rather, does not give it,
but is itself their substance.  <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) For instance, the Resurrection has
not come, nor does it exist substantially, but hope makes it substantial
in our soul. This is \[the meaning of\] “the substance of things.”

<span id="v.xxv-p37"></span> If therefore it is an “evidence of things
not seen,” why forsooth do you wish to see them, so as to fall away from
faith, and from being just?  <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190)
Since “the just shall live by faith,” whereas ye, if ye wish to see
these things, are no longer faithful. Ye have labored (he says), ye have
struggled: I too allow this, nevertheless, wait; for this is Faith: do
not seek the whole “here.”

<span id="v.xxv-p39"></span>\[5.\] These things were indeed said to the
Hebrews, but they are a general exhortation also to many of those who
are here assembled. How and in what way? To the faint-hearted; to the
mean-spirited. For when they see the wicked prospering, and themselves
faring ill, they are troubled, they bear it impatiently: while they long
for the chastisement, and the inflicting vengeance on others; while they
wait for the rewards of their own sufferings. “For yet a little time,
and He that shall come will come.”

<span id="v.xxv-p40"></span> Let us then say this to the slothful:
Doubtless there will be punishment; doubtless He will come, henceforth
the events of the  <span id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191)
Resurrection are even at the doors.

<span id="v.xxv-p42"></span>Whence \[does\] that \[appear\] (you say)? I
do not say, from the prophets; for neither do I now speak to Christians
only; but even if a heathen be here, I am perfectly confident, and bring
forward my proofs, and will instruct him. How (you say)?

<span id="v.xxv-p43"></span> Christ foretold many things. If those
former things did not come to pass, then do not believe them; but if
they all came to pass, why doubt concerning those that remain? And
indeed, it were very unreasonable,  <span
id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) nothing having come to pass, to
believe the one, or when all has come to pass, to disbelieve the others.

<span id="v.xxv-p45"></span>But I will make the matter more plain by an
example. Christ said, that Jerusalem should be taken, and should be so
taken as no city ever was before, and that it should never be raised up:
and in fact this prediction came to pass. He said, that there should be
“great tribulation” ( [Matt. xxiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)
<span id="v.xxv-p45.1"></span> ), and it came to pass. He said that a
grain of mustard seed is sown, so should the preaching \[of the Gospel\]
be extended: and every day we see this running over the world. He said,
that they who left father or mother, or brethren, or sisters, should
have both fathers and mothers; And this we see fulfilled by facts. He
said, “in the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world” ( [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033) <span id="v.xxv-p45.2"></span> ),
that is, no man shall get the better of you. And this we see by the
events has come to pass. He said that “the gates of hell shall not
prevail against the Church” ( [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018) <span id="v.xxv-p45.3"></span> ),
even though persecuted, and that no one shall quench the preaching \[of
the Gospel\]: and the experience of events bears witness to this
prediction also: and yet when He said these things, it was very hard to
believe Him. Why? Because all these were words, and He had not as yet
given proof of the things spoken. So that they have now become far more
credible. He said that “when the Gospel should have been preached among
all the nations, then the end shall come” ( [Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014) <span id="v.xxv-p45.4"></span> );
lo! now ye have arrived at the end: for the greater part of the world
hath been preached to, therefore the end is now at hand. Let us tremble,
beloved.

<span id="v.xxv-p46"></span> \[6.\] But what, tell me? Art thou anxious
about the end? It indeed is itself near, but each man’s life and death
is nearer.  <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) For it is said,
“the days of our years are seventy years; but if \[one be\] in strength,
fourscore years.” ( [Ps. xc. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010) <span
id="v.xxv-p47.4"></span> ; \[LXX. lxxxix. 10\].) The day of judgment is
near. Let us fear. “A brother doth not redeem; shall man redeem?” ( [Ps.
xlix. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007) <span id="v.xxv-p47.5"></span>
; \[LXX. xlviii. 8\].) There we shall repent much, “but in death no man
shall praise Him.” ( [Ps. vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005) <span
id="v.xxv-p47.6"></span> ; \[LXX. 6\].) Wherefore he saith, “Let us come
before His presence with thanksgiving” ( [Ps. xcv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#002) <span id="v.xxv-p47.7"></span> ;
\[LXX. [Ps. xciv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#000)<span
id="v.xxv-p47.8"></span>\]), that is, his coming. For here \[in this
life\] indeed, whatever we do has efficacy; but there, no longer. Tell
me, if a man placed us for a little while in a flaming furnace, should
we not submit to anything in order to escape, even were it necessary to
part with our money, nay to undergo slavery? How many have fallen into
grievous diseases, and would gladly give up all, to be delivered from
them, if the choice were offered them? If in this world then, a disease
of short duration so afflicts us, what shall we do yonder, when
repentance will be of no avail?

<span id="v.xxv-p48"></span>\[7.\] Of how many evils are we now full,
without being conscious of them? We bite one another, we devour one
another, in wronging, accusing, calumniating, being vexed by the credit
of our neighbors. (Cf. [Gal. v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)
<span id="v.xxv-p48.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxv-p49"></span> And see the difficulty.  <span
id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) When a man wishes <span
id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span id="v.xxv-Page_464"></span> to
undermine the reputation of a neighbor, he says, ‘Such an one said this
of him; O God, forgive me, do not examine me strictly, I must give
account of what I have heard.’  <span
id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) Why then dost thou speak of it at
all, if thou dost not believe it? Why dost thou speak of it? Why dost
thou make it credible by much reporting? Why dost thou pass on the story
which is not true? Thou dost not believe it, and thou entreatest God not
to call thee to strict account? Do not say it then, but keep silence,
and free thyself from all fear.

<span id="v.xxv-p52"></span> But I know not from whence this disease has
fallen upon men. We have become tattlers, nothing remains  <span
id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196) in our mind. Hear the exhortation
of a wise man who says, “Hast thou heard a word? Let it die in  <span
id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) thee, be bold; it will not burst
thee.” ( [Ecclesiasticus 19.10](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#010)<span
id="v.xxv-p54.3"></span> .) And again, “A fool heareth a word, and
travaileth, as a women in labor of a child.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
19.11](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#011)<span id="v.xxv-p54.4"></span> .)
We are ready to make accusations, prepared for condemning. Even if no
other evil thing had been done by us, this were sufficient to ruin us,
and to carry us away to Hell, this involves us in ten thousand evils.
And that thou mayest know this certainly, hear what the prophet says,
“Thou satest and spakest against thy brother.” ( [Ps. l.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020) <span id="v.xxv-p54.5"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxv-p55"></span> But it is not I, you say, but the other
\[who told me\]. Nay rather, it is thyself; for if *thou* hadst not
spoken, another would not have heard: or even if he should hear it, yet
*thou* wouldest not have been to blame for the sin. We ought to shade
over and conceal the failings of neighbors, but thou paradest them under
a cloak of zeal for goodness. Thou becomest, not an accuser, but a
gossip, a trifler, a fool. O what cleverness! Without being aware of it,
thou bringest disgrace upon thyself as well as on him.

<span id="v.xxv-p56"></span>And see what great evils which arise from
this. Thou provokest the wrath of God. Dost thou not hear Paul saying
about widows, “they not only” (these are his words) “learn to be idle,
but tattlers also and busybodies, wandering about from house to house,
and speaking things which they ought not.” ( [1 Tim. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013) <span id="v.xxv-p56.1"></span> .)
So that even when thou believest the things which are said against thy
brother, thou oughtest not even in that case to speak of them; much
less, when thou dost not believe them.

<span id="v.xxv-p57"></span>But thou \[forsooth\] lookest to thine own
interest? Thou fearest to be called to account by God? Fear then, lest
even for thy tattling thou be called to account. For here, thou canst
not say, ‘O God, call me not to account for light talking’: for the
whole matter is light talking. Why didst thou publish it? Why didst thou
increase the evil? This is sufficient to destroy us. On this account
Christ said, “Judge not, that ye be not judged.” ( [Matt. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001) <span id="v.xxv-p57.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxv-p58"></span>But we pay no regard to this, neither are we
brought to our senses by what happened to the Pharisee. He said what was
true, “I am not as this Publican” ( [Luke xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011) <span id="v.xxv-p58.1"></span> ),
he said it too in no man’s hearing; yet was he condemned. If he were
condemned when he said what was true, and uttered it in no man’s
hearing, what fearful \[punishment\] shall not they suffer, who like
gossiping women, carry about everywhere lies which they do not even
themselves believe? What shall they not endure?

<span id="v.xxv-p59"></span>\[8.\] Henceforward let us set “a door and a
bolt before the mouth.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
28.25](../../../bib/apo/sir028.htm#025)<span id="v.xxv-p59.1"></span> .)
For innumerable evils have arisen from tattling; families have been
ruined, friendships torn asunder, innumerable other miseries have
happened. Busy not thyself, O man, about the affairs of thy neighbor.

<span id="v.xxv-p60"></span>But thou art talkative and hast a weakness.
Talk of thine own \[faults\] to God: thus the weakness will be no longer
a weakness, but an advantage. Talk of thy own \[faults\] to thy friends,
those who are thorough friends and righteous men, and in whom thou hast
confidence, that so they may pray for thy sins. If thou speak of the
\[sins\] of others, thou art nowise profited, neither hast thou gained
anything, but hast ruined thyself. If thou confessest thy own \[sins\]
to the Lord, thou hast great reward: for one says, “I said, I will
confess against myself mine iniquity to the Lord, and Thou forgavest the
impiety of my heart.” ( [Ps. xxxii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)
<span id="v.xxv-p60.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxv-p61"></span> Dost thou wish to judge? Judge thine own
\[sins\]. No one will accuse  <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198)
thee, if thou condemn thyself: but he will accuse if thou do not
condemn; he will accuse thee, unless thou convict thyself; will accuse
thee of insensibility. Thou hast seen such an one angry, irritated,
doing something else out of place? Think at once, even thou on thy own
\[faults\]: and thus thou wilt not greatly condemn him, and wilt free
thyself from the load of thy past transgressions. If we thus regulate
our own conduct, if we thus manage our own life, if we condemn
ourselves, we shall probably not commit many sins, and we shall do many
good things, being fair and moderate; and shall enjoy all the promises
to them that love God: to which may all attain, by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever
and world with end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[461:3175](1140119.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="v.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p4.1"></span>παθημάτων</span>

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[461:3176](1140119.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="v.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p5.1"></span>θλίψεσι</span>

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[461:3177](1140119.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="v.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.1"></span>τοῖς δεσμίοις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.2"></span>. This is held to be the true reading of the
sacred text: </span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.3"></span>τοῖς δεσμοῖς μου</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.4"></span>was substituted here, but not in the body of the
Homily, in some <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxv-p6.5"></span>mss.</span> and in the editions of St. Chrys.
before the Benedictine.</span>

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[461:3178](1140119.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="v.xxv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.1"></span>ἑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.2"></span>αυτοῖς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.3"></span>without</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.5"></span>ν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.6"></span>is the approved reading of the sacred text, and
is found in all the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.7"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. of St. Chrys. \[It is the
reading in the margin of the A.V. and of the R.V. There is but slight
authority for the</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.8"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.9"></span>ν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.10"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.11"></span>In heaven</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p7.12"></span>is also omitted by the more important
authorities, the critical editors, and by the R.V.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[461:3179](1140119.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="v.xxv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p9.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p9.2"></span>νήγεσθε</span>

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[461:3180](1140119.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="v.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p11.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p11.2"></span>θλησιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p11.3"></span>, a contest, as that of wrestlers.</span>

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[461:3181](1140119.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="v.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p13.1"></span>The common editions have the entire text,</span>
“ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p13.2"></span>My tears have been
my meat day and night, while,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p13.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[461:3182](1140119.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="v.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p15.1"></span>θεατριζόμενοι</span>

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[461:3183](1140119.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="v.xxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p18.1"></span>A catena, the Verona editions, and perhaps one
<span class="c11"><span id="v.xxv-p18.2"></span>ms.</span> have</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p18.3"></span>with my bonds.</span>
”

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[462:3184](1140119.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="v.xxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.1"></span>κατηξιώθησαν ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος
ἀτιμασθῆναι</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p21.2"></span>.
The common editions of St. Chrys. as the common text of the New
Testament, add</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.3"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.4"></span>,</span> “ *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.5"></span>His</span>* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.6"></span>Name,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p21.7"></span>in this and in other places.</span>

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[462:3185](1140119.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="v.xxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p23.1"></span>προσεδέξασθε</span>

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[462:3186](1140119.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="v.xxv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p30.1"></span>It is to be observed that the words</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.2"></span>He that cometh will
come and will not tarry,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p30.3"></span>are from the prophet</span> <span
id="v.xxv-p30.4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p30.5"></span>[Habakkuk ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span id="v.xxv-p30.6"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.7"></span>: where the LXX.
has,</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.8"></span>ἐ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.9"></span>ὰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.10"></span>ν ὑστερήσῃ ὑπόμεινον
αὐτὸν</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.11"></span>(</span>
“ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.12"></span>Him</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.13"></span>not</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.14"></span>it.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.15"></span>)</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.16"></span>ὅ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.17"></span>τι ἐρχόμενος ἥξει, καὶ οὐ
μὴ χρονίσῃ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.18"></span>,
&c. The Apostle interprets this by adding the article: </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.19"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.20"></span>ἐρχόμενος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p30.21"></span>, the well-known
designation of the Messiah.</span>

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[462:3187](1140119.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="v.xxv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p33"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p33.1"></span>substantiality.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[462:3188](1140119.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="v.xxv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.1"></span>δήλων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.2"></span>. Savile and Morell following some <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xxv-p34.3"></span>mss.</span> read</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p34.4"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p34.5"></span>δήλων</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p34.6"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p34.7"></span>obscure</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p34.8"></span>: but St. Chrys. means that
we use the word</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.9"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.10"></span>λεγχος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p34.11"></span>of a proof which makes things most certain and
evident \[and so Mutianus read.—F.G.\].</span>

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[463:3189](1140119.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="v.xxv-p34.12"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p35.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p35.2"></span>πόστασιν</span>

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[463:3190](1140119.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="v.xxv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p36.1"></span>οὑσία</span>

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[463:3191](1140119.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="v.xxv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p38.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p38.2"></span>righteous.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[463:3192](1140119.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="v.xxv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p41.1"></span>τὰ τῆς ἀ</span>

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[463:3193](1140119.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="v.xxv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p44.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p44.2"></span>πίθανον</span>

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[463:3194](1140119.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="v.xxv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p47.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p47.2"></span>δὲ ἑκάστου ζωὴ ἐγγυτέρα πολλῷ καὶ ἡ
τελευτή</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p47.3"></span>. But
Mut.</span> “sed et vitæ finis uniuscujuscunque prope est.”

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[463:3195](1140119.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="v.xxv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p50.1"></span>τὸ χαλεπόν</span>

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[464:3196](1140119.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="v.xxv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p51.1"></span>Or might it be read,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p51.2"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p51.3"></span>κοῆς λόγον ὀφείλω</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p51.4"></span>;</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxv-p51.5"></span>am I responsible for what I
hear, for common reports?</span> ”

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[464:3197](1140119.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="v.xxv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p53.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p53.2"></span>ναπομένει</span>

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[464:3198](1140119.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="v.xxv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p54.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p54.2"></span>ναποθανέτω</span>

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[464:3199](1140119.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="v.xxv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p62.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxv-p62.2"></span>γκαλεῖ</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXII](1140120)
