[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140089)  [Next](1140091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxvii"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p2.1"></span>
<span class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p2.2"></span>[John xix.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p3"></span> *“Then delivered he Him therefore unto
them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led Him away. And He,
bearing His Cross, went forth into a place called the place of a skull,*
 <span id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470) *where they crucified Him.”*
 <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p6"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p6.1"></span>Successes</span> have terrible power to cast
down or draw aside those who take not heed. Thus the Jews, who at first
enjoyed the influence  <span id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472) of
God, sought the law of royalty from the Gentiles, and in the wilderness
after the manna remembered the onions. In the same way here, refusing
the Kingdom of Christ, they invited to themselves that of Cæsar.
Wherefore God set a king over them, according to their own decision.
When then Pilate heard these things, he delivered Him to be crucified.
Utterly without reason. For when he ought to have enquired whether
Christ had aimed at sovereign power, he pronounced the sentence through
fear alone. Yet that this might not befall him, Christ said beforehand,
“My kingdom is not of this world”; <span id="page_315">p. 315</span>
<span id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_315"></span> but he having given himself
wholly up to present things, would practice no great amount of wisdom.
And yet his wife’s dream should have been sufficient to terrify him; but
by none of these things was he made better, nor did he look to heaven,
but delivered Him up. And now they laid the cross upon Him as a
malefactor. For even the wood they abominated, and endured not even to
touch it. This was also the case in the type; for Isaac bare the wood.
But then the matter stopped at the will of his father,  <span
id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473) for it was the type; while here it
proceeded to action, for it was the reality.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p9"></span> “And He came to the place of a skull.”
Some say that Adam died there, and there lieth; and that Jesus in this
place where death had reigned, there also set up the trophy. For He went
forth bearing the Cross as a trophy over the tyranny of death: and as
conquerors do, so He bare upon His shoulders the symbol of victory. What
matter if the Jews did  <span id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474) these
things with a different intent. They crucified Him too with thieves, in
this also unintentionally fulfilling prophecy; for what they did for
insult contributed to the truth, that thou mayest learn how great is its
power, since the Prophet had foretold of old, that “He was numbered with
the transgressors.” ( [Isa. liii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)
<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p10.3"></span> .) The devil therefore wished to
cast a veil over what was done, but was unable; for the three were
crucified, but Jesus alone was glorious, that thou mayest learn, that
His power effected all. Yet the miracles took place when the three had
been nailed to the cross; but no one attributed anything of what was
done to either of those others, but to Jesus only; so entirely was the
plot of the devil rendered vain,  <span
id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475) and all returned upon his own head.
For even of these two, one was saved. He therefore did not insult the
glory of the Cross,  <span id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476) but
contributed to it not a little. For it was not a less matter than
shaking the rocks, to change a thief upon the cross, and to bring him
unto Paradise.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p13"></span> [John
19.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p13.1"></span> . “And Pilate wrote a title.”  <span
id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p15"></span> At the same time requiting the Jews,
and making a defense for Christ. For since they had given Him up as
worthless, and attempted to confirm this sentence by making Him share
the punishment of the robbers, in order that for the future it might be
in no man’s power to prefer evil charges against him, or to accuse him
as a worthless and wicked person, to close moreover their mouths and the
mouths of all who might desire to accuse Him, and to show that they had
risen up against their own King, Pilate thus placed, as on a trophy,
those letters, which utter a clear voice, and show forth His Victory,
and proclaim His Kingdom, though not in its completeness. And this he
made manifest not in a single tongue, but in three languages; for since
it was likely that there would be a mixed multitude among the Jews on
account of the Feast, in order that none might be ignorant of the
defense, he publicly recorded  <span
id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478) the madness of the Jews, in all the
languages. For they bore malice against Him even when crucified.  <span
id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479) “Yet what did this harm you?  <span
id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480) Nothing. For if He was a mortal and
weak, and was about to become extinct, why did ye fear the letters
asserting that He is the King of the Jews?” And what do they ask? “Say
that ‘he said.’ For now it is an assertion, and a general sentence, but
if ‘he said’ be added, the charge is shown to be one arising from his
own rashness and arrogance.” Still Pilate was not turned aside, but
stood to his first decision. And it is no little thing that is dispensed
even from this circumstance, but the whole matter. For since the wood of
the cross was buried, because no one was careful to take it up, inasmuch
as fear was pressing, and the believers were hurrying to other urgent
matters; and since it was in after times to be sought for, and it was
likely that the three crosses would lie together, in order that the
Lord’s might not be unknown, it was made manifest to all, first by its
lying in the middle, and then by the title. For those of the thieves had
no titles.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p19"></span> \[2.\] The soldiers parted the
garments, but not the coat.  <span id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481)
See the prophecies in every instance fulfilled by their wickednesses;
for this also had been predicted of old; yet there were three crucified,
but the matters of the prophecies  <span
id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482) were fulfilled in Him. For why did
they not this in the case of the others, but in His case only? Consider
too, I pray you, the exactness of the prophecy. For the Prophet saith
not only, that they “parted,” but that they “did not part.” The rest
therefore they divided, the coat they divided not, but committed the
matter to a decision by lot. And the, “Woven from the top” ( [John
19.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p21.3"></span> ) is not put without a purpose; but some
say that a figurative assertion is declared by it, that the Crucified
was not simply man, but had also the Divinity from above.  <span
id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483) Others say that the Evangelist
describes the very form <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_316"></span> of the coat.  <span
id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484) For since in Palestine they put
together two strips of cloth and so weave their garments, John, to show
that the coat was of this kind, saith, “Woven from the top”; and to me
he seems to say this, alluding to the poorness of the garments, and that
as in all other things, so in dress also, He followed a simple  <span
id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485) fashion.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p25"></span> [John
19.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p25.1"></span> . “These things the soldiers did.” But He
on the Cross, committeth His mother to the disciple,  <span
id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486) teaching us even to our last breath
to show every care for our parents. When indeed she unseasonably
troubled Him, He said, “Woman, what have I to do with thee?” ( [John
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.5"></span>
.) And, “Who is My mother?” ( [Matt. xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048) <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.6"></span>
.) But here He showeth much loving affection, and committeth her to the
disciple whom He loved. Again John conceals himself, in modesty; for had
he desired to boast, he would have also put in the cause for which he
was loved, since probably it was some great and wonderful one. But
wherefore doth He converse on nothing else with John, nor comfort him
when desponding? Because it was no time for comforting by words;
besides, it was no little thing for him to be honored with such honor,
and to receive the reward of steadfastness. But do thou consider, I
pray, how even on the cross He did everything without being troubled,
speaking with the disciple concerning His mother, fulfilling prophecies,
holding forth good hopes to the thief. Yet before He was crucified He
appeareth sweating, agonized, fearing.  What then can this mean? Nothing
difficult, nothing doubtful. There indeed the weakness of nature had
been shown, here was being shown the excess of Power. Besides, by these
two things He teacheth us, even if before things terrible we be
troubled, not on that account to shrink from things terrible, but when
we have embarked in the contest to deem all things  <span
id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487) possible and easy. Let us then not
tremble at death. Our soul hath by nature the love of life, but it lies
with us either to loose the bands of nature, and make this desire weak;
or else to tighten them, and make the desire more tyrannous. For as we
have the desire of sexual intercourse, but when we practice true wisdom
we render the desire weak, so also it falls out in the case of life; and
as God hath annexed carnal desire to the generation of children, to
maintain a succession among us, without however forbidding us from
traveling the higher road of continence; so also He hath implanted in us
the love of life, forbidding us from destroying ourselves, but not
hindering our despising the present life. And it behooves us, knowing
this, to observe due measure, and neither to go at any time to death of
our own accord, even though ten thousand terrible things possess us; nor
yet when dragged to it, for the sake of what is pleasing to God, to
shrink back from and fear it, but boldly to strip for it, preferring the
future to the present life.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p28"></span>But the women stood by the Cross, and
the weaker sex then appeared the manlier ( [John
19.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p28.1"></span> ); so entirely henceforth were all things
transformed.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p29"></span>\[3.\] And He, having committed His
mother to John, said, “Behold thy Son.” ( [John
19.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p29.1"></span> .) O the honor! with what honor did He
honor the disciple! when He Himself was now departing, He committed her
to the disciple to take care of. For since it was likely that, being His
mother, she would grieve, and require protection, He with reason
entrusted her to the beloved. To him He saith, “Behold thy mother.” (
[John 19.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p29.2"></span> .) This He said, knitting them together in
charity; which the disciple understanding, took her to his own home.
“But why made He no mention of any other woman, although another stood
there?” To teach us to pay more than ordinary respect to our mothers.
For as when parents oppose us on spiritual matters, we must not even own
them, so when they do not hinder us, we ought to pay them all becoming
respect, and to prefer them before others, because they begat us,
because they bred us up, because they bare for us ten thousand terrible
things. And by these words He silenceth the shamelessness of Marcion;
for if He were not born according to the flesh, nor had a mother,
wherefore taketh He such forethought for her alone?

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p30"></span> [John
19.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p30.1"></span> . “After this, Jesus knowing that all
things were now accomplished.”

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p31"></span>That is, “that nothing was wanting to
the Dispensation.” For He was everywhere desirous to show, that this
Death was of a new kind, if indeed the whole lay in the power of the
Person dying, and death came not on the Body before He willed it; and He
willed it after He had fulfilled all things. Therefore also He said, “I
have power to lay down My life; and I have power to take it again.” (
[John 10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p31.1"></span> .) Knowing therefore that all things were
fulfilled, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p32"></span> “I thirst.”  <span
id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p34"></span>Here again fulfilling a prophecy. But
consider, I pray, the accursed nature of the bystanders. Though we have
ten thousand enemies, and have suffered intolerable things at their
hands, yet when we see them perishing, we relent; but they did not even
so make peace with <span id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_317"></span> Him, nor were tamed by what they saw,
but rather became more savage, and increased their irony; and having
brought to Him vinegar on a sponge,  <span
id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489) as men bring it to the condemned,
thus they gave Him to drink; since it is on this account that the hyssop
is added.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p36"></span> [John
19.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p36.1"></span> . “Having therefore received it, He saith,
It is finished.”

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p37"></span>Seest thou how He doth all things
calmly, and with power? And what follows shows this. For when all had
been completed,

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p38"></span> “He bowed His head, (this had not been
nailed,) and gave up  <span id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490) the
ghost.”

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p40"></span> That is, “died.” Yet to expire does
not come  <span id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491) after the bowing
the head; but here, on the contrary, it doth. For He did not, when He
had expired, bow His head, as happens with us, but when He had bent His
head, then He expired. By all which things the Evangelist hath shown,
that He was Lord of all.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p42"></span>But the Jews, on the other hand, who
swallowed the camel and strained at the gnat, having wrought so
atrocious a deed, are very precise concerning the day.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p43"></span> [John
19.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p43.1"></span> . “Because it was the Preparation, that
the bodies should not remain upon the cross  <span
id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) —they besought Pilate that their
legs might be broken.”  <span id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p46"></span> Seest thou how strong a thing is
truth? By means of the very things which are the objects of their zeal,
prophecy is fulfilled, for by occasion of those things, this plain
prediction, unconnected with them,  <span
id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) receives its accomplishment. For
the soldiers  <span id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) when they came,
brake the legs of the others, but not those of Christ. Yet these to
gratify the Jews pierced His side with a spear, and now insulted the
dead body. O abominable and accursed purpose! Yet, beloved, be not thou
confounded, be not thou desponding; for the things which these men did
from a wicked will, fought on the side of the truth. Since there was a
prophecy, saying, (from this circumstance,  <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) “They shall look on Him whom they
pierced.” ( [John 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037), [Zech.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p49.3"></span> .) And not this only, but the deed then
dared was a demonstration of the faith, to those who should afterwards
disbelieve; as to Thomas, and those like him. With this too an ineffable
mystery was accomplished. For “there came forth water and blood.” Not
without a purpose, or by chance, did those founts come forth, but
because by means of these two together the Church consisteth.  <span
id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) And the initiated know it, being by
water indeed regenerate, and nourished by the Blood and the Flesh. Hence
the Mysteries take their beginning; that  <span
id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498) when thou approachest to that awful
cup, thou mayest so approach, as drinking from the very side.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p52"></span> [John
19.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p52.1"></span> . “And he that saw it bare record, and his
record is true.”  <span id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p54"></span>That is, “I heard it not from others,
but was myself present and saw it, and the testimony is true.” As may be
supposed. For he relates an insult done; he relates not anything great
and admirable, that thou shouldest suspect his narrative; but securing
the mouths of heretics, and loudly proclaiming beforehand the Mysteries
that should be, and beholding the treasure laid up in them, he is very
exact concerning what took place. And that prophecy also is fulfilled,

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p55"></span> [John
19.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p55.1"></span> . “A bone of Him shall not be broken.”
 <span id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500) ( [Exod.
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046), [Num.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#012)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.8"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p57"></span>For even if this was said with
reference to the lamb of the Jews, still it was for the sake of the
reality that the type preceded, and in Him the prophecy was more fully
accomplished. On this account the Evangelist brought forward the
Prophet. For since by continually producing himself as witness he would
have seemed unworthy of credit, he brings Moses to help him, and saith,
that neither did this come to pass without a purpose, but was written
before of old. And this is the meaning of the words, “A bone of Him
shall not be broken.” Again he confirms the Prophet’s words by his own
witness. “These things,” saith he, “I have told you, that ye might learn
that great is the connection of the type with the reality.” Seest thou
what pains he takes to make that believed which seemed to be matter of
reproach, and bringing shame? For that the soldier should insult even
the dead body, was far worse than being crucified. “But still, even
these things,” he saith, “I have told, and told with much earnestness,
‘that ye might believe.’ ( [John
19.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p57.1"></span> .) Let none then be unbelieving, nor
through shame injure our cause. For the things which appear to be most
shameful, are the very venerable records  <span
id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) of our good things.”

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p59"></span> [John
19.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p59.1"></span> . “After this came Joseph of Arimathæa,
being a disciple.”  <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502)

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_318"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p61"></span> Not one of the twelve, but perhaps one
of the seventy. For now deeming that the anger of the Jews was quenched
by the Cross, they approached without fear, and took charge of His
funeral. Joseph therefore came and asked the favor from Pilate, which he
granted; why should he not? Nicodemus also assists him, and furnishes a
costly burial. For they were still disposed to think of Him as a mere
man. And they brought those  <span id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503)
spices whose especial nature is to preserve the body for a long time,
and not to allow it quickly to yield to corruption, which was an act of
men imagining nothing great respecting Him; but anyhow, they exhibited
very loving affection. But how did no one of the twelve come, neither
John, nor Peter, nor any other of the more distinguished disciples? Nor
doth the writer conceal this point. If any one say that it was from fear
of the Jews, these men also  <span id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504)
were occupied by the same fear; for Joseph too was, it saith, “A secret
(disciple) for fear of the Jews.” And not one can say that Joseph acted
thus because he greatly despised them,  <span
id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505) but though himself afraid, still he
came. But John who was present, and had seen Him expire, did nothing of
the kind. It seems to me that Joseph was a man of high rank, (as is
clear from the funeral,) and known  <span
id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506) to Pilate, on which account also he
obtained the favor; and then he buried Him, not as a criminal, but
magnificently, after the Jewish fashion, as some great and admirable
one.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p66"></span> \[4.\] And because they were
straitened by the time, (since the Death took place at the ninth hour,
and it is probable, that what with going to Pilate and what with taking
down the body, evening would come upon them when it was not lawful to
work,) they laid Him in the tomb that was near.  <span
id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507) And it is providentially ordered,
 <span id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508) that He should be placed in
a new tomb, wherein no one had been placed before, that His Resurrection
might not be deemed to be that of some other who lay there with Him; and
that the disciples might be able easily to come and be spectators of
what came to pass, because the place was near; and that not they alone
should be witnesses of His burial, but His enemies also, for the placing
seals on the tomb, and the sitting by of the soldiers to watch it, were
the actions of men testifying to the burial. For Christ earnestly
desired that this should be confessed, no less than the Resurrection.
Wherefore also the disciples are very earnest about this, the showing
that He died. For the Resurrection all succeeding time would confirm,
but the Death, if at that time it had been partially concealed, or not
made very manifest, was likely to harm the account of the Resurrection.
Nor was it for these reasons only that He was laid near, but also that
the story about the stealing might be proved false.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p69"></span> “The first day of the week” (that is,
the Lord’s day) “cometh Mary Magdalene, very early in the morning,
 <span id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) and seeth the stone taken
away from the sepulcher.” ( [John
20.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.6"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p71"></span> For He arose while both stone and
seals lay over Him; but because it was necessary that others should be
fully satisfied, the tomb was opened after the Resurrection, and thus
what had come to pass was confirmed. This then was what moved Mary. For
being entirely full of loving affection towards her Master, when the
Sabbath was past, she could not bear to rest, but came very early in the
morning, desiring to find some consolation from the place. But when she
saw the place, and the stone  <span id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510)
taken away, she neither entered in nor stooped down, but ran to the
disciples,  <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) in the greatness
of her longing; for this was what she earnestly desired, she wished very
speedily to learn what had become of the body. This was the meaning of
her running, and her words declare it.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p74"></span> [John
20.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p74.1"></span> . “They have taken away,” she saith, “my
Lord,  <span id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) and I know not where
they have laid Him.”

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p76"></span> Seest thou how she knew not as yet
anything clearly concerning the Resurrection, but thought there had been
a removal of the body, and tells all simply to the disciples? And the
Evangelist hath not deprived the woman of such a praise, nor thought it
shame that they should have learnt these things first from her who had
passed the night in watching. Thus everywhere doth the truth-loving
nature of his disposition shine forth. When then she came and said these
things, they hearing them, draw near with great eagerness to the
sepulcher,  <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) and see the linen
clothes lying, which was a sign of the Resurrection. For neither, if any
persons had removed the body, would they before doing so have stripped
it; nor if any had stolen it, would they have taken the trouble to
remove the napkin, <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_319"></span> and roll it up, and lay it in a place
by itself; but how? they would have taken the body as it was. On this
account John tells us by anticipation that it was buried with much
myrrh, which glues linen to the body not less firmly than lead; in order
that when thou hearest that the napkins lay apart, thou mayest not
endure those who say that He was stolen. For a thief would not have been
so foolish as to spend so much trouble on a superfluous matter. For why
should he undo the clothes? and how could he have escaped detection if
he had done so? since he would probably have spent much time in so
doing, and be found out by delaying and loitering. But why do the
clothes lie apart, while the napkin was wrapped together by itself? That
thou mayest learn that it was not the action of men in confusion or
haste, the placing some in one place, some in another, and the wrapping
them together. From this they believed in the Resurrection. On this
account Christ afterwards appeared to them, when they were convinced by
what they had seen. Observe too here again the absence of boastfulness
in the Evangelist, how he witnesses to the exactness of Peter’s search.
For he himself having gotten before Peter, and having seen the linen
clothes, enquired not farther, but withdrew; but that fervent one
passing farther in, looked at everything carefully, and saw somewhat
more, and then the other too was summoned to the sight.  <span
id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514) For he entering after Peter, saw
the grave-clothes lying, and separate. Now to separate, and to place one
thing by itself, and another, after rolling it up, by itself, was the
act of some one doing things carefully, and not in a chance way, as if
disturbed.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p79"></span> \[5.\] But do thou, when thou hearest
that thy Lord arose naked, cease from thy madness about funerals; for
what is the meaning of that superfluous and unprofitable  <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515) expense, which brings much loss to
the mourners, and no gain to the departed, or (if we must say that it
brings anything) rather harm? For the costliness of burial hath often
caused the breaking open of tombs, and hath caused him to be cast out
naked and unburied, who had been buried with much care. But alas for
vainglory! How great the tyranny which it exhibits even in sorrow! how
great the folly! Many, that this may not happen, having cut in pieces
those fine clothes, and filled them with many spices, so that they may
be doubly useless to those who would insult the dead, then commit them
to the earth. Are not these the acts of madmen? of men beside
themselves? to make a show of their ambition, and then to destroy it?
“Yea,” saith some one, “it is in order that they may lie safely with the
dead that we use all these contrivances.” Well then, if the robbers do
not get them, will not the moths get them, and the worms? Or if the
moths and worms get them not, will not time and the moisture of
putrefaction  <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516) destroy them?
But let us suppose that neither tomb-breakers, nor moths, nor worms, nor
time, nor anything else, destroy what lies in the tomb, but that the
body itself remains untouched until the Resurrection, and these things
are preserved new and fresh and fine; what advantage is there from this
to the departed, when the body is raised naked, while these remain here,
and profit us nothing for those accounts which must be given? “Wherefore
then,” saith some one, “was it done in the case of Christ?” First of
all, do not compare these with human matters, since the harlot poured
even ointment upon His holy feet. But if we must speak on these things,
we say, that they were done when the doers knew not the word of the
Resurrection; therefore it saith, “As was the manner of the Jews.” For
they who honored Christ  <span id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517) were
not of the twelve, but were those who did not honor Him greatly. The
twelve honored Him not in this way, but by death and massacre and
dangers for His sake. That other indeed was honor, but far inferior to
this of which I have spoken. Besides, as I began by saying, we are now
speaking of men, but at that time these things were done with relation
to the Lord. And that thou mayest learn that Christ made no account of
these things, He said, “Ye saw Me an hungered, and ye fed Me; thirsty,
and ye gave Me drink; naked, and ye clothed Me” ( [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035) <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p82.2"></span>
); but nowhere did He say, “dead, and ye buried Me.” And this I say not
as taking away the custom of burial, (that be far from me,) but as
cutting short its extravagance and unseasonable vanity. “But,” saith
some one, “feeling and grief and sympathy for the departed persuade to
this practice.” The practice doth not proceed from sympathy for the
departed, but from vainglory. Since if thou desirest to sympathize with
the dead, I will show thee another way of mourning, and will teach thee
to put on him garments which shall rise again with him, and make him
glorious. For these garments are not consumed by worms, nor wasted by
time, nor stolen by tomb-breakers. Of what sort then are these? The
clothing of alms-doing; for this is a robe that shall rise again with
him, because the seal of alms-doing is with him. With these garments
shine they who then hear, “Hungering ye fed Me.” These make men
distinguished, these make them glorious, these place them in safety; but
those used now are only something for moths to consume, and a table for
worms. And this I say, not forbid <span id="page_320">p. 320</span>
<span id="iv.lxxxvii-Page_320"></span> ding to use funeral observance,
but bidding you to do it with moderation, so as to cover the body, and
not commit it naked to the earth. For if living He biddeth us have no
more than enough to cover us, much more when dead; since the dead body
 <span id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518) hath not so much need of
garments as when it is living and breathing. For when alive, on account
of the cold, and for decency’s sake, we need the covering of garments,
but when dead we require grave-clothes for none of these reasons, but
that the body may not lie naked; and better than grave-clothes we have
the earth, fairest of coverings, and more suited for the nature of such
bodies as ours. If then where there are so many needs we must not search
for anything superfluous, much more where there is no such necessity, is
the ostentation unseasonable.

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p84"></span> \[6.\] “But the lookers-on will
laugh,” saith some one. Most certainly if there be any laughter, we need
not care much for one so exceedingly foolish; but at present there are
many who rather admire and accept our true wisdom. For these are not the
things which deserve laughter, but those which we do at present,
weeping, and wailing, and burying ourselves with the departed; these
things deserve ridicule and punishment. But to show true wisdom, both in
these respects and in the modesty of the attire used, prepares crowns
and praises for us, and all will applaud us, and will admire the power
of Christ, and will say, “Amazing! How great is the power of the
Crucified One! He hath persuaded those who are perishing and wasting,
that death is not death; they therefore do not act as perishing men, but
as men who send the dead before them to a distant and better
dwelling-place. He hath persuaded them that this corruptible and earthy
body shall put on a garment more glorious than silk or cloth of gold,
the garment of immortality; therefore they are not very anxious about
their burial, but deem a virtuous life to be an admirable
winding-sheet.” These things they will say, if they see us showing true
wisdom; but if they behold us bent down with grief, playing the woman,
placing around troops of female mourners, they will laugh, and mock, and
find fault in ten thousand ways, pulling to pieces our foolish expense,
our vain labor. With these things we hear all finding fault; and very
reasonably. For what excuse can we have, when we adorn a body, which is
consumed by  <span id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519) corruption and
worms, and neglect Christ when thirsting, going about naked, and a
stranger? Cease we then from this vain trouble. Let us perform the
obsequies of the departed, as is good both for us and them, to the glory
of God: let us do much alms for their sake, let us send with them the
best provision for the way. For if the memory of admirable men, though
dead, hath protected the living, (for, “I will defend,” it saith, “this
city for Mine Own. sake, and for My servant David’s sake”— [2 Kings xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034) <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.5"></span>
,) much more will alms-doing effect this; for this hath raised even the
dead, as when the widows stood round  <span
id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520) showing what things Dorcas had
made, while she was with them. ( [Acts ix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#039) <span id="iv.lxxxvii-p86.3"></span>
.) When therefore one is about to die, let the friend of that dying
person prepare the obsequies,  <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) and persuade  <span
id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522) the departing one to leave somewhat
to the needy. With these garments let him send him to the grave, leaving
 <span id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) Christ his heir. For if they
who write kings among their heirs, leave a safe portion to their
relations,  <span id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) when one leaves
Christ heir with his children, consider how great good he will draw down
upon himself and all his. These are the right  <span
id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525) sort of funerals, these profit both
those who remain and those who depart.  If we be so buried, we shall be
glorious at the Resurrection-time. But if caring for the body we neglect
the soul, we then shall suffer many terrible things, and incur much
ridicule. For neither is it a common unseemliness to depart without
being clothed with virtue, nor is the body, though cast out without a
tomb, so disgraced, as a soul appearing bare of virtue in that day. This
let us put on, this let us wrap around us; it is best to do so during
all our lifetime; but if we have in this life been negligent, let us at
least in our end be sober, and charge our relations to help us when we
depart by alms-doing; that being thus assisted by each other, we may
attain  <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) to much confidence,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, dominion, and honor, now and
ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[314:2471](1140090.htm#fr_2470) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p4.1"></span>place of a skull, which is called in the
Hebrew, Golgotha.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p4.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[314:2472](1140090.htm#fr_2471) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p5.1"></span>Him, and two others with Him, on either side
one, and Jesus in the midst.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p5.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[314:2473](1140090.htm#fr_2472) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p7.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p7.2"></span>οπῆς</span>

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[315:2474](1140090.htm#fr_2473) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p8.1"></span>i.e. only showed Abraham’s
willingness.</span>

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[315:2475](1140090.htm#fr_2474) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p10.2"></span>ordered.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[315:2476](1140090.htm#fr_2475) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p11.1"></span>ἕ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p11.2"></span>ωλος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p11.3"></span>, lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p11.4"></span>stale.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[315:2477](1140090.htm#fr_2476) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p12.2"></span>the Crucified.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[315:2478](1140090.htm#fr_2477) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p14"></span> [John
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p14.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p14.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p14.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p14.4"></span>And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the
Cross, and the writing was, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews. This
title then read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh to the city, and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek,
and Latin.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[315:2479](1140090.htm#fr_2478) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p16.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p16.2"></span>inscribed on a pillar.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[315:2480](1140090.htm#fr_2479) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p17"></span> [John
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#022)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.4"></span>Then said the chief priests of the Jews to
Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of
the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[315:2481](1140090.htm#fr_2480) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p17.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p18.1"></span>to the Jews.</span>

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[315:2482](1140090.htm#fr_2481) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p20"></span> [John
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.4"></span>Then the soldiers, when they had crucified
Jesus, took His garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part;
and also His coat; now the coat was without seam, woven from the top
throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it,
but cast lots for it, whose it shall be, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled which saith, They parted My raiment among them, and for My
vesture they did cast lots.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[315:2483](1140090.htm#fr_2482) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p20.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p21.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p21.2"></span>of the prophetical.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[315:2484](1140090.htm#fr_2483) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p22.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p22.2"></span>from the first,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p22.3"></span>ἄ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p22.4"></span>νωθεν</span>

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[316:2485](1140090.htm#fr_2484) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p23.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p23.2"></span>little coat.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[316:2486](1140090.htm#fr_2485) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p24.1"></span>λιτόν</span>

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[316:2487](1140090.htm#fr_2486) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p26"></span> [John
19.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.4"></span>Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus His
mother, and His mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw His mother, and the disciple
standing by whom He loved, He saith unto His mother, Woman, behold thy
son. Then saith He to the disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that
hour that disciple took her to his own home.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[316:2488](1140090.htm#fr_2487) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p26.7"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p27.2"></span>all things are.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[316:2489](1140090.htm#fr_2488) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p33"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p33.1"></span>that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
saith, I thirst,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p33.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[317:2490](1140090.htm#fr_2489) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p35"></span> [John
19.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p35.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p35.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p35.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p35.4"></span>Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar:
and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put
it to His mouth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[317:2491](1140090.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p39.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p39.2"></span>φῆκε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p39.3"></span>, \[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p39.4"></span>παρέδωκε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p39.5"></span>,\] G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[317:2492](1140090.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p41.1"></span>i.e. naturally.</span>

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[317:2493](1140090.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p44"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p44.1"></span>Upon the cross on the Sabbath day, (for
that day was a high day.)</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p44.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[317:2494](1140090.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p45"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p45.1"></span>Be broken, and that they might be taken
away.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p45.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[317:2495](1140090.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p47.1"></span>ἑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p47.2"></span>τέρα αὐτοῖς αὕτη προαναφώνησῖς</span>

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[317:2496](1140090.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p48"></span> [John
19.32-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.4"></span>Then came the soldiers and brake the legs
of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. But when
they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead already, they brake not His
legs, but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and
forthwith came thereout blood and water.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[317:2497](1140090.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p48.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p49.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p49.2"></span>ντεῦθεν</span>

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[317:2498](1140090.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p49.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p50.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p50.2"></span>ξ ἀμφοτέρων τούτων ἡ ̓Εκκλησία
συνέστηκε</span>

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[317:2499](1140090.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p51.1"></span>i.e. to teach thee that.</span>

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[317:2500](1140090.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p53"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p53.1"></span>is true; and he knoweth that he saith true,
that ye might believe,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p53.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[317:2501](1140090.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p56"></span> [John
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.4"></span>For these things were done, that the
Scripture should be fulfilled, A bone,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.5"></span>&c. </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.6"></span>And again, another
Scripture saith, They shall look on Him whom they pierced.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p56.7"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[317:2502](1140090.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p58.1"></span>σεμνολογήματα</span>

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[317:2503](1140090.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p60"></span> [John
19.38-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p60.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p60.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p60.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p60.4"></span>And after this Joseph of Arimathæa, being a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate gave him leave. He
came therefore, and took the body of Jesus. And there came also
Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.  Then took
they the body of Jesus, and wound it in the linen clothes with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[318:2504](1140090.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p62.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p62.2"></span>such.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[318:2505](1140090.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p63.1"></span>i.e. Joseph and Nicodemus.</span>

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[318:2506](1140090.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p64.2"></span>that the greatly despising them effected
this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[318:2507](1140090.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p65.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p65.2"></span>known in some way.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[318:2508](1140090.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p67"></span> [John
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#042)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p67.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p67.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p67.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p67.4"></span>Now in the place where He was crucified
there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulcher, wherein was never
man yet laid. There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews’
preparation; for the sepulcher was nigh at hand.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[318:2509](1140090.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p67.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p68.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p68.2"></span>dispensed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[318:2510](1140090.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.1"></span>ὄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.2"></span>ρθρου βαθέος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.3"></span>om. in Ben. N.T.</span>
“ <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.4"></span>early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulcher and seeth,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p70.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[318:2511](1140090.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p72.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p72.2"></span>saw the stone.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[318:2512](1140090.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p72.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p73"></span> [John
20.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p73.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p73.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p73.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p73.4"></span>Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[318:2513](1140090.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p75"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p75.1"></span>the Lord out of the sepulcher,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p75.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[318:2514](1140090.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p77"></span> [John
20.3-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#003)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.4"></span>Peter therefore went forth, and that other
disciple, and came to the sepulcher. So they ran both together: and the
other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulcher. And he
stooping down, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. Then
cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulcher, and seeth
the linen clothes lie; and the napkin that was about His head, not lying
with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by
itself.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.5"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[319:2515](1140090.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p77.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p78"></span> [John
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#009)<span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p78.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p78.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p78.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p78.4"></span>Then went in also that other disciple which
came first to the sepulcher, and he saw, and believed. For as yet they
knew not the Scripture, that He must rise again from the dead.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p78.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[319:2516](1140090.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p80.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p80.2"></span>senseless.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[319:2517](1140090.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p80.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p81.1"></span>ἰ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p81.2"></span>χὼρ</span>

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[319:2518](1140090.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p81.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p82.1"></span>i.e. in His burial.</span>

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[320:2519](1140090.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p82.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p83"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p83.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p83.2"></span>body of the dead.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[320:2520](1140090.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p85"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.2"></span>given over to,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.3"></span>lit.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.4"></span>spent upon.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[320:2521](1140090.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p85.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p86"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p86.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p86.2"></span>stood by.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[320:2522](1140090.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p86.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p87.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p87.2"></span>burial dress,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p87.3"></span>τὰ ἐντάφια</span>

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[320:2523](1140090.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p87.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p88.1"></span>i.e. by persuading.</span>

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[320:2524](1140090.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p89.1"></span>Sav. reads,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p89.2"></span>κληρονόμον ἀφιέναι τὸν
Χ.  ἀφίεντα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p89.3"></span>may be conjectured. The Ben. ed.
reads,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p89.4"></span>πειθέτω καὶ κλ. κ.τ.λ</span>

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[320:2525](1140090.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p89.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p90"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.2"></span>leave very great safety.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.3"></span> One <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.4"></span>ms.</span> has a slight
variety of sense: </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.5"></span>If they who write kings their heirs among
their relations, leave that portion for the safety of the
children.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[320:2526](1140090.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p90.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p91"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p91.1"></span>καλὰ</span>

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[320:2527](1140090.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxvii-p92"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p92.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p92.2"></span>πιτύχωμεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p92.3"></span>without any conjunction preceding. Sav.
conject.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p92.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxvii-p92.5"></span>πιτευξόμεθα</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 20.10,11](1140091)
