[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140067)  [Next](1140069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxv"></span> <span id="iv.lxv-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="iv.lxv-Page_230"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxv-p1.1"></span>Homily LXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxv-p2.2"></span>[John
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031)<span
id="iv.lxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p3"></span> *“Now Jesus was not yet come into the town,
but was in that place where Martha met Him. The Jews then which were
with her,” and what follows.*  <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722)

<span id="iv.lxv-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxv-p5.1"></span>A great</span> good is philosophy; the
philosophy, I mean, which is with us. For what the heathen have is words
and fables only; nor have these fables anything truly wise  <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) in them; since everything among
those men is done for the sake of reputation. A great good then is true
wisdom, and even here  <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724)
returns to us a recompense. For he that despises wealth, from this at
once reaps advantage,  <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) being
delivered from cares which are superfluous and unprofitable;  <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) and he that tramples upon glory
from this at once receives his reward, being the slave of none, but free
with the real freedom; and he that desires heavenly things hence
receives his recompense, regarding present things as nothing, and being
easily superior to every grief. Behold, for example, how this woman by
practicing true wisdom even here received her reward. For when all were
sitting by her as she mourned and lamented, she did not wait that the
Master should come to her, nor did she maintain what might have seemed
her due, nor was she restrained by her sorrow, (for, in addition to the
other wretchedness, mourning women have this malady, that they wish to
be made much of on account of their case,) but she was not at all so
affected; as soon as she heard, she quickly came to Him.  <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) “Jesus was not yet come into the
town.”  <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) He proceeded somewhat
slowly, that He might not seem to fling Himself upon the miracle, but
rather to be  <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) entreated by
them. At least, it is either with an intention of implying this that the
Evangelist has said the, “riseth up quickly,” or else he showeth that
she ran so as to anticipate Christ’s arrival. She came not alone, but
drawing after her the Jews that were in the house. Very wisely did her
sister call  <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) her secretly, so
as not to disturb those who had come together, and not mention the cause
either; for assuredly many would have gone back, but now as though she
were going to weep, all followed her. By these means again it is proved
 <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) that Lazarus was dead.

<span id="iv.lxv-p15"></span> [John
11.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxv-p15.1"></span> .
“And she fell at His feet.”  <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732)

<span id="iv.lxv-p17"></span>She is more ardent than her sister. She
regarded not the multitude, nor the suspicion which they had concerning
Him, for there were many of His enemies, who said, “Could not this man,
which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man
should not have died?” ( [John
11.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#037)<span id="iv.lxv-p17.1"></span>
); but cast out all mortal things in the presence of her Master, and was
given up to one thing only, the honor of that Master. And what saith
she?

<span id="iv.lxv-p18"></span>“Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my brother
had not died.”

<span id="iv.lxv-p19"></span> What doth Christ? He converseth not at all
with her for the present, nor saith to her what He said to her sister,
(for a great multitude was by, and this was no fit time for such words,)
He only acteth measurably and condescendeth; and to prove His human
nature, weepeth in silence, and deferreth the miracle for the present.
For since that miracle was a great one, and such as He seldom wrought,
and since many were to believe  <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) by means of it, lest to work it
without their presence should prove a stumbling-block to the multitude,
and so they should gain nothing by its greatness, in order that He might
not lose the quarry,  <span id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) He
draweth to Him many witnesses by His condescension, and showeth proof of
 <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) His human nature. He
weepeth, and is troubled; for grief is wont to stir up the feelings.
Then rebuking those feelings, (for He “groaned  <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) in spirit” meaneth, “restrained His
trouble,”) He asked,

<span id="iv.lxv-p24"></span> [John
11.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)<span id="iv.lxv-p24.1"></span> .
“Where have ye laid him?”

<span id="iv.lxv-p25"></span>So that the question might not be attended
with lamentation. But why doth He ask? Because He desired not to cast
Himself on (the miracle), but to learn all from them, to do all at their
invitation, so as to free the miracle from any suspicion.

<span id="iv.lxv-p26"></span>“They say unto Him, Come and see.”

<span id="iv.lxv-p27"></span> [John
11.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035)<span id="iv.lxv-p27.1"></span> .
“Jesus wept.”

<span id="iv.lxv-p28"></span>Seest thou that He had not as yet shown any
sign of the raising, and goeth not as if to raise Lazarus, but as if to
weep? For the Jews show that He seemed to them to be going to bewail,
not to raise him; at least they said,

<span id="iv.lxv-p29"></span> <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="iv.lxv-Page_231"></span>[John
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#037)<span id="iv.lxv-p29.1"></span> .
“Behold how he loved him! And some of them said, Could not this man,
which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man
should not have died?”

<span id="iv.lxv-p30"></span>Not even amid calamities did they relax
their wickedness. Yet what He was about to do was a thing far more
wonderful; for to drive away death when it hath come and conquered, is
far more than to stay it when coming on. They therefore slander Him by
those very points through which they ought to have marveled at His
power. They allow for the time that He opened the eyes of the blind, and
when they ought to have admired Him on account of that miracle, they, by
means of this latter case, cast a slur upon it, as though it had not
even taken place. And not from this only are they shown to be all
corrupt, but because when He had not yet come, nor exhibited any action,
they prevent Him with their accusations without waiting the end of the
matter. Seest thou how corrupt was their judgment?

<span id="iv.lxv-p31"></span> \[2.\] He cometh then to the tomb; and
again  <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) rebuketh His feelings.
Why doth the Evangelist carefully in several places mention that “He
wept,” and that, “He groaned”?  <span
id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) That thou mayest learn that He had
of a truth put on our nature. For when this Evangelist is remarkable for
uttering great things concerning Christ more than the others, in matters
relating to the body, here he also speaketh much more humbly than they.
 <span id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) For instance, concerning His
death he hath said nothing of the kind; the other Evangelists declare
that He was exceedingly sorrowful, that He was in an agony; but John, on
the contrary, saith, that He even cast the officers backwards. So that
he hath made up here what is omitted there, by mentioning His grief.
When speaking of His death, Christ saith, “I have power to lay down My
life” ( [John 10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.lxv-p34.3"></span> ), and then He uttereth no lowly word;
therefore at the Passion they  <span
id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740) attribute to Him much that is
human, to show the reality of the Dispensation. And Matthew proves this
by the Agony, the trouble, the trembling,  <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) and the sweat; but John by His
sorrow. For had He not been of our nature, He would not once and again
have been mastered by grief. What did Jesus? He made no defense with
regard to their charges; for why should He silence by words those who
were soon to be silenced by deeds? a means less annoying, and more
adapted to shame them.

<span id="iv.lxv-p37"></span> [John
11.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="iv.lxv-p37.1"></span> .
“He saith, Take ye away the stone.”

<span id="iv.lxv-p38"></span> Why did not He when at a distance summon
Lazarus, and place him before their eyes? Or rather, why did He not
cause him to arise while the stone yet lay on the grave? For He who was
able by His voice to move a corpse, and to show it again endowed with
life, would much more by that same voice have been able to move a stone;
He who empowered by His voice one bound and entangled in the
grave-clothes to walk, would much more have been able to move a stone;
why then did He not so? In order to make them witnesses of the miracle;
that they might not say as they did in the case of the blind man, “It is
he,” “It is not he.” For their hands  <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) and their coming to the tomb
testified that it was indeed he. If they had not come, they might have
deemed that they saw a vision, or one man in place of another. But now
the coming to the place, the raising the stone, the charge given them to
loose the dead man bound in grave-clothes from his bands; the fact that
the friends who bore him from the tomb, knew from the grave-clothes
 <span id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) that it was he; that his
sisters were not left behind; that one of them said, “He now stinketh,
for he hath been dead four days”; all these things, I say, were
sufficient to silence the ill-disposed, as they were made witnesses of
the miracle. On this account He biddeth them take away the stone from
the tomb, to show that He raiseth the man. On this account also He
asketh, “Where have ye laid him?” that they who said, “Come and see,”
and who conducted Him, might not be able to say that He had raised
another person; that their voice and their hands might bear witness,
(their voice by saying, “Come and see,” their hands by lifting the
stone, and loosing the grave-clothes,) as well as their eyes and ears,
(the one by hearing His voice, the other by seeing Lazarus come forth,)
and their smell also by perceiving the ill-odor, for Martha said, “He
now stinketh, for he hath been dead four days.”

<span id="iv.lxv-p41"></span> Therefore I said with good reason, that
the woman did not at all understand Christ’s words, “Though he were
dead, yet shall he live.” At least observe, that she speaketh as though
the thing were impossible on account of the time which had intervened.
For indeed it was a strange thing to raise a corpse which had been dead
four days, and was corrupt. To the disciples Jesus said, “That the Son
of Man may be glorified,” referring to Himself; but to the woman, “Thou
shalt see the glory of God,” speaking of the Father. Seest thou that the
weakness of the hearers is the cause of the difference of the words? He
therefore remindeth her of what He had spoken unto her, well nigh
rebuking her, as being forgetful. Yet He did not wish at present to
confound the spectators, wherefore He saith,  <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744)

<span id="iv.lxv-p43"></span> <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iv.lxv-Page_232"></span>[John
11.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#040)<span id="iv.lxv-p43.1"></span> .
“Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see
the glory of God?”

<span id="iv.lxv-p44"></span> \[3.\] A great blessing truly is faith,
great, and one which makes great those who hold it rightly with (good)
living.  <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) By this men (are
enabled) to do the things of God in His  <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) name. And well did Christ say,
 <span id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) “If ye have faith ye shall
say unto this mountain, Remove, and it shall remove” ( [Matt. xvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020) <span id="iv.lxv-p47.3"></span> );
and again, “He that believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he do
also, and greater works than these shall he do.” ( [John
14.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="iv.lxv-p47.4"></span>
.) What meaneth He by “greater”? Those which the disciples are seen
after this to work. For even the shadow of Peter raised a dead man; and
so the power of Christ was the more proclaimed. Since it was not so
wonderful that He while alive should work miracles, as that when He was
dead others should be enabled to work in His name greater than He
wrought. This was an indisputable proof of the Resurrection; nor if
(that Resurrection) had been seen by all, would it have been equally
believed. For men might have said that it was an appearance, but one who
saw that by His name alone greater miracles were wrought than when He
conversed with men, could not disbelieve unless he were very senseless.
A great blessing then is faith when it arises from glowing feelings,
great love,  <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) and a fervent
soul; it makes us truly wise, it hides our human meanness, and leaving
reasonings beneath, it philosophizes about things in heaven; or rather
what the wisdom of men cannot discover,  <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) it abundantly comprehends and
succeeds in. Let us then cling to this, and not commit to reasonings
 <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) what concerns ourselves. For
tell me, why have not the Greeks been able to find out anything? Did
they not know all the wisdom of the heathen?  <span
id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) Why then could they not prevail
against fishermen and tentmakers, and unlearned persons? Was it not
because the one committed all to argument, the others to faith? and so
these last were victorious over Plato and Pythagoras, in short, over all
that had gone astray; and they surpass those whose lives had been worn
out in  <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) astrology and
geometry, mathematics and arithmetic, and who had been thoroughly
instructed in  <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) every sort of
learning, and  <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) were as much
superior to them as true and real philosophers are superior to those who
are by nature foolish and out of their senses.  <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) For observe, these men asserted
that the soul was immortal, or rather, they did not merely assert this,
but persuaded others of it. The Greeks, on the contrary, did not at
first know what manner of thing the soul was, and when they had found
out, and had distinguished it from the body, they were again in the same
case, the one asserting that it was incorporeal, the other that it was
corporeal and was dissolved with the body. Concerning heaven again, the
one said that it had life and was a god, but the fishermen both taught
and persuaded that it was the work and device  <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) of God. Now that the Greeks should
use reasonings is nothing wonderful, but that those who seem to be
believers, that “they” should be found carnal,  <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) this is what may justly be
lamented.  <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) And on this
account they have gone astray, some saying that they know God as He
knoweth Himself, a thing which not even any of those Greeks have dared
to assert; others that God cannot beget without passion, not even
allowing Him any superiority over men;  <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) others again, that a righteous life
and exact  <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) conversation avail
nothing. But it is not the time to refute these things now. \[4.\] Yet
that a right faith availeth nothing if the life be corrupt, both Christ
and Paul declare, having taken the more care for this latter part;
Christ when He teacheth,  <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761)
“Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven” ( [Matt. vii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)
<span id="iv.lxv-p61.3"></span> ); and again, “Many will say unto Me in
that day, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy Name? And I will profess
unto them, I never knew you; depart from Me, ye that work iniquity”
 <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) ( [Matt. xxii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023) <span id="iv.lxv-p62.6"></span> );
(for they who take not heed to themselves, easily slip away  <span
id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) into wickedness, even though they
have a right faith;) and Paul, when in his letter to the Hebrews he thus
speaks and exhorts them; “Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord.” ( [Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014) <span id="iv.lxv-p63.3"></span> .)
By “holiness,” meaning chastity, so that it behooved each to be content
with his own wife, and not have to do with  <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) any other woman; for it is
impossible that one not so contented should be saved; he must assuredly
perish though he have ten thousand right actions, since with fornication
it is impossible to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Or rather, this is
henceforth  <span id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) not fornication
but adultery; for as a woman who is bound to a man, if she come together
with  <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) another man, then hath
committed adultery, so he that is bound to a woman, if he have another,
hath committed adultery. Such an one shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven, but shall fall into the pit. Hear what Christ <span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span id="iv.lxv-Page_233"></span> saith
concerning these,  <span id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) “Their
worm shall not die,  <span id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) and the
fire shall not be quenched.” ( [Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044) <span id="iv.lxv-p68.3"></span> .)
For he can have no pardon, who after (possessing) a wife, and the
comfort of a wife, then acts shamelessly towards another woman; since
this is henceforth wantonness.  <span
id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769) And if the many abstain even from
their wives when it be a season of fast or prayer, how great a fire doth
he heap up for himself who is not even content with his wife, but
mingleth with another; and if it is not permitted one who has put away
and cast out his own wife to mingle with another, (for this is
adultery,) how great evil doth he commit who, while his wife is in his
house, brings in another. Let no one then allow this malady to dwell in
his soul; let him tear it up by the root. He doth not so much wrong his
wife as himself. For so grievous and unpardonable is this offense, that
if a woman separate herself from a husband which is an idolater without
his consent, God punisheth her; but if she separate herself from a
fornicator, not so. Seest thou how great an evil this is? “If,” It
saith, “any faithful woman have  <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) a husband that believeth not, and
if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.” ( [1 Cor.
vii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#013) <span
id="iv.lxv-p70.2"></span> .) Not so concerning a harlot; but what? “If
any man  <span id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771) put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, he causeth her to commit adultery.”
( [Matt. v. 32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032) <span
id="iv.lxv-p71.2"></span> .) For if the coming together maketh one body,
he who cometh together with a harlot must needs become one body with
her. How then shall the modest woman, being a member of Christ, receive
such an one, or how shall she join to herself the member of an harlot.
And observe the excess of the one (fornication) over the other
(idolatry).  The woman who dwelleth with an unbeliever is not impure;
(“for,” It saith, “the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife”—
[1 Cor. vi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015) <span
id="iv.lxv-p71.3"></span> ;) not so with the harlot; but what? “Shall I
then make the members of Christ the members of an harlot?” In the one
case sanctification remains, and is not removed though the unbeliever
dwelleth with his wife; but in the other case it departeth. A dreadful,
a dreadful thing is fornication, and an agent for  <span
id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) everlasting punishment; and even in
this world it brings with it ten thousand woes. The man so guilty is
forced to lead a life of anxiety and toil; he is nothing better off than
those who are under punishment, creeping  <span
id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773) into another man’s house with fear
and much trembling, suspecting all alike  <span
id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) both slave and free. Wherefore I
exhort you to be  <span id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775) freed from
this malady, and if you obey  <span id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776)
not, step not on the sacred threshold.  <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) Sheep that are covered with the
scab, and full of disease, may not herd with those that are in health;
we must drive them from the fold until they get rid of the malady. We
have been made members of Christ; let us not, I entreat, become members
of an harlot. This place is not a brothel but a church; if then thou
hast the members of an harlot, stand not in the church, lest thou insult
the place. If there were no hell, if there were no punishment, yet,
after those contracts, those marriage torches, the lawful bed, the
procreation of children, the intercourse, how couldest thou bear to join
 <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) thyself to another? How is
it that thou art not ashamed nor blushest? Knowest thou not that they
who after the death of their own wife, introduce another into their own
house, are blamed by many? yet this action hath no penalty attached to
it: but thou bringest in another while thy wife is yet alive. What
lustfulness is this! Learn what hath been spoken concerning such men,
“Their worm,” It saith, “shall not die, and the fire shall not be
quenched.” ( [Mark ix. 44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044) <span
id="iv.lxv-p78.3"></span> .) Shudder at the threat, dread the vengeance.
The pleasure here is not so great as the punishment there, but may it
not came to pass that any one (here) become liable to that punishment,
but that exercising holiness they may see Christ, and obtain the
promised good things, which may we all enjoy, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[230:1723](1140068.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="iv.lxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p4"></span> [John
11.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031)<span
id="iv.lxv-p4.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p4.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p4.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p4.4"></span>The Jews then which were with her, when they saw
Mary that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She
goeth unto the grave to weep there.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[230:1724](1140068.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="iv.lxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p6.2"></span>any real wisdom.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[230:1725](1140068.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="iv.lxv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p7.2"></span>ντεῦθεν</span>

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[230:1726](1140068.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="iv.lxv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p8.2"></span>good.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[230:1727](1140068.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="iv.lxv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p9.2"></span>senseless.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[230:1728](1140068.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="iv.lxv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p10.2"></span>but rising straightway went to meet Him.</span>
”

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[230:1729](1140068.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iv.lxv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p11.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p11.2"></span>the place.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[230:1730](1140068.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iv.lxv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p12.2"></span>being.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[230:1731](1140068.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iv.lxv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p13.2"></span>speak to.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[230:1732](1140068.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iv.lxv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p14.2"></span>perhaps it is proved.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[230:1733](1140068.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="iv.lxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p16"></span> [John
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033)<span
id="iv.lxv-p16.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p16.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p16.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p16.4"></span>Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and
saw Him, she fell down at His feet, saying unto Him, Lord, if Thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died. When Jesus therefore saw her
weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, He groaned in
the spirit, and troubled Himself.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[230:1734](1140068.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iv.lxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p20.2"></span>they were about to gain much.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[230:1735](1140068.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iv.lxv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p21.1"></span>τὴν θήραν</span>

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[230:1736](1140068.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="iv.lxv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p22.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p22.2"></span>showeth for a time.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[230:1737](1140068.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="iv.lxv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p23.1"></span>̓</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p23.2"></span>Ενεβριμήσατο</span>

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[231:1738](1140068.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="iv.lxv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p32"></span> [John
11.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#038)<span
id="iv.lxv-p32.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p32.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p32.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p32.4"></span>Jesus therefore, again groaning in Himself,
cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[231:1739](1140068.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="iv.lxv-p32.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p33.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p33.2"></span>rebuked.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[231:1740](1140068.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="iv.lxv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p34.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p34.2"></span>all things more humble.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[231:1741](1140068.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="iv.lxv-p34.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p35.1"></span>i.e. the other Evangelists.</span>

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[231:1742](1140068.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="iv.lxv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p36.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p36.2"></span>the trembling.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[231:1743](1140068.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="iv.lxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p39.1"></span>i.e. which raised the stone.</span>

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[231:1744](1140068.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iv.lxv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p40.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p40.2"></span>garments.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[231:1745](1140068.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="iv.lxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p42.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p42.2"></span>saith gently.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[232:1746](1140068.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="iv.lxv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p45.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p45.2"></span>great and causing many blessings.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[232:1747](1140068.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iv.lxv-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p46"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p46.1"></span>Jesus.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[232:1748](1140068.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="iv.lxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p47"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p47.1"></span>if ye believe,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxv-p47.2"></span>It saith, &c.</span>

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[232:1749](1140068.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iv.lxv-p47.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p48.1"></span>φίλτρου</span>

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[232:1750](1140068.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="iv.lxv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p49.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p49.2"></span>discover, but slips off.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[232:1751](1140068.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="iv.lxv-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p50.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p50.2"></span>strip off by.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[232:1752](1140068.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="iv.lxv-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p51.1"></span>τὴν ἔξωθεν</span>

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[232:1753](1140068.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="iv.lxv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p52.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p52.2"></span>who were familiar with.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[232:1754](1140068.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="iv.lxv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p53.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p53.2"></span>had got together.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[232:1755](1140068.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="iv.lxv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p54.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p54.2"></span>these they cast as dust, and.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[232:1756](1140068.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="iv.lxv-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p55.2"></span>so that these appeared henceforward to be truly
philosophers, but those fools by nature and out of their senses.</span>
”

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[232:1757](1140068.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="iv.lxv-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p56.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p56.2"></span>devices.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[232:1758](1140068.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="iv.lxv-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p57.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p57.2"></span>having only the natural life,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxv-p57.3"></span>ψυχικὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxv-p57.4"></span>, opposed in G. T.
to</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p57.5"></span>πνευματικὸς</span>

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[232:1759](1140068.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="iv.lxv-p57.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p58.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p58.2"></span>is the ridiculous thing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[232:1760](1140068.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iv.lxv-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p59.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p59.2"></span>the many.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[232:1761](1140068.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="iv.lxv-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p60.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p60.2"></span>right.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[232:1762](1140068.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="iv.lxv-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p61.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p61.2"></span>Christ discourseth the more about this, and
saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[232:1763](1140068.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="iv.lxv-p61.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p62.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p62.2"></span>I never knew you</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxv-p62.3"></span>: and again,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxv-p62.4"></span>Rejoice not that the devils
are subject to you</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p62.5"></span>: for, &c.</span>

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[232:1764](1140068.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="iv.lxv-p62.7"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p63.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p63.2"></span>often turn aside.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[232:1765](1140068.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="iv.lxv-p63.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p64.2"></span>attend to.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[232:1766](1140068.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="iv.lxv-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p65.1"></span>i.e. after marriage.</span>

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[232:1767](1140068.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="iv.lxv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p66.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p66.2"></span>lie with.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[233:1768](1140068.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="iv.lxv-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p67.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p67.2"></span>for of such saith God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[233:1769](1140068.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="iv.lxv-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p68"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p68.1"></span>dieth not,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p68.2"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[233:1770](1140068.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="iv.lxv-p68.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p69.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p69.2"></span>stupidity.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[233:1771](1140068.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="iv.lxv-p69.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p70"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p70.1"></span>the woman which hath.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[233:1772](1140068.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="iv.lxv-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p71"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p71.1"></span>whosoever shall.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[233:1773](1140068.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="iv.lxv-p71.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p72.1"></span>προξενοῦσα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p72.2"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p72.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p72.4"></span>πάγουσα</span>

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[233:1774](1140068.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="iv.lxv-p72.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p73.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p73.2"></span>introducing himself.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[233:1775](1140068.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="iv.lxv-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p74.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p74.2"></span>everywhere.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[233:1776](1140068.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="iv.lxv-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p75.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p75.2"></span>give diligence to be.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[233:1777](1140068.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="iv.lxv-p75.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p76.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p76.2"></span>will.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[233:1778](1140068.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="iv.lxv-p76.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p77"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p77.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p77.2"></span>sanctuary.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[233:1779](1140068.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="iv.lxv-p77.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxv-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p78.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxv-p78.2"></span>place.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 11.41,42](1140069)
