[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140044)  [Next](1140046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xlii"></span> <span id="iv.xlii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>Homily XL.</span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xlii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xlii-p2.2"></span>[John
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xlii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p3"></span>“If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is
not true; there is another that beareth witness of Me, and I know that
the witness which he witnesseth of Me is true.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xlii-p4.1"></span>If</span> any one unpracticed in the art
undertake to work a mine, he will get no gold, but confounding all
aimlessly and together, will undergo a labor unprofitable and
pernicious: so also they who understand not the method  <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086) of Holy Scripture, nor search out
its peculiarities  <span id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087) and laws,
but go over all its points carelessly and in one manner, will mix the
gold with earth, and never discover the treasure which is laid up in it.
I say this now because the passage before us containeth much gold, not
indeed manifest to view, but covered over with much obscurity, and
therefore by digging and purifying we must arrive at the legitimate
sense. For who would not at once be troubled at hearing Christ say, “If
I testify of Myself, My witness is not true”; inasmuch as He often
appeareth to have testified of Himself? For instance, conversing with
the Samaritan woman He said, “I Am that speak unto thee”: and in like
manner to the blind man, “It is He that talketh with thee” ( [John
9.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#037)<span id="iv.xlii-p6.3"></span> );
and rebuking the Jews, “Ye say,  <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088) thou blasphemest, because I said I
am the Son of God.” ( [c. x. 36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036) <span
id="iv.xlii-p7.4"></span> .) And in many other places besides He doth
this. If now all these assertions be false, what hope of salvation shall
we have? And where shall we find truth when Truth Itself declareth, “My
witness is not true”? Nor doth this appear to be the only contradiction;
there is another not less than this. He saith farther on, “Though I bear
witness of Myself, yet My witness is true” ( [John
8.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014)<span id="iv.xlii-p7.5"></span> );
which then, tell me, am I to receive, and which deem a falsehood? If we
take them out thus \[from the context\] simply as they are said, without
carefully considering the person to whom nor the cause for which they
are said, nor any other like circumstances, they will both be
falsehoods. For if His witness be “not true,” then this assertion is not
true either, not merely the second, but the first also. What then is the
meaning? We need great watchfulness, or rather the grace of God, that we
rest not in the mere <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="iv.xlii-Page_143"></span> words; for thus the heretics err, because
they enquire not into the object of the speaker nor the disposition of
the hearers. If we add not these and other points besides, as times and
places and the opinions of the listeners, many absurd consequences will
follow.

<span id="iv.xlii-p8"></span> What then is the meaning?  <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089) The Jews were about to object to
Him, “If thou bearest witness  <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) concerning thyself, thy witness is
not true” ( [John 8.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xlii-p10.3"></span> ): therefore He spake these words in
anticipation; as though He had said, “Ye will surely say to Me, we
believe thee not; for no one that witnesseth of himself is readily
 <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) held trustworthy among men.”
So that the “is not true” must not be read absolutely, but with
reference to  <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) their
suspicions, as though He had said, “to you it is not true”; and so He
uttered the words not looking to His own dignity, but to their secret
thoughts. When He saith, “My witness is not true,” He rebuketh their
opinion of Him, and the objection about to be urged by them against Him;
but when He saith, “Though I bear witness of Myself, My witness is true”
( [John 8.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xlii-p12.4"></span> ), He declareth the very nature of the thing
itself, namely, that as God they ought to deem Him trustworthy even when
speaking of Himself. For since He had spoken of the resurrection of the
dead, and of the judgment, and that he that believeth on Him is not
judged, but cometh unto life, and that He shall sit to require account
of all men, and that He hath the same Authority and Power with the
Father; and since He was about again otherwise to prove these things, He
necessarily put their objection first. “I told you,” He saith, “that ‘as
the Father raiseth the dead and quickeneth them, so the Son quickeneth
whom He will’; I told you that ‘the Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son’; I told you that men must ‘honor
the Son as they honor the Father’; I told you that ‘he that honoreth not
the Son honoreth not the Father’; I told you that ‘he that heareth My
words and believeth them shall not see death, but hath passed from death
unto life’ ( [John 5.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xlii-p12.5"></span> ; not exactly quoted); that My voice shall
raise the dead, some now, some hereafter; that I shall demand account
from all men of their transgressions, that I shall judge righteously,
and recompense those who have walked uprightly.” Now since all these
were assertions, since the things asserted were important, and since no
clear proof of them had as yet been afforded to the Jews but one rather
 <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) indistinct, He putteth their
objection first when He is about to proceed  <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) to establish His assertions,
speaking somewhat in this way if not in these very words:  <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) “Perhaps ye will say, thou
assertest all this, but thou art not a credible witness, since thou
testifiest of thyself.” First then checking their disputatious spirit by
setting forth what they would say, and showing that He knew the secrets
of their hearts, and giving this first proof of His power, after stating
the objection He supplieth other proofs clear and indisputable,
producing three witnesses to what He said, namely, the works wrought by
Him, the witness of the Father, and the preaching of John. And He
putteth first the less important witness of John. For after saying,
“There is another that beareth witness of Me, and I know that his
witness is true,” He addeth,

<span id="iv.xlii-p16"></span> [John
5.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033)<span id="iv.xlii-p16.1"></span> .
“Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p17"></span>Yet if Thy witness be not true, how sayest
Thou, “I know that the testimony of John is true, and that he hath borne
witness to the truth”? and seest thou (O man) how clear it hence is,
that the expression, “My witness is not true,” was addressed to their
secret thoughts?

<span id="iv.xlii-p18"></span> \[2.\] “What then,” saith some one, “if
John bare witness partially.”  <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) That the Jews might not assert
this, see how He removeth this suspicion. For He said not, “John
testified of Me,” but, “Ye first sent to John, and ye would not have
sent had ye not deemed him trustworthy.” Nay, what is more, they had
sent not to ask him about Christ, but about himself, and the man whom
they deemed trustworthy in what related to himself they would much more
deem so in what related to another. For it is, so to speak, the nature
of us all not to give so much credit to those who speak of themselves as
to those who speak of others; yet him they deemed so trustworthy as not
to require even concerning himself any other testimony. For they who
were sent said not, “What sayest thou concerning Christ?” but, “Who art
thou? What sayest thou of thyself?” So great admiration felt they for
the man. Now to all this Christ made allusion by saying, “Ye sent unto
John.” And on this account the Evangelist hath not merely related that
they sent, but is exact as to the persons sent that  <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) they were Priests and of the
Pharisees, not common or abject persons, nor such as might be corrupted
or cheated, but men able to understand exactly what he said.

<span id="iv.xlii-p21"></span> [John
5.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034)<span id="iv.xlii-p21.1"></span> .
“But I receive not testimony from man.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p22"></span>“Why then hast Thou brought forward that
of John?” His testimony was not the “testimony of man,” for, saith he,
“He that sent me to baptize with water, He said unto me.” ( [John
1.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="iv.xlii-p22.1"></span>
.) So that John’s testimony was the testimony of God; for having learned
from Him he said what he did. But that none should ask, “Whence is it
<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="iv.xlii-Page_144"></span>
clear that he learnt from God?” and stop at this, He abundantly silences
them by still addressing Himself to their thoughts. For neither was it
likely that many would know these things; they had hitherto given heed
unto John as to one who spake of himself, and therefore Christ saith, “I
receive not testimony from man.” And that the Jews might not ask, “And
if Thou wert not about to receive the testimony of man, and by it to
strengthen Thyself, why hast Thou brought forward this man’s testimony?”
see how He correcteth this contradiction by what He addeth. For after
saying, “I receive not testimony from man,” He hath added,

<span id="iv.xlii-p23"></span>“But these things I say, that ye may be
saved.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p24"></span>What He saith is of this kind; “I, being
God, needed not the witness of John which is man’s witness, yet because
ye gave more heed to him, believe him more trustworthy than any, ran to
him as to a prophet, (for all the city was poured forth to Jordan,) and
have not believed on Me, even when working miracles, therefore I remind
you of that witness of his.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p25"></span> [John
5.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iv.xlii-p25.1"></span> .
“He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p26"></span> That they may not reply, “What if he did
speak and we received him not,” He showeth that they did receive John’s
sayings: since they sent not common men, but priests and Pharisees and
were willing to rejoice;  <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) so
much did they admire the man, and at the same time had nothing to say
against his words. But the “for a season,” is the expression of one
noting their levity,  <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099) and the
fact that they soon started away from him.

<span id="iv.xlii-p29"></span> [John
5.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span id="iv.xlii-p29.1"></span> .
“But I have greater witness than that of John.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p30"></span> “For had ye been willing to admit faith
according to the (natural) consequence of the facts, I would have
brought you over by My works more than he by his words. But since ye
will not, I bring you to John, not as needing his testimony, but because
I do all ‘that ye may be saved.’ For I have greater witness than that of
John, namely, that from My works; yet I do not merely consider how I may
be made acceptable to you by credible evidence, but how by that (of
persons) known  <span id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) to and
admired by you.” Then glancing at them and saying that they rejoiced for
a season in his (John’s) light, He declared that their zeal was but
temporary and uncertain.  <span id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101)

<span id="iv.xlii-p33"></span> He called John a torch,  <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) signifying that he had not light of
himself, but by the grace of the Spirit; but the circumstance which
caused the absolute distinction  <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) between Himself and John, namely,
that He was the Sun of righteousness, this He put not yet; but merely
hinting as yet at this He touched  <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) them sharply, by showing that from
the same disposition which led them to despise John, neither could they
believe in Christ. Since it was but for a season that they admired even
the man whom they did admire, and who, had they not acted thus, would
soon have led them by the hand to Jesus. Having then proved them
altogether unworthy of forgiveness, He went on to say, “I have greater
witness than that of John.” “What is that?” It is that from His works.

<span id="iv.xlii-p37"></span> “For the works,” He saith, “which the
Father hath given Me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of
Me that the Father sent  <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) Me.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p39"></span> By this He reminded them of the paralytic
restored, and of many other things. The words perhaps one of them might
have asserted were mere boast, and said by reason of John’s friendship
towards Him, (though indeed it was not in their power to say even this
of John, a man equal to the exact practice of wisdom,  <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106) and on this account admired by
them,) but the works could not even among the maddest of them admit this
suspicion; therefore He added this second testimony, saying, “The works
which the Father hath given Me to finish, the same works that I do bear
witness of Me that the Father sent Me.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p41"></span>\[3.\] In this place He also meeteth the
accusation respecting the violation of the Sabbath. For since those
persons argued, “How can he be from God, seeing that he keepeth not the
Sabbath?” ( [John 9.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xlii-p41.1"></span> ), therefore He saith, “Which My Father hath
given unto Me.” Yet in truth, He acted with absolute power, but in order
most abundantly to show that He doth nothing contrary to the Father,
therefore He hath put the expression of much inferiority. Since why did
He not say, “The works which the Father hath given Me testify that I am
equal to the Father”? for both of these truths were to be earned from
the works, that He did nothing contrary, and that He was equal to Him
who begat Him; a point which He is establishing elsewhere, where He
saith, “If ye believe not Me, believe the works: that ye may know and
believe that I am in the Father and the Father in Me.”  <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107) ( [John
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span id="iv.xlii-p42.4"></span>
.) In both respects, therefore, the works bare witness to Him, that He
was equal to the Father, and that He did nothing contrary to Him. Why
then said He not so, instead of leaving out the greater and putting
forward this? Because to establish this was His first object. For
although <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="iv.xlii-Page_145"></span> it was a far less thing to have it
believed that He came from God, than to have it believed that God was
equal with Him, (for that belonged to the Prophets also,  <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108) but this never,) still He taketh
much pains as to the lesser point, as knowing that, this admitted,
 <span id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109) the other would afterwards
be easily received. So that making no mention of the more important
portion of the testimony, He putteth  <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110) its lesser office, that by this
they may receive the other also. Having effected this, He addeth,

<span id="iv.xlii-p46"></span> [John
5.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)<span id="iv.xlii-p46.1"></span> .
“And the Father Himself, which hath sent Me, hath borne witness of Me.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p47"></span>Where did He “bear witness of” Him? In
Jordan: “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased” ( [Matt.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016) <span
id="iv.xlii-p47.1"></span> ); hear Him.  <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111) Yet even this needed proof. The
testimony of John then was clear, for they themselves had sent to him,
and could not deny it. The testimony from miracles was in like manner
clear, for they had seen them wrought, and had heard from him who was
healed, and had believed; whence also they drew their accusation. It
therefore remained to give proof to the testimony of the Father. Next in
order to effect this, He added,

<span id="iv.xlii-p49"></span>“Ye have neither heard His voice at any
time”:

<span id="iv.xlii-p50"></span>How then saith Moses, “The Lord spake, and
Moses answered”? ( [Ex. xix. 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019) <span
id="iv.xlii-p50.1"></span> ); and David, “He had heard a tongue which he
knew not” ( [Ps. lxxxi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005) <span
id="iv.xlii-p50.2"></span> ); and Moses again, “Is there any such people
which hath ‘heard the voice of God’?” ( [Deut. iv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033) <span id="iv.xlii-p50.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xlii-p51"></span>“Nor seen His shape.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p52"></span>Yet Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, are
said to have seen Him, and many others. What then is that which Christ
saith now? He guideth them by degrees to a philosophical doctrine,
showing that with God is neither voice nor shape, but that He is higher
than such forms or sounds like these. For as when He saith, “Ye have not
heard His voice,” He doth not mean that God doth indeed utter a voice,
but one which cannot be heard; so when He saith, “Nor seen His shape,”
He doth not mean that God hath a shape though one invisible, but that
neither of these things belongeth to God. And in order that they might
not say, “Thou art a boaster, God spake to Moses only”; (this at least
they did say, “We know that God spake with Moses: as for this fellow, we
know not whence He is”— [John
9.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#029)<span id="iv.xlii-p52.1"></span>
;) on this account He spake as He did, to show that there is neither
voice nor shape with God. “But why,” He saith, “name I these things? Not
only have ye ‘neither heard His voice nor seen His shape,’ but it is not
even in your power to assert that of which you most boast and of which
you are all most fully assured, namely, that ye have received and keep
His commandments.” Wherefore He addeth,

<span id="iv.xlii-p53"></span> [John
5.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#038)<span id="iv.xlii-p53.1"></span> .
“And ye have not His word abiding in you.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p54"></span> That is, the ordinances, the
commandments, the Law, and the Prophets. For even if God ordained these,
still they are not with you, since ye believe not on Me. Because, if the
Scriptures everywhere say  <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112)
that it is necessary to give heed to  <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) Me, and yet ye believe not, it is
quite clear that His word is removed from you. Wherefore again He
addeth,

<span id="iv.xlii-p57"></span>“For whom He hath sent, Him ye believe
not.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p58"></span>Then that they may not argue, “How, if we
have not heard His voice, hath He testified unto thee?” He saith,

<span id="iv.xlii-p59"></span> [John
5.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span id="iv.xlii-p59.1"></span> .
“Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of Me.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p60"></span> Since by these the Father gave His
testimony. He gave it indeed by Jordan also and in the mount, but Christ
bringeth not forward those voices; perhaps by doing so  <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) He would have been disbelieved;
 <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115) for one of them, that in the
mount, they did not hear, and the other they heard indeed, but heeded
not. For this reason He referreth them to the Scriptures, showing that
from them cometh the Father’s  <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116) testimony, having first removed the
old grounds on which they used to boast, either as having seen God or as
having heard His voice. For as it was likely that they would disbelieve
His voice, and picture to themselves what took place on Sinai, after
first correcting their suspicions on these points, and showing that what
had been done was a condescension, He then referreth them to the
testimony of the Scriptures.

<span id="iv.xlii-p64"></span>\[4.\] And from these too let us also,
when we war against heretics, arm and fortify ourselves. For “all
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good
work” ( [2 Tim. 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)<span id="iv.xlii-p64.1"></span> );
not that he may have some and not others, for such a man is not
“perfect.” For tell me what profit is it, if a man pray continually, but
give not liberal alms? or if he give liberal alms, but be covetous or
violent? or if he be not covetous nor violent, but (is liberal) to make
a show before men, and to gain the praise of the beholders? or if he
give alms with exactness and according to God’s pleasure, yet be lifted
up by this very thing, and be highminded ? or if he be humble and
constant in fasting, but covetous, greedy of gain,  <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) and nailed to earth, and one who
introduceth into his soul the mother of mischief? for the love of money
is the root of all evils.  <span id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118)
Let us then shudder at the action, let us flee the sin; this hath made
the world a waste,  <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119) this hath
brought all things into confusion, this seduceth us from the most
blessed service of Christ. “It is not possible,”  <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) He saith, “to serve God and
mammon.” For mammon giveth commands contradictory to those of Christ.
The one saith, “Give to them that need”; the other, “Plunder the goods
of the needy.” Christ saith, “Forgive them that wrong thee”; the other,
“Prepare snares against those who do thee no wrong.” Christ saith, “Be
merciful and kind”; mammon saith, “Be savage and cruel, and count the
tears of the poor as nothing”; to the intent that he may render the
Judge stern to us in that day. For then all our actions shall come
 <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121) before our eyes, and those
who have been injured and stripped by us, shutting us out from all
excuse. Since if Lazarus, who received no wrong from Dives, but only did
not enjoy any of his good things, stood forth at that time  <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) as a bitter accuser and allowed him
not to obtain any pardon, what excuse, tell me, shall they have, who,
besides giving no alms of their own substance, seize that of others, and
overthrow orphans’ houses? If they who have not fed Christ when He
hungered have drawn such fire upon their heads, what consolation shall
they enjoy who plunder what belongs not to them at all, who weave ten
thousand law-suits, who unjustly grasp the property of all men? Let us
then cast out this desire; and we shall cast it out if we think of those
before us who did wrongfully, who were covetous and are gone. Do  <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123) not others enjoy their wealth and
labors while they lie in punishment, and vengeance, and intolerable
woes? And how can this be anything but extreme folly, to weary and vex
ourselves, that living we may strain ourselves with labor, and on our
departure hence undergo intolerable punishments and vengeances, when we
might have enjoyed ourselves here, (for nothing so much causeth pleasure
as the consciousness of almsgiving,  <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) ) and departing to that place might
have been delivered from all our woes, and obtained ten thousand
blessings? For as wickedness is wont to punish those who go after it,
even before (they arrive at) the pit, so also virtue, even before the
(gift of) the Kingdom, provides delights for those who here practice it,
making them to live in company with good hopes and continual pleasure.
Therefore that we may obtain this, both here and in the life to come,
let us hold fast to good works, so shall we gain the future crown; to
which may we all reach through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost,
be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[142:1087](1140045.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="iv.xlii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p5.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p5.2"></span>consequence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[142:1088](1140045.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="iv.xlii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p6.1"></span>ἰ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p6.2"></span>διώματα</span>

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[142:1089](1140045.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="iv.xlii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p7.1"></span>Savile reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p7.2"></span>and to the Jews, How say
ye,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p7.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[143:1090](1140045.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="iv.xlii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p9.2"></span>let us see then with what intent these words
were said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[143:1091](1140045.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="iv.xlii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p10.1"></span>σὺ μαρτυρεῖς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p10.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[143:1092](1140045.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="iv.xlii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p11.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p11.2"></span>ever.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[143:1093](1140045.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="iv.xlii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p12.1"></span>al. with the addition</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p12.2"></span>to their,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p12.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[143:1094](1140045.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="iv.xlii-p12.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p13.2"></span>in every way.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[143:1095](1140045.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="iv.xlii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p14.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p14.2"></span>ρμᾶν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p14.3"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p14.4"></span>χωρεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[143:1096](1140045.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="iv.xlii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p15.1"></span>Morel. reads,</span> “a <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p15.2"></span>ll but conclusively
refuting them by what He saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[143:1097](1140045.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="iv.xlii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p19.1"></span>χάριτι</span>

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[143:1098](1140045.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="iv.xlii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p20.2"></span>showing that.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[144:1099](1140045.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="iv.xlii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p27.1"></span>clause omitted in Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[144:1100](1140045.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="iv.xlii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p28.1"></span>εὐκολίαν</span>

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[144:1101](1140045.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="iv.xlii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p31.2"></span>nearer.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[144:1102](1140045.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="iv.xlii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p32.1"></span>This passage is read variously in Ben. and
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.xlii-p32.2"></span>ms.</span> but without
any variety of meaning.</span>

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[144:1103](1140045.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="iv.xlii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p34.1"></span>λύχνον</span>

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[144:1104](1140045.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="iv.xlii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p35.2"></span>ντιδιαστολὴν</span>

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[144:1105](1140045.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="iv.xlii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p36.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p36.2"></span>reaches.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[144:1106](1140045.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="iv.xlii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.2"></span>πέστειλε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.3"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.4"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.5"></span>πέσταλκε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p38.6"></span>, G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[144:1107](1140045.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="iv.xlii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p40.1"></span>φιλοσοφεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[144:1108](1140045.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="iv.xlii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p42.2"></span>ν ἐμοὶ ὁ Πατὴρ, κἀγὼ ἐν αὐτῷ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p42.3"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[145:1109](1140045.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="iv.xlii-p42.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p43.2"></span>the Prophets said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[145:1110](1140045.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="iv.xlii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p44.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p44.2"></span>said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[145:1111](1140045.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="iv.xlii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p45.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p45.2"></span>deems worthy of mention,</span> ”

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[145:1112](1140045.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="iv.xlii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p48.1"></span>The latter words heard at the
Transfiguration.</span>

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[145:1113](1140045.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="iv.xlii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p55.2"></span>teach.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[145:1114](1140045.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="iv.xlii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p56.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p56.2"></span>believe.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[145:1115](1140045.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="iv.xlii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p61.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p61.2"></span>ντεύθεν</span>

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[145:1116](1140045.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="iv.xlii-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p62.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p62.2"></span>they would have disbelieved them.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[145:1117](1140045.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="iv.xlii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p63.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p63.2"></span>of the Spirit.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[145:1118](1140045.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="iv.xlii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p65.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p65.2"></span>μπορικὸς</span>

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[145:1119](1140045.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="iv.xlii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p66.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p66.2"></span>for Paul has said,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p66.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[145:1120](1140045.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="iv.xlii-p66.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p67.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p67.2"></span>revolted,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p67.3"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p67.4"></span>νάστατον</span>

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[145:1121](1140045.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="iv.xlii-p67.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p68.1"></span>οὐ δύνασθε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p68.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[145:1122](1140045.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="iv.xlii-p68.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p69.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p69.2"></span>stand.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[145:1123](1140045.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="iv.xlii-p69.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p70.1"></span>τότε</span>

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[145:1124](1140045.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="iv.xlii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p71.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p71.2"></span>shall.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[145:1125](1140045.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="iv.xlii-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p72.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p72.2"></span>almsgiving and a clear conscience.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 5.39,40](1140046)
