[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140049)  [Next](1140051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xlvii"></span> <span id="iv.xlvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XLV.</span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xlvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xlvii-p2.2"></span>[John vi.
28-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p3"></span> *“Then said they unto Him, What shall we
do,*  <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) *that we might work the
works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent. They said therefore unto
Him, What sign showest thou then, that we may see and believe thee? what
dost thou work?”*

<span id="iv.xlvii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p5.1"></span>There</span> is nothing worse, nothing more
shameful, than gluttony; it makes the mind gross, and the soul carnal;
it blinds, and permits not to see clearly. Observe, for instance, how
this is the case with the Jews; for because they were intent upon
gluttony, entirely occupied with worldly things, and without any
spiritual thoughts, though Christ leads them on by ten thousand sayings,
sharp and at the same time forbearing, even thus they arise not, but
continue groveling below. For consider; He said to them, “Ye seek Me,
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the bread,
and were filled”; He touched them by the reproof, He showed them what
food they ought to seek, saying, “Labor not for the meat that
perisheth”; He set before them the prize, saying, “but that which
endureth unto everlasting life”; then provided a remedy for what might
have been an objection, by declaring that He was sent from the Father.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p6"></span>What then did they?  As though they had
heard nothing, they said, “What shall we do, that we might work the
works of God?” This they said, not that they might learn and do them,
(as the sequel shows,) but to induce Him again to supply them with food,
and desiring to persuade Him to satisfy them. What then saith Christ?
“This is the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent.” On
this they asked, “What sign showest thou, that we may see and believe?”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p7"></span> <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iv.xlvii-Page_158"></span>[John
6.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031)<span id="iv.xlvii-p7.1"></span> .
“Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p8"></span> Nothing more senseless, nothing more
unreasonable, than these men! While the miracle was yet in their hands,
 <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) as though none had been
done, they spake after this manner, “What sign shewest thou?” and having
thus spoken, they do not even allow Him the right of choosing the sign,
but think to force Him to exhibit none other than such a one as was
wrought in the days of their fathers; wherefore they say, “Our fathers
did eat manna in the wilderness,” thinking by this to provoke Him to
work such a miracle as might supply them with carnal nourishment. Else
why did they mention none other of the miracles of old, though many took
place in those times, both in Egypt and at the sea and in the
wilderness, but only that of the manna? Was it not because they greatly
desired that one by reason of the tyranny of their bellies? Ye who when
ye saw His miracle called him a Prophet, and attempted to make Him a
king, how is that now, as though none had been wrought, ye have become
thankless and ill-minded, and ask for a sign, uttering words fit for
parasites, or hungry dogs?  Does the manna now seem wonderful to you?
Your soul is not now  <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) parched
up.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p11"></span>Mark too their hypocrisy. They said not,
“Moses did this sign, what doest thou?” thinking it would annoy Him; but
for a while they address Him with great reverence, through expectation
of food. So they neither said, “God did this, what doest thou?” that
they might not seem to make Him equal with God; nor did they bring
forward Moses, that they might not seem to lower Him, but put the matter
in an intermediate form, “Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness.”
He indeed might have replied, “I, but now, have wrought greater wonders
than did Moses, requiring no rod, having no need of prayer, but doing
all of Myself; and, if ye call to remembrance the manna, see, I have
given you bread.” But this was not the season for such speeches; and the
one thing He earnestly desired was, to bring them to spiritual food. And
observe His infinite wisdom and His manner of answering.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p12"></span> [John
6.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)<span id="iv.xlvii-p12.1"></span>
. “Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but My Father giveth you
the true bread from heaven.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p13"></span>Why said He not, “It was not Moses that
gave it to you, but I”; but putteth God in the place of Moses, and
Himself instead of manna? Because the infirmity of His hearers was
great. As is seen from what followeth. For not even when He had spoken
thus did He secure their attention, although He said at first, “Ye seek
Me, not because ye saw the miracle, but because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled.” ( [John
6.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026)<span id="iv.xlvii-p13.1"></span>
.) Now because they sought these (carnal) things, He would have
corrected them by His succeeding words, yet not even so did they desist.
When He promised the Samaritan woman that He would give her “the water,”
He made no mention of the Father. What saith He? “If thou knewest who it
is that saith unto thee, Give Me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of
Him, and He would have given unto thee living water” ( [John
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)<span id="iv.xlvii-p13.2"></span>
); and again, “The water which I shall give.” He referreth her not to
The Father. But here He maketh mention of The Father, that thou mayest
understand how great was the faith of the Samaritan woman, and how great
the infirmity of the Jews.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p14"></span>Was then the manna not from heaven? How
then is it said to be from heaven? In the same manner as Scripture
speaketh of “fowls of heaven” ( [Ps. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008) <span id="iv.xlvii-p14.1"></span> );
and again, “The Lord thundered from heaven.” ( [Ps. xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013) <span id="iv.xlvii-p14.2"></span>
.) And He calleth that other the “true bread,” not because the miracle
of the manna was false, but because it was a type, and not the very
truth. But in mentioning Moses, He doth not compare Himself to him, for
the Jews did not as yet prefer Him to Moses, of whom they still had a
higher opinion. So that after saying, “Moses gave not,” He addeth not
that “I give,” but saith that The Father, and not Moses, giveth. They,
when they heard this, replied, “Give us this bread to eat”; for they yet
thought that it was something material, they yet expected to gratify
their appetites, and so hastily ran to Him. What doth Christ? Leading
them on  <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) little by little, He
saith,

<span id="iv.xlvii-p16"></span> [John
6.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)<span id="iv.xlvii-p16.1"></span>
. “The bread of God is He which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life
unto the world.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p17"></span>Not, saith He, to Jews alone, but to all
the “world,” not mere food, but “life,” another and an altered “life.”
He calleth it “life,” because they all were dead in sins. Yet they still
kept downward bent, saying,

<span id="iv.xlvii-p18"></span> [John
6.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#034)<span id="iv.xlvii-p18.1"></span>
. “Give us this bread.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p19"></span>Then He, to rebuke them, because while
they supposed that the food was material they ran to Him, but not when
they learned that it was a spiritual kind, said,

<span id="iv.xlvii-p20"></span> [John
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036)<span id="iv.xlvii-p20.1"></span> .
“I am the bread of life; he that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he
that believeth on Me shall never thirst. But I said unto you, that ye
also have seen Me, and believe Me not.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p21"></span>\[2.\] Thus also John crieth, saying
beforehand, “He speaketh that He knoweth, and testifieth that He hath
seen, and no man receiveth <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.xlvii-Page_159"></span> His testimony” ( [John
3.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)<span id="iv.xlvii-p21.1"></span>
); and again Christ Himself, “We speak that We do know, and testify that
We have seen” ( [John 3.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p21.2"></span> ), “and ye believe not.”  <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) This He doth to prevent them, and
to show them that the matter doth not trouble Him, that He desireth not
honor, that He is not ignorant of the secrets of their minds, nor of
things present, nor of things to come.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p23"></span> “I am the bread of life.” Now He
proceedeth to commit unto them mysteries. And first He discourseth of
His Godhead, saying, “I am the bread of life.” For this is not spoken of
His Body, (concerning that He saith towards the end, “And the bread
which I shall give is My flesh,”) but at present it referreth to His
Godhead. For That, through God the Word, is Bread, as this bread also,
through the Spirit descending on it, is made Heavenly Bread.  Here He
useth not witnesses, as in His former address, for He had the miracle of
the loaves to witness to Him, and the Jews themselves for a while
pretending to believe Him; in the former case they opposed and accused
Him. This is the reason why here He declareth Himself. But they, since
they expected to enjoy a carnal feast, were not  <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) disturbed until they gave up their
hope. Yet not for that was Christ silent, but uttered many words of
reproof. For they,  <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) who while
they were eating called Him a Prophet, were here offended, and called
Him the carpenter’s son; not so while they ate the loaves, then they
said, “He is The Prophet,” and desired to make Him a king. Now they
seemed to be indignant at His asserting that He “came down from heaven,”
but in truth it was not this that caused their indignation, but the
thought that they should not enjoy a material table. Had they been
really indignant, they ought to have asked and enquired how He was the
“bread of life,” how He had “come down from heaven”; but now they do not
this, but murmur. And that it was not this which offended them is plain
from another circumstance. When He said, “My Father giveth you the
bread,” they exclaimed not, “Beseech Him that He give”; but what? “Give
us that bread”; yet He said not, “I give,” but, “My Father giveth”;
nevertheless, they, from desire of the food, thought Him worthy to be
trusted to for its supply. Now how should they, who deemed Him worthy of
their trust for giving, be afterward offended when they also heard that
“the Father giveth”? What is the reason? It is that when they heard that
they were not to eat, they again disbelieved, and put forth by way of a
cloak for their disbelief, that “it was a high saying.” Wherefore He
saith, “Ye have seen Me, and believe not” ( [John
5.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span id="iv.xlvii-p25.3"></span>
); alluding partly to His miracles, partly to the testimony from the
Scriptures; “For they,” He saith, “are they which testify of Me” ( [John
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)<span id="iv.xlvii-p25.4"></span>
); and, “I am come in My Father’s Name, and ye receive Me not”; and,
“How can ye believe which receive honor of men?”  <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257)

<span id="iv.xlvii-p27"></span> [John
6.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)<span id="iv.xlvii-p27.1"></span>
. “All that the Father giveth Me shall come to Me, and him that cometh
to Me I will in nowise cast out.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p28"></span>Observe how He doeth all things for the
sake of them that are saved; therefore He added this, that He might not
seem to be trifling and speaking these things to no purpose. But what is
it that He saith, “All that the Father giveth Me shall come unto Me” (
[John 6.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p28.1"></span> ), and “I will raise it  <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) up in the last day”? ( [John
6.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span id="iv.xlvii-p29.3"></span>
.) Wherefore speaketh He of the common resurrection, in which even the
ungodly have a part, as though it were the peculiar gift of those who
believe on Him? Because He speaketh not simply of resurrection, but of a
particular kind of resurrection. For having first said, “I will not cast
him out, I shall lose nothing of it,” He then speaketh of the
resurrection. Since in the resurrection some are cast out,  <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) (“Take him, and cast him into outer
darkness,” [Matt. xxii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p30.4"></span> ,) and some are destroyed. (“Rather fear Him
who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.”) ( [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028) <span id="iv.xlvii-p30.5"></span>
.) And  <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) the expression, “I
give eternal life” ( [John 10.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p31.3"></span> ), declareth this; for they “that have done
evil shall go forth to the resurrection of damnation, and they that have
done good to the resurrection of life.”  <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) ( [John
5.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iv.xlvii-p32.2"></span>
.) This then, the resurrection to good things,  <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) is that which He here designed. But
what meaneth He by saying, “All that the Father giveth Me, shall come to
Me”? He toucheth their unbelief, showing that whosoever believeth not on
Him transgresseth the will of the Father. And thus He saith it not
nakedly, but in a covert manner, and this He doth  <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) everywhere, wishing to show that
unbelievers are at variance with the Father, not with Him alone. For if
this is His will, and if for this He came, that He might save man,
 <span id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) those who believe not
transgress His will. “When therefore,” He saith, “the Father guideth any
man, there is nothing that hindereth him from coming unto Me”; and in
another place, “No man can come unto Me, except the Father draw him.” (
[John 6.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p35.3"></span> .) And Paul saith, that He delivereth them
up unto the Father; “When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father.” ( [1 Cor. xv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)
<span id="iv.xlvii-p35.4"></span> .) Now as the Father when He giveth
doth so without first depriving Himself, so the Son when He delivereth
up doth so without excluding Himself. He <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="iv.xlvii-Page_160"></span> is said to deliver us
up, because through Him we have access (to the Father).

<span id="iv.xlvii-p36"></span> \[3.\] And the “by whom”  <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) is also applied to the Father, as
when the Apostle saith, “By whom ye were called unto the fellowship of
His Son” ( [1 Cor. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p37.2"></span> ): and,  <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) “By the will of the Father.” And
again; “Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not
revealed it unto thee.” ( [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017) <span id="iv.xlvii-p38.3"></span>
.) What He here intimateth is something of this kind,  <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) that “faith in Me is no ordinary
thing, but needeth an impulse  <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) from above”; and this He
establisheth throughout His discourse, showing that this faith requires
a noble sort of soul, and one drawn on by God.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p41"></span> But perhaps some one will say, “If all
that the Father giveth, and whomsoever He shall draw, cometh unto Thee,
if none can come unto Thee except it be given him from above, then those
to whom the Father giveth not are free from any blame or charges.” These
are mere words and pretenses. For we require our own deliberate choice
also, because whether we will be taught is a matter of choice, and also
whether we will believe. And in this place, by the “which the Father
giveth Me,” He declareth nothing else than that “the believing on Me is
no ordinary thing, nor one that cometh of human reasonings, but needeth
a revelation from above, and a well-ordered soul to receive that
revelation.” And the, “He that cometh to Me shall be saved,” meaneth
that he shall be greatly cared for. “For on account of these,” He saith,
“I came, and took upon Me the flesh, and entered into  <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) the form of a servant.” Then He
addeth;

<span id="iv.xlvii-p43"></span> [John
6.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span id="iv.xlvii-p43.1"></span>
. “I came down from heaven not to do Mine own will, but the will of Him
that sent Me.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p44"></span>What sayest Thou? Why, is Thy will one,
and His another? That none may suspect this, He explaineth it by what
follows, saying;

<span id="iv.xlvii-p45"></span> [John
6.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span id="iv.xlvii-p45.1"></span>
. “And this is the will of Him that sent Me, that every one which seeth
the Son, and believeth on Him, may have everlasting life.”

<span id="iv.xlvii-p46"></span> Is not then this Thy will? And how
sayest Thou, “I am come to send fire upon the earth, and what have I
desired to see,  <span id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) if that be
already kindled”? ( [Luke xii. 49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)
<span id="iv.xlvii-p47.5"></span> .) For if Thou also desirest this, it
is very clear that Thy will and the Father’s is one. In another place
also He saith, “For as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth
them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will.” ( [John
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="iv.xlvii-p47.6"></span>
.) But what is the will of the Father? Is it not, that not so much as
one of them should perish? This Thou willest also. ( [Matt. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014) <span id="iv.xlvii-p47.7"></span>
.) So that the will of the One differeth not from the will of the Other.
So  <span id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) in another place He is
seen establishing yet more firmly His equality with the Father, saying,
“I and My Father ‘will come, and will make Our abode with him.’” ( [John
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.10"></span> .) What He saith then is this; “I came not
to do anything other than that which the Father willeth, I have no will
of Mine own different from that of the Father, for all that is the
Father’s is Mine, and all that is Mine is the Father’s.” If now the
things of the Father and the Son are in common, He saith with reason,
“Not that I might do Mine own will.” But here He speaketh not so, but
reserveth this for the end. For, as I have said, He concealeth and
veileth for a while high matters, and desireth to prove that had He even
said, “This is My will,” they would have despised Him. He therefore
saith, that “I co-operate with that Will,” desiring thus to startle them
more; as though He had said, “What think ye? Do ye anger Me by your
disbelief? Nay, ye provoke My Father.” “For this is the will of Him that
sent Me, that of all which He hath given Me I should lose nothing.” (
[John 6.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.11"></span> .) Here He showeth that He needeth not
their service, that He came not for His own advantage,  <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) but for their salvation; and not to
get honor from them. Which indeed He declared in a former address,
saying, “I receive not honor from men” ( [John
5.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041)<span id="iv.xlvii-p49.3"></span>
); and again, “These things I say that ye may be saved.” ( [John
5.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034)<span id="iv.xlvii-p49.4"></span>
.) Since He everywhere laboreth to persuade  <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) them that He came for their
salvation. And He saith, that He obtaineth honor to the Father, in order
that He may not be suspected by them. And that it is for this reason He
thus speaketh, He hath more clearly revealed by what follows. For He
saith, “He that seeketh his own will  <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) seeketh his own glory; but He that
seeketh His glory that sent Him is true, and there is no unrighteousness
in Him.” ( [John 7.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p51.3"></span> .) “And this is the will of the Father, that
every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may have
everlasting life.” ( [John 6.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p51.4"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xlvii-p52"></span> “And I will raise him up at the last
day.” Why doth He continually dwell upon the Resurrection? Is it that
men may not judge of God’s providence by present things alone; that if
they enjoy not results  <span id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) here,
they become not on that account desponding, but wait for the things that
are to come, and that they may not, because their sins are not punished
for the present, despise Him, but look for another life.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p54"></span>Now those men gained nothing, but let us
<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="iv.xlvii-Page_161"></span>
take pains to gain by having the Resurrection continually sounded in our
ears; and if we desire to be grasping, or to steal, or to do any wrong
thing, let us straightway take into our thoughts that Day, let us
picture to ourselves the Judgment-seat, for such reflections will check
the evil impulse more strongly than any bit. Let us continually say to
others,  <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) and to ourselves,
“There is a resurrection, and a fearful tribunal awaiteth us.” If we see
any man insolent and puffed up with the good things of his world, let us
make the same remark to him, and show him that all those things abide
here: and if we observe another grieving and impatient, let us say the
same to him, and point out to him that his sorrows shall have an end; if
we see one careless and dissipated,  <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) let us say the same charm over him,
and show that for his carelessness he must render account. This saying
is able more than any other remedy to heal our souls. For there is a
Resurrection, and that Resurrection is at our doors, not afar off, nor
at a distance. “For yet a little while, and He that shall come will
come, and will not tarry.” ( [Heb. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037) <span id="iv.xlvii-p56.2"></span>
.) And again, “We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ” (
[2 Cor. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p56.3"></span> ); that is, both bad and good, the one to be
shamed in sight of all, the other in sight of all to be made more
glorious. For as they who judge here punish the wicked and honor the
good publicly, so too will it be there, that the one sort may have the
greater shame, and the other more conspicuous glory. Let us picture
these things to ourselves every day. If we are ever revolving them, no
care for present things will be able to sting us.  <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) “For the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.” ( [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018) <span id="iv.xlvii-p57.3"></span>
.) Continually let us say to ourselves and to others,  <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) “There is a Resurrection, and a
Judgment, and a scrutiny of our actions”; and let as many as deem that
there is such a thing as fate repeat this, and they shall straightway be
delivered from the rottenness of their malady; for if there is a
Resurrection, and a Judgment, there is no fate, though they bring ten
thousand arguments, and choke themselves to prove it. But I am ashamed
to be teaching Christians concerning the Resurrection: for he that
needeth to learn that there is a Resurrection, and who hath not firmly
persuaded himself that the affairs of this world go not on by fate, and
without design, and as chance will have them, can be no Christian.
Wherefore, I exhort and beseech you, that we cleanse ourselves from all
wickedness, and do all in our power to obtain pardon and excuse in that
Day.

<span id="iv.xlvii-p59"></span> Perhaps some one will say, “When will be
the consummation? When will be the Resurrection? See how long a time
hath gone by, and nothing of the kind hath come to pass?” Yet it shall
be, be sure. For those before the flood spake after this manner, and
mocked at Noah, but the flood came and swept away  <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280) all those unbelievers, but
preserved him  <span id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) who believed.
And the men of Lot’s time expected not that stroke from God, until those
lightnings and thunderbolts came down and destroyed them all utterly.
Neither in the case of these men, nor of those who lived in the time of
Noah, was there any preamble  <span id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282)
to what was about to happen, but when they were all living daintily, and
drinking, and mad with wine, then came these intolerable calamities upon
them. So also shall the Resurrection be; not with any preamble, but
while we are in the midst of good times.  <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) Wherefore Paul saith, “For when
they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon
them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.” (
[1 Thess. v. 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p63.3"></span> .) God hath so ordered this, that we may be
always struggling, and be not confident even in time of safety. What
sayest thou? Dost thou not expect that there will be a Resurrection and
a Judgment? The devils confess these, and art thou shameless?  <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) “Art Thou come,” they say, “to
torment us before the time?” ( [Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029) <span id="iv.xlvii-p64.3"></span>
); now they who say that there will be “torment;” are aware of the
Judgment, and the reckoning, and the vengeance. Let us not then besides
daring evil deeds, anger God by disbelieving the word of the
Resurrection. For as in other things Christ hath been our beginning, so
also hath He in this; wherefore He is called “the first-born from the
dead.” ( [Col. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p64.4"></span> .) Now if there were no Resurrection, how
could He be “the first-born,” when no one of “the dead” was to follow
Him? If there were no Resurrection, how would the justice of God be
preserved, when so many evil men prosper, and so many good men are
afflicted and die in their affliction? Where shall each of these obtain
his deserts, if so be that there is no Resurrection? No one of those who
have lived aright disbelieves the Resurrection, but every day they pray
and repeat that holy sentence, “Thy Kingdom come.” Who then are they
that disbelieve the Resurrection? They who have unholy ways and an
unclean life: as the Prophet saith, “His ways are always polluted. Thy
judgments are far above out of his sight.” ( [Ps. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005) <span id="iv.xlvii-p64.5"></span> .)
For a man cannot possibly live a pure life without believing in the
Resurrection; since they who are conscious of no <span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="iv.xlvii-Page_162"></span> iniquity both speak of,
and wish for, and believe in it, that they may receive their recompense.
Let us not then anger Him, but hear Him when He saith, “Fear Him which
is able to destroy both body and soul in hell” ( [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028) <span id="iv.xlvii-p64.6"></span>
); that by that fear we may become better, and being delivered from that
perdition, may be deemed worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which may we
all attain to, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
now and ever and to the endless ages of eternity. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[157:1251](1140050.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p4.1"></span>ποιῶμεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p4.2"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p4.3"></span>ποιοῦμεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p4.4"></span>, G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[158:1252](1140050.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p9.2"></span>in their eyes.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[158:1253](1140050.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p10.2"></span>when your soul is.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[158:1254](1140050.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p15.2"></span>up.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[159:1255](1140050.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p22.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p22.2"></span>and ye receive not our witness,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p22.3"></span>as in N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[159:1256](1140050.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p24.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p24.2"></span>remain and are not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[159:1257](1140050.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p25.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p25.2"></span>But they.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[159:1258](1140050.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p25.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p26.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p26.2"></span>one of another?</span> ”

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[159:1259](1140050.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p29.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p29.2"></span>him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[159:1260](1140050.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p30.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p30.2"></span>as appears from,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p30.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[159:1261](1140050.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p30.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p31.2"></span>So that.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[159:1262](1140050.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p32.1"></span>clauses transposed.</span>

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[159:1263](1140050.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p33.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p33.2"></span>πὶ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς</span>

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[159:1264](1140050.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p34.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p34.2"></span>thou wilt see Him doing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[159:1265](1140050.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p35.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p35.2"></span>all the world.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[160:1266](1140050.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p37.1"></span>δἰ οὗ</span>

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[160:1267](1140050.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p38.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p38.2"></span>that is.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[160:1268](1140050.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p39.2"></span>all but this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[160:1269](1140050.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p40.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p40.2"></span>οπῆς</span>

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[160:1270](1140050.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p42.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p42.2"></span>πῆλθον</span>

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[160:1271](1140050.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p47.1"></span>S. C. here instead of</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p47.2"></span>τί θέλω</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p47.3"></span>; reads</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p47.4"></span>τί ἤθελον ἰδεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[160:1272](1140050.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p47.8"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.1"></span>In place of the passage which follows, Savile
notices in the margin another reading: </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p48.2"></span>Besides at a later time
He said, (</span> <span id="iv.xlvii-p48.3"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p48.4"></span>[Luke xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034)<span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.5"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.6"></span>,)</span> ‘ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.7"></span>How often would I have gathered thy children
together, and ye would not!</span> ’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.8"></span>what is it then that He saith? Nothing else
but,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.9"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[160:1273](1140050.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p48.12"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p49.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p49.2"></span>ministering.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[160:1274](1140050.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p49.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p50.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p50.2"></span>show.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[160:1275](1140050.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p51"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p51.1"></span>that speaketh of himself,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlvii-p51.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[160:1276](1140050.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p53.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p53.2"></span>πολαύωσι</span>

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[161:1277](1140050.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p55.2"></span>one to another.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[161:1278](1140050.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p56.1"></span>διακεχυμένον</span>

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[161:1279](1140050.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p56.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p57.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p57.2"></span>none of the things present and perishable
will be able to occupy us.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[161:1280](1140050.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p57.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p58.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p58.2"></span>one to another.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[161:1281](1140050.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p60.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p60.2"></span>seized.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[161:1282](1140050.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p61.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p61.2"></span>him only.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[161:1283](1140050.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p62.1"></span>προοίμιον</span>

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[161:1284](1140050.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p63.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p63.2"></span>fair weather.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[161:1285](1140050.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="iv.xlvii-p63.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlvii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlvii-p64.2"></span>dost thou not confess?</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 6.41,42](1140051)
