[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140039)  [Next](1140041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxvii"></span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>[John iv.
40-43](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#040)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p3"></span>“So when the Samaritans were come unto
Him, they besought Him that He would tarry with them: and He abode there
two days. And many more believed because of His own Word; and said unto
the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard
Him ourselves, and know that This is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of
the world. Now after two days He departed thence, and went into
Galilee.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p4"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> is worse than envy and malice,
nothing more mischievous than vainglory; it is wont to mar ten thousand
good things. So the Jews, who excelled the Samaritans in knowledge, and
had been always familiar with  <span id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912)
the Prophets, were shown from this cause inferior to them. For these
believed even on the testimony of the woman, and without having seen any
sign, came forth beseeching Christ to tarry  <span
id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) with them; but the Jews, when they had
beheld His wonders, not only did not detain Him among them, but even
drove Him away, and used every means to cast Him forth from their land,
although His very Coming  <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) had
been for their sake. The Jews expelled Him, but these even entreated Him
to tarry with them. Was it not then rather fitting, tell me, that He
should receive those who asked and besought Him, than that He should
wait upon those who plotted against and repulsed Him, while to those who
loved and desired to retain Him He gave not Himself? Surely this would
not have been worthy of His tender care;  <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) He therefore both accepted  <span
id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) them, and tarried with them two days.
They desired to keep Him among them continually, (for this the
Evangelist has shown by saying, that “they besought Him that He would
tarry with them,”) but this He endured not, but stayed with them only
two days; and in these many more believed on Him. Yet there was no
likelihood that these would have believed, since they had seen no sign,
and had hostile feelings towards the Jews; but still, inasmuch as they
gave in sincerity their judgment on His words, this stood not in their
way, but they received a notion which surmounted their hindrances, and
vied with each other to reverence Him the more. For, saith the
Evangelist, “they said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy
saying: for we have heard Him ourselves, and know that this is indeed
the Christ, the Saviour of the world.” The scholars overshot their
instructress. With good reason might they condemn the Jews, both by
their believing on, and their receiving Him. The Jews, for whose sake He
had contrived  <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) the whole scheme,
 <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) continually were for stoning
Him,  <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) but these, when He was not
even intending to come to them, drew Him to themselves. And they, even
with signs, remain uncorrected; these, without signs, manifested great
faith respecting Him, and glory in this very thing that they believe
without them; while the others ceased not asking  <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) for signs and tempting Him.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p14"></span> Such need is there everywhere of an
honest soul; and if truth lay hold on such an one, she easily masters
it; or if she masters it not, this is owing not to any weakness of
truth, but to want of candor  <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) in
the soul itself. Since the sun too, when he encounters clear eyes,
easily enlightens them; if he enlightens them not, it is the fault of
their infirmity, not of his weakness.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p16"></span> Hear then what these say; “We know that
this is of a truth the Christ, the Saviour of the world.” Seest thou how
they at once understood that He should draw the world to Him, that He
came to order aright  <span id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922) our common
salvation, that He intended not to confine His care to the Jews, but to
sow His Word everywhere? The Jews did not so, but going about to
establish their own righteousness, submitted not themselves to the
righteousness of God; while these confess that all are deserving of
punishment, declaring with the Apostle, that “all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God; being justified freely by His grace.” ( [Rom.
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p17.3"></span>
.)   <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_122"></span> For by saying that He was “the Saviour
of the world,” they showed that it was of a lost world,  <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) and He not simply a Saviour, but one
of the very mightiest. For many had come to “save,” both Prophets and
Angels  <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) ; but this, saith one,
is the True Saviour, who affordeth the true salvation, not that which is
but for a time. This proceeded from pure faith. And in both ways are
they admirable; because they believed, and because they did so without
signs, (whom Christ also calleth “blessed,” saying, “Blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed,”) ( [John
20.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p19.3"></span> ,) and because they did so sincerely.
Though they had heard the woman say doubtfully, “Is not this the
Christ?” they did not also say, “we too suspect,” or, “we think,”  <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) but, “we know,” and not merely, “we
know,” but, “we know that this is of a truth the Saviour of the world.”
They acknowledged Christ not as one of the many,  <span
id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) but as the “Saviour” indeed. Yet whom
had they seen saved? They had but heard His words, and yet they spake as
they would have spoken had they beheld many and great marvels. And why
do not the Evangelists tell us these words, and that He discoursed
admirably? That thou mayest learn that they pass by many important
matters, and yet have declared the whole to us by the event. For He
persuaded an entire people and a whole city by His words. When His
hearers are not persuaded, then the writers are constrained to mention
what was said, lest any one from the insensibility of the hearers should
give a judgment against Him who addressed them.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p22"></span>“Now after two days He departed thence
and went into Galilee.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p23"></span> [John
4.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>
. “For Jesus Himself testified that a Prophet hath no honor in his own
country.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p24"></span> Wherefore is this added? Because He
departed not unto Capernaum, but into Galilee, and thence to Cana. For
that thou mayest not enquire why He tarried not with His own people, but
tarried with the Samaritans, the Evangelist puts the cause,  <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) saying that they gave no heed unto
Him; on this account He went not thither, that their condemnation might
not be the greater. For I suppose that in this place He speaketh of
Capernaum as “His country.” Now, to show that there He received no
honor, hear Him say, “And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
heaven, shalt be brought down to hell.” ( [Matt. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023) <span id="iv.xxxvii-p25.5"></span>
.) He calleth it “His own country,” because there He set forth the Word
of the Dispensation, and more especially dwelt upon it. “What then,”
saith some one, “do we not see many admired among their kindred?” In the
first place such judgments must not be formed from rare instances; and
again, if some have been honored in their own, they would have been much
more honored in a strange country, for familiarity is wont to make men
easily despised.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p26"></span> [John
4.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#045)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>
. “Then when He was come into Galilee, the Galilæans received Him,
having seen all the things that He did at Jerusalem at the feast, for
they also came unto the feast.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p27"></span>Seest thou that these men so ill spoken
of are found most to come to Him? For one said, “Can there any good
thing come out of Nazareth?” ( [John
1.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>
), and another, “Search and look, for out of Galilee ariseth no
prophet.” ( [John 7.52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p27.2"></span> .) These things they said insulting Him,
because He was supposed by the many to be of Nazareth, and they also
reproached Him with being a Samaritan; “Thou art a Samaritan,” said one,
“and hast a devil.” ( [John 8.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p27.3"></span> .) Yet behold, both Samaritans and
Galilæans believe, to the shame of the Jews, and Samaritans are found
better than Galilæans, for the first received Him through the words of
the woman, the second when they had seen the miracles which He did.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p28"></span> [John
4.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>
. “So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where He made the water
wine.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p29"></span>The Evangelist reminds the hearer of the
miracle to exalt the praise of the Samaritans. The men of Cana received
Him by reason of the miracles which He had done in Jerusalem and in that
place; but not so the Samaritans, they received Him through His teaching
alone.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p30"></span> That He came then “to Cana,” the
Evangelist has said, but he has not added the cause why He came.  <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) Into Galilee He had come because of
the envy of the Jews; but wherefore to Cana? At first He came, being
invited to a marriage; but wherefore now? Methinks to confirm by His
presence the faith which had been implanted by His miracle, and to draw
them to Him the more by coming to them self-invited, by leaving His own
country, and by preferring them.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p32"></span>“And there was a certain nobleman whose
son was sick at Capernaum.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p33"></span> [John
4.47](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#047)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p33.1"></span>
. “When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judæa into Galilee, he went
unto Him and besought Him that He would come down and heal his son.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p34"></span>This person certainly was of royal race,
or possessed some dignity from his office, to which the title “noble”
was attached. Some indeed think that this is the man mentioned by
Matthew ( [Matt. viii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p34.1"></span> ), but he is shown to be a different
person, not only from his dignity, but also from his faith. That other,
even when Christ was <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_123"></span> willing to go to him, entreats Him to
tarry; this one, when He had made no such offer, draws Him to his house.
The one saith, “I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof”;
but this other even urges  <span id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) Him,
saying, “Come down ere my son die.” In that instance He came down from
the mountain, and entered into Capernaum; but here, as He came from
Samaria, and went not into Capernaum but into Cana, this person met Him.
The servant of the other was possessed by the palsy, this one’s son by a
fever.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p36"></span>“And he came and besought Him that He
would heal his son: for he was at the point of death.” What saith
Christ?

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p37"></span> [John
4.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#048)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p37.1"></span>
. “Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p38"></span> Yet the very coming and beseeching Him
was a mark of faith. And besides, after this the Evangelist witnesses to
him,  <span id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) declaring that when Jesus
said, “Go, thy son liveth,” he believed His word, and went. What then is
that which He saith here? Either He useth the words as approving of
 <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) the Samaritans because they
believed without signs; or, to touch Capernaum which was thought to be
His own city, and of which this person was. Moreover, another man in
Luke, who says, “Lord, I believe,” said besides, “help Thou mine
unbelief.”  <span id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) And so if this ruler
also believed, yet he believed not entirely or soundly, as is clear from
his enquiring “at what hour the fever left him,” since he desired to
know whether it did so of its own accord, or at the bidding of Christ.
When therefore he knew that it was “yesterday at the seventh hour,” then
“himself believed and his whole house.”

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-Page_124"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p42"></span> Seest thou that he believed when his
servants, not when Christ spake? Therefore He rebuketh the state of mind
with which he had come to Him, and spoken as he did, (thus too He the
more drew him on to belief,) because that before the miracle he had not
believed strongly. That he came and entreated was nothing wonderful, for
parents in their great affection are also wont to resort not only to
physicians in whom they have confidence, but also to talk with those in
whom they have no confidence, desiring to omit nothing whatever.  <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) Indeed, that he came without any
strong purpose  <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934) appears from
this, that when Christ was come into Galilee, then he saw Him, whereas
if he had firmly believed in Him, he would not, when his child was on
the point of death, have hesitated to go into Judæa. Or if he was
afraid, this is not to be endured either.  <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935)

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p46"></span>Observe how the very words show the
weakness of the man; when he ought, after Christ had rebuked his state
of mind, to have imagined something great concerning Him, even if he did
not so before, listen how he drags along the ground.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p47"></span> [John
4.49](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#049)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p47.1"></span>
. “Sir,” he saith, “come down ere my child die.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p48"></span>As though He could not raise him after
death, as though He knew not what state the child was in. It is for this
that Christ rebuketh him and toucheth his conscience, to show that His
miracles were wrought principally for the sake of the soul. For here He
healeth the father, sick in mind, no less than the son, in order to
persuade us to give heed to Him, not by reason of His miracles, but of
His teaching. For miracles are not for the faithful, but for the
unbelieving and the grosser sort.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p49"></span> \[3.\] At that time then, owing to his
emotion, the nobleman gave no great heed to the words, or to those only
which related to his son,  <span id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) yet
he would afterwards recollect what had been said, and draw from thence
the greatest advantage. As indeed was the case.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p51"></span> But what can be the reason why in the
case of the centurion He by a free offer undertook to come, while here
though invited, He goeth not? Because in the former case faith had been
perfected, and therefore He undertook to go, that we might learn the
rightmindedness of the man; but here the nobleman was imperfect. When
therefore he continually  <span id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937) urged
Him, saying, “Come down,” and knew not yet clearly that even when absent
He could heal, He showeth that even this was possible unto Him in order
that this man might gain from Jesus not going, that knowledge which the
centurion had of himself.  <span id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) And
so when He saith,“ Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe,” His meaning is, “Ye have not yet the right faith, but still
feel towards Me as towards a Prophet.” Therefore to reveal Himself and
to show that he ought to have believed even without miracles, He said
what He said also to Philip, “Believest thou  <span
id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939) that the Father is in Me and I in the
Father?  <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) Or if not, believe Me
for the very works’ sake.” ( [John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p55.4"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p56"></span> [John
4.51-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#051)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p56.1"></span> . “And as he was now going down, his
servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son liveth. Then enquired he
of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto him,
Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. So the father knew
that it was at the same hour in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son
liveth; and himself believed, and his whole house.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p57"></span> Seest thou how evident the miracle was?
Not simply nor in a common way was the child freed from danger, but all
at once, so that what took place was seen to be the consequence not of
nature, but the working  <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) of
Christ. For when he had reached the very gates of death, as his father
showed by saying, “Come down ere my child die”; he was all at once freed
from the disease. A fact which roused the servants also, for they
perhaps came to meet their master, not only to bring him the good news,
but also deeming that the coming of Jesus was now superfluous, (for they
knew that their master was gone there,) and so they met him even in the
way. The man released from his fear, thenceforth escaped  <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942) into faith, being desirous to show
that what had been done was the result of his journey, and thenceforth
he is ambitious of appearing not to have exerted himself  <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) to no purpose; so he ascertained all
things exactly, and “himself believed and his whole house.” For the
evidence was after this unquestionable. For they who had not been
present nor had heard Christ speak nor known the time, when they had
heard from their master that such and such was the time, had
incontrovertible demonstration of His power. Wherefore they also
believed.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p61"></span> What now are we taught by these things?
Not to wait for miracles, nor to seek pledges of the Power of God. I see
many persons even now become more pious,  <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) when during the sufferings of a child
or the sickness of a wife they enjoy any comfort, yet they ought even if
they obtain it not, to persist just the same in giving thanks, in
glorifying God. Because it is the part of right-minded servants, and of
those who feel such affection  <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945)
and love as they ought for their Master, not only when pardoned, but
also when scourged, to run to Him. For these also are effects of the
tender care of God; “Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth,”
it says, “every son whom He receiveth.” ( [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006) <span id="iv.xxxvii-p63.3"></span>
.) When therefore a man serves Him only in the season of ease, he gives
proofs of no great love, and loves not Christ purely. And why speak I of
health, or abundant riches, or poverty, or disease? Shouldest thou hear
of the fiery pit or of any other dreadful thing, not even so must thou
cease from speaking good of thy Master, but suffer and do all things
because of thy love for Him. For this is the part of right-minded
servants and of an unswerving soul; and he who is disposed after this
sort will easily endure the present, and obtain good  <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) things to come, and enjoy much
confidence in the presence of  <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947)
God; which may it be that we all obtain through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_912"></span>[121:913](1140040.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p5.2"></span>brought up with.</span> ”

<span id="fn_913"></span>[121:914](1140040.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p6.2"></span>to be.</span> ”

<span id="fn_914"></span>[121:915](1140040.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p7.2"></span>that coming.</span> ”

<span id="fn_915"></span>[121:916](1140040.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>κηδεμονίας</span>

<span id="fn_916"></span>[121:917](1140040.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p9.2"></span>elected.</span> ”

<span id="fn_917"></span>[121:918](1140040.htm#fr_917) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>instituted.</span> ”

<span id="fn_918"></span>[121:919](1140040.htm#fr_918) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>i.e. of Redemption. </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p11.2"></span>πᾶσαν τὴν πραγματείαν
συνεστήσατο</span>

<span id="fn_919"></span>[121:920](1140040.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p12.2"></span>them,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p12.3"></span>i.e. the Prophets.</span>

<span id="fn_920"></span>[121:921](1140040.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>seeking.</span> ”

<span id="fn_921"></span>[121:922](1140040.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p15.2"></span>γνωμοσύνην</span>

<span id="fn_922"></span>[121:923](1140040.htm#fr_922) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p17.2"></span>πὶ διορθώσει</span>

<span id="fn_923"></span>[122:924](1140040.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p18"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>in Bodl. reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p18.3"></span>and why say I of a lost
world? of a world which was in evils great exceedingly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_924"></span>[122:925](1140040.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>messengers.</span> ”

<span id="fn_925"></span>[122:926](1140040.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p20.2"></span>suppose.</span> ”

<span id="fn_926"></span>[122:927](1140040.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>i.e. who had wrought deliverances.</span>

<span id="fn_927"></span>[122:928](1140040.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p25"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p25.2"></span>in Bodl.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p25.3"></span>and this is, that</span> ‘ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p25.4"></span>a prophet hath no honor
in his own country.</span> ’”

<span id="fn_928"></span>[122:929](1140040.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p31"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p31.2"></span>in Bodl. reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p31.3"></span>and why, saith some one,
went He again to Cana?</span> ”

<span id="fn_929"></span>[123:930](1140040.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p35.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p35.2"></span>brings on.</span> ”

<span id="fn_930"></span>[123:931](1140040.htm#fr_930) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p39.2"></span>witnesses it.</span> ”

<span id="fn_931"></span>[123:932](1140040.htm#fr_931) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>θαυμάζων</span>

<span id="fn_932"></span>[123:933](1140040.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p41"></span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-p41.1"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p41.2"></span>[Mark ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p41.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p41.4"></span>\[not found in St. Luke\].</span>

<span id="fn_933"></span>[124:934](1140040.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p43"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p43.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p43.2"></span>in Bodl. adds,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p43.3"></span>of things belonging to
carefulness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_934"></span>[124:935](1140040.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p43.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p44.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p44.2"></span>κ παρέργου</span>

<span id="fn_935"></span>[124:936](1140040.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p45.1"></span>i.e. in a true believer.</span>

<span id="fn_936"></span>[124:937](1140040.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p50.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p50.2"></span>and regarded only what was taking place
concerning his son.</span> ”

<span id="fn_937"></span>[124:938](1140040.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p52.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p52.2"></span>νω καὶ κάτω</span>

<span id="fn_938"></span>[124:939](1140040.htm#fr_938) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p53.1"></span>οἴκοθεν</span>

<span id="fn_939"></span>[124:940](1140040.htm#fr_939) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p54"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p54.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p54.2"></span>in Bodl. reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p54.3"></span>He said this as (He
said) to the disciples,</span> ‘ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p54.4"></span>Believe,</span> ’ ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p54.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_940"></span>[124:941](1140040.htm#fr_940) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p54.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p55.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p55.2"></span>γὼ ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ ὁ Πατὴρ ἐν ἐμοί</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p55.3"></span>. G. T. and
Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_941"></span>[124:942](1140040.htm#fr_941) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p58.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p58.2"></span>νεργείας</span>

<span id="fn_942"></span>[124:943](1140040.htm#fr_942) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p59.1"></span>διέκυψε</span>

<span id="fn_943"></span>[124:944](1140040.htm#fr_943) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p60.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p60.2"></span>been aroused.</span> ”

<span id="fn_944"></span>[124:945](1140040.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p62.1"></span>εὐλαβεστέρους</span>

<span id="fn_945"></span>[124:946](1140040.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p63.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p63.2"></span>are stanch.</span> ”

<span id="fn_946"></span>[124:947](1140040.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p63.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p64.2"></span>all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_947"></span>[124:948](1140040.htm#fr_947) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p65.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p65.2"></span>from.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 4.54; 5.1](1140041)
