[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140058)  [Next](1140060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lvi"></span> <span id="iv.lvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lvi-p1.1"></span>Homily LIV.</span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lvi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lvi-p2.2"></span>[John
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.lvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p3"></span>“Then said Jesus to those Jews which
believed on Him, If ye continue in My word, then are ye My disciples
indeed. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lvi-p4.1"></span>Beloved</span> , our condition needs much
endurance; and endurance is produced when doctrines are deeply rooted.
For as no wind is able by its assaults to tear up the oak, which sends
down its root into the lower recesses of the earth, and is firmly
clenched there; so too the soul which is nailed by the fear of God none
will be able to overturn. Since to be nailed is more than to be rooted.
Thus the Prophet prayeth, saying, “Nail my flesh by Thy fear” ( [Ps.
cxix. 120](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#120) <span
id="iv.lvi-p4.2"></span> , LXX.); “do Thou so fix and join me, as by a
nail riveted into me.” For as men of this kind are hard to be captured,
so the opposite sort are a ready prey, and are easily thrown down. As
was the case of the Jews at that time; for after having heard and
believed, they again turned out of the way. Christ therefore desiring to
deepen their faith that it might not be merely superficial, diggeth into
their souls by more striking words. For it was the part of believers to
endure even reproofs, but they immediately were wroth. But how doth He
this? He first telleth them, “If ye continue in My word, ye are My
disciples indeed: and the truth shall make you free.” All but saying, “I
am about to make a deep incision, but be not ye moved”; or rather by
these expressions He allayed the pride of their imagination. “Shall make
you free”: from what, tell me? From your sins. What then say those
boasters?

<span id="iv.lvi-p5"></span> [John
8.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033)<span id="iv.lvi-p5.1"></span> .
“We be Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p6"></span> Immediately their imagination dropped, and
this happened from their having been fluttered  <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[1469](#fn_1468) about worldly things. “If ye
continue in My word,” was the expression of One declaring what was in
their heart, and knowing that they had indeed believed, but had not
continued. And He promiseth a great thing, that they should become His
disciples. For since some had gone away from Him before this, alluding
to them He saith, “If ye continue,” because they also had heard and
believed, and departed because they could not continue. “For many of His
disciples went back, and walked no more openly with Him.”  <span
id="fr_1469"></span>[1470](#fn_1469) ( [John
6.66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066)<span id="iv.lvi-p8.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lvi-p9"></span>“Ye shall know the truth,” that is, “shall
know Me, for I am the truth. All the Jewish matters were types, but ye
shall know the truth from Me, and it shall free you from your sins.” As
to those others He said, “Ye shall die in your sins,” so to these He
saith, “shall make you free.” He said not, “I will deliver you from
bondage,” this He allowed them to conjecture. What then said they?

<span id="iv.lvi-p10"></span>“We be Abraham’s seed, and were never in
bondage to any man.” And yet if they must needs have been vexed, it
might have been expected that they would have been so at the former part
of His speech, at His having said, “Ye shall know the truth”; and that
they would have replied, “What! do we not now know the truth? Is then
the Law and our knowledge a lie?” But they cared for none of these
things, they are grieved at worldly things, and these were their notions
of bondage. And certainly even now, there are many who feel shame at
indifferent matters, and at this kind of bondage, but who feel none for
the bondage of sin, and <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.lvi-Page_192"></span> who would rather be called servants to this
latter kind of bondage ten thousand times, than once to the former. Such
were these men, and they did not even know of any other bondage, and
they say, “Bondsmen callest thou those who are of the race of Abraham,
the nobly born, who therefore ought not to be called bondsmen? For,
saith one, we were never in bondage to any man.” Such are the boastings
of the Jews. “We are the seed of Abraham,” “we are Israelites.” They
never mention their own righteous deeds. Wherefore John cried out to
them, saying, “Think not to say that we have Abraham to our father.” (
[Matt. iii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009) <span
id="iv.lvi-p10.1"></span> .) And why did not Christ confute them, for
they had often been in bondage to the Egyptians, Babylonians, and many
others? Because His words were not to gain honor for Himself, but for
their salvation, for their benefit, and toward this object He was
pressing. For He might have spoken of the four hundred years, He might
have spoken of the seventy, He might have spoken of the years of bondage
during the time of the Judges, at one time twenty, at another two, at
another seven; He might have said that they had never ceased being in
bondage. But He desired not to show that they were slaves of men, but
that they were slaves of sin, which is the most grievous slavery, from
which God alone can deliver; for to forgive sins belongeth to none
other. And this too they allowed. Since then they confessed that this
was the work of God, He bringeth them to this point, and saith,

<span id="iv.lvi-p11"></span> [John
8.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034)<span id="iv.lvi-p11.1"></span> .
“Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p12"></span>Showing that this is the freedom of which
He speaketh, the freedom from this service.

<span id="iv.lvi-p13"></span> [John
8.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035)<span id="iv.lvi-p13.1"></span> .
“The servant abideth not in the house, but the Son abideth forever.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p14"></span> Gently too from this He casts down the
things of the Law,  <span id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470) alluding
to former times. For that they may not run back to them and say, “We
have the sacrifices which Moses commanded, they are able to deliver us,”
He addeth these words, since otherwise what connection would the saying
have? For “all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being
justified freely by His grace” ( [Rom.
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span id="iv.lvi-p15.3"></span> ),
even the priests themselves. Wherefore Paul also saith of the priest,
that “he ought as for the people so also for himself to offer for sins,
for that he also is compassed about with infirmity.” ( [Heb.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#003),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002)<span id="iv.lvi-p15.4"></span> .)
And this is signified by His saying, “The servant abideth not in the
house.” Here also He showeth His equal honor with the Father, and the
difference between slave and free. For the parable has this meaning,
that is, “the servant hath no power,” this is the meaning of “abideth
not.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p16"></span>\[2.\] But why when speaking of sins doth
He mention a “house”? It is to show that as a master hath power over his
house, so He over all. And the, “abideth not,” is this,“ hath not power
to grant favors, as not being master of the house”; but the Son is
master of the house. For this is the, “abideth forever,” by a metaphor
drawn from human things. That they may not say, “who art thou?” “All is
Mine, (He saith,) for I am the Son, and dwell in My Father’s house,”
calling by the name of “house” His power. As in another place He calleth
the Kingdom His Father’s house, “In My Father’s house are many
mansions.” ( c. xiv. 2 <span id="iv.lvi-p16.1"></span> .) For since the
discourse was of freedom and bondage, He with reason used this metaphor,
telling them that they had no power to set free.  <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471)

<span id="iv.lvi-p18"></span> [John
8.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="iv.lvi-p18.1"></span> .
“If the Son therefore shall make you free.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p19"></span>Seest thou the consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father, and how He declareth that He hath the same power as the
Father? “If the Son make you free, no man afterwards gain-sayeth, but ye
have firm freedom.” For “it is God that justifieth, who is He that
condemneth?” ( [Rom. 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="iv.lvi-p19.1"></span> .)
Here He showeth that He Himself is pure from sin, and alludeth to that
freedom which reached only to a name; this even men give, but that God
alone. And so he persuaded them not to be ashamed at this slavery, but
at that of sin. And desiring to show that they were not slaves, except
by repudiating that liberty, He the more showeth them to be slaves by
saying,  <span id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472)

<span id="iv.lvi-p21"></span>“Ye shall be free indeed.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p22"></span>This is the expression of one declaring
that this freedom was not real. Then, that they might not say, “We have
no sin,” (for it was probable that they would say so,) observe how He
bringeth them beneath this imputation. For omitting to convict all their
life, He bringeth forward that which they had in hand, which they yet
desired to do, and saith,

<span id="iv.lvi-p23"></span> [John
8.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037)<span id="iv.lvi-p23.1"></span> .
“I know that ye are Abraham’s seed but ye seek to kill Me.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p24"></span>Gently and by little doth He expel them
from that relationship, teaching them not to be high-minded because of
it. For as freedom and bondage depend on men’s actions, so also doth
relationship. He said not directly, “Ye are not the seed of Abraham, ye
the murderers of the righteous”; but for a while He even goeth along
with them, and saith, “I know that ye are Abraham’s seed.” Yet this is
not the matter in question, and during the remainder of this speech He
useth greater vehemence. For we <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="iv.lvi-Page_193"></span> may for the most part observe, that when He
is about to work any great thing, after He hath wrought it, He useth
greater boldness of speech, as though the testimony from His works shut
men’s mouths. “But ye seek to kill Me.” “What of that,” saith some one,
“if they sought to do so justly.” But this was not so either; wherefore
also He puts the reason;

<span id="iv.lvi-p25"></span>“Because My word hath no place in you.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p26"></span> “How then was it,” saith some one, “that
they believed on Him?” As I before said, they changed again. On which
account He touched them sharply. “If ye boast the relationship of
Abraham ye ought also to show forth his life.” And He said not, “Ye do
not contain  <span id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473) my words,” but,
“My word hath no place in you,” thus declaring the sublimity of His
doctrines. Yet not for this ought they to have slain, but rather to have
honored and waited on Him so as to learn. “But what,” saith some one,
“if thou speakest these things of thyself?” On this account He added,

<span id="iv.lvi-p28"></span> [John
8.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038)<span id="iv.lvi-p28.1"></span> .
“I speak that which I have seen with My Father, and ye do that which ye
have heard from  <span id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) your
father.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p30"></span>“As,” He saith, “I both by My words and by
the truth declare the Father, so also do ye by your actions (declare
yours). For I have not only the same Substance, but also the same Truth
with the Father.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p31"></span> [John
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span id="iv.lvi-p31.1"></span> .
“They said unto Him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye
had Abraham to your father, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye
seek to kill Me.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p32"></span> He here repeatedly handleth their
murderous intention, and maketh mention of Abraham. And this He doth
desiring to draw off their attention from this relationship, and to take
away their excessive boasting, and also to persuade them no longer to
rest their hopes of salvation in Abraham, nor in the relationship which
is according to nature, but in that which is according to the will.
 <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475) For what hindered their
coming to Christ was this, their deeming that relationship to be
sufficient for them to salvation. But what is the “truth” of which He
speaketh? That He is equal with the Father. For it was on this account
that the Jews sought to slay Him; and He saith,

<span id="iv.lvi-p34"></span> “Ye seek to kill Me because I have  <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) told you the truth, which I have
heard of My Father.”  <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477)

<span id="iv.lvi-p37"></span>To show that these things are not opposed
to the Father, He again betaketh Himself to Him. They say unto Him,

<span id="iv.lvi-p38"></span> [John
8.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041)<span id="iv.lvi-p38.1"></span> .
“We be not born of fornication, we have one Father, even God.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p39"></span>\[3.\] “What sayest thou? Ye have God for
your Father, and do ye blame Christ for asserting this?” Seest thou that
He said that God was His Father in a special manner? When therefore He
had cast them out of their relationship to Abraham, having nothing to
reply, they dare a greater thing, and betake themselves to God. But from
this honor also He expelleth them, saying,

<span id="iv.lvi-p40"></span> [John
8.42-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042)<span id="iv.lvi-p40.1"></span>
. “If God were your Father, ye would love Me; for I proceeded forth and
came from God; neither came I of Myself, but He sent Me. Why do ye not
understand My speech? Even because ye cannot hear My word. Ye are of
your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth:  <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh
of his own.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p42"></span> He had driven them out of their
relationship to Abraham, and when they dared greater things, He then
addeth a blow, telling them that they not only are not Abraham’s
children, but that they are even children of the devil, and inflicting a
wound which might counterbalance their shamelessness; nor doth He leave
it unsupported, but establisheth it by proofs. “For,” He saith, “to
murder  <span id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) belongeth to the
wickedness of the devil.” And He said not merely, “ye do his works,”
but, “ye do his lusts,” showing that both he and they hold to murder,
 <span id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) and that envy was the cause.
For the devil destroyed Adam, not because he had any charge against him,
but only from envy. To this also He alludeth here.

<span id="iv.lvi-p45"></span> “And abode not in the truth.” That is, in
the right life. For since they continually accused Him of not being from
God, He telleth them that this also is from thence.  <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) For the devil first was the father
of a lie, when he said, “In the day that ye eat thereof your eyes shall
be opened” ( [Gen. iii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005) <span
id="iv.lvi-p46.2"></span> ), and he first used it. For men use a lie not
as a thing proper, but alien to their nature, but he as proper.

<span id="iv.lvi-p47"></span> [John
8.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#045)<span id="iv.lvi-p47.1"></span> .
“And because I tell you the truth, ye believe Me not.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p48"></span>What kind of consequence is this? “Having
no charge against Me, ye desire to kill Me. For because ye are enemies
of the truth, therefore ye persecute Me. Since had this not been the
reason, ye would have named your charge.” Wherefore He added,

<span id="iv.lvi-p49"></span> [John
8.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046)<span id="iv.lvi-p49.1"></span> .
“Which of you convinceth Me of sin?”

<span id="iv.lvi-p50"></span>Then they said, “We be not born of
fornication.” Yet in fact many of them were born of <span
id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span id="iv.lvi-Page_194"></span>
fornication, for they practiced unbefitting unions. Still He doth not
convict them of this, but setteth Himself to the other point. For when
He hath proved them to be, not of God, but of the devil, by all these
signs, (for to do murder is of the devil, and to lie is of the devil,
both which ye do,) then He showeth that to love is the sign of being of
God.  “Why do ye not understand My speech?” Since they were always
doubting, saying, “What is it that he saith, ‘Whither I go ye cannot
come’?” therefore He telleth them, “Ye do not understand My speech,”
“because ye have not the word of God. And this cometh to you, because
that your understanding is groveling, and because what is Mine is far
too great for you.” But what if they could not understand? Not to be
able here means not to be willing; for “ye have trained yourselves to be
mean, to imagine nothing great.” Because they said that they persecuted
Him as being themselves zealous for God, on this account He everywhere
striveth to show that to persecute Him is the act of those who hate God,
but that, on the contrary, to love Him is the act of those who know God.

<span id="iv.lvi-p51"></span>“We have one Father, even God.” On this
ground they pride themselves, on their honor not their righteous deeds.
“Therefore your not believing is no proof that I am an enemy to God, but
your unbelief is a sign that you do not know God. And the reason is,
from your being willing to lie and to do the works of the devil. But
this is the effect of meanness of soul; (as the Apostle saith, ‘For
whereas there is among you envying and strife, are ye not carnal?’) ( [1
Cor. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003) <span
id="iv.lvi-p51.1"></span> .) And why is it that ye cannot  <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) ? Because ye will to do the lusts
of your father, ye are eager, ye are ambitious (to do them).” Seest thou
that “ye cannot” express a want of will? For “this did not Abraham.”
“What are his works? Gentleness, meekness, obedience. But ye set
yourselves on the contrary part, being hard and cruel.”

<span id="iv.lvi-p53"></span> But how came it into their thoughts to
betake themselves to God? He had shown them unworthy of Abraham;
desiring therefore to escape this charge, they mounted higher. For when
He reproached them with murder, they said this,  <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) making it, as it were, a kind of
excuse for themselves that they were avenging God. Therefore He showeth
that this very thing is the act of men opposing God. And the, “I came
forth,” showeth that He was from thence.  <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) He saith, “I came forth,” alluding
to His arrival among us. But since they would probably say to Him, “Thou
speaketh certain things strange and new,  <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485) ” He telleth them that He was come
from God. “And therefore with good reason ye hear them not, because ye
are of the devil. For on what account would ye kill Me? What charge have
ye to bring against Me? If there be none, why do ye not believe Me?”
Thus then having proved them to be of the devil by their lying and their
murder, He showeth them also to be alien from Abraham and from God, both
because they hated One who had done no wrong, and because they would not
hear His word; and in every way He proveth that He was not opposed to
God, and that it was not on this account that they refused to believe,
but because they were aliens from God. For when One who had done no sin,
who said that He came from God and was sent of God, who spake the truth,
and so spake it as to challenge all to the proof, after this was not
believed, it is clear that He was not believed because of their being
carnal. Since sins do use, yea they do use to debase a soul.  Wherefore
It saith, “Seeing ye are become dull of hearing.” ( [Heb. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011) <span id="iv.lvi-p56.3"></span> .)
For when a man cannot despise earthly things, how shall he ever be wise
concerning heavenly things?

<span id="iv.lvi-p57"></span>\[4.\] Wherefore, I exhort you, use we
every means that our life may be righteous, that our minds may be
cleansed, so that no filthiness be a hindrance to us; kindle for
yourselves the light of knowledge, and sow not among thorns. For how
shall one who knows not that covetousness is an evil, ever know the
greater good? how shall one who refrains not from these earthly things
ever hold fast to those heavenly? It is good to take by violence, not
the things that perish, but the Kingdom of heaven. “The violent,” it
saith, “take it by force.” ( [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012) <span id="iv.lvi-p57.1"></span> .)
It is then not possible to attain to it by sluggishness, but by zeal.
But what meaneth “the violent”? There is need of much violence, (for
strait is the way,) there is need of a youthful soul and a noble.
Plunderers desire to outstrip all other, they look to nothing, neither
to conviction, nor accusation, nor punishment, but are given up to one
thing only, the getting hold of what they desire to seize, and they run
past all that are before them in the way. Seize we then the Kingdom of
heaven, for here to seize is no fault but rather praise, and the fault
is the not seizing. Here our wealth comes not from another’s loss. Haste
we then to seize it. Should passion disquiet us, should lust disquiet
us, let us do violence to our nature, let us become more gentle, let us
labor a little, that we may rest forever. Seize not thou gold, but seize
that wealth which showeth gold to be but mud. For tell me, if lead and
gold were laid before thee, which wouldest thou take? Is it not clear
that thou wouldest take the gold? Dost thou then, where one who seizes
is punished, prefer that which is the more valuable, but where one who
seizes is honored, give up what is the more <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> <span id="iv.lvi-Page_195"></span> valuable? If there were
punishment in both cases, wouldest thou not rather aim at this latter
 <span id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486) ? But in this case there is
nothing like punishment, but even blessedness. And, “How,” saith some
one, “may one seize it?” Cast away the things which thou hast already in
thy hands; for so long as thou graspest them  <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487) thou wilt not be able to seize the
other. For consider, I pray you, a man with his hands full of silver,
will he be able, as long as he retains it, to seize on gold, unless he
first cast away the silver, and be free? Because he that seizes a thing
must be well-girt so as not to be detained. And even now there are
adverse powers running down against us to rob us, but let us fly them,
let us fly them, trailing after us nothing that may give a hold, let us
cut asunder the cords, let us strip ourselves of the things of earth.
What need of silken garments? How long shall we be unrolling this
mockery? How long shall we be burying gold? I desired to cease from
always saying these things, but ye will not suffer me, continually
supplying me with occasions and arguments. But now at least let us
desist, that having instructed others by our lives, we may obtain the
promised good things, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[191:1469](1140059.htm#fr_1468) <span
id="iv.lvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p7.2"></span>πτοῆσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[191:1470](1140059.htm#fr_1469) <span
id="iv.lvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p8.1"></span>some omit</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p8.2"></span>openly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[192:1471](1140059.htm#fr_1470) <span
id="iv.lvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p15.1"></span>Sav.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p15.2"></span>Gently and by help of the Law He casts them
down.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[192:1472](1140059.htm#fr_1471) <span
id="iv.lvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p17.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p17.2"></span>forgive.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[192:1473](1140059.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="iv.lvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p20.1"></span>This reading is from a Vatican <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lvi-p20.2"></span>ms.</span> which has</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lvi-p20.3"></span>εἰ μὴ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lvi-p20.4"></span>. Savile’s is not
grammatical. Ben. reads,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p20.5"></span>Then desiring to show that if they were not
slaves, by repudiating that former slavery they were slaves the more, He
straightway added.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[193:1474](1140059.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="iv.lvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p27.1"></span>χωρεῖτε</span>

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[193:1475](1140059.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="iv.lvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p29.1"></span>seen with,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p29.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[193:1476](1140059.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="iv.lvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p33.1"></span>κατὰ προαίρεσιν</span>

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[193:1477](1140059.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="iv.lvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p35"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p35.1"></span>a man that hath,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lvi-p35.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[193:1478](1140059.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="iv.lvi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p36"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p36.1"></span>of God,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p36.2"></span>N. T</span>

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[193:1479](1140059.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="iv.lvi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p41"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p41.1"></span>because there is no truth in him,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lvi-p41.2"></span>omitted.</span>

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[193:1480](1140059.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="iv.lvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p43.2"></span>be murderously minded.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[193:1481](1140059.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="iv.lvi-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p44.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p44.2"></span>are murderously minded.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[193:1482](1140059.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="iv.lvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p46.1"></span>i.e. that this assertion of theirs being false
is from the devil.</span>

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[194:1483](1140059.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iv.lvi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p52.1"></span>i.e. cannot understand.</span>

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[194:1484](1140059.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iv.lvi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p54.1"></span>i.e. that God was their Father.</span>

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[194:1485](1140059.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iv.lvi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p55.1"></span>i.e.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p55.2"></span>from God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[194:1486](1140059.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="iv.lvi-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p56.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p56.2"></span>empty.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[195:1487](1140059.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="iv.lvi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p58.1"></span>i.e. at the Kingdom.</span>

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[195:1488](1140059.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="iv.lvi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lvi-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p59.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lvi-p59.2"></span>these present things.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 8.48,49](1140060)
