[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140071)  [Next](1140073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxix"></span> <span id="iv.lxix-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span id="iv.lxix-Page_246"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>Homily LXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxix-p2.2"></span>[John
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p3"></span>“He that loveth his life shall lose it, and
he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
If any man serve Me, let him follow Me.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxix-p4.1"></span>Sweet</span> is the present life, and full of
much pleasure, yet not to all, but to those who are riveted to it.
Since, if any one look to heaven and see the beauteous things there, he
will soon despise this life, and make no account of it. Just as the
beauty of an object is admired while none more beautiful is seen, but
when a better appears, the former is despised. If then we would choose
to look to that beauty, and observe the splendor of the kingdom there,
we should soon free ourselves from our present chains; for a kind of
chain it is, this sympathy with present things. And hear what Christ
saith to bring us in to this, “He that loveth his life shall lose it,
and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life
eternal; if any man serve Me let him follow Me”; and, “Where I am, there
is  <span id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891) My servant also.” The
words seem like a riddle, yet they are not so, but are full of much
wisdom. But how shall “he that loveth his life, lose it”? When he doeth
its unseemly desires, when he gratifies it where he ought not. Wherefore
one exhorteth us, saying, “Walk not in the desires of thy soul” (
[Ecclesiasticus 18.30](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#030)<span
id="iv.lxix-p5.3"></span> ); for so wilt thou destroy it since it
leadeth away from the path leading to virtue; just as, on the contrary,
“he that hateth it in this world, shall save it.” But what meaneth, “He
that hateth it”? He who yields not to it when it commands what is
pernicious. And He said not, “ he that yieldeth not to it,” but, “He
that hateth it”; for as we cannot endure even to hear the voice of those
we hate, nor to look upon them with pleasure, so from the soul also we
must turn away with vehemence, when it commands things contrary to what
is pleasing to God. For since He was now about to say much to them
concerning death, His own death, and saw that they were dejected  <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892) and desponding, He spake very
strongly, saying, “What say I? If ye bear not valiantly My death? Nay,
if ye die not yourselves, ye will gain nothing.” Observe also how He
softens the discourse. It was a very grievous and sad thing to be told,
that the man who loves life should die. And why speak I of old times,
when even now we shall find many gladly enduring to suffer anything. in
order to enjoy the present life, and this too when they are persuaded
concerning things to come; who when they behold buildings, and works of
art, and contrivances, weep, uttering the reflection, “How many things
man inventeth, and yet becometh dust! So great is the longing after this
present life.” To undo these bonds then, Christ saith, “He that hateth
his soul in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.” For that thou
mayest know that He spake as exhorting them, and dissipating their fear,
hear what comes next.

<span id="iv.lxix-p7"></span>“If any man serve Me, let him follow Me.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p8"></span>Speaking of death, and requiring the
following which is by works. For certainly he that serveth must follow
him who is served. And observe at what time He said these things to
them; not when they were persecuted, but when they were confident; when
they thought they were in safety on account of the honor and attention
of the many, when they might rouse themselves and hear, “Let him take up
his cross, and follow Me” ( [Matt. xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024) <span id="iv.lxix-p8.1"></span> );
that is, “Be ever,”  <span id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) He
saith, “prepared against dangers, against death, against your departure
hence.” Then after He had spoken what was hard to bear, He putteth also
the prize. And of what kind was this? The following Him, and being where
He is; showing that Resurrection shall succeed death. For, saith He,

<span id="iv.lxix-p10"></span> “Where I am, there is  <span
id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894) My servant also.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p12"></span>But where is Christ? In heaven. Let us
therefore even before the Resurrection remove thither in soul and mind.

<span id="iv.lxix-p13"></span> “If any man serve Me, the Father shall
love  <span id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895) him.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p15"></span>Why said He not, “I”? Because they did not
as yet hold a right opinion concerning Him, but held a higher opinion of
the Father. For how could they imagine anything great concerning Him,
who did not even know that He was to rise again? Wherefore He said to
the sons of Zebedee, “It is not mine to give, but it shall be given to
them for whom it is prepared by my Father” ( [Mark x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040) <span id="iv.lxix-p15.1"></span> ),
yet He it is that judgeth. But in this passage He also establisheth His
genuine sonship.  <span id="fr_1896"></span>[1897](#fn_1896) For as the
servants of His own Son, so will the Father receive them.

<span id="iv.lxix-p17"></span> [John
12.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="iv.lxix-p17.1"></span>
. “Now is My soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from
this hour.”

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span id="iv.lxix-Page_247"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p18"></span> “But surely this is not  <span
id="fr_1897"></span>[1898](#fn_1897) the expression of one urging them
to go even to death.” Nay, it is that of one greatly so urging them. For
lest they should say, that “He being exempt from mortal pains easily
philosophizes on death, and exhorts us being himself in no danger,” He
showeth, that although feeling its agony,  <span
id="fr_1898"></span>[1899](#fn_1898) on account of its profitableness He
declineth it not. But these things belong to the Dispensation, not the
Godhead. Wherefore He saith, “Now is My soul troubled”; since if this be
not the case, What connection hath that which was spoken, and His
saying, “Father, save Me from this hour”? And so troubled, that He even
sought deliverance from death, if at least it were possible to escape.
These were the infirmities of His human nature.

<span id="iv.lxix-p21"></span>\[2.\] “But,” He saith, “I have not what
to say, when asking for deliverance.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p22"></span>“For for this cause came I unto this
hour.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p23"></span>As though He had said, “Though we be
confounded, though we be troubled, let us not fly from death, since even
now I though troubled do not speak of flying; for it behooveth to bear
what is coming on. I say not, Deliver Me from this hour,” but what?

<span id="iv.lxix-p24"></span> [John
12.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span id="iv.lxix-p24.1"></span>
. “Father, glorify Thy Name.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p25"></span> “Although My trouble urges Me to say
this,  <span id="fr_1899"></span>[1900](#fn_1899) yet I say the
opposite, ‘Glorify Thy Name,’ that is, Lead Me henceforth to the Cross”;
which greatly shows His humanity, and a nature unwilling to die, but
clinging to the present life, proving that He was not exempt from human
feelings. For as it is no blame to be hungry, or to sleep, so neither is
it to desire the present life; and Christ indeed had a body pure from
sin, yet not free from natural wants, for then it would not have been a
body. By these words also He taught something else. Of what kind is
that? That if ever we be in agony and dread, we even then start not back
from that which is set before us; and by saying,  <span
id="fr_1900"></span>[1901](#fn_1900) “Glorify Thy Name” He showeth that
He dieth for the truth calling the action, “glory to God.” And this fell
out after the Crucifixion. The world was about to be converted, to
acknowledge the Name of God, and to serve Him, not the Name of the
Father only, but also that of the Son; yet still as to this He is
silent.

<span id="iv.lxix-p28"></span>“There came therefore a Voice from Heaven,
I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p29"></span>When had He “glorified it”? By what had
been done before; and “I will glorify it again” after the Cross. What
then said Christ?

<span id="iv.lxix-p30"></span> [John
12.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)<span id="iv.lxix-p30.1"></span>
.  <span id="fr_1901"></span>[1902](#fn_1901) “This Voice came not
because of Me, but for your sakes.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p32"></span> They thought that it thundered, or that
an Angel spake to Him. And how did they think this? Was not the voice
clear and distinct? It was, but it quickly flew away from them as being
of the grosser sort, carnal and slothful. And some of them caught the
sound only,  <span id="fr_1902"></span>[1903](#fn_1902) others knew that
the voice was articulate, but what it meant, knew not. What saith
Christ? “This Voice came not because of Me, but for your sakes.” Why
said He this? He said it, setting Himself against what they continually
asserted, that He was not of God. For He who was glorified by God, how
was He not from that God whose name by Him was glorified? indeed for
this purpose the Voice came. Wherefore He saith Himself, “This Voice
came not because of Me, but for your sakes,” “not that I may learn by it
anything of which I am ignorant, (for I know all that belongeth to the
Father,) but for your sakes.” For when they said, “An Angel hath spoken
unto Him,” or “It hath thundered,” and gave not heed to Him, He saith,
“it was for your sakes,” that even so ye might be led to enquire what
the words meant. But they, being excited, did not even so enquire,
though they heard that the matter related to them. For to one who knew
not wherefore it was uttered, the Voice naturally appeared indistinct.
“The Voice came for your sakes.” Seest thou that these lowly
circumstances take place on their account, not as though the Son needeth
help?

<span id="iv.lxix-p34"></span> [John
12.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)<span id="iv.lxix-p34.1"></span>
. “Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world
be cast down.”  <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1904](#fn_1903)

<span id="iv.lxix-p36"></span> What connection hath this with, “I have
glorified, and will glorify”? Much, and closely harmonizing. For when
God saith, “I will glorify,” He showeth the manner of the glorifying.
What is it? That one  <span id="fr_1904"></span>[1905](#fn_1904) should
be cast down. But what is, “the judgment of this world”? It is as though
He said, “there shall be a tribunal and a retribution.” How and in what
way? “He  <span id="fr_1905"></span>[1906](#fn_1905) slew the first man,
having found him guilty of sin, (for ‘by sin death entered’— [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012) <span id="iv.lxix-p38.2"></span> ;)
but in Me this he found not. Why then did he spring upon Me and give Me
over to death? Why did he put into the mind of Judas to destroy Me?”
(Tell me not that it was God’s dispensation, for this belongeth not to
the devil, but His wisdom; for the present let the disposition of that
evil one be enquired into.) “How then is the world judged in Me?” It
shall be said, as if a court of justice were sitting, to Satan, “Well,
thou hast slain all men, because thou didst find them guilty of sin. But
why didst thou slay Christ? Is it not clear that thou didst it
wrongfully?” Therefore in Him the whole world shall be avenged. But,
that this may be still more clear, I will make it plain by an exam <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="iv.lxix-Page_248"></span> ple.
Suppose there is some cruel tyrant, bringing ten thousand evils on all
those who fall into his hands. If such a one engaging with a king, or a
king’s son, slay him unjustly, his death will have power to get revenge
for the others also. Suppose there is one who demands payment of his
debtors, that he beats them and casts them into prison; then from the
same recklessness that he leads to the same dungeon one who owes him
nothing: such a man shall suffer punishment for what he hath done to the
others. For that one shall destroy him.

<span id="iv.lxix-p39"></span>\[3.\] So also it is in the case of the
Son; for of those things which the devil hath done against us, of these
shall the penalty be required by means of what he hath dared against
Christ. And to show that He implieth this, hear what He saith; “Now
shall the prince of this world be cast down,” “by My Death.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p40"></span> [John
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxix-p40.1"></span>
. “And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p41"></span>That is, “even those of the Gentiles.” And
that no one may ask, “How shall he be cast down, if he is stronger even
than Thou art?” He saith, “He is not stronger; how can he be stronger
than One who draweth others to Him?” And He speaketh not of the
Resurrection, but of what is more than the Resurrection, “I will draw
all men to Myself.” For had He said, “I shall rise again,” it was not
yet clear that they would believe; but by His saying, “they shall
believe,” both are proved at once, both this, and also that He must rise
again. For had He continued dead, and been a mere man, no one would have
believed. “I will draw all men to Myself.” ( [John
6.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span id="iv.lxix-p41.1"></span>
.) How then said He that the Father draweth? Because when the Son
draweth, the Father draweth also. He saith, “I will draw them,” as
though they were detained by a tyrant, and unable of themselves alone to
approach Him, and to escape the hands of him who keepeth hold of them.
In another place He calleth this “spoiling; no man can  <span
id="fr_1906"></span>[1907](#fn_1906) spoil a strong man’s goods, except
he first bind the strong man, and then spoil his goods.” ( [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029) <span id="iv.lxix-p42.3"></span> .)
This He said to prove His strength, and what there He calleth
“spoiling,” He hath here called “drawing.”

<span id="iv.lxix-p43"></span>Knowing then these things, let us rouse
ourselves, let us glorify God, not by our faith alone, but also by our
life, since otherwise it would not be glory, but blasphemy. For God is
not so much blasphemed by an impure heathen, as by a corrupt Christian.
Wherefore I entreat you to do all that God may be glorified; for, “Woe,”
it saith, “to that servant by whom the Name of God is blasphemed,” (and
wherever there is a “woe,” every punishment and vengeance straightway
follows,) “but blessed is he by whom that Name is glorified.” Let us
then not be as in darkness, but avoid all sins, and especially those
which tend to the hurt of others, since by these God is most blasphemed.
What pardon shall we have, when, being commanded to give to others, we
plunder the property of others? What shall be our hope of salvation?
Thou art punished if thou hast not fed the hungry; but if thou hast even
stripped one who was clothed, what sort of pardon shalt thou obtain?
These things I will never desist from saying, for they who have not
heard to-day perhaps will hear tomorrow, and they who take no heed
to-morrow perhaps will be persuaded the next day; and even if any be so
disposed as not to be persuaded, yet for us there will be no account to
give of them at the Judgment. Our part we have fulfilled; may we never
have cause to be ashamed of our words, nor you to hide your faces, but
may all be able to stand with boldness before the judgment-seat of
Christ, that we also may be able to rejoice over you, and to have some
compensation of our own faults, in your being approved in Christ Jesus
our Lord, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[246:1892](1140072.htm#fr_1891) <span
id="iv.lxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p5.1"></span>shall be,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p5.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[246:1893](1140072.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="iv.lxix-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p6.2"></span>looking down,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxix-p6.3"></span>or,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxix-p6.4"></span>disdainful.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[246:1894](1140072.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="iv.lxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p9.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p9.2"></span>in battle array.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[246:1895](1140072.htm#fr_1894) <span
id="iv.lxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p11"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p11.1"></span>shall be,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p11.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[246:1896](1140072.htm#fr_1895) <span
id="iv.lxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p14"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p14.1"></span>honor,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p14.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1896"></span>[246:1897](1140072.htm#fr_1896) <span
id="iv.lxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p16.1"></span>τὸ γνήσιον</span>

<span id="fn_1897"></span>[247:1898](1140072.htm#fr_1897) <span
id="iv.lxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p19.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p19.2"></span>is no longer.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1898"></span>[247:1899](1140072.htm#fr_1898) <span
id="iv.lxix-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p20.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p20.2"></span>γωνιῶν αὐτὸν</span>

<span id="fn_1899"></span>[247:1900](1140072.htm#fr_1899) <span
id="iv.lxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p26.1"></span>i.e.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p26.2"></span>Save Me,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p26.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1900"></span>[247:1901](1140072.htm#fr_1900) <span
id="iv.lxix-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p27.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p27.2"></span>and by saying.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1901"></span>[247:1902](1140072.htm#fr_1901) <span
id="iv.lxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p31"></span> [John
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)<span
id="iv.lxix-p31.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p31.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p31.3"></span>omitted. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p31.4"></span>The people therefore that stood by, and heard
it, said that it thundered; others said, An Angel spake to Him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[247:1903](1140072.htm#fr_1902) <span
id="iv.lxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p33.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p33.2"></span>only.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[247:1904](1140072.htm#fr_1903) <span
id="iv.lxix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p35"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p35.1"></span>cast out,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p35.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[247:1905](1140072.htm#fr_1904) <span
id="iv.lxix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p37.1"></span>i.e. the prince of this world.</span>

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[247:1906](1140072.htm#fr_1905) <span
id="iv.lxix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p38.1"></span>i.e. Satan.</span>

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[248:1907](1140072.htm#fr_1906) <span
id="iv.lxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxix-p42"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p42.1"></span>how can,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxix-p42.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 12.34](1140073)
