[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140110)  [Next](1140112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xvii"></span> <span id="v.xvii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span id="v.xvii-Page_427"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="v.xvii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xvii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews vii.
11-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)<span
id="v.xvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p3"></span> *“If therefore perfection were by*  <span
id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949) *the Levitical priesthood; (for
under it the people have received the law’*  <span
id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950) *) what further need was there that
another priest should arise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be
called after the order of Aaron? For the priesthood being changed, there
is*  <span id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951) *made of necessity a
change also of the law. For He of whom these things are spoken,
pertained to another tribe, of*  <span
id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952) *which no man gave attendance at
the altar. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priests.”*  <span
id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953)

<span id="v.xvii-p9"></span> \[1.\] “ <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvii-p9.1"></span>If</span> therefore” (he says) “perfection were
by the Levitical priesthood.” Having spoken concerning Melchisedec, and
shown how much superior he was to Abraham, and having set forth the
great difference between them, he begins from this point forward to
prove the wide difference as to the covenant itself, and how the one is
imperfect and the other perfect. However he does not even yet enter on
the matters themselves, but first contends on the ground of the
priesthood, and the tabernacle. For these things would be more easily
received by the unbelieving, when the proof was derived from things
already allowed, and believed.

<span id="v.xvii-p10"></span>He had shown that Melchisedec was greatly
superior both to Levi and to Abraham, being to them in the rank of the
priests. Again he argues from a different point. What then is this? Why
(he says) did he not say, “after the order of Aaron”? And observe, I
pray you, the great superiority \[of his argument\]. For from the very
circumstance which naturally excluded His priesthood, viz. that He was
not “after the order of Aaron,” from that he establishes Him, and
excludes the others. For this is the very thing that I say (he
declares); why has He “not been made after the order of Aaron”?

<span id="v.xvii-p11"></span> And the \[saying\] “what further need” has
much emphasis. For if Christ had been “after the order of Melchisedec”
according to the flesh, and then afterwards the law had been introduced,
and all that pertained to Aaron, one might reasonably say that the
latter as being more perfect, annulled the former, seeing that it had
come in after it. But if Christ comes later, and takes a different type,
as that of His priesthood, it is evident that it is because those were
imperfect. For (he would say) let us suppose for argument’s sake, that
all has been fulfilled, and that there is nothing imperfect in the
priesthood. “What need” was there in that case that He should be called
“after the order of Melchisedec and not after the order of Aaron”? Why
did He set aside Aaron, and introduce a different priesthood, that of
Melchisedec? “If then perfection,” that is the perfection of the things
themselves, of the doctrines, of life,  <span
id="fr_2954"></span>[2955](#fn_2954) “had been by the Levitical
priesthood.”

<span id="v.xvii-p13"></span> And observe how he goes forward on his
path. He had said that \[He was\] “after the order of Melchisedec,”
implying that the \[priesthood\] “after the order of Melchisedec” is
superior: for \[he was\]  <span id="fr_2955"></span>[2956](#fn_2955) far
superior. Afterwards he shows this from the time also, in that He was
after Aaron; evidently as being better.

<span id="v.xvii-p15"></span> \[2.\]  And what is the meaning of what
follows? “For” (he says) “under \[or “upon”\] it the people have
received the Law \[or “have been legislated for”\].”  <span
id="fr_2956"></span>[2957](#fn_2956) What is “under it” \[&c.\]?
Ordereth itself  <span id="fr_2957"></span>[2958](#fn_2957) by it;
through it does all things. You cannot say that it was given to others,
“the people under it have received the law,” that is, have used it, and
did use it. You cannot say indeed that it was perfect, it did not govern
the people; “they have been legislated for upon it,” that is, they used
it.

<span id="v.xvii-p18"></span>What need was there then of another
priesthood? “For the priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a
change of the law also.” But if there must be another priest, or rather
another priesthood, there must needs be also another law. This is for
those who say, What need was there of a new Covenant? For he could
indeed have alleged a testimony from prophecy also. “This is the
covenant which I made with your fathers” \[&c.\]. ( [Heb.
8.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010)<span id="v.xvii-p18.1"></span> .)
But for the present he contends on the ground of the priesthood. And
observe, how he says this from the first. He said, “According to the
order of Melchisedec.” By this he excluded the order of Aaron. For he
would not have said “After the order of Melchisedec,” if the other had
been better. If therefore another priesthood has been brought in, there
must be <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="v.xvii-Page_428"></span> also \[another\] Covenant; for neither is
it possible that there should be a priest, without a covenant and laws
and ordinances, nor that having received a different priesthood He
should use the former \[covenant\].

<span id="v.xvii-p19"></span> In the next place, as to the ground of
objection: “How could He be a priest if He were not a Levite?” Having
overthrown this by what had been said above, he does not even think it
worth answering, but introduces it in passing. I said (he means) that
the priesthood was changed, therefore also the Covenant is. And it was
changed not only in its character,  <span
id="fr_2958"></span>[2959](#fn_2958) or in its ordinances, but also in
its tribe. For of necessity \[it must be changed\] in its tribe also.
How? “For the priesthood being changed \[or “transferred ”\],” from
tribe to tribe, from the sacerdotal to the regal \[tribe\], that the
same might be both regal and sacerdotal.

<span id="v.xvii-p21"></span>And observe the mystery. First it was
royal, and then it is become sacerdotal: so therefore also in regard to
Christ: for King indeed He always was, but has become Priest from the
time that He assumed the Flesh, that He offered the sacrifice. Thou
seest the change, and the very things which were ground of objection
these he introduces, as though the natural order of things required
them. “For” (he says) “He of whom these things are spoken pertained to
another tribe.” I myself also say it, I know that this tribe \[of
Judah\] had nothing of priesthood. For there is a transferring.

<span id="v.xvii-p22"></span>\[3.\] Yea and I am showing another
difference also (he would say): not only from the tribe, nor yet only
from the Person, nor from the character \[of the Priesthood\], nor from
the covenant, but also from the type itself. ( [Heb.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)<span id="v.xvii-p22.1"></span> )
“Who was made \[“became” so\], not according to the law of a carnal
commandment, but according to the power of an endless life. He became”
(he says) “a priest not according to the law of a carnal commandment”:
for that law was in many respects unlawful.  <span
id="fr_2959"></span>[2960](#fn_2959)

<span id="v.xvii-p24"></span> What is, “of a carnal commandment”?
Circumcise the flesh, it says; anoint the flesh; wash the flesh; purify
the flesh; shave the flesh; bind upon the flesh;  <span
id="fr_2960"></span>[2961](#fn_2960) cherish the flesh; rest as to the
flesh. And again its blessings, what are they? Long life for the flesh;
milk and honey for the flesh; peace for the flesh; luxury for the flesh.
From this law Aaron received the priesthood; Melchisedec however not so.

<span id="v.xvii-p26"></span> [Heb.
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#015)<span id="v.xvii-p26.1"></span> .
“And it is yet far more evident, if after the similitude of Melchisedec
there ariseth another priest.” What is evident? The interval between the
two priesthoods, the difference; how much superior He is “who was made
not according to the law of a carnal commandment.” (Who? Melchisedec?
Nay; but Christ.) “But according to the power of an endless  <span
id="fr_2961"></span>[2962](#fn_2961) life. For He testifieth, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec”; that is, not for a
time, nor having any limit, “but according to the power of an endless
life,” that is, by means of power, by means of “endless life.”

<span id="v.xvii-p28"></span>And yet this does not follow after, “who
was made not according to the law of a carnal commandment”: for what
would follow would be to say, “but according to that of a spiritual
one.” However by “carnal,” he implied temporary. As he says also in
another place, carnal ordinances imposed until the time of reformation.”
( [Heb. 9.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)<span
id="v.xvii-p28.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvii-p29"></span>“According to the power of life,” that is,
because He lives by His own power.

<span id="v.xvii-p30"></span> \[4.\] He had said, that there is also a
change of law, and up to this point he has shown it; henceforward he
enquires into the cause, that which above all gives full assurance to
men’s minds, \[I mean\] the knowing the cause thoroughly; and it leads
us more to faith  <span id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962) when we
have learned also the cause, and the principle according to which \[the
thing\] comes to pass.

<span id="v.xvii-p32"></span> [Heb.
7.18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018)<span id="v.xvii-p32.1"></span> .
“For there is verily” (he says) “a disannulling of the commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.” Here the
Heretics  <span id="fr_2963"></span>[2964](#fn_2963) press on. But
listen attentively. He did not say “for the evil,” nor, “for the
viciousness,” but “for the weakness and unprofitableness \[thereof\],”
yea and in other places also he shows the weakness; as when he says “In
that it was weak through the flesh.” ( [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003) <span id="v.xvii-p33.2"></span> .)
\[The law\] itself then is not weak, but we.

<span id="v.xvii-p34"></span> [Heb.
7.19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019)<span id="v.xvii-p34.1"></span> .
“For the Law made nothing perfect.” What is, “make nothing perfect”?
Made no man perfect, being disobeyed. And besides, even if it had been
listened to, it would not have made one perfect and virtuous. But as yet
he does not say this here, but that it had no strength: and with good
reason. For written precepts were there set down, Do this and Do not
that, being enjoined only, and not giving power within.  <span
id="fr_2964"></span>[2965](#fn_2964) But “the Hope” is not such.

<span id="v.xvii-p36"></span>What is “a disannulling”? A casting out. A
“disannulling” is a disannulling of things which are of force. So that
he implied, that it \[once\] was of force, but henceforward was of no
account, since it accomplished nothing. Was the Law then of no use? It
was indeed of use; and of great use: but to make men perfect it was of
no use. For in this respect he says, “The Law made nothing perfect.” All
were figures, all shadows; circumcision, sacrifice, sabbath. There <span
id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="v.xvii-Page_429"></span> fore they
could not reach through the soul, wherefore they pass away and gradually
withdraw. “But the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw
nigh unto God.”

<span id="v.xvii-p37"></span>\[5.\] ( [Heb.
7.20](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#020)<span id="v.xvii-p37.1"></span> )
“And forasmuch as not without the taking of an oath.”  <span
id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965) Thou seest that the matter of the
oath becomes necessary for him here. Accordingly for this reason he
previously treated much \[hereon\], how that God swore; and swore for
the sake of \[our\] fuller assurance.

<span id="v.xvii-p39"></span>“But the bringing in of a better hope.” For
that system also had a hope, but not such as this. For they hoped that,
if they were well pleasing \[to God\], they should possess the land,
that they should suffer nothing fearful. But in this \[dispensation\] we
hope that, if we are well pleasing \[to God\], we shall possess not
earth, but heaven; or rather (which is far better than this) we hope to
stand near to God, to come unto the very throne of the Father, to
minister unto Him with the Angels. And see how he introduces these
things by little and little. For above he says “which entereth into that
within the veil”, ( [Heb. 6.19](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#019)<span
id="v.xvii-p39.1"></span> ), but here, “by which we draw nigh unto God.”

<span id="v.xvii-p40"></span>“And inasmuch as not without an oath.” What
is “And inasmuch as not without an oath”? That is, Behold another
difference also. And these things were not merely promised (he says).
“For those priests were made without an oath,” ( [Heb.
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022)<span id="v.xvii-p40.1"></span> )
“but This with an oath, by Him that said unto Him, The Lord swore and
will not repent, Thou art Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec.  <span id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966) By so much was
Jesus made a surety of a better covenant.”  <span
id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967) He lays down two points of
difference, that it hath no end as the \[covenant\] of the Law had;
 <span id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968) and this he proves from
\[its being\] Christ who exercises \[the priesthood\]; for he says
“according to the power of an endless life.” And he proves it also from
the oath, because “He swore,” &c., and from the fact; for if the other
was cast out, because it was weak, this stands firm, because it is
powerful. He proves it also from the priest. How? Because He is One
\[only\]; and there would not have been One \[only\], unless He had been
immortal. For as there were many priests, because they were mortal, so
\[here is\] The One, because He is immortal. “By so much was Jesus made
a surety of a better covenant,” inasmuch as He sware to Him that He
should always be \[Priest\]; which He would not have done, if He were
not living.

<span id="v.xvii-p44"></span>\[6.\] ( [Heb.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)<span id="v.xvii-p44.1"></span> )
“Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.” Thou
seest that he says this in respect of that which is according to the
flesh. For when He \[appears\] as Priest, then He also intercedes.
Wherefore also when Paul says, “who also maketh intercession for us” (
[Rom. viii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034) <span
id="v.xvii-p44.2"></span> ), he hints the same thing; the High Priest
maketh intercession. For He “that raiseth the dead as He will, and
quickeneth them,” ( [John v. 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021) <span
id="v.xvii-p44.3"></span> ), and that “even as the Father” \[doth\], how
\[is it that\] when there is need to save, He “maketh intercession”? (
[John v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022) <span
id="v.xvii-p44.4"></span> .) He that hath “all judgment,” how \[is it
that\] He “maketh intercession”? He that “sendeth His angels” ( [Matt.
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042)<span id="v.xvii-p44.5"></span> ),
that they may “cast” some into “the furnace,” and save others, how \[is
it that\] He “maketh intercession”? Wherefore (he says) “He is able also
to save.” For this cause then He saves, because He dies not. Inasmuch as
“He ever liveth,” He hath (he means) no successor: And if He have no
successor, He is able to aid all men. For there \[under the Law\]
indeed, the High Priest although he were worthy of admiration during the
time in which he was \[High Priest\] (as Samuel for instance, and any
other such), but, after this, no longer; for they were dead. But here it
is not so, but “He” saves “to the uttermost.”  <span
id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969)

<span id="v.xvii-p46"></span> What is “to the uttermost”? He hints at
some mystery. Not here  <span id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970) only
(he says) but there  <span id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971) also He
saves them that “come unto God by Him.” How does He save? “In that He
ever liveth” (he says) “to make intercession for them.” Thou seest the
humiliation? Thou seest the manhood? For he says not, that He obtained
this, by making intercession once for all, but continually, and
whensoever it may be needful to intercede for them.

<span id="v.xvii-p49"></span>“To the uttermost.” What is it? Not for a
time only, but there also in the future life. ‘Does He then always need
to pray? Yet how can \[this\] be reasonable? Even righteous men have
oftentimes accomplished all by one entreaty, and is He always praying?
Why then is He throned with \[the Father\]?’ Thou seest that it is a
condescension. The meaning is: Be not afraid, nor say, Yea, He loves us
indeed, and He has confidence towards the Father, but He cannot live
always. For He doth live alway.

<span id="v.xvii-p50"></span>\[7.\] ( [Heb.
7.26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)<span id="v.xvii-p50.1"></span> )
“For such an High Priest also  <span
id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972) became us, who is holy, harmless,
unde <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="v.xvii-Page_430"></span> filed, separate from the sinners.” Thou
seest that the whole is said with reference to the manhood. (But when I
say ‘the manhood,’ I mean \[the manhood\] having Godhead; not dividing
\[one from the other\], but leaving \[you\] to suppose  <span
id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973) what is suitable.) Didst thou mark
the difference of the High Priest? He has summed up what was said
before, “in all points tempted like as we are yet without sin.” ( [Heb.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="v.xvii-p52.3"></span> .)
“For” (he says) “such an High Priest also became us, who is holy,
harmless.” “Harmless”: what is it? Without wickedness: that which
another  <span id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974) Prophet says: “guile
was not found in His mouth” ( [Isa. liii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009) <span id="v.xvii-p56.7"></span> ),
that is, \[He is\] not crafty. Could any one say this concerning God?
And is one not ashamed to say that God is not crafty, nor deceitful?
Concerning Him, however, in respect of the Flesh, it might be reasonable
\[to say it\]. “Holy, undefiled.” This too would any one say concerning
God? For has He a nature capable of defilement? “Separate from sinners.”

<span id="v.xvii-p57"></span>\[8.\] Does then this alone show the
difference, or does the sacrifice itself also? How? ( [Heb.
7.27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027)<span id="v.xvii-p57.1"></span> )
“He needeth not” (he says) “daily, as the High Priest,  <span
id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975) to offer up sacrifices for his
sins, for this He did once for all, when He offered up Himself.” “This,”
what? Here what follows sounds a prelude concerning the exceeding
greatness of the spiritual sacrifice and the interval \[between them\].
He has mentioned the point of the priest; he has mentioned that of the
faith; he has mentioned that of the Covenant; not entirely indeed, still
he has mentioned it. In this place what follows is a prelude concerning
the sacrifice itself. Do not then, having heard that He is a priest,
suppose that He is always executing the priest’s office. For He executed
it once, and thenceforward “sat down.” ( [Heb.
10.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012)<span id="v.xvii-p58.2"></span>
.) Lest thou suppose that He is standing on high, and is a minister, he
shows that the matter is \[part\] of a dispensation \[or economy\]. For
as He became a servant, so also \[He became\] a Priest and a Minister.
But as after becoming a servant, He did not continue a servant, so also,
having become a Minister, He did not continue a Minister. For it belongs
not to a minister to sit, but to stand.

<span id="v.xvii-p59"></span>This then he hints at here, and also the
greatness of the sacrifice, if being \[but\] one, and having been
offered up once only, it affected that which all \[the rest\] were
unable to do. But he does not yet \[treat\] of these points.

<span id="v.xvii-p60"></span>“For this He did,” he says. “This”; what?
“For” (he says) “it is of necessity that this \[Man\] have somewhat also
to offer” ( [Heb. 8.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003)<span
id="v.xvii-p60.1"></span> ); not for Himself; for how did He offer
Himself? But for the people. What sayest thou? And is He able to do
this? Yea (he says). “For the Law maketh men high priests, which have
infirmity.” ( [Heb. 7.28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#028)<span
id="v.xvii-p60.2"></span> .) And doth He not need to offer for Himself?
No, he says. For, that you may not suppose that the \[words, “this”\]
“He did once for all,” are said respecting Himself also, hear what he
says: “For the law maketh men high priests, which have infirmity.” On
this account they both offer continually, and for themselves. He however
who is mighty, He that hath no sin, why should He offer for Himself, or
oftentimes for others?

<span id="v.xvii-p61"></span> “But the word of the oath which was since
the Law \[maketh\] the Son who has been consecrated for evermore.”
“Consecrated”:  <span id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976) what is that?
Paul does not set down the common terms of contradistinction;  <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977) for after saying “having
Infirmity,” he did not say “the Son” who is mighty, but “consecrated”:
 <span id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978) i.e. mighty, as one might
say. Thou seest that the name Son is used in contradistinction to that
of servant. And by “infirmity” he means either sin or death.

<span id="v.xvii-p65"></span>What is, “for evermore”? Not now only
without sin but always. If then He is perfect, if He never sins, if He
lives always, why shall He offer many sacrifices for us? But for the
present he does not insist strongly on this point: but what he does
strongly insist upon is, His not offering on His own behalf.

<span id="v.xvii-p66"></span> \[9.\] Since then we have such an High
Priest, let us imitate Him: let us walk in His footsteps. There is no
other sacrifice: one alone has cleansed us, and after this, fire and
hell. For indeed on this account he repeats it over and over, saying,
“one Priest,” “one Sacrifice,” lest any one supposing that there are
many \[sacrifices\] should sin without fear. Let us then, as many as
have been counted worthy of The Seal,  <span
id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979) <span id="page_431">p. 431</span>
<span id="v.xvii-Page_431"></span> as many as have enjoyed The
Sacrifice, as many as have partaken of the immortal Table, continue to
guard our noble birth and our dignity for falling away is not without
danger.

<span id="v.xvii-p68"></span> And as many as have not yet been counted
worthy these \[privileges\], let not these either be confident on that
account. For when a person goes on in sin, with the view of receiving
holy baptism at the last gasp, oftentimes he will not obtain it. And,
believe me, it is not to terrify you that I say what I am going to say.
I have myself known many persons, to whom this has happened, who in
expectation indeed of the enlightening  <span
id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980) sinned much, and on the day of
their death went away empty. For God gave us baptism for this cause,
that He might do away our sins, not that He might increase our sins.
Whereas if any man have employed it as a security for sinning more, it
becomes a cause of negligence. For if there had been no Washing, they
would have lived more warily, as not having \[the means of\]
forgiveness. Thou seest that we are the ones who cause it to be said
“Let us do evil, that good may come.” ( [Rom. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008) <span id="v.xvii-p69.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvii-p70"></span> Wherefore, I exhort you also who are
uninitiated, be sober. Let no man follow after virtue as an hireling, no
man as a senseless  <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) person,
no man as after a heavy and burdensome thing. Let us pursue it then with
a ready mind, and with joy. For if there were no reward laid up, ought
we not to be good? But however, at least with a reward, let us become
good. And how is this anything else than a disgrace and a very great
condemnation? Unless thou give me a reward (says one), I do not become
self-controlled. Then am I bold to say something: thou wilt never be
self-controlled, no not even when thou livest with self-control, if thou
dost it for a reward. Thou esteemest not virtue at all, if thou dost not
love it. But on account of our great weakness, God was willing that for
a time it should be practiced even for reward, yet not even so do we
pursue it.

<span id="v.xvii-p72"></span> But let us suppose, if you will, that a
man dies, after having done innumerable evil things, having also been
counted worthy of baptism (which however I think does not readily
happen), tell me, how will he depart thither? Not indeed called to
account for the deeds he had done, but yet without confidence;  <span
id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) as is reasonable. For when after
living a hundred years, he has no good work to show,  <span
id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983) but only that he has not sinned, or
rather not even this, but that he was saved by grace  <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) only, and when he sees others
crowned, in splendor, and highly approved: even if he fall not into
hell, tell me, will he endure his despondency?

<span id="v.xvii-p76"></span>\[10.\] But to make the matter clear by an
example, Suppose there are two soldiers, and that one of them steals,
injures, overreaches, and that the other does none of these things, but
acts the part of a brave man, does important things well, sets up
trophies in war, stains his right hand with blood; then when the time
arrives, suppose that (from the same rank in which the thief also was)
he is at once conducted to the imperial throne and the purple; but
suppose that the other remains there where he was, and merely of the
royal kindness does not pay the penalty of his deeds, let him however be
in the last place, and let him be stationed under the King. Tell me,
will he be able to endure his despair when he sees him who was
\[ranked\] with himself ascended even to the very highest dignities, and
made thus glorious, and master of the world, while he himself still
remains below, and has not even been freed from punishment with honor,
but through the grace and kindness of the King? For even should the King
forgive him, and release him from the charges against him, still he will
live in shame; for surely not even will others admire him: since in such
forgiveness, we admire not those who receive the gifts, but those who
bestow them. And as much as the gifts are greater, so much the more are
they ashamed who receive them, when their transgressions are great.

<span id="v.xvii-p77"></span>With what eyes then will such an one be
able to look on those who are in the King’s courts, when they exhibit
their sweatings out of number and their wounds, whilst he has nothing to
show, but has his salvation itself of the mere loving-kindness of God?
For as if one were to beg off a murderer, a thief, an adulterer, when he
was going to be arrested, and were to command him to stay at the porch
of the King’s palace, he will not afterwards be able to look any man in
the face, although he has been set free from punishment: so too surely
is this man’s case.

<span id="v.xvii-p78"></span> For do not, I beseech you, suppose that
because it is called a palace,  <span
id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) therefore all attain the same
things. For if here in Kings’ courts there is the Prefect, and all who
are about the King, and also those who are in very inferior stations,
and occupy the place of what are called Decani  <span
id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) (though the interval be so great
between the Prefect and the Decanus) much more shall this be so in the
royal court above.

<span id="v.xvii-p85"></span> <span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="v.xvii-Page_432"></span> And this I say not of myself. For Paul
layeth down another difference greater even than these. For (he says) as
many differences as there are between the sun and the moon and the stars
and the very smallest star, so many also between those in the kingdom
\[of Heaven\]. And that the difference between the sun and the smallest
star is far greater than that between the Decanus (as he is called) and
the Prefect, is evident to all. For while the sun shines upon all the
world at once, and makes it bright, and hides the moon and the stars,
the other often does not appear, not even in the dark. For there are
many of the stars which we do not see. When then we see others become
suns, and we have the rank of the very smallest stars, which are not
even visible, what comfort shall we have?

<span id="v.xvii-p86"></span>Let us not, I beseech you, let us not be so
slothful, not so inert, let us not barter away the salvation of God for
an easy life, but let us make merchandise of it, and increase it. For
even if one be a Catechumen, still he knows Christ, still he understands
the Faith, still he is a hearer of the divine oracles, still he is not
far from the knowledge; he knows the will of his Lord. Wherefore does he
procrastinate? wherefore does he delay and postpone? Nothing is better
than a good life whether here or there, whether in case of the
Enlightened or of the Catechumens,

<span id="v.xvii-p87"></span> \[11.\] For tell me what burdensome
command have we enjoined? Have a wife (it is said) and be chaste. Is
this difficult? How? when many, not Christians only but heathens also,
live chastely without a wife. That which the heathen surpasses  <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987) for vainglory, thou dost not even
keep for the fear of God.

<span id="v.xvii-p89"></span>Give (He says) to the poor out of what thou
hast. Is this burdensome? But in this case also heathen condemn us who
for vainglory only have emptied out their whole possessions.

<span id="v.xvii-p90"></span>Use not filthy communication. Is this
difficult? For if it had not been enjoined, ought we not to have done
right in this, to avoid appearing degraded? For that the contrary
conduct is troublesome, I mean the using filthy communication, is
manifest from the fact that the soul is ashamed and blushes if it have
been led to say any such thing and would not unless perhaps it were
drunk. For when sitting in a public place, even if thou doest it at
home, why dost thou not do it there? Because of those that are present.
Why dost thou not readily do the same thing before thy wife? That thou
mayest not insult her. So then thou dost it not, lest thou shouldest
insult thy wife; and dost thou not blush at insulting God? For He is
everywhere present, and heareth all things.

<span id="v.xvii-p91"></span> Be not drunken, He says. For this very
thing of itself, is it not a chastisement? He did not say, Put thy body
on the rack, but what? Do not give it free rein  <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) so as to take away the authority of
the mind: on the contrary “make not provision for the lusts thereof.” (
[Rom. xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014) <span
id="v.xvii-p92.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.xvii-p93"></span>Do not (He says) seize by violence what is
not thine own; do not overreach; do not forswear thyself. What labors do
these things require! what sweatings!

<span id="v.xvii-p94"></span>Speak evil of no man (He says) nor accuse
falsely. The contrary indeed is a labor. For when thou hast spoken ill
of another, immediately thou art in danger, in suspicion, \[saying\] Did
he of whom I spake, hear? whether he be great or small. For should he be
a great man, immediately thou wilt be indeed in danger; but if small, he
will requite thee with as much, or rather with what is far more
grievous; for he will say evil of thee in a greater degree. We are
enjoined nothing difficult, nothing burdensome, if we have the will. And
if we have not the will, even the easiest things will appear burdensome
to us. What is easier than eating? but from great effeminacy many feel
disgust even at this, and I hear many say, that it is weariness even to
eat. None of these things is wearisome if thou hast but the will. For
everything depends on the will after the grace from above. Let us will
good things that we may attain also to the good things eternal, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost
be glory, might, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[427:2950](1140111.htm#fr_2949) <span
id="v.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p4.1"></span>by means of.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[427:2951](1140111.htm#fr_2950) <span
id="v.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p5.1"></span>νενομοθέτηται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p5.2"></span>is the reading of the best <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xvii-p5.3"></span>mss.</span> of St. Chrys. here
and throughout the Homily. The common editions had</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p5.4"></span>νενομοθέτητο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p5.5"></span>. So while the common
editions \[</span> *Textus Rec* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p5.6"></span>.\] of the N.T. read</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p5.7"></span>νενομοθέτητο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p5.8"></span>, the critical editors
have</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p5.9"></span>νενομοθέτηται</span>

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[427:2952](1140111.htm#fr_2951) <span
id="v.xvii-p5.10"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p6"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p6.1"></span>takes place.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[427:2953](1140111.htm#fr_2952) <span
id="v.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p7"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p7.1"></span>from.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[427:2954](1140111.htm#fr_2953) <span
id="v.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.1"></span>ἱ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.2"></span>ερέων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.3"></span>. The editions had</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.4"></span>ἱ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.5"></span>ερωσύνης</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.6"></span>; so the common text of the
New Test. read</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.7"></span>ἱ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.8"></span>ερωσύνης</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p8.9"></span>, the critical editions have</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.10"></span>ἱ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.11"></span>έ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p8.12"></span>ρέων</span>

<span id="fn_2954"></span>[427:2955](1140111.htm#fr_2954) <span
id="v.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p12.1"></span>εἰ μὲν οὖν τελείωσις, τουτέστι τῆς τῶν
πραγμάτων, τῆς τῶν δογμάτων, τοῦ Βίου ἡ τελείωσις</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p12.2"></span>. It is not clear, as Mr.
Field remarks, to what the articles</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p12.3"></span>τῆς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p12.4"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p12.5"></span>τῆς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p12.6"></span>are to be referred.</span>

<span id="fn_2955"></span>[427:2956](1140111.htm#fr_2955) <span
id="v.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.1"></span>or \[</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.2"></span>it is</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.3"></span>\]. S. B. have</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.5"></span>κεῖνος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p14.6"></span>in the text.</span>

<span id="fn_2956"></span>[427:2957](1140111.htm#fr_2956) <span
id="v.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p16.1"></span>\[have been subjected to the law.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2957"></span>[427:2958](1140111.htm#fr_2957) <span
id="v.xvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p17.1"></span>στοιχεῖ</span>

<span id="fn_2958"></span>[428:2959](1140111.htm#fr_2958) <span
id="v.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p20.1"></span>τρόπω</span>

<span id="fn_2959"></span>[428:2960](1140111.htm#fr_2959) <span
id="v.xvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p23.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p23.2"></span>νομος</span>

<span id="fn_2960"></span>[428:2961](1140111.htm#fr_2960) <span
id="v.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p25.1"></span>See</span> <span id="v.xvii-p25.2"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p25.3"></span>[Deut. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008)<span
id="v.xvii-p25.4"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2961"></span>[428:2962](1140111.htm#fr_2961) <span
id="v.xvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p27.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p27.2"></span>καταλύτου</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p27.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p27.4"></span>indestructible.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[428:2963](1140111.htm#fr_2962) <span
id="v.xvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p31.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p31.2"></span>conviction.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2963"></span>[428:2964](1140111.htm#fr_2963) <span
id="v.xvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p33.1"></span>The early Heretics denied the divine character
of the Mosaic dispensation.</span>

<span id="fn_2964"></span>[428:2965](1140111.htm#fr_2964) <span
id="v.xvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p35.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p35.2"></span>ντιθέντα</span>

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[429:2966](1140111.htm#fr_2965) <span
id="v.xvii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p38.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p38.2"></span>ρκωμοσίας</span>

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[429:2967](1140111.htm#fr_2966) <span
id="v.xvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p41.1"></span>\[The words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p41.2"></span>after the order of Melchisedec</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p41.3"></span>are in the text of St.
Chrys. and in the</span> *Textus Rec* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p41.4"></span>. They are omitted in recent critical editions,
but are implied in the context.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[429:2968](1140111.htm#fr_2967) <span
id="v.xvii-p41.5"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p42.1"></span>The common editions add here</span> [Heb.
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024)<span
id="v.xvii-p42.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p42.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p42.4"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p42.5"></span>and they truly were many priests, because they
were not suffered to continue by reason of death; but this \[man\]
because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p42.6"></span> St. Chrys. alludes
to these words in what follows: but without citing them.</span>

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[429:2969](1140111.htm#fr_2968) <span
id="v.xvii-p42.7"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p43.1"></span>The common texts add here</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p43.2"></span>and that it is with
oath-taking</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p43.3"></span>: this is probably to be understood: as if he
had said, He lays down a second point of difference that, &c.</span>

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[429:2970](1140111.htm#fr_2969) <span
id="v.xvii-p44.6"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p45.1"></span>εἰς τὸ παντελές</span>

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[429:2971](1140111.htm#fr_2970) <span
id="v.xvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p47.1"></span>in this world.</span>

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[429:2972](1140111.htm#fr_2971) <span
id="v.xvii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p48.1"></span>in the other world.</span>

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[429:2973](1140111.htm#fr_2972) <span
id="v.xvii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p51.1"></span>In Mr. Field’s ed.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.2"></span>καὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.3"></span>is read here, and where the
words are cited afterwards, in the common texts it is omitted. So
critical editors consider that the sacred text is</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.4"></span>τοιοῦτος γὰρ ἡμῖν καὶ
ἔπρεπεν κ. λ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.5"></span>.
\[The critical editors are not agreed; some insert the</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.6"></span>καί</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p51.7"></span>, others place it in
brackets.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[430:2974](1140111.htm#fr_2973) <span
id="v.xvii-p51.8"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p52.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p52.2"></span>ποπτεύειν</span>

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[430:2975](1140111.htm#fr_2974) <span
id="v.xvii-p52.4"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p53.1"></span>As this passage is cited by Facundus
Hermianensis, an African Bishop, writing about the year 547, it may be
well to give his words and also the two Greek texts corresponding to
them, as an evidence that the text which he had was of the short and
simple form now restored in Mr. Field’s edition.</span>

<span id="v.xvii-p54"></span>“In interpretatione quoque Epistolæ ad
Hebræos, Sermone xiv, de eo quod scriptum est, *Sicut consummatio per
Leviticum sacerdotium erat* , ita locutus est: Dicit alter propheta,
Dolus non est inventus in ore ejus, hoc est nulla calliditas. Hoc
forsitan quisquam de Deo dicat, et non erubescit dicens, quia Deus non
est callidus, neque dolosus. De eo vero qui secundum carnem est, habebit
forsitan rationem.” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p54.1"></span> (pro def. trium capp. lib. xi. c. 5, p. 488,
ed Sirm.) \[ *Gall. Bibl. Patr* . xi. 789.\]</span>

<span id="v.xvii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p55.1"></span>Mr. Field’s text is,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.2"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.3"></span>\[</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.4"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.5"></span>om. <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xvii-p55.6"></span>ms.</span> R.)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p55.7"></span>λέγει ἕτερος προφήτης·  δόλος οὐχ εὑρέθη ἐν τῷ
στόματι αὐτοῦ (τουτέστιν, οὐχ ὕπουλος· τοῦτο ἄν τις περὶ Θεοῦ
εἴποι</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.8"></span>;</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.9"></span>καὶ οὐκ αἰσχύνεται
λέγων, ὅτι ὁ θεὸς οὐκ ἔστιν ὕπουλος, οὐδὲ δολερός</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.10"></span>;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p55.11"></span>περὶ μέντοι τοῦ κατὰ σάκρα
ἔχοι ἂν λόγον</span>

<span id="v.xvii-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p56.1"></span>The text of Savile and the Benedictines</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p56.2"></span>οὐχ ὕπουλος· καὶ ὅτι
τοιοῦτος, ἄκουε τοῦ προφήτου λέγοντος·  οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος ἐν τῷ στόματι
αὐτοῦ, τοῦτο οὖν ἄν τις περὶ Θεοῦ εἴποι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p56.3"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p56.4"></span>ὁ δὲ οὐκ αἰσχύνεται λέγων, ὅτι ὁ θεὸς οὐκ ἔστιν
ὕπουλος, οὐδὲ δολερός</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p56.5"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p56.6"></span>περὶ μὲν οὖν τοῦ κατὰ σάρκα ἔχοι ἂν
λόγον</span>

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[430:2976](1140111.htm#fr_2975) <span
id="v.xvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p58.1"></span>This is the reading adopted by Mr. Field. The
common texts give the passage as it stands in the text of the Epistle
\[where there is no *var. lect.* of importance.—F.G.\]. Indeed what is
omitted must plainly be intended to be supplied.</span>

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[430:2977](1140111.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="v.xvii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p62.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p62.2"></span>τετελειωμένον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p62.3"></span>. This is the common Levitical term for
priestly *consecration* . It is also used in the Classics in a
corresponding sense of *initiation* into the mysteries. The English
edition takes it in the common sense of *perfected* .—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[430:2978](1140111.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="v.xvii-p62.4"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p63.1"></span>τὰς ἀντιδιαστολὰς κυρίας</span>

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[430:2979](1140111.htm#fr_2978) <span
id="v.xvii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p64.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p64.2"></span>τετελειωμένον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p64.3"></span>. This is the common Levitical term for
priestly *consecration* . It is also used in the Classics in a
corresponding sense of *initiation* into the mysteries. The English
edition takes it in the common sense of *perfected* .—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[430:2980](1140111.htm#fr_2979) <span
id="v.xvii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p67.1"></span>i.e. Baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[431:2981](1140111.htm#fr_2980) <span
id="v.xvii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p69.1"></span>Baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[431:2982](1140111.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="v.xvii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p71.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p71.2"></span>γνώμων</span>

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[431:2983](1140111.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="v.xvii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p73.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p73.2"></span>παρρησιαστος</span>

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[431:2984](1140111.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="v.xvii-p73.3"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p74.1"></span>\[St. Cyril Alex. speaks too of those who put
off baptism till they are old and receive forgiveness through it, but
have nought to bring to their Master. Glaph. 273.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[431:2985](1140111.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="v.xvii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p75.1"></span>i.e. mercy \[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p75.2"></span>χάριτι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p75.3"></span>, the common word for</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p75.4"></span>grace.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p75.5"></span>—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[431:2986](1140111.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="v.xvii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p79.1"></span>βασίλεια</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p79.2"></span>, but Sav.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p79.3"></span>βασιλεια</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p79.4"></span>, a kingdom.</span>

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[431:2987](1140111.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="v.xvii-p79.5"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p80"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p80.1"></span>The</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p80.2"></span>Δεκανοὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p80.3"></span>at Constantinople were lictors, and had the
charge of burying the dead: they are otherwise called</span> *funerum
elatores, lecticarii, vespillones, libitinarii* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p80.4"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p80.5"></span>κοπιᾶται</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xvii-p80.6"></span>. Corippus, lib. iii.,
says</span>

<span id="v.xvii-p81"></span>Jamque ordine certo

<span id="v.xvii-p82"></span>Turba *decanorum* , cursorum, in rebus
agentum,

<span id="v.xvii-p83"></span>Cumque palatinis stans candida turba
tribunis.”

<span id="v.xvii-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p84.1"></span>Suicer, *Thes. Eccles* . p. 835, cited by Mr.
Field.</span>

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[432:2988](1140111.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="v.xvii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p88.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p88.2"></span>περβαίνει</span>

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[432:2989](1140111.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="v.xvii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p92"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p92.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xvii-p92.2"></span>κτραχηλίσῃς</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIV](1140112)
