[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140038)  [Next](1140040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxvi"></span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>[John
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>“The woman then left her water pot, and
went her way into the city, and saith to the men, Come, see a Man which
told me all things that ever I did; is not this the Christ?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>We</span> require much fervor and uproused
zeal, for without these it is impossible to obtain the blessings
promised to us. And to show this, Christ at one time saith, “Except a
man take  <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) up his cross and
follow Me, he is not worthy of Me” ( [Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p5.5"></span> );
at another, “I am come to send fire upon the earth, and what will I if
it be already kindled?” ( [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p5.6"></span> );
by both these desiring to represent to us a disciple full of heat and
fire, and prepared for every danger. Such an one was this woman. For so
kindled was she by His words, that she left her water pot and the
purpose for which she came, ran into the city, and drew all the people
to Jesus. “Come,” she saith, “see a Man which told me all things that
ever I did.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p6"></span> Observe her zeal and wisdom. She came to
draw water, and when she had lighted upon the true Well, she after that
despised the material one; teaching us even by this trifling instance
when we are listening to spiritual matters to overlook the things of
this life, and make no account of them. For what the Apostles did, that,
after her ability, did this woman also.  <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) They when they were called, left their
nets; she of her own accord, without the command of any, leaves her
water pot, and winged by joy  <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891)
performs the office of Evangelists. And she calls not one or two, as did
Andrew and Philip, but having aroused a whole city and people, so
brought them to Him.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p9"></span> Observe too how prudently she speaks; she
said not, “Come and see the Christ,” but with the same condescension
 <span id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) by which Christ had netted her
she draws the men to Him; “Come,” she saith, “see a Man who told me all
that ever I did.” She was not ashamed to say that He “told me all that
ever I did.” Yet she might have spoken otherwise, “Come, see one that
prophesieth”; but when the soul is inflamed with holy fire, it looks
then to nothing earthly, neither to glory nor to shame, but belongs to
one thing alone, the flame which occupieth it.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-Page_118"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p11"></span> “Is not this the Christ?” Observe again
here the great wisdom of the woman; she neither declared the fact
plainly, nor was she silent, for she desired not to bring them in by her
own assertion, but to make them to share in this opinion by hearing Him;
which rendered her words more readily acceptable to them. Yet He had not
told all her life to her, only from what had been said she was persuaded
(that He was informed) as to the rest. Nor did she say, “Come, believe,”
but, “Come, see”; a gentler  <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893)
expression than the other, and one which more attracted them. Seest thou
the wisdom of the woman? She knew, she knew certainly that having but
tasted that Well, they would be affected in the same manner as herself.
Yet any one of the grosser sort would have concealed the reproof which
Jesus had given; but she parades her own life, and brings it forward
before all men, so as to attract and capture all.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p13"></span> [John
4.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>
. “In the mean time His disciples asked  <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) Him, saying, Master, eat.” “Asked,”
here is “besought,” in their native language; for seeing Him wearied
with the journey, and the oppressive heat, they entreated Him; for their
request concerning food proceeded not from hastiness, but from loving
affection for their Teacher? What then saith Christ?

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p15"></span> [John
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#033)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p15.1"></span> .
“I have meat to eat that ye know not of. Therefore” (saith the
Evangelist) “said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought Him
aught to eat?”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p16"></span>Why now wonderest thou that the woman
when she heard of “water,” still imagined mere water to be meant, when
even the disciples are in the same case, and as yet suppose nothing
spiritual, but are perplexed? though they still show their accustomed
modesty and reverence toward their Master, conversing one with the
other, but not daring to put any question to Him. And this they do in
other places, desiring to ask Him, but not asking. What then saith
Christ?

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p17"></span> [John
4.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p17.1"></span>
. “My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to finish His
work.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p18"></span> He here calleth the salvation of men
“meat,” showing what an earnest desire He hath of providing for us;
 <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) for as we long for food, so He
that we may be saved. And hear how in all places He revealeth not all
off-hand, but first throweth the hearer into perplexity, in order that
having begun to seek the meaning of what has been said, and then being
perplexed and in difficulty, he may when what he sought appears, receive
it the more readily, and be made more attentive to listening. For
wherefore said He not at once, “My meat is to do the will of My Father?”
(though not even this would have been clear, yet clearer than the
other.) But what saith He? “I have meat to eat that ye know not of”; for
He desireth, as I said, first to make them more attentive through their
uncertainty, and by dark sayings like these to accustom them to listen
to His words. But what is “the will of the Father”? He next speaketh of
this, and explaineth.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p20"></span> [John
4.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p20.1"></span>
. “Say ye not, that there are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?
Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look upon the fields, for
they are white already to harvest.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p21"></span>\[2.\] Behold, He again by familiar words
leadeth them up to the consideration of greater matters; for when He
spoke of “meat,” He signified nothing else than the salvation of the men
who should come to Him; and again, the “field” and the “harvest” signify
the very same thing, the multitude of souls prepared for the reception
of the preaching; and the “eyes” of which He speaketh are those both of
the mind and of the body; (for they now beheld the crowd of Samaritans
advancing;) and the readiness of their will He calleth, “fields already
white.” For as the ears of corn, when they have become white, and are
ready for reaping, so these, He saith, are prepared and fitted for
salvation.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p22"></span> And wherefore instead of calling them
“fields” and “harvest,” did He not plainly say, that “the men were
coming to believe and were ready to receive the Word, having been
instructed by the Prophets; and now bringing forth fruit”? What mean
these figures used by Him? for this He doth not here only, but through
all the Gospel; and the Prophets also employ the same method, saying
many things in a metaphorical manner. What then may be the cause of
this? for the grace of the Spirit did not ordain it to be so without a
reason, but why and wherefore? On two accounts; one, that the discourse
may be more vivid, and bring what is said more clearly before our eyes.
For the mind when it has laid hold on a familiar image of the matters in
hand, is more aroused, and beholding them as it were in a picture, is
occupied by them to a greater degree. This is one reason; the other is,
that the statement may be sweetened, and that the memory of what is said
may be more lasting. For assertion does not subdue and bring in an
ordinary hearer so much as narration by objects, and the representation
of experience.  <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) Which one may
here see most wisely effected by the parable.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p24"></span> [John
4.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p24.1"></span>
. “And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p25"></span>For the fruit of an earthly harvest
profiteth <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_119"></span> not to life eternal, but to this which is
for a time; but the spiritual fruit to that which hath neither age nor
death. Seest thou that the expressions are of sense, but the thoughts
spiritual, and that by the very words themselves He divideth things
earthly from heavenly? For when in discoursing of water He made this the
peculiar property of the heavenly Water, that “he who drinketh it shall
never thirst,” so He doth here also when He saith, “that this fruit is
gathered unto eternal life.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p26"></span>“That both he that soweth and he that
reapeth may rejoice together.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p27"></span> Who is “he that soweth”? Who “he that
reapeth”? The Prophets are they that sowed but they reaped not, but the
Apostles. “Yet not on this account are they deprived of the pleasure and
recompense of their labors, but they rejoice and are glad with us,
although they reap not with us. For harvest is not such work as sowing.
I therefore have kept you for that in which the toil is less and the
pleasure greater, and not for sowing because in that there is much
hardship and toil. In harvest the return is large, the labor not so
great; nay there is much facility.”  <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) By these arguments He here desireth to
prove, that “the wish of the Prophets is, that all men should come to
Me.” This also the Law was engaged in effecting; and for this they
sowed, that they might produce this fruit.  <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) He showeth moreover that He sent them
also, and that there was a very intimate connection between the New
Covenant and the Old, and all this He effecteth at once by this parable.
He maketh mention also of a proverbial expression generally circulated.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p30"></span> [John
4.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p30.1"></span>
. “Herein,” He saith, “is that saying true, One soweth and another
reapeth.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p31"></span> These words the many used whenever one
party had supplied toil and another had reaped the fruits; and He saith,
“that the proverb is in this instance especially true, for the Prophets
labored, and ye reap the fruits of their labors.” He said not “the
rewards,” (for neither did their great labor go unrewarded,) but “the
fruits.” This also Daniel did, for he too makes mention of a proverb,
“Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked”; and David in his lamenting
makes mention of a similar proverb.  <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) Therefore He said beforehand, “that
both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together.” For since
He was about to declare, that “one hath sowed and another reapeth,” lest
any one should deem that the Prophets were deprived of their reward, He
asserteth something strange and paradoxical, such as never chanceth in
sensual things, but is peculiar to spiritual only. For in things of
sense, if it chance that one sow and another reap, they do not “rejoice
together,” but those who sowed are sad, as having labored for others,
and those who reap alone rejoice. But here it is not so, but those who
reap not what they sowed rejoice alike with those who reap; whence it is
clear that they too share the reward.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p33"></span> [John
4.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p33.1"></span>
. “I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labors; other men
labored, and ye are entered into their labors.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p34"></span> By this He the more encourageth them;
for when it seemed a very hard matter to go through all the world and
preach the Gospel, He showeth them that it is even most  <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) easy. The very difficult work was that
other, which required great labor, the putting in the seed, and
introducing the uninitiated soul to the knowledge of God. But wherefore
uttereth He these sayings? It is that when He sendeth them to preach
they may not be confounded, as though sent on a difficult task. “For
that of the Prophets,” He saith, “was the more difficult, and the fact
witnesseth to My word, that ye are come to what is easy; because as in
harvest time the fruits are collected with ease, and in one moment the
floor is filled with sheaves, which await  <span
id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) not the revolutions of the seasons,
and winter, and spring, and rain, so it is now. The facts proclaim it
aloud.” While He was in the midst of saying these things, the Samaritans
came forth, and the fruit was at once gathered together. On this account
 <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) He said, “Lift up your eyes,
and look on the fields, that they are white.” Thus He spake, and the
fact was clear, and the words seen (true) by the event. For saith St.
John,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p38"></span> [John
4.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p38.1"></span>
. “Many of the Samaritans of that city believed on Him for the saying of
the woman which testified, He told me all that ever I did.”

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p39"></span> They perceived  <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903) that the woman would not from favor
have admired One who had rebuked her sins, nor to gratify another have
paraded her own course of life.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p41"></span>\[3.\] Let us then also imitate this
woman, and in the case of our own sins not be ashamed of men, but fear,
as is meet, God who now beholdeth what is done, and who hereafter
punisheth those who do not now repent. At present we do the opposite of
this, for we fear not Him who shall judge us, but shudder at those who
do not in anything hurt us, and tremble at the shame which comes from
them. Therefore in the very thing which we fear, in this do we incur
punishment.  For he who now regards only the reproach of men, but when
God seeth is not <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_120"></span> ashamed to do anything unseemly, and who
will not repent and be converted, in that day will be made an example,
not only before one or two, but in the sight of the whole world. For
that a vast assembly is seated there to behold righteous actions as well
as those which are not such, let the parable of the sheep and the goats
teach thee, as also the blessed Paul when He saith, “For we must all
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it
be good or bad” ( [2 Cor. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p41.1"></span> ), and again, “Who will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness.” ( [1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p41.2"></span> .)
Hast thou done or imagined any evil thing, and dost thou hide it from
man? yet from God thou hidest it not. But for this thou careth nothing;
the eyes of men, these are thy fear.  Think then that thou wilt not be
able to escape the sight even of men in that day  <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904) ; for all things as in a picture shall
then be set before our very eyes, so that each shall be self-condemned.
This is clear even from the instance of Dives, for the poor man whom he
had neglected, Lazarus I mean, he saw standing before his eyes, and the
finger which he had often loathed, he intreats may become a comfort to
him then. I exhort you therefore, that although no one see what we do,
yet that each of us enter into his own conscience, and set reason for
his judge, and bring forward his transgressions, and if he desire them
not to be exposed to public view then in that fearful day, let him now
heal his wounds, let him apply to them the medicines of repentance. For
it is in the power, yea, it is in the power of one full of ten thousand
wounds to go hence whole. For “if ye forgive,” He saith, “your sins are
forgiven unto you.”  <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) ( [Matt.
vi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p43.4"></span> , not verbally quoted.) For as sins buried
 <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) in Baptism appear no more, so
these  <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) also shall disappear, if
we be willing to repent. And repentance is the not doing the same again;
for he that again puts his hand to the same, is like the dog that
returneth to his own vomit, and like him in the proverb who cards wool
into the fire,  <span id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) and draws water
into a cask full of holes. It behooves therefore to depart both in
action and in thought from what we have dared to do, and having
departed, to apply to the wounds the remedies which are the contraries
of our sins. For instance: hast thou been grasping and covetous? Abstain
from rapine, and apply almsgiving to the wound. Hast thou been a
fornicator? Abstain from fornication, and apply chastity to the wound.
Hast thou spoken ill of thy brother, and injured him? Cease finding
fault,  <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) and apply kindness. Let
us thus act with respect to each point in which we have offended, and
let us not carelessly pass by our sins, for there awaiteth us hereafter,
there awaiteth us a season of account. Wherefore also Paul said, “The
Lord is at hand: be careful for nothing.” ( [Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p47.3"></span> .)
But we perhaps must add the contrary of this, “The Lord is at hand, be
careful.” For they might well hear, “Be careful for nothing,” living as
they did in affliction, and labors, and trials; but they who live by
rapine, or in luxury, and who shall give a grievous reckoning, would in
reason hear not this, but that other, “The Lord is at hand, be careful.”
Since no long time now remains until the consummation, but the world is
hastening to its end; this the wars declare, this the afflictions, this
the earthquakes, this the love which hath waxed cold. For as the body
when in its last gasp and near to death, draws to itself ten thousand
sufferings; and as when a house is about to fall, many portions are wont
to fall beforehand from the roof and walls; so is the end of the world
nigh and at the very doors, and therefore ten thousand woes are
everywhere scattered abroad. If the Lord was then “at hand,” much more
is He now “at hand.” If three hundred  <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) years ago, when those words were used,
Paul called that season “the fullness of time,” much more would he have
called the present so. But perhaps for this very reason some disbelieve,
yet they ought on this account to believe the more. For whence knowest
thou, O man, that the end is not “at hand,” and the words shortly to be
accomplished? For as we speak of the end of the year not as being the
last day, but also the last month, though it has thirty days; so if of
so many years I call even four hundred years “the end,” I shall not be
wrong; and so at that time Paul spoke of the end by anticipation. Let us
then set ourselves in order, let us delight in the fear of God; for if
we live here without fear of Him, His coming will surprise us suddenly,
when we are neither careful, nor looking for Him. As Christ declared
when He said, “For as in the days of Noah, and as in the days of Lot, so
shall it be at the end of this world.” ( [Matt. xxiv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p48.3"></span> ,
not verbally quoted.) This also Paul declared when he said, “For when
they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon
them, as travail upon a woman with child.” ( [1 Thess. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p48.4"></span> .)
What means, “as travail upon a woman with child”? Often have pregnant
women when sporting, or at their meals, or in the bath or market-place,
and foreseeing nothing of what was coming, been seized in a moment by
their pains. Now since <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvi-Page_121"></span> our case is like theirs, let us ever be
prepared, for we shall not always hear these things, we shall not always
have power to do them. “In the grave” saith David, “who shall give Thee
thanks?”  <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) ( [Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005) <span id="iv.xxxvi-p49.3"></span> .)
Let us then repent here, that so we may find God merciful unto us in the
day that is to come, and be enabled to enjoy abundant forgiveness; which
may we all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_889"></span>[117:890](1140039.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>ὃ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p5.3"></span>οὐ λαμβάνει κ.τ.λ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p5.4"></span>. G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_890"></span>[117:891](1140039.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p7.2"></span>in a higher degree.</span> ”

<span id="fn_891"></span>[117:892](1140039.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p8.2"></span>by grace.</span> ”

<span id="fn_892"></span>[117:893](1140039.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>i.e. to their infirmity.</span>

<span id="fn_893"></span>[118:894](1140039.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p12.2"></span>more fearful.</span> ”

<span id="fn_894"></span>[118:895](1140039.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>ἠ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p14.2"></span>ρώτων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p14.3"></span>. E.V. prayed: Ben and <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p14.4"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl.</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p14.5"></span>ἠ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p14.6"></span>ρώτων ἐνταῦθα παρεκαλοῦν
ἐστὶ, τῇ ἐγχωρίῳ αὐτῶν φωνῇ</span>

<span id="fn_895"></span>[118:896](1140039.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p19"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p19.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p19.2"></span>in Bodl.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p19.3"></span>our salvation.</span> ”

<span id="fn_896"></span>[118:897](1140039.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p23.1"></span>i.e. given by means of things which are
objects of experience. </span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p23.2"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p23.3"></span>πογραφὴ πείρας</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p23.4"></span>, al.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p23.5"></span>πείρα</span>

<span id="fn_897"></span>[119:898](1140039.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.1"></span>εὐκολία</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.2"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.3"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.4"></span>αστώνη</span>

<span id="fn_898"></span>[119:899](1140039.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p28.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p29.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p29.2"></span>by this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_899"></span>[119:900](1140039.htm#fr_899) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.1"></span>There is no authority for a different
reading, but it seems to be rightly conjectured by Savile and Ben. that
the names</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.2"></span>Daniel</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.3"></span>and</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.4"></span>David</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.5"></span>should be transposed. The proverb is that
used by David,</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.6"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.7"></span>[1 Sam. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.8"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.9"></span>, and the other passage alluded to may
be</span> <span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.11"></span>[Dan. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.12"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.13"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.14"></span>the wicked shall do wickedly.</span> ” <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.15"></span>ms.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.16"></span>in Bodl. reads,</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.17"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p32.18"></span>νομία ἐκ
βαβυλῶνος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.19"></span>for</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.20"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p32.21"></span>ξ ἀνόμων πλημμελεία</span>

<span id="fn_900"></span>[119:901](1140039.htm#fr_900) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p35.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p35.2"></span>more.</span> ”

<span id="fn_901"></span>[119:902](1140039.htm#fr_901) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p36.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p36.2"></span>awaits.</span> ”

<span id="fn_902"></span>[119:903](1140039.htm#fr_902) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p37"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p37.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p37.2"></span>in Bodl.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p37.3"></span>alluding to these.</span> ”

<span id="fn_903"></span>[119:904](1140039.htm#fr_903) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p40"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p40.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p40.2"></span>in Bodl.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p40.3"></span>as soon as they heard the woman they
believed, for they,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p40.4"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_904"></span>[120:905](1140039.htm#fr_904) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p42"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p42.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p42.2"></span>in Bodleian reads here,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p42.3"></span>and be more careful than
thy (present) self.</span> ”

<span id="fn_905"></span>[120:906](1140039.htm#fr_905) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p43"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p43.1"></span>ms.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p43.2"></span>in Bodl. reads,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p43.3"></span>My Heavenly Father will
also forgive you, but if ye forgive not, neither will He forgive
you.</span> ”

<span id="fn_906"></span>[120:907](1140039.htm#fr_906) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p43.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p44.1"></span>καταχωννύμενα</span>

<span id="fn_907"></span>[120:908](1140039.htm#fr_907) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p45.1"></span>i.e. sins done after Baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_908"></span>[120:909](1140039.htm#fr_908) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p46.1"></span>Εἰς πῦρ ξαίνοντι</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p46.2"></span>. Plat. *Legg.* vi. p.
750. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p46.3"></span>And
like,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvi-p46.4"></span>&c.
is not in the text of Savile.</span>

<span id="fn_909"></span>[120:910](1140039.htm#fr_909) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p46.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.2"></span>speaking evil.</span> ”

<span id="fn_910"></span>[120:911](1140039.htm#fr_910) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p47.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p48.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p48.2"></span>four hundred.</span> ”

<span id="fn_911"></span>[121:912](1140039.htm#fr_911) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p48.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p49.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvi-p49.2"></span>confess to Thee.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 4.40—43](1140040)
