[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140013)  [Next](1140015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi"></span> <span id="iv.xi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="iv.xi-Page_32"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xi-p2.2"></span>[John i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="iv.xi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>“He came unto His own, and His own received
Him not.”

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xi-p4.1"></span>If</span> ye remember our former reflections, we
shall the more zealously proceed with the building up  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) of what remains, as doing so for great
gain. For so will our discourse be more intelligible to you who remember
what has been already said, and we shall not need much labor, because
you are able through your great love of learning to see more clearly
into what remains. The man who is always losing what is given to him
will always need a teacher, and will never know anything; but he who
retains what he has received, and so receives in addition what remains,
will quickly be a teacher instead of a learner, and useful not only to
himself, but to all others also; as, conjecturing from their great
readiness to hear, I anticipate that this assembly will specially be.
Come then, let us lay up in your souls, as in a safe treasury, the
Lord’s money, and unfold, as far as the grace of the Spirit may afford
us power, the words this day set before us.

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span>He (St. John) had said, speaking of the old
times, that “the world knew him not” ( [John
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span id="iv.xi-p6.1"></span> );
afterwards he comes down in his narrative to the times of the
proclamation (of the Gospel), and says, “He came to His own, and His own
received Him not,” now calling the Jews “His own,” as His peculiar
people, or perhaps even all mankind, as created by Him. And as above,
when perplexed at the folly of the many, and ashamed of our common
nature, he said that “the world by Him was made,” and having been made,
did not recognize its Maker; so here again, being troubled beyond
bearing  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) at the stupidity of the
Jews and the many, he sets forth the charge in a yet more striking
manner, saying, that “His own received Him not,” and that too when “He
came to them.” And not only he, but the prophets also, wondering, said
the very same, as did afterwards Paul, amazed at the very same things.
Thus did the prophets cry aloud in the person of Christ, saying, “A
people whom I have not known, have served Me; as soon as they heard Me,
they obeyed Me; the strange children have dealt falsely with Me.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) The strange children have waxed aged,
and have halted from their paths.” ( [Ps. xviii.
43-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043) <span id="iv.xi-p8.1"></span> ,
LXX.) And again, “They to whom it had not been told concerning Him,
shall see, and they which had not heard, shall understand.” And, “I was
found of them that sought Me not” ( [Isa. lii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015) <span id="iv.xi-p8.2"></span> ); “I
was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.” ( [Isa.
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), [Rom.
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020)<span id="iv.xi-p8.3"></span> .)
And Paul, in his Epistles to the Romans, has said, “What then? Israel
hath not obtained that which he seeketh for: but the election hath
obtained it.” ( [Rom. xi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007) <span
id="iv.xi-p8.4"></span> .) And again; “What shall we say then? That the
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained unto
righteousness: but Israel which followed after the law of righteousness,
hath not attained to the law of righteousness.” ( [Rom. ix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030) <span id="iv.xi-p8.5"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span> For it is a thing indeed worthy of our
amazement, how they who were nurtured in (knowledge of) the prophetical
books, who heard Moses every day telling them ten thousand things
concerning the coming of the Christ, and the other prophets afterwards,
who moreover themselves beheld Christ Himself daily working miracles
among them, giving up His time  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)
to them alone, neither as yet allowing His disciples to depart into the
way of the Gentiles, or to enter into a city of Samaritans, nor doing so
Himself, but everywhere  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)
declaring that He was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel (
[Matt. x. 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005) <span
id="iv.xi-p11.3"></span> ): how, (I say), while they saw the signs, and
heard the Prophets, and had Christ Himself continually putting them in
remembrance, they yet made themselves once for all so blind and dull, as
by none of these things to be brought to faith in Christ. ( [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024) <span id="iv.xi-p11.4"></span> .)
While they of the Gentiles, who had enjoyed none of these things, who
had never heard the oracles of God, not, as one may say, so much as in a
dream, but ever ranging among the fables of madmen, (for heathen
philosophy is this,) having ever in their hands  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) the sillinesses of their poets, nailed
to stocks and stones, and neither in doctrines nor in conversation
 <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) possessing anything good or
sound. (For their way of life was more impure and more accursed than
their doctrine. As was likely; for when they saw their gods delighting
in all wickedness, worshiped by shameful words, and more shameful deeds,
reckoning this festivity and praise, and moreover honored by foul
murders, and child-slaughters, how should not they emulate these
things?) Still, fallen as they were as low as the very depth of
wickedness, on a <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="iv.xi-Page_33"></span> sudden, as by the agency of some machine,
they have appeared to us shining from on high, and from the very summit
of heaven.

<span id="iv.xi-p14"></span>How then and whence came it to pass? Hear
Paul telling you. For that blessed person searching exactly into these
things, ceased not until he had found the cause, and had declared it to
all others. What then is it? and whence came such blindness upon the
Jews? Hear him who was entrusted with this stewardship declare. What
then does he say in resolving this doubt of the many? ( [1 Cor. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#017) <span id="iv.xi-p14.1"></span> .)
“For they,” says he, “being ignorant of God’s righteousness and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.” ( [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003) <span id="iv.xi-p14.2"></span> .)
Wherefore they have suffered this. And again, explaining the same matter
in other terms, he says, “What shall we say then? That the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have attained unto
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith; but Israel,
which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith.
For they stumbled at that stumbling stone.” ( [Rom.
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)<span id="iv.xi-p14.3"></span> .)
His meaning is this: “These men’s unbelief has been the cause of their
misfortunes, and their haughtiness was parent of their unbelief.” For
when having before enjoyed greater privileges than the heathen,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) through having received the law,
through knowing God, and the rest which Paul enumerates, they after the
coming of Christ saw the heathen and themselves called on equal terms
through faith, and after faith received one of the circumcision in
nothing preferred to the Gentile, they came to envy and were stung by
their haughtiness, and could not endure the unspeakable and exceeding
lovingkindness of the Lord. So this has happened to them from nothing
else but pride, and wickedness, and unkindness.

<span id="iv.xi-p16"></span> \[2.\] For in what, O most foolish of men,
are ye injured by the care  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202)
bestowed on others? How are your blessings made less through having
others to share the same? But of a truth wickedness is blind, and cannot
readily perceive anything that it ought. Being therefore stung by the
prospect of having others to share the same confidence,  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) they thrust a sword against
themselves, and cast themselves out from the lovingkindness of God. And
with good reason. For He saith, “Friend, I do thee no wrong, I will give
to ‘these also’ even as unto thee.” ( [Matt. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014) <span id="iv.xi-p18.2"></span> .)
Or rather, these Jews are not deserving even of these words. For the man
in the parable if he was discontented, could yet speak of the labors and
weariness, the heat and sweat, of a whole day. But what could these men
have to tell? nothing like this, but slothfulness and profligacy and ten
thousand evil things of which all the prophets continued ever to accuse
them, and by which they like the Gentiles had offended against God. And
Paul declaring this says, “For there is no difference between the Jew
and the Greek: For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God:
being justified freely by His grace.” ( [Rom.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012), [Rom.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span id="iv.xi-p18.3"></span> .)
And on this head he treats profitably and very wisely throughout that
Epistle. But in a former part of it he proves that they are worthy of
still greater punishment. “For as many as have sinned in the law shall
be judged by the law” ( [Rom. ii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)
<span id="iv.xi-p18.4"></span> ); that is to say, more severely, as
having for their accuser the law as well as nature. And not for this
only, but for that they have been the cause that God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles: “My  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) Name,” He
saith, “is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.” ( [Rom.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024), [Isa.
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="iv.xi-p19.2"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xi-p20"></span>Since now this it was that stung them most,
(for the thing appeared incredible even to those of the circumcision who
believed, and therefore they brought it as a charge against Peter, when
he was come up to them from Cesarea, that he “went in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them” ( [Acts xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003) <span id="iv.xi-p20.1"></span> );
and after that they had learned the dispensation of God, even so still
 <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) they wondered how “on the
Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost” ( [Acts x.
45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045) <span id="iv.xi-p21.1"></span> ):
showing by their astonishment that they could never have expected so
incredible a thing,) since then he knew that this touched them nearest,
see how he has emptied  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) their
pride and relaxed  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) their highly
swelling insolence. For after having discoursed on the case of the
heathen,  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) and shown that they
had not from any quarter any excuse, or hope of salvation, and after
having definitely charged them both with the perversion  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) of their doctrines and the uncleanness
of their lives, he shifts his argument to the Jews; and  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) after recounting all the expressions
of the Prophet, in which he had said that they were polluted,
treacherous, hypocritical persons, and had “altogether become
unprofitable,” that there was “none” among them “that seeketh after
God,” that they had “all gone out of the way” ( [Rom. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012) <span id="iv.xi-p26.1"></span> ),
and the like, he adds, “Now we know that what things soever the law
saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.” ( [Rom. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019) <span id="iv.xi-p26.2"></span> .)
“For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.” ( [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023) <span id="iv.xi-p26.3"></span> .)

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="iv.xi-Page_34"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p27"></span> Why then exaltest thou thyself, O Jew? why
art thou high minded? for thy mouth also is stopped, thy boldness also
is taken away, thou also with all the world art become guilty, and, like
others, art placed in need of being justified freely. Thou oughtest
surely even if thou hadst stood upright and hadst had great boldness
with God, not even so to have envied those who should be pitied and
saved through His lovingkindness. This is the extreme of wickedness, to
pine at the blessings of others; especially when this was to be effected
without any loss of thine. If indeed the salvation of others had been
prejudicial to thy advantages, thy grieving might have been reasonable;
though not even then would it have been so to one who had learned true
wisdom.  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) But if thy reward is
not increased by the punishment of another, nor diminished by his
welfare, why dost thou bewail thyself because that other is freely
saved? As I said, thou oughtest not, even wert thou (one) of the
approved, to be pained at the salvation which cometh to the Gentiles
through grace. But when thou, who art guilty before thy Lord of the same
things as they, and hast thyself offended, art displeased at the good of
others, and thinkest great things, as if thou alone oughtest to be
partaker of the grace, thou art guilty not only of envy and insolence,
but of extreme folly, and mayest be liable to all the severest torments;
for thou hast planted within thyself the root of all evils, pride.

<span id="iv.xi-p29"></span>Wherefore a wise man has said, “Pride is the
beginning of sin” ( [Ecclesiasticus
10.13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013)<span id="iv.xi-p29.1"></span> ):
that is, its root, its source, its mother. By this the first created was
banished from that happy abode: by this the devil who deceived him had
fallen from that height of dignity; from which that accursed one,
knowing that the nature of the sin was sufficient to cast down even from
heaven itself, came this way when he labored to bring down Adam from
such high honor. For having puffed him up with the promise that he
should be as a God, so he broke him down, and cast him down into the
very gulfs of hell.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) Because
nothing so alienates men from the lovingkindness of God, and gives them
over to the fire of the pit,  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) as
the tyranny of pride. For when this is present with us, our whole life
becomes impure, even though we fulfill temperance, chastity, fasting,
prayer, almsgiving, anything. For, “Every one,” saith the wise man,
“that is proud in heart is an abomination  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) to the Lord.” ( [Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005) <span id="iv.xi-p32.1"></span> .)
Let us then restrain this swelling of the soul, let us cut up by the
roots this lump of pride, if at least we would wish to be clean, and to
escape the punishment appointed for the devil. For that the proud must
fall under the same punishment as that (wicked) one, hear Paul declare;
“Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
judgment, and the snare of the devil.”  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) What is “the judgment”?  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) He means, into the same
“condemnation,” the same punishment. How then does he say, that a man
may avoid this dreadful thing? By reflecting upon  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) his own nature, upon the number of his
sins, upon the greatness of the torments in that place, upon the
transitory nature of the things which seem bright in this world,
differing in nothing from grass, and more fading than the flowers of
spring. If we continually stir within ourselves these considerations,
and keep in mind those who have walked most upright, the devil, though
he strive ten thousand ways, will not be able to lift  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) us up, nor even to trip  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) us at all. May the God who is the God
of the humble, the good and merciful God, grant both to you and me a
broken and humbled heart, so shall we be enabled easily to order the
rest aright, to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[32:195](1140014.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span> al. “the dispensing.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[32:196](1140014.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p7.1"></span>δυσανασχετῶν</span>

<span id="fn_196"></span>[32:197](1140014.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span> “lied unto me.” LXX.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[32:198](1140014.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iv.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p10"></span> al. “conversing with.”

<span id="fn_198"></span>[32:199](1140014.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iv.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p11.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p11.2"></span>νω καὶ κάτω</span>

<span id="fn_199"></span>[32:200](1140014.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iv.xi-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p12.2"></span>νελίττοντες</span> , “unrolling.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[32:201](1140014.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iv.xi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p13.1"></span>πολιτείας</span> .

<span id="fn_201"></span>[33:202](1140014.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iv.xi-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p15.1"></span>̔</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p15.2"></span>Ελλήνων</span> .

<span id="fn_202"></span>[33:203](1140014.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iv.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p17.1"></span>κηδεμονίας</span> .

<span id="fn_203"></span>[33:204](1140014.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iv.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p18.1"></span>παῤῥησίας</span> .

<span id="fn_204"></span>[33:205](1140014.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iv.xi-p18.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p19.1"></span>τοῦ Θεοῦ</span> G. T.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[33:206](1140014.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iv.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p21"></span> al. “again.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[33:207](1140014.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iv.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p22"></span> al. “he does all things that he may empty.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[33:208](1140014.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iv.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p23"></span> al. “may relax.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[33:209](1140014.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iv.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p24.1"></span>τῶν ̔Ελληνίκων</span> .

<span id="fn_209"></span>[33:210](1140014.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iv.xi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p25.1"></span>διαστροφή</span> .

<span id="fn_210"></span>[33:211](1140014.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iv.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p26"></span> al. “then.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[34:212](1140014.htm#fr_211) <span
id="iv.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p28.1"></span>φιλοσοφεῖν</span> .

<span id="fn_212"></span>[34:213](1140014.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iv.xi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p30.1"></span>ᾅ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p30.2"></span>δου</span> .

<span id="fn_213"></span>[34:214](1140014.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iv.xi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p31.1"></span>γεέννης</span> .

<span id="fn_214"></span>[34:215](1140014.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iv.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p32"></span> “Unclean,” LXX.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[34:216](1140014.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iv.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p33"></span> [1 Tim.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.xi-p33.1"></span>
(partially quoted).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[34:217](1140014.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iv.xi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p34.1"></span>κρίμα</span> , “condemnation,” E.V.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[34:218](1140014.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.xi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p35"></span> al. “calculating.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[34:219](1140014.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p36.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p36.2"></span>πᾶραι</span> .

<span id="fn_219"></span>[34:220](1140014.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.xi-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p37.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi-p37.2"></span>ποσκελίσαι</span> (a gymnastic term like the
preceding).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.11](1140015)
