[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140051)  [Next](1140053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xlix"></span> <span id="iv.xlix-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="iv.xlix-Page_166"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xlix-p1.1"></span>Homily XLVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xlix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xlix-p2.2"></span>[John
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053),
[54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)<span
id="iv.xlix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p3"></span> *“Jesus therefore said unto them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink His blood, ye have not eternal*  <span
id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314) *life in yourselves. Whoso eateth
My flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath life*  <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) *in himself.”*

<span id="iv.xlix-p6"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xlix-p6.1"></span>When</span> we converse of spiritual things,
let there be nothing secular in our souls, nothing earthy, let all such
thoughts retire, and be banished, and let us  <span
id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) be entirely given up to the hearing
the divine oracles only. For if at the arrival of a king  <span
id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) all confusion is driven away, much
more when the Spirit speaketh with us do we need  <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) great stillness, great awe. And
worthy of awe is that which is said to-day. How it is so, hear. “Verily
I say unto you, Except a man eat My flesh, and drink My blood, he hath
not eternal life in him.” Since the Jews had before asserted that this
was impossible, He showeth not only that it is not impossible, but that
it is absolutely necessary. Wherefore He addeth, “He that eateth My
flesh and drinketh My blood, hath eternal life.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p10"></span>“And I will raise him up at the last day.”
For since He had said, “He that eateth of this bread shall not die for
ever” ( [John 6.50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#050)<span
id="iv.xlix-p10.1"></span> , not verbally quoted), and it was likely
that this would stand in their way, (just as they before said, “Abraham
is dead, and the prophets are dead; and how sayest Thou, that he shall
not taste of death?”— [John 8.52](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#052)<span
id="iv.xlix-p10.2"></span> , not verbally quoted.) He bringeth forward
the Resurrection to solve the question, and to show that (the man who
eateth) shall not die at the last.  <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319) He continually handleth the subject
of the Mysteries, showing the necessity of the action, and that it must
by all means be done.

<span id="iv.xlix-p12"></span> [John
6.55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055)<span id="iv.xlix-p12.1"></span> .
“For My flesh is true  <span id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320) meat,
and My blood is true drink.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p14"></span> What is that He saith?  <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321) He either desireth to declare that
this is the true meat which saveth the soul, or to assure them
concerning what had been said, that they might not suppose the words to
be a mere enigma or parable, but might know that it is by all means
needful to eat the Body. Then He saith,

<span id="iv.xlix-p16"></span> [John
6.56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056)<span id="iv.xlix-p16.1"></span> .
“He that eateth My flesh, dwelleth in Me.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p17"></span> This He said, showing that such an one is
blended with  <span id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322) Him. Now what
follows seems unconnected, unless we enquire into the sense; for, saith
some one, after saying, “He that eateth My flesh, dwelleth in Me,” what
kind of a consequence is it to add,

<span id="iv.xlix-p19"></span> [John
6.57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="iv.xlix-p19.1"></span> .
“As the living Father hath sent Me, and I live by the Father”?

<span id="iv.xlix-p20"></span> Yet the words harmonize perfectly. For
since He continually spake of “eternal life,” to prove this point He
introduceth the expression, “dwelleth in Me”; for “if he dwelleth in Me,
and I live, it is plain that he will live also.” Then He saith, “As the
living Father hath sent Me.” This is an expression of comparison and
resemblance, and its meaning is of this kind, “I live in like manner as
the Father liveth.” And that thou mayest not deem Him unbegotten, He
immediately subjoineth, “by the Father,” not by this to show that He
needeth, in order to live, any power working in Him,  <span
id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) for He said before, to remove such
a suspicion, “As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to
the Son also to have life in Himself”; now if He needeth the working of
another, it will be found that either the Father hath not given Him so
to have it, and so the assertion is false, or if He hath so given it,
then He will need no other one to support Him. What then means the, “By
the Father”? He here merely hinteth at the cause, and what He saith is
of this kind: “As the Father liveth, so I live, and he that eateth Me
shall live by Me.” And the “life” of which He speaketh is not life
merely, but the excellent  <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324)
life; for that He spake not simply of life, but of that glorious and
ineffable life, is clear from this. For all men “live,” even
unbelievers, and uninitiated, who eat not of that flesh. Seest thou that
the words relate not to this life, but to that other? And what He saith
is of this kind: “He that eateth My flesh, when he dieth shall not
perish nor suffer punishment”; He spake not of the general resurrection,
(for all alike rise again,) but concerning the special, the glorious
Resurrection, that which hath a reward.

<span id="iv.xlix-p23"></span> [John
6.58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#058)<span id="iv.xlix-p23.1"></span> .
“This is that bread which came down from heaven; not as your fathers did
eat manna, and are dead; he that eateth of this bread shall live for
ever.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p24"></span>Continually doth He handle the same point,
so as to imprint it on the understanding of the hearers, (for the
teaching on these points was a <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span
id="iv.xlix-Page_167"></span> kind of final teaching,) and to confirm
the doctrine of the Resurrection and of eternal life. Wherefore He
mentioneth the Resurrection since He promiseth eternal life, showing
that that life is not now, but after the Resurrection.  <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) “And whence,” saith some one, “are
these things clear?” From the Scriptures; to them He everywhere
referreth the Jews, bidding them learn these things from them. And by
saying, “Which giveth life to the world,” He inciteth them to jealousy,
that from very vexation that others should enjoy the gift, they may not
stay without. And continually He remindeth them of the manna, showing
the difference, (between it and His bread,) and guiding them to the
faith; for if He was able  <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326) to
support their life for forty years without harvest, or corn, or other
things in course;  <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) much more
now will He be able to do so, as having come for greater ends. Moreover,
if those things were but types, and yet men collected what came down
without sweat or labor; much more shall this be the case, where the
difference is great both in the never dying, and in the enjoying the
true life. And rightly hath He spoken often of “life,” since this is
desired by men, and nothing is so pleasing to them as not to die. Since
even under the old Covenant, this was the promise, length of life and
many days, but now it is not length merely, but life having no end. He
desireth at the same time to show, that He now revoketh the punishment
caused by sin, annulling that sentence which condemneth to death, and
bringing in not life merely, but life eternal, contrariwise to the
former things.  <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328)

<span id="iv.xlix-p29"></span> [John
6.59](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#059)<span id="iv.xlix-p29.1"></span> .
“These things said He in the synagogue, as He taught in Capernaum.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p30"></span>\[2.\] The place where most of His marvels
had been done, so that He ought there especially to have been listened
to. But wherefore taught He in the synagogue and in the Temple? As well
because He desired to catch the greatest number of them, as because He
desired to show that He was not opposed to the Father.

<span id="iv.xlix-p31"></span> [John
6.60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)<span id="iv.xlix-p31.1"></span> .
“But many of the disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is a
hard saying.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p32"></span> What means “hard”? Rough, laborious,
troublesome. Yet He said nothing of this kind, for He spake not of a
mode of life,  <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) but of
doctrines, continually handling the faith which is in Him. What then
means, “is a hard saying”? Is it because it promiseth life and
resurrection? Is it because He said that He came down from heaven? Or
that it was impossible for one to be saved who ate not His flesh? Tell
me, are these things “hard”? Who can assert that they are? What then
means “hard”? It means, “difficult to be received,” “transcending their
infirmity,” “having much terror.” For they thought that He uttered words
too high for His real character, and such as were above Himself.
Therefore they said,

<span id="iv.xlix-p34"></span>“Who can hear it?”

<span id="iv.xlix-p35"></span>Perhaps making excuse for themselves,
since they were about to start away.

<span id="iv.xlix-p36"></span> [John
6:61](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#061),
[62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062)<span id="iv.xlix-p36.1"></span> .
“When Jesus knew in Himself that His disciples murmured at it,” (for
this is an attribute of His Godhead to bring secret things to light,)
“He said unto them, Doth this offend you? What and if ye shall see
 <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) the Son of Man ascend up
where He was before?”

<span id="iv.xlix-p38"></span>This also He doth in the case of
Nathanael, saying, “Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the
fig-tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these.” (
[John 1.50](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#050)<span
id="iv.xlix-p38.1"></span> .) And to Nicodemus, “No man hath ascended up
to heaven but the Son of man which is in heaven.” ( [John
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="iv.xlix-p38.2"></span>
.) What then, doth He add difficulties to difficulties? No, (that be far
from Him,) but by the greatness of the doctrines, and the number of
them, He desireth to bring them over. For if one had said simply, “I
have come down from heaven,” and added nothing more, he would have been
the more likely to offend them; but He who said, “My body is the life of
the world”; He who said, “As the living Father hath sent Me, so I live
by the Father”; and who said, “I have come down from heaven,” solves the
difficulty. For the man who utters any one great thing concerning
himself may perhaps be suspected of feigning, but he who connects
together so many one after another removes all suspicion. All that He
doth and saith is intended to lead them away from the thought, that
Joseph was His father. And it was not with a wish to strengthen, but
rather to do away that stumbling-block, that He said this. For whosoever
deemed that He was Joseph’s son could not receive His sayings, while one
that was persuaded that He had come down from heaven, and would ascend
thither, might more easily give heed to His words: at the same time He
bringeth forward also another explanation, saying,

<span id="iv.xlix-p39"></span> [John
6.63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063)<span id="iv.xlix-p39.1"></span> .
“It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p40"></span>His meaning is, “Ye must hear spiritually
what relateth to Me, for he who heareth carnally is not profited, nor
gathereth any advantage.” It was carnal to question how He came down
from heaven, to deem that He was the son of Joseph, to ask, “How can he
give us His flesh to eat?” All this was carnal, when they ought to have
understood the matter in a mystical and <span id="page_168">p.
168</span> <span id="iv.xlix-Page_168"></span> spiritual sense. “But,”
saith some one, “how could they understand what the ‘eating flesh’ might
mean?” Then it was their duty to wait for the proper time and enquire,
and not to abandon Him.

<span id="iv.xlix-p41"></span>“The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit and they are life.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p42"></span>That is, they are divine and spiritual,
have nothing carnal about them, are not subject to the laws of physical
consequence, but are free from any such necessity, are even set above
the laws appointed for this world, and have also another and a different
meaning. Now as in this passage He said “spirit,” instead of
“spiritual,” so when He speaketh of “flesh,” He meant not “carnal
things,” but “carnally hearing,” and alluding at the same time to them,
because they ever desired carnal things when they ought to have desired
spiritual. For if a man receives them carnally, he profits nothing.
“What then, is not His flesh, flesh?” Most certainly. “How then saith
He, that the flesh profiteth nothing?” He speaketh not of His own flesh,
(God forbid!) but of those who received His words in a carnal manner.
But what is “understanding carnally”? It is looking merely to what is
before our eyes, without imagining anything beyond. This is
understanding carnally. But we must not judge thus by sight, but must
look into all mysteries with the eyes within. This is seeing
spiritually. He that eateth not His flesh, and drinketh not His blood,
hath no life in him. How then doth “the flesh profit nothing,” if
without it we cannot live? Seest thou that the words, “the flesh
profiteth nothing,” are spoken not of His own flesh, but of carnal
hearing?

<span id="iv.xlix-p43"></span> [John
6.64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#064)<span id="iv.xlix-p43.1"></span> .
“But there are some of you that believe not.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p44"></span>Again, according to His custom, He addeth
weight to His words, by foretelling what would come to pass, and by
showing that He spake thus not from desire of honor from them, but
because He cared for them. And when He said “some,” He excepted the
disciples. For at first He said, “Ye have both seen Me, and believe not”
( [John 6.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xlix-p44.1"></span> ); but here, “There are some of you that
believe not.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p45"></span>For He “knew from the beginning who they
were that believed not, and who should betray Him.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p46"></span> [John
6.65](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#065)<span id="iv.xlix-p46.1"></span> .
“And He said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto Me
except it were given unto Him from above from My Father.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p47"></span> \[3.\] Here the Evangelist intimates to
us the voluntary character of the Dispensation, and His endurance of
evil. Nor is the, “from the beginning,” put here without a cause, but
that thou mayest be aware of His foreknowledge from the first, and that
before the words were uttered, and not after the men had murmured nor
after they had been offended, He knew the traitor, but before, which was
an attribute of Godhead. Then He added, “Except it be given him from
above from My Father”; thus persuading them to deem God His Father, not
Joseph, and showing them that it is no common thing to believe in Him.
As though He had said, “Unbelievers disturb Me not; trouble Me not,
astonish Me not. I know of old before they were created, I know to whom
the Father hath given to believe;” and do thou, when thou hearest that
“He hath given,” imagine not merely an arbitrary distribution,  <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) but that if any hath rendered
himself worthy to receive the gift, he hath received it.

<span id="iv.xlix-p49"></span> [John
6.66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066)<span id="iv.xlix-p49.1"></span> .
“From that time many of His disciples went back, and walked no more with
Him.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p50"></span>Rightly hath the Evangelist said, not that
they “departed,” but that they “went back”; showing that they cut
themselves off from any increase in virtue, and that by separating
themselves they lost the faith which they had of old. But this was not
the case with the twelve; wherefore He saith to them,

<span id="iv.xlix-p51"></span> [John
6.67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067)<span id="iv.xlix-p51.1"></span> .
“Will ye also go away?”

<span id="iv.xlix-p52"></span>Again showing that He needeth not their
ministry and service, and proving to them that it was not for this that
He led them about with Him. For how could He when He used such
expressions even to them? But why did He not praise them? why did He not
approve them? Both because He preserved the dignity befitting a teacher,
and also to show them that they ought rather to be attracted by this
mode of dealing. For had He praised them, they might, supposing that
they were doing Him a favor, have had some human feeling; but by showing
them that He needed not their attendance, He kept them to Him the more.
And observe with what prudence He spake. He said not, “Depart ye,” (this
would have been to thrust them from Him,) but asked them a question,
“Will ye also go away?” the expression of one who would remove all force
or compulsion, and who wished not that they should be attached to Him
through any sense of shame, but with a sense of favor. By not openly
accusing, but gently glancing at them, He showeth what is the truly wise
course under such circumstances. But we feel differently; with good
reason, since we do everything holding fast our own honor, and therefore
think that our estate is lowered by the departure of those who attend on
us. But He neither flattered nor repulsed them, but asked them a
question. Now this was <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="iv.xlix-Page_169"></span> not the act of one despising them, but of
one wishing them not to be restrained by force and compulsion: for to
remain on such terms is the same as to depart. What then saith Peter?

<span id="iv.xlix-p53"></span> [John
6:68](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068),
[69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069)<span id="iv.xlix-p53.1"></span> .
“To whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we
believe and are sure that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God.”

<span id="iv.xlix-p54"></span> Seest thou that it was not the words that
caused offense, but the heedlessness, and sloth, and wrong-mindedness of
the hearers? For even had He not spoken, they would have been offended,
and would not have ceased to be ever anxious about bodily food, ever
nailed to earth. Besides, the disciples heard at the same time with the
others, yet they declared an opinion contrary to theirs, saying, “To
whom shall we go?” An expression indicating much affection, for it shows
that their Teacher  <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) was more
precious to them than anything, than father or mother, or any
possessions,  <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) and that if
they withdrew from Him, they had not then whither to flee. Then lest it
should seem that he had said, “to whom shall we go?” because there were
none that would receive them, he straightway added, “Thou hast the words
of eternal life.” For the Jews listened carnally, and with human
reasonings, but the disciples spiritually, and committing all to faith.
Wherefore Christ said, “The words which I have spoken unto you are
spirit”; that is, “do not suppose that the teaching of My words is
subject to the rule of material consequences, or to the necessity of
created things. Things spiritual are not of this nature, nor endure to
submit to the laws of earth.” This also Paul declareth, saying, “Say not
in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ
down;) or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ
again from the dead.”) ( [Rom. 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#007)<span id="iv.xlix-p56.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xlix-p57"></span> “Thou hast the words of eternal life.”
These men already admitted the Resurrection, and all the apportionment
 <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) which shall be there. And
observe the brotherly and affectionate man, how he maketh answer for all
the band. For he said not, “I know,” but, “We know.” Or rather, observe
how he goes to the very words of his Teacher, not speaking as did the
Jews. They said, “This is the son of Joseph”; but he said, “Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God”; and “Thou hast the words of eternal
life”; having perhaps heard Him say,  <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) “He that believeth on Me  <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) hath eternal life, and I will raise
him up at the last day.” For he showed that he retained all that had
been said, by recalling the very words. What then did Christ? He neither
praised nor expressed admiration of Peter, though He had elsewhere done
so; but what saith He?

<span id="iv.xlix-p61"></span> [John
6.70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span id="iv.xlix-p61.1"></span> .
“Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?”

<span id="iv.xlix-p62"></span>For since Peter said, “We believe,” Jesus
excepteth Judas from the band. In the other place Peter made no mention
of the disciples; but when Christ said, “Whom say ye that I am?” he
replied, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God” ( [Matt. xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#015) <span id="iv.xlix-p62.1"></span> );
but here, since he said, “We believe,” Christ with reason admitteth not
Judas into that band. And this He did afar off, and long before the
time, to check the wickedness of the traitor, knowing that He should
avail nothing, yet doing His own part.

<span id="iv.xlix-p63"></span>\[4.\] And remark His wisdom. He made not
the traitor manifest, yet allowed him not to be hidden; that on the one
hand he might not lose all shame, and become more contentious; and on
the other, that he might not, thinking to be unperceived, work his
wicked deed without fear. Therefore by degrees He bringeth plainer
reproofs against him. First, He numbered him too among the others, when
He said, “There are some of you that believe not,” (for that He counted
the traitor the Evangelist hath declared, saying, “For He knew from the
beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray Him;”)
but when he yet remained such, He brought against him a more severe
rebuke, “One of you is a devil,” yet made the fear common to them all,
wishing to conceal him. And here it is worth while to enquire, why the
disciples at this time said nothing, but afterwards were afraid and
doubted, looking one upon another, and asking, “Lord, is it I?” ( [Matt.
xxvi. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#022) <span
id="iv.xlix-p63.1"></span> ), when Peter beckoned to John to find out
the traitor, by enquiring of their Teacher which was he. What is  <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) the reason? Peter had not yet
heard, “Get thee behind me, Satan,” wherefore he had no fear at all; but
when he had been rebuked, and though he spoke through strong affection,
 <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338) instead of being approved
of, had even been called “Satan,” he afterwards with reason feared when
he heard, “One of you shall betray Me.” Besides, He saith not even now,
“One of you shall betray Me,” but, “One of you is a devil”; wherefore
they understood not what was spoken, but thought that He was only
reflecting upon their wickedness.

<span id="iv.xlix-p66"></span>But wherefore said He, “I have chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil”? It was to show that His teaching was
entirely free from flattery. For that they might not think that He would
flatter them, because when all had left Him they alone remained, and
confessed by Peter that He was the Christ, He leadeth them <span
id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="iv.xlix-Page_170"></span> away
from such a suspicion. And what He saith is of this kind. “Nothing
abasheth Me from rebuking the bad; think not that because ye have
remained I shall choose to flatter you, or that because ye have followed
Me I shall not rebuke the wicked. For neither doth another circumstance
abash Me, which is much more powerful than this to abash a teacher. For
he that remaineth affordeth a proof of his affection, while one that
hath been chosen by a teacher, being rejected, attacheth to him a
character for folly among senseless persons. Still neither doth this
cause Me to refrain from My reproofs.” This at least even now the
heathen frigidly and senselessly urge against Christ. For God is not
wont to make men good by compulsion and force, neither is His election
and choice compulsory on those who are called,  <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339) but persuasive.  <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340) And that thou mayest learn that the
calling compelleth not, consider how many of these who have been called
have come to perdition, so that it is clear that it lieth in our own
will  <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341) also to be saved, or to
perish.

<span id="iv.xlix-p70"></span> \[5.\] Hearing therefore these things,
learn we always to be sober and to watch. For if when he who was
reckoned among that holy band, who had enjoyed so great a gift, who had
wrought miracles, (for he too was with the others who were sent to raise
the dead and to heal lepers,) if when he was seized by the dreadful
disease of covetousness, and betrayed his Master, neither the favors,
nor the gifts, nor the being with Christ, nor the attendance on Him, nor
the washing the feet, nor the sharing His table, nor the bearing the
bag, availed him, if these things rather served to help on  <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342) his punishment, let us also fear
lest we ever through covetousness imitate Judas. Thou betrayest not
Christ. But when thou neglectest the poor man wasting with hunger, or
perishing with cold, that man draws upon thee the same condemnation.
 <span id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343) When we partake of the
Mysteries unworthily, we perish equally with the Christ-slayers. When we
plunder, when we oppress  <span id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344)
those weaker than ourselves, we shall draw down upon us severest
punishment. And with reason; for how long shall the love of things
present so occupy us, superfluous as they are and unprofitable? since
wealth consists in superfluities, in which no advantage is. How long
shall we be nailed to vanities? How long shall we not look through and
away into heaven, not be sober, not be satiated with these fleeting
things of earth, not learn by experience their worthlessness?  Let us
think of those who before us have been wealthy; are not all those things
a dream? are they not a shadow, a flower? are they not a stream which
floweth by? a story and a tale? Such a man has been rich, and where now
is his wealth? It has gone, has perished, but the sins done by reason of
it stay by him, and the punishment which is because of the sins. Yea,
surely if there were no punishment, if no kingdom were set before us, it
were a duty to show regard for those of like descent and family, to
respect those who have like feelings with ourselves. But now we feed
dogs, and many of us wild asses, and bears, and different beasts, while
we care not for a man perishing with hunger; and a thing alien to us is
more valued than that which is of our kin, and our own family less
honored than creatures which are not so, nor related to us.

<span id="iv.xlix-p74"></span>Is it a fine thing to build one’s self
splendid houses, to have many servants, to lie and gaze at a gilded
roof? Why then, assuredly, it is superfluous and unprofitable. For other
buildings there are, far brighter and more majestic than these; on such
we must gladden our eyes, for there is none to hinder us. Wilt thou see
the fairest of roofs? At eventide look upon the starred heaven. “But,”
saith some one, “this roof is not mine.” Yet in truth this is more thine
than that other. For thee it was made, and is common to thee and to thy
brethren; the other is not thine, but theirs who after thy death inherit
it.  The one may do thee the greatest service, guiding thee by its
beauty to its Creator; the other the greatest harm, becoming thy
greatest accuser at the Day of Judgment, inasmuch as it is covered with
gold, while Christ hath not even needful raiment. Let us not, I entreat
you, be subject to such folly, let us not pursue things which flee away,
and flee those which endure; let us not betray our own salvation, but
hold fast to our hope of what shall be hereafter; the aged, as certainly
knowing that but a little space of life is left us; the young, as well
persuaded that what is left is not much. For that day cometh so as a
thief in the night. Knowing this, let wives exhort their husbands, and
husbands admonish their wives; let us teach youths and maidens, and all
instruct one another, to care not for present things, but to desire
those which are to come, that we may be able also to obtain them;
through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever
and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[166:1315](1140052.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="iv.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p4.1"></span>no life,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p4.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[166:1316](1140052.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="iv.xlix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p5.1"></span>eternal life,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p5.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[166:1317](1140052.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="iv.xlix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p7.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p7.2"></span>but having renounced all these things, and
having banished all these things from our minds, let us,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p7.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[166:1318](1140052.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="iv.xlix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p8.1"></span>Ben. adds,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p8.2"></span>in a city.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[166:1319](1140052.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="iv.xlix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p9.2"></span>we must needs hear with.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[166:1320](1140052.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="iv.xlix-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p11.1"></span>εἰς τέλος</span>

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[166:1321](1140052.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="iv.xlix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p13"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p13.1"></span>truly,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p13.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[166:1322](1140052.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="iv.xlix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p15.2"></span>but what is the,</span> ‘ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p15.3"></span>is true meat</span> ’
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p15.4"></span>?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p15.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[166:1323](1140052.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="iv.xlix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p18.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p18.2"></span>νακιρνᾶται</span>

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[166:1324](1140052.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="iv.xlix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p21.2"></span>νεργείας</span>

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[166:1325](1140052.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="iv.xlix-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p22.1"></span>εὐδόκιμον</span>

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[167:1326](1140052.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="iv.xlix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p25.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p25.2"></span>both because He had said *eternal life* , and
also showing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[167:1327](1140052.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="iv.xlix-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p26.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p26.2"></span>it was possible.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[167:1328](1140052.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="iv.xlix-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p27.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p27.2"></span>κολουθίας</span>

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[167:1329](1140052.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iv.xlix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p28.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p28.2"></span>those before.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[167:1330](1140052.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iv.xlix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p33.1"></span>πολιτείας</span>

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[167:1331](1140052.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iv.xlix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p37.1"></span>ἴ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p37.2"></span>δητε θεωρῆτε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p37.3"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[168:1332](1140052.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iv.xlix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p48.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p48.2"></span>ποκλήρωσιν</span>

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[169:1333](1140052.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iv.xlix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p55.2"></span>Christ.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[169:1334](1140052.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iv.xlix-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p56.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p56.2"></span>anything that is.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[169:1335](1140052.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="iv.xlix-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p58.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p58.2"></span>rest,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p58.3"></span>ληξιν</span>

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[169:1336](1140052.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="iv.xlix-p58.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p59.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p59.2"></span>often say.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[169:1337](1140052.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="iv.xlix-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p60"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p60.1"></span>Him (the Son),</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlix-p60.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[169:1338](1140052.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iv.xlix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p64.2"></span>Is not this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[169:1339](1140052.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="iv.xlix-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p65.1"></span>διαθεσεως</span>

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[170:1340](1140052.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="iv.xlix-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p67.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p67.2"></span>for what is to come.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[170:1341](1140052.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="iv.xlix-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p68.1"></span>προτρεπτικὴ</span>

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[170:1342](1140052.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="iv.xlix-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p69.1"></span>γνώμῃ</span>

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[170:1343](1140052.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="iv.xlix-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p71.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p71.2"></span>φόδια γέγονε</span>

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[170:1344](1140052.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="iv.xlix-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p72.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p72.2"></span>vengeance.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[170:1345](1140052.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="iv.xlix-p72.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlix-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p73.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlix-p73.2"></span>throttle.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 7.1,2](1140053)
