[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140018)  [Next](1140020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xvi"></span> <span id="iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XIV.</span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xvi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>[John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p3"></span>“And of His fullness have all we received,
and grace for grace.”

<span id="iv.xvi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>I said</span> the other day, that John, to
resolve the doubts of those who should question with themselves how the
Lord, though He came after to the preaching, became before and more
glorious than he, added, “for He was before me.” And this is indeed one
reason. But not content with this, he adds again a second, which now he
declares. What is it? “And of his fullness,” says he, “have all we
received, and grace for grace.” With these again he mentions another.
What is this? That

<span id="iv.xvi-p5"></span> [John
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="iv.xvi-p5.1"></span> .
“The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.xvi-p6"></span> And what means that, saith he, “Of His
fullness have all we received”? for to this we must for a while direct
our discourse. He possesseth not, says he, the gift by participation,
 <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) but is Himself the very
Fountain and very Root of all good, very Life, and very Light, and very
Truth, not retaining within Himself the riches of His good things, but
overflowing with them unto all others, and after the overflowing
remaining full, in nothing diminished by supplying others, but streaming
ever forth, and imparting to others a share of these blessings, He
remains in sameness of perfection. What I possess is by participation,
(for I received it from another) and is a small portion of the whole, as
it were a poor  <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) rain-drop
compared with the untold abyss or the boundless sea; or rather not even
can this instance fully express what we attempt to say, for if you take
a drop from the sea, you have lessened the sea itself,  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) though the diminution be
imperceptible. But of that Fountain we cannot say this; how much soever
a man draw, It continues undiminished. We therefore must needs proceed
to another instance, a weak one also, and not able to establish what we
seek, but which guides us better than the former one to the thought now
proposed to us.

<span id="iv.xvi-p10"></span>Let us suppose that there is a fountain of
fire; that from that fountain ten thousand lamps are kindled, twice as
many, thrice as many, ofttimes as many; does not the fire remain at the
same degree of fullness even after its imparting of its virtue to such
members? It is plain to every man that it does. Now if in the case of
bodies which are made up of parts, and are diminished by abstraction,
one has been found of such a nature, that after supplying to others
something from itself it sustains no loss, much more will <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="iv.xvi-Page_47"></span> this take
place with that incorporeal and uncompounded Power. If in the instance
given, that which is communicated is substance and body, is divided yet
does not suffer division, when our discourse is concerning an energy,
and an energy too of an incorporeal substance, it is much more probable
that this will undergo nothing of the sort. And therefore John said, “Of
His fullness have all we received,” and joins his own testimony to that
of the Baptist; for the expression, “Of his fulness have we all
received,” belongs not to the forerunner but to the disciple; and its
meaning is something like this: “Think not,” he says, “that we, who long
time companied with Him, and partook of His food  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) and table, bear witness through
favor,” since even John, who did not even know Him before, who had never
even been with Him, but merely saw Him in company with others when he
was baptizing cried out, “He was before me,” having from that source
 <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) received all; and all we the
twelve, the three hundred, the three thousand, the five thousand, the
many myriads of Jews, all the fullness of the faithful who then were,
and now are, and hereafter shall be, have “received of His fulness.”
What have we received? “grace for grace,” saith he. What grace, for
what? For the old, the new. For there was a righteousness, and again a
righteousness, (“Touching the righteousness which is in the law,” saith
Paul “blameless.”) ( [Philip. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)
<span id="iv.xvi-p12.3"></span> .) There was a faith, there is a faith.
(“From faith to faith.”) ( [Rom. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)
<span id="iv.xvi-p12.4"></span> .) There was an adoption, there is an
adoption. (“To whom pertaineth the adoption.”) ( [Rom. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004) <span id="iv.xvi-p12.5"></span> .)
There was a glory, there is a glory. (“For if that which was done away
was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.”) ( [2 Cor.
iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011) <span
id="iv.xvi-p12.6"></span> .) There was a law, and there is a law. (“For
the law of the Spirit of life hath made me free.”) ( [Rom. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002) <span id="iv.xvi-p12.7"></span> .)
There was a service, and there is a service. (“To whom pertaineth the
service”— [Rom. ix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004) <span
id="iv.xvi-p12.8"></span> : and again: “Serving God in the Spirit.”) (
[Philip. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003) <span
id="iv.xvi-p12.9"></span> .) There was a covenant, and there is a
covenant. (“I will make with you  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) a new covenant, not according to the
covenant which I made with your  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)
fathers.”) ( [Jer. xxxi. 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031) <span
id="iv.xvi-p14.1"></span> .) There was a sanctification, and there is a
sanctification: there was a baptism, and there is a Baptism: there was a
sacrifice, and there is a Sacrifice: there was a temple, and there is a
temple: there was a circumcision, and there is a circumcision; and so
too there was a “grace,” and there is a “grace.” But the words in the
first case are used as types, in the second as realities, preserving a
sameness of sound, though not of sense. So in patterns and figures, the
shape of a man scratched with white lines  <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) upon a black ground is called a man as
well as that which has received the correct coloring; and in the case of
statues, the figure whether formed of gold or of plaster, is alike
called a statue, though in the one case as a model, in the other as a
reality.

<span id="iv.xvi-p16"></span>\[2.\] Do not then, because the same words
are used, suppose that the things are identical, nor yet diverse either;
for in that they were models they did not differ from the truth; but in
that they merely preserved the outline, they were less than the truth.
What is the difference in all these instances? Will you that we take in
hand and proceed to examine one or two of the cases mentioned? thus the
rest will be plain to you; and we shall see that the first were lessons
for children, the last for high-minded full-grown men; that the first
laws were made as for mortals, the latter as for angels.

<span id="iv.xvi-p17"></span>Whence then shall we begin? From the
sonship itself? What then is the distinction between the first and
second? The first is the honor of a name, in the second the thing goes
with it. Of the first the Prophet says, “I have said, Ye are gods, and
all of you are children of the Most High” ( [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006) <span id="iv.xvi-p17.1"></span> );
but of the latter, that they “were born of God.” How, and in what way?
By the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. For
they, even after they had received the title of sons, retained the
spirit of slavery, (for while they remained slaves they were honored
with this appellation,) but we being made free, received the honor, not
in name, but in deed. And this Paul has declared and said, “For ye have
not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.” ( [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015) <span id="iv.xvi-p17.2"></span> .)
For having been born again,  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372)
and, as one may say, thoroughly remade,  <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) we so are called “sons.” And if one
consider the character of the holiness, what the first was and what the
second, he will find there also great  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) difference. They when they did not
worship idols, nor commit fornication or adultery, were called by this
name; but we become holy, not by refraining from these vices merely, but
by acquiring things greater. And this gift we obtain first by means of
the coming upon us of the Holy Ghost; and next, by a rule of life far
more comprehensive  <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) than that of
the Jews. To prove that these words are not mere boasting hear what He
saith to them, “Ye shall not use divination,  <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) nor make purification of your
children, for ye are a holy people.”  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) So that holiness with them consisted
<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="iv.xvi-Page_48"></span> in
being free from the customs of idolatry; but it is not so with us. “That
she may be holy,” saith Paul, “in body and spirit.” ( [1 Cor. vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034) <span id="iv.xvi-p23.2"></span> .)
“Follow peace, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord” (
[Heb. xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014) <span
id="iv.xvi-p23.3"></span> ): and, “Perfecting holiness in the fear of
God.” ( [2 Cor. vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001) <span
id="iv.xvi-p23.4"></span> .) For the word “holy” has not force to give
the same meaning in every case to which it is applied; since God is
called “Holy,” though not as we are. What, for instance, does the
Prophet say, when he heard that cry raised  <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) by the flying Seraphim? “Woe is me!
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people
of unclean lips” ( [Isa. vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005) <span
id="iv.xvi-p24.1"></span> ); though he was holy and clean; but if we be
compared with the holiness which is above, we are unclean. Angels are
holy, Archangels are holy, the Cherubim and Seraphim themselves are
holy, but of this holiness again there is a double difference; that is,
in relation to us, and to the higher powers.  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) We might proceed to all the other
points, but then the discussion would become too long, and its extent
too great. We will therefore desist from proceeding farther, and leave
it to you to take in hand the rest, for it is in your power at home to
put these things together, and examine their difference, and in the same
way to go over what remains. “Give,” saith one, “a starting place to the
wise, and he becometh wiser.” ( [Prov. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#009) <span id="iv.xvi-p25.2"></span> ,
LXX.) The beginning is from us, but the end will be from you. We must
now resume the connection.

<span id="iv.xvi-p26"></span>After having said, “Of His fullness have
all we received,” he adds, “and grace for grace.” For by grace the Jews
were saved: “I chose you,” saith God, “not because you were many in
number, but because of your fathers.” ( [Deut. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007) <span id="iv.xvi-p26.1"></span> ,
LXX.) If now they were chosen by God not for their own good deeds,
 <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) it is manifest that by grace
they obtained this honor. And we too all are saved by grace, but not in
like manner; not for the same objects, but for objects much greater and
higher. The grace then that is with us is not like theirs. For not only
was pardon of sins given to us, (since this we have in common with them,
for all have sinned,) but righteousness also, and sanctification, and
sonship, and the gift of the Spirit far more glorious  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) and more abundant. By this grace we
have become the beloved of God, no longer as servants, but as sons and
friends. Wherefore he saith, “grace for grace.” Since even the things of
the law were of grace, and the very fact of man  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) being created from nothing, (for we
did not receive this as a recompense for past good deeds, how could we,
when we even were not? but from God who is ever the first to bestow His
benefits,) and not only that we were created from nothing, but that when
created, we straightway learned what we must and what we must not do,
and that we received this law in our very nature, and that our Creator
entrusted to us the impartial rule of conscience, these I say, are
proofs of the greatest grace and unspeakable lovingkindness. And the
recovery of this law after it had become corrupt, by means of the
written (Law), this too was the work of grace. For what might have been
expected to follow was, that they who falsified  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) the law once given should suffer
correction and punishments; but what actually took place was not this,
but, on the contrary, an amending of our nature, and pardon, not of
debt, but given through mercy and grace. For to show that it was of
grace and mercy, hear what David saith; “The Lord executeth
righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed; He made known His
ways unto Moses, His acts unto the children of Israel” ( [Ps.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)<span id="iv.xvi-p30.2"></span> ):
and again; “Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will He give laws to
them that are in the way.” ( [Ps. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008) <span id="iv.xvi-p30.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xvi-p31"></span> \[3.\] Therefore that men received the law
was of pity, mercies, and grace; and for this reason he saith, “Grace
for grace.” But striving yet more fervently  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) to (express) the greatness of the
gifts, he goes on to say,

<span id="iv.xvi-p33"></span> [John
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="iv.xvi-p33.1"></span> .
“The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.xvi-p34"></span>See ye how gently, by a single word and by
little and little, both John the Baptist and John the Disciple lead up
their hearers to the highest knowledge, having first exercised them in
humbler things? The former having compared to himself Him who is
incomparably superior to all, thus afterwards shows His superiority, by
saying, “is become before me,” and then adding the words, “was before
me”: while the latter has done much more than he, though too little for
the worthiness of the Only-Begotten, for he makes the comparison, not
with John, but with one reverenced by the Jews more than John, with
Moses. “For the law,” saith he, “was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.xvi-p35"></span> Observe his wisdom. He makes enquiry not
concerning the person, but the things; for these being proved, it was
probable that even the senseless would of necessity receive from them a
much higher judgment and notion respecting Christ. For when facts bear
witness, which cannot be suspected  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) of doing so either from favor to any,
or from malice, they afford a means of judging which cannot be doubted
even by the <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="iv.xvi-Page_49"></span> senseless; for they remain to open view just
as their actors may have arranged them, and therefore their evidence is
the least liable to suspicion of any. And see how he makes the
comparison easy even to the weaker sort; for he does not prove the
superiority by argument, but points out the difference by the bare
words, opposing “grace and truth” to “law,” and “came” to “was given.”
Between each of these there is a great difference; for one, “was given,”
belongs to something ministered, when one has received from another, and
given to whom he was commanded to give; but the other, “grace and truth
came,” befits a king forgiving all offenses, with authority, and himself
furnishing the gift. Wherefore He said, “Thy sins be forgiven thee” (
[Matt. ix. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002) <span
id="iv.xvi-p36.1"></span> ); and again, “But that ye may know that the
Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins (He saith to the sick of
the palsy), Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.” ( [Matt.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="iv.xvi-p36.2"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xvi-p37"></span> Seest  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) thou how “grace” cometh by Him? look
also to “truth.” His “grace” the instance just mentioned, and what
happened in the case of the thief, and the gift of Baptism, and the
grace of the Spirit given by Him  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) declare, and many other things. But
His “truth” we shall more clearly know, if we understand the types. For
the types like patterns anticipated and sketched beforehand the
dispensations  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) which should be
accomplished under the new covenant, and Christ came and fulfilled them.
Let us now consider the types in few words, for we cannot at the present
time go through all that relates to them; but when you have learned some
points from those (instances) which I shall set before you,  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) you will know the others also.

<span id="iv.xvi-p42"></span>Will you then that we begin with the
Passion itself? What then saith the type? “Take ye a lamb for an house,
and kill it, and do as he commanded and ordained.” ( [Ex. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003) <span id="iv.xvi-p42.1"></span> .)
But it is not so with Christ. He doth not command this to be done, but
Himself becomes It,  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) by offering
Himself a Sacrifice and Oblation to His Father.

<span id="iv.xvi-p44"></span>\[4.\] See how the type was “given by
Moses,” but the “Truth came by Jesus Christ.” ( [Ex. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012) <span id="iv.xvi-p44.1"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xvi-p45"></span>Again, when the Amalekites warred in Mount
Sinai, the hands of Moses were supported, being stayed up by Aaron and
Hur standing on either side of him ( [Ex. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012) <span id="iv.xvi-p45.1"></span> );
but when Christ came, He of Himself stretched forth His Hands upon the
Cross. Hast thou observed how the type “was given,” but “the Truth
came”?

<span id="iv.xvi-p46"></span>Again, the Law said, “Cursed is every one
that continueth not in all things that are written in this book.” (
[Deut. xxvii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026) <span
id="iv.xvi-p46.1"></span> , LXX.) But what saith grace? “Come unto Me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest” (
[Matt. xi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028) <span
id="iv.xvi-p46.2"></span> ); and Paul, “Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us.” ( [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013) <span id="iv.xvi-p46.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xvi-p47"></span> Since then we have enjoyed such “grace”
and “truth,” I exhort you that we be not more slothful by reason of the
greatness of the gift; for the greater the honor of which we have been
deemed worthy, the greater our debt of excellence; for one who has
received but small benefits, even though he makes but small returns,
does not deserve the same condemnation; but he who has been raised to
the highest summit of honor, and yet manifests groveling and mean
dispositions, will be worthy of much greater punishment. May I never
have to suspect this of you. For we trust in the Lord that you have
winged your souls for heaven, that you have removed from earth, that
being in the world ye handle not the things of the world; yet though so
persuaded, we do not cease thus continually to exhort you. In the games
of the heathen, they whom all the spectators encourage are not those who
have fallen and lie supine, but those who are exerting themselves and
running still; of the others, (since they would be doing what would be
of no use,  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) and would not be
able to raise up by their encouragements men once for all severed from
victory,) they cease to take any notice. But in this case some good may
be expected, not only of you who are sober, but even of those who have
fallen, if they would but be converted. Wherefore we use every means,
exhorting, reproving, encouraging, praising, in order that we may bring
about your salvation. Be not then offended by our continual admonishing
concerning the Christian conversation, for the words are not the words
of one accusing you of sloth, but of one who has very excellent hopes
respecting you. And not to you alone, but to ourselves who speak them,
are these words said, yea, and shall be said, for we too need the same
teaching; so though they be spoken by us, yet nothing hinders their
being spoken to us, (for the Word, when it finds a man in fault, amends
him, when clear and free, sets him as far off from it as possible,) and
we ourselves are not pure from transgressions. The course of healing is
the same for all, the medicines are set forth for all, only the
application is not the same, but is made according to the choice of
those who use the medicines; for one who will handle the remedy as he
ought, gains some benefit from the application, while he who <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="iv.xvi-Page_50"></span> does not
place it upon the wound, makes the evil greater, and brings it to the
most painful end. Let us then not fret when we are being healed, but
much rather rejoice, even though the system of discipline bring bitter
pains, for hereafter it will show to us fruit sweeter than any. Let us
then do all to this end, that we may depart to that world,  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) cleared of the wounds and strokes
which the teeth of sin make in the soul, so that having become worthy to
behold the countenance of Christ, we may be delivered in that day, not
to the avenging and cruel powers, but to those who are able to bring us
to that inheritance of the heavens which is prepared for them that love
Him; to which may it come to pass that we all attain, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_364"></span>[46:365](1140019.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>μεθεκτἡν δωρεὰν</span> .

<span id="fn_365"></span>[46:366](1140019.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iv.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p8"></span> al. “little.”

<span id="fn_366"></span>[46:367](1140019.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iv.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p9"></span> or, “just so much.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[47:368](1140019.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iv.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p11"></span> lit. “salt.”

<span id="fn_368"></span>[47:369](1140019.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p12"></span> or, “sight,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p12.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p12.2"></span>κεῖθεν</span> .

<span id="fn_369"></span>[47:370](1140019.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iv.xvi-p12.10"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p13"></span> in Orig. “the house of Israel and Judah.”

<span id="fn_370"></span>[47:371](1140019.htm#fr_370) <span
id="iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p14"></span> in Orig. “their.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[47:372](1140019.htm#fr_371) <span
id="iv.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p15"></span> al. “with black on white colors.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[47:373](1140019.htm#fr_372) <span
id="iv.xvi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p18"></span> or, “from above.”

<span id="fn_373"></span>[47:374](1140019.htm#fr_373) <span
id="iv.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p19.2"></span>ναστοιχειωθέντες</span> , made up of fresh
elements.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[47:375](1140019.htm#fr_374) <span
id="iv.xvi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p20"></span> So Morel. Ben. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvi-p20.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian. Savile reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvi-p20.2"></span>οὐ πολλὴν</span> .

<span id="fn_375"></span>[47:376](1140019.htm#fr_375) <span
id="iv.xvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p21.1"></span>μείζονος πολιτείας</span> .

<span id="fn_376"></span>[47:377](1140019.htm#fr_376) <span
id="iv.xvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p22"></span> or, “purify yourselves,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvi-p22.1"></span>φοιβάσεσθε</span> .

<span id="fn_377"></span>[47:378](1140019.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iv.xvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p23"></span> Perhaps from [Deut. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010) <span id="iv.xvi-p23.1"></span> .

<span id="fn_378"></span>[48:379](1140019.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iv.xvi-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p24"></span> al. “sung.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[48:380](1140019.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iv.xvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p25"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvi-p25.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian read the passage thus:
“are holy, but the (Holiness) of God is greater than their holiness, and
surpassing, as in comparison with us, so also with the powers which are
above us.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[48:381](1140019.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iv.xvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>κατορθωμάτων</span> .

<span id="fn_381"></span>[48:382](1140019.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iv.xvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p28"></span> al. “stronger.”

<span id="fn_382"></span>[48:383](1140019.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iv.xvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p29"></span> al. “our.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[48:384](1140019.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iv.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p30.1"></span>παραχαράτοντας</span> .

<span id="fn_384"></span>[48:385](1140019.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iv.xvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p32"></span> al. “clearly.”

<span id="fn_385"></span>[48:386](1140019.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iv.xvi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p36"></span> al. “accused.”

<span id="fn_386"></span>[49:387](1140019.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iv.xvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p38"></span> al. “see.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[49:388](1140019.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iv.xvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p39"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvi-p39.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian, read, “and the adoption
through the Spirit, given to us.”

<span id="fn_388"></span>[49:389](1140019.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iv.xvi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p40.1"></span>οἰκονομίας</span> .

<span id="fn_389"></span>[49:390](1140019.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iv.xvi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p41"></span> al. “having from a few learned the whole.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[49:391](1140019.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iv.xvi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvi-p43.1"></span>αὐτὸς αὐτὸ γίγνεται</span> .

<span id="fn_391"></span>[49:392](1140019.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iv.xvi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p48"></span> al. “senseless.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[50:393](1140019.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iv.xvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p49"></span> αἰῶνα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.18](1140020)
