[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140056)  [Next](1140058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.liv"></span> <span id="iv.liv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.liv-p1.1"></span>Homily LII.</span>

<span id="iv.liv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.liv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.liv-p2.2"></span>[John
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#045),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#046)<span
id="iv.liv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p3"></span>“Then came the officers to the Chief Priests
and Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The
officers answered, Never man spake like this Man.”

<span id="iv.liv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.liv-p4.1"></span>There</span> is nothing clearer, nothing simpler
than the truth, if we deal not perversely; just as (on the other hand)
if we deal perversely, nothing is more difficult. For behold, the
Scribes and Pharisees, who seemed forsooth to be wiser than other men,
being ever with Christ for the sake of plotting against Him, and
beholding His miracles, and reading the Scriptures, were nothing
profited, but were even harmed; while the officers, who could not claim
one of these privileges, were subdued by one single sermon, and they who
had gone forth to bind Him, came back bound themselves by wonder. We
must not only marvel at their understanding, that they needed not signs,
but were taken by the teaching alone; (for they said not, “Never man
wrought miracles thus,” but, “Never man spake thus”;) we must not, I
say, merely marvel at their understanding, but also at their boldness,
that they spake thus to those that had sent them, to the Pharisees, to
His enemies, to men who were doing all with a view to gratify their
enmity. “The officers,” saith the Evangelist, “came, and the Pharisees
said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?” To “come” was a far
greater deed than to have remained, for in the latter case they would
have been rid of the annoyance of these men, but now they become heralds
of the wisdom of Christ, and manifested their boldness in greater
degree. And they say not, “We could not become of the multitude, for
they gave heed unto Him as unto a prophet”; but what? “Never man spake
as this Man.” Yet they might have alleged that, but they show their
right feeling. For theirs was the saying not only of men admiring Him,
but blaming their masters, because they had sent them to bind Him whom
it behooved rather to hear. Yet they had not heard a sermon either, but
a short one; for when the long mind is impartial, there is no need of
long arguments. Such a thing is truth. What then say the Pharisees? When
they ought to have been pricked at the heart, they, on the contrary,
retort a charge on the officers, saying,

<span id="iv.liv-p5"></span> <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="iv.liv-Page_185"></span>[John
7.47](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#047)<span id="iv.liv-p5.1"></span> .
“Are ye also deceived?”

<span id="iv.liv-p6"></span>They still speak them fair, and do not
express themselves harshly, dreading lest the others should entirely
separate themselves, yet nevertheless they give signs of anger, and
speak sparingly. For when they ought to have asked what He spake, and to
have marveled at the words, they do not so, (knowing that they might
have been captivated,) but reason with them from a very foolish
argument;

<span id="iv.liv-p7"></span> [John
7.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#048)<span id="iv.liv-p7.1"></span> .
“Wherefore,” saith one, “hath none  <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446) of the rulers  <span
id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447) believed on Him?”

<span id="iv.liv-p10"></span>Dost thou then make this a charge against
Christ, tell me, and not against the unbelievers?

<span id="iv.liv-p11"></span> [John
7.49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049)<span id="iv.liv-p11.1"></span> .
“But the  <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448) people,” saith one,
“which knoweth not the Law, are accursed.”

<span id="iv.liv-p13"></span>Then is the charge against you the heavier,
because the people believed, and ye believed not. They acted like men
that knew the Law; how then are they accursed? It is ye that are
accursed, who keep not the Law, not they, who obey the Law. Neither was
it right, on the evidence of unbelievers, to slander one in whom they
believed not, for this is an unjust mode of acting. For ye also believed
not God, as Paul saith; “What if some did not believe? shall their
unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? God forbid.” ( [Rom.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="iv.liv-p13.1"></span> .)
For the Prophets ever rebuked them, saying, “Hear, ye rulers of Sodom”;
and, “Thy rulers are disobedient” ( [Isa.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)<span id="iv.liv-p13.2"></span> );
and again, “Is it not for you to know judgment?” ( [Mic. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001) <span id="iv.liv-p13.3"></span> .)
And everywhere they attack them vehemently. What then? Shall one blame
God for this? Away with the thought. This blame is theirs. And what
other proof can a man bring of your not knowing the Law than your not
obeying it? For when they had said, “Hath any of the rulers believed on
him?” and, “These who know not the Law,” Nicodemus in fair consequence
upbraids them, saying,

<span id="iv.liv-p14"></span> [John
7.51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051)<span id="iv.liv-p14.1"></span> .
“Doth our  <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) law judge any man
before it hear him?”

<span id="iv.liv-p16"></span>He showeth that they neither know the Law,
nor do the Law; for if that Law commandeth to kill no man without first
hearing him, and they before hearing were eager for this deed, they were
transgressors of the Law. And because they said, “None of the rulers
hath believed on him” ( [John
7.50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050)<span id="iv.liv-p16.1"></span> ),
therefore the Evangelist informs us that Nicodemus was “one of them,” to
show that even rulers believed on Him; for although they showed not yet
fitting boldness, still they were becoming attached  <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) to Christ. Observe how cautiously
he rebukes them; he said not, “Ye desire to kill him, and condemn the
man for a deceiver without proof”; but spake in a milder way, hindering
their excessive violence, and their inconsiderate and murderous
disposition. Wherefore he turns his discourse to the Law, saying,
“Except it hear him carefully, and know what he doeth.” So that not a
bare “hearing,” but “careful hearing” is required. For the meaning of,
“know what he doeth,” is, “what he intendeth,” “on what account,” “for
what purpose,” “whether for the subversion of the order of things and as
an enemy.” Being therefore perplexed, because they had said, “None of
the rulers hath believed on him,” they addressed him, neither
vehemently, nor yet with forbearance. For tell me, after he had said,
“The Law judgeth no man,” how doth it follow that they should say,

<span id="iv.liv-p18"></span> [John
7.52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052)<span id="iv.liv-p18.1"></span> .
“Art thou also of Galilee?”

<span id="iv.liv-p19"></span>\[2.\] When they ought to have shown that
they had not sent to summon Him without judgment, or that it was not
fitting to allow Him speech, they take the reply rather in a rough and
angry manner.

<span id="iv.liv-p20"></span>“Search, and look: for out of Galilee hath
arisen no prophet.”

<span id="iv.liv-p21"></span>Why, what had the man said? that Christ was
a prophet? No; he said, that He ought not to be slain unjudged; but they
replied insolently, and as to one who knew nothing of the Scriptures; as
though one had said, “Go, learn,” for this is the meaning of, “Search,
and look.” What then did Christ? Since they were continually dwelling
upon Galilee and “The Prophet,” to free all men from this erroneous
suspicion, and to show that He was not one of the prophets, but the
Master of the world, He said,

<span id="iv.liv-p22"></span> [John
8.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="iv.liv-p22.1"></span> .
 <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451) “I am the light of the
world.”

<span id="iv.liv-p24"></span>Not “of Galilee,” not of Palestine, nor of
Judæa. What then say the Jews?

<span id="iv.liv-p25"></span> [John
8.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013)<span id="iv.liv-p25.1"></span> .
“Thou bearest record of thyself, thy record is not true.”

<span id="iv.liv-p26"></span>Alas! for their folly, He continually
referred them to the Scriptures, and now they say, “Thou bearest record
of thyself.” What was the record He bare? “I am the light of the world.”
A great thing to say, great of a truth, but it did not greatly amaze
them, because He did not now make Himself equal to the Father, nor
assert that He was His Son, nor that He was God, but for a while calleth
Himself “a light.” They indeed desired to disprove this also, and yet
this was a much greater thing than to say,

<span id="iv.liv-p27"></span>“He that followeth Me, shall not walk in
darkness.”

<span id="iv.liv-p28"></span>Using the words “light” and “darkness” in a
spiritual sense, and meaning thereby “abideth not in error.” In this
place He draweth on <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="iv.liv-Page_186"></span> Nicodemus, and bringeth him in as having
spoken very boldly, and praiseth the servants who had also done so. For
to “cry aloud,”  <span id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452) is the act
of one desirous to cause that they also should hear. At the same time He
hinteth at these  <span id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453) who were
secretly contriving treacheries, being both in darkness and error, but
that they should not prevail over the light. And He remindeth Nicodemus
of the words which He had uttered before, “Every one that doeth evil
hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved.” ( [John 3.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.liv-p30.2"></span> .) For since they had asserted that none of
the rulers had believed on Him, therefore He saith, that “he that doeth
evil cometh not to the light,” to show that their not having come
proceedeth not from the weakness of the light, but from their own
perverse will.

<span id="iv.liv-p31"></span>“They answered and said unto Him, Dost thou
bear witness to thyself?”

<span id="iv.liv-p32"></span>What then saith He?

<span id="iv.liv-p33"></span> [John
8.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014)<span id="iv.liv-p33.1"></span> .
“Though I bear record of Myself, My record is true; for I know whence I
come, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come.”

<span id="iv.liv-p34"></span> What He had before said,  <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) these men bring forward as if it
had been specially  <span id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455) asserted.
What then doth Christ? To refute this, and to show that He used those
expressions as suitable to them and to their suspicions, who supposed
Him to be a mere man, He saith, “Though I bear record of Myself, My
record is true, for I know whence I come.” What is this? “I am of God,
am God, the Son of God, and God Himself is a faithful witness unto
Himself, but ye know Him not; ye willingly err,  <span
id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456) knowing ye pretend not to know, but
say all that ye say according to mere human imagination, choosing to
understand nothing beyond what is seen.”

<span id="iv.liv-p38"></span> [John
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015)<span id="iv.liv-p38.1"></span> .
“Ye judge after the flesh.”

<span id="iv.liv-p39"></span>As to live after the flesh is to live
badly, so to judge after the flesh is to judge unjustly. “But I judge no
man.”

<span id="iv.liv-p40"></span> [John
8.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#016)<span id="iv.liv-p40.1"></span> .
“And yet if I judge, My judgment is true.”  <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457)

<span id="iv.liv-p42"></span>What He saith, is of this kind; “Ye judge
unjustly.” “And if,” saith some one, “we judge unjustly, why dost Thou
not rebuke us? why dost Thou not punish us? why dost Thou not condemn
us?” “Because,” He saith, “I came not for this.” This is the meaning of,
“I judge no man; yet if I judge, My judgment is true.” “For had I been
willing to judge, ye would have been among the condemned. And this I
say, not judging you. Yet neither do I tell you that I say it, not
judging you, as though I were not confident that had I judged you, I
should have convicted you; since if I had judged you, I must justly have
condemned you. But now the time of judgment is not yet.” He alluded also
to the judgment to come, saying,

<span id="iv.liv-p43"></span>“I am not alone, but I and the Father that
sent Me.”

<span id="iv.liv-p44"></span>Here He hinted, that not He alone
condemneth them, but the Father also. Then He concealed this, by leading
them to His own testimony.

<span id="iv.liv-p45"></span> [John
8.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017)<span id="iv.liv-p45.1"></span> .
“It is written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true.”

<span id="iv.liv-p46"></span>\[3.\] What would the heretics say here?
(They would say,) “How is he better than man, if we take what he hath
said simply? For this rule is laid down in the case of men, because no
man by himself is trustworthy. But in the case of God, how can one
endure such a mode of speaking? How then is the word ‘two’ used? Is it
because they are two, or because being men they are therefore two? If it
is because they are two, why did he not betake himself to John, and say,
I bear witness of myself, and John beareth witness of me? Wherefore not
to the angels? Wherefore not to the prophets? For he might have found
ten thousand other testimonies.” But he desireth to show not this only
that there are Two, but also that they are of the same Substance.

<span id="iv.liv-p47"></span> [John
8.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span id="iv.liv-p47.1"></span> .
“Then said they unto Him, Who is thy father? Jesus answered, Ye neither
know Me, nor My Father.”

<span id="iv.liv-p48"></span> Because while they knew they spake as
though they knew not, and as if trying Him, He doth not even deem them
worthy of an answer. Wherefore henceforth He speaketh all more clearly
and more boldly; drawing His testimony from signs, and from His teaching
of them that followed Him, and  <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) by the Cross being near. For, “I
know,” He saith, “whence I come.” This would not greatly affect them,
but the adding, “and whither I go,” would rather terrify them, since He
was not to remain in death. But why said He not, “I know that I am God,”
instead of, “I know whence I come”? He ever mingleth lowly words with
sublime, and even these He veileth. For after saying, “I bear witness of
Myself,” and proving this, He descendeth to a humbler strain. As though
He had said, “I know from whom I am sent, and to whom I depart.” For so
they could have had nothing to say against it, when they heard that He
was sent from Him, and would depart to Him. “I could not have spoken,”
He saith, “any falsehood, I who am come from thence, and depart thither,
to the true God. But ye know not God, and therefore judge according
<span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span id="iv.liv-Page_187"></span> to
the flesh. For if having heard so many sure signs and proofs ye still
say, ‘thy witness is not true,’ if ye deem Moses worthy of credit, both
as to what he speaketh concerning others and what he speaketh concerning
himself, but Christ not so, this is to judge according to the flesh.”
“But I judge no man.” He saith indeed also that “the Father judgeth no
man.” ( [John 5.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.liv-p49.3"></span> .) How then doth He here declare, that, “If I
judge, My judgment is just, for I am not alone”? He again speaketh in
reply to their thoughts. “The judgment which is Mine is the judgment of
the Father. The Father, judging, would not judge otherwise than as I do,
and I should not judge otherwise than as the Father.” Wherefore did He
mention the Father? Because they would not have thought that the Son was
to be believed unless He received the witness of the Father.  Besides,
the saying doth not even hold good. For in the case of men when two bear
witness in a matter pertaining to another, then their witness is true,
(this is for two to witness,) but if one should witness for himself,
then they are no longer two. Seest thou that He said this for nothing
else but to show that He was of the same Substance, that He needed no
other witness, and was in nothing inferior to the Father? Observe at
least His independence  <span id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) ;

<span id="iv.liv-p51"></span> [John
8.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018)<span id="iv.liv-p51.1"></span> .
“I am One that bear witness of Myself; and the Father that sent Me
beareth witness of Me.”

<span id="iv.liv-p52"></span>Had He been of inferior substance, He would
not have put this. But now that thou mayest not deem that the Father is
included, to make up the number (of two), observe that His power hath
nothing different (from the Father’s). A man bears witness when he is
trustworthy of himself, not when he himself needs testimony, and that
too in a matter pertaining to another; but in a matter of his own, where
he needs the witness of another, he is not trustworthy. But in this case
it is all contrary. For He though bearing witness in a matter of His
own, and saying that witness is borne to Him by another, asserteth that
He is trustworthy, in every way manifesting His independence. For why,
when He had said, “I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent Me,”
and, “The testimony of two men is true,” did He not hold His peace,
instead of adding, “I am One that bear witness of Myself”? It was
evidently to show His independence. And He placeth Himself first; “I am
One that bear witness of Myself.” Here He showeth His equality of honor,
and that they were profited nothing by saying that they knew God the
Father, while they knew not Him. And He saith that the cause of this
(ignorance) was that they were not willing to know Him. Therefore He
telleth them that it was not possible to know the Father without knowing
Him, that even so He might draw them to the knowledge of Him. For since
leaving Him they even sought to get the knowledge of the Father, He
saith, “Ye cannot know the Father without Me.” ( [John
8.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span id="iv.liv-p52.1"></span> .)
So that they who blaspheme the Son, blaspheme not the Son only, but Him
that begat Him also.

<span id="iv.liv-p53"></span> \[4.\] This let us avoid, and glorify the
Son. Had He not been of the same Nature, He would not have spoken thus.
For had He merely taught, but been of different Substance, a man might
not have known Him, and yet have known the Father; and again, it would
not have been that one who knew Him, would have altogether known the
Father; for neither doth one who knoweth a man know an Angel. “Yes,”
replieth some one, “he that knoweth the creation, knoweth God.” By no
means. Many, or rather I should say, all men know the creation, (for
they see it,) but they know not God. Let us then glorify the Son of God,
not with this glory (of words) only, but that also which is by works.
For the first without the last is nothing. “Behold,” saith St. Paul,
“thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and makest thy boast of
God—thou therefore that teachest another, teachest  <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) thou not thyself? Thou that makest
thy boast of the Law, through breaking of the Law dishonorest thou God?”
( [Rom. 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023)<span id="iv.liv-p54.3"></span> .)
Beware lest we also who make boast of the rightness of our faith
dishonor God by not manifesting a life agreeable to the faith, causing
Him to be blasphemed. For He would have the Christian to be the teacher
of the world, its leaven, its salt, its light. And what is that light?
It is a life which shineth, and hath in it no dark thing. Light is not
useful to itself, nor leaven, nor salt, but showeth its usefulness
towards others, and so we are required to do good, not to ourselves
only, but to others. For salt, if it salt not, is not salt.  Moreover
another thing is evident, that if we be righteous, others shall
certainly be so also; but as long as we are not righteous, we shall not
be able to assist others. Let there be nothing foolish or silly among
us; such are worldly matters, such are the cares of this life. Wherefore
the virgins were called foolish, because they were busy about foolish,
worldly matters, gathering things together here, but laying not up
treasure where they ought. Fear there is lest this be our case, fear
lest we too depart clothed with filthy garments, to that place where all
have them bright and shining. For nothing is more filthy, nothing more
impure, than sin. Wherefore the Prophet declaring its nature cried out,
“My wounds stink, and are corrupt.” ( [Ps. xxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005) <span id="iv.liv-p54.4"></span> .)
And if thou wilt fully learn how ill-savored sin is, consider it after
<span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span id="iv.liv-Page_188"></span> it
hath been done; when thou art delivered from the desire, when the fire
no longer troubleth thee, then shalt thou see what sin is. Consider
anger, when thou art calm; consider avarice, when thou dost not feel it.
There is nothing more shameful, nothing more accursed, than rapine and
avarice. This we continually say, desiring not to vex you, but to gain
some great and wonderful advantage. For he who hath not acted rightly
after hearing once, may perhaps do so after hearing a second time; and
he who hath passed by the second time, may do right after the third. God
grant that we, being delivered from all evil things, may have the sweet
savor of Christ; for to Him, with the Father and the Holy Ghost is
glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[185:1447](1140057.htm#fr_1446) <span
id="iv.liv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p8"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p8.1"></span>Hath any,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p8.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[185:1448](1140057.htm#fr_1447) <span
id="iv.liv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p9"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p9.1"></span>or of the Pharisees,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.liv-p9.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[185:1449](1140057.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="iv.liv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p12"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p12.1"></span>this,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p12.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[185:1450](1140057.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="iv.liv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p15.2"></span>your.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[185:1451](1140057.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iv.liv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p17.1"></span>ᾠ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p17.2"></span>κειοῦντο</span>

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[185:1452](1140057.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iv.liv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p23.1"></span>The history of the woman taken in adultery is
omitted by St. Chrysostom, and all the Greek commentators.</span>

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[186:1453](1140057.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="iv.liv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p29.1"></span>S. C. seems to refer to</span> [John
7.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)<span
id="iv.liv-p29.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p29.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p29.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p29.5"></span>Then cried Jesus in the Temple,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.liv-p29.6"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[186:1454](1140057.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="iv.liv-p29.7"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p30.1"></span>i.e. the Pharisees.</span>

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[186:1455](1140057.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="iv.liv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p35.1"></span>῞</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p35.2"></span>Οπερ φθάσας εἶπε</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.liv-p35.3"></span>, according to Savile’s
conjecture and a Vatican <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.liv-p35.4"></span>ms.</span> The common reading is</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.liv-p35.5"></span>εἶπον</span>

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[186:1456](1140057.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="iv.liv-p35.6"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p36.1"></span>προηγουμένως</span>

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[186:1457](1140057.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="iv.liv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p37.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p37.2"></span>θελοκακεῖτε</span>

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[186:1458](1140057.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="iv.liv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p41.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p41.2"></span>just.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[186:1459](1140057.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="iv.liv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p49.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p49.2"></span>and.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[187:1460](1140057.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="iv.liv-p49.4"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p50.1"></span>αὐθεντίαν</span>

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[187:1461](1140057.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iv.liv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.liv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p54.1"></span>Sav.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.liv-p54.2"></span>judgest.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 8.20](1140058)
