[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140126)  [Next](1140128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxxiii"></span> <span id="v.xxxiii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span id="v.xxxiii-Page_499"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIX.</span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxxiii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews xii.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p3"></span> *“Ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin.  And ye have forgotten the exhortation which
speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him. For whom
the Lord loveth, He chasteneth: and scourgeth every son whom He
receiveth.”*  <span id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373)

<span id="v.xxxiii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>There</span> are two kinds of consolation,
apparently opposed to one another, but yet contributing great strength
each to the other; both of which he has here put forward. The one is
when we say that persons have suffered much: for the soul is refreshed,
when it has many witnesses of its own sufferings, and this he introduced
above, saying, “Call to mind the former days, in which after ye had been
illuminated ye endured a great fight of afflictions.” ( [Heb.
10.32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span id="v.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>
.) The other is when we say, “Thou hast suffered no great thing.” The
former, when \[the soul\] has been exhausted refreshes it, and makes it
recover breath: the latter, when it has become indolent and supine,
turns it again  <span id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374) and pulls
down pride. Thus that no pride may spring up in them from that testimony
\[to their sufferings\], see what he does. “Ye have not yet” (he says)
“resisted unto blood, \[striving\] against sin.” And he did not at once
go on with what follows, but after having shown them all those who had
stood “unto blood,” and then brought in the glory of Christ, His
sufferings,  <span id="fr_3375"></span>[3376](#fn_3375) he afterwards
easily pursued his discourse. This he says also in writing to the
Corinthians, “There hath no temptation taken you, but such as is common
to man” ( [1 Cor. x. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p7.4"></span> ), that is, small. For this is enough to
arouse and set right the soul, when it considers that it has not risen
to the whole \[trial\], and encourages itself from what has already
befallen it.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p8"></span>What he means is this: Ye have not yet
submitted to death; your loss has extended to money, to reputation, to
being driven from place to place. Christ however shed His blood for you,
while you have not \[done it\] for yourselves. He contended for the
Truth even unto death fighting for you; while ye have not yet entered
upon dangers that threaten death.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p9"></span> “And ye have forgotten the exhortation.”
That is, And ye have slackened your hands, ye have become faint. “Ye
have not yet,” he said, “resisted unto blood, striving against sin.”
Here he indicates that sin is both very vigorous,  <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376) and is itself armed. For the
\[expression\] “Ye have resisted \[stood firm against\],” is used with
reference to those who stand firm.  <span
id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377)

<span id="v.xxxiii-p12"></span>\[2.\] “Which” (he says) “speaketh unto
you as unto sons, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord,
nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him.” He has drawn his encouragement
from the facts themselves; over and above he adds also that which is
drawn from arguments, from this testimony.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p13"></span> “Faint not” (he says) “when thou art
rebuked of Him.” It follows that these things are of God. For this too
is no small matter of consolation, when we learn that it is God’s work
that such things have power,  <span id="fr_3378"></span>[3379](#fn_3378)
He allowing \[them\]; even as also Paul says; “He said unto me, My grace
is sufficient for thee: for My strength is made perfect in weakness.” (
[2 Cor. xii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p14.4"></span> .) He it is who allows \[them\].

<span id="v.xxxiii-p15"></span> “For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,
and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” Thou canst not say that any
righteous man is without affliction: even if he appear to be so, yet
*we* know not his other afflictions. So that of necessity every
righteous man must pass through affliction. For it is a declaration of
Christ, that the wide and broad way leads to destruction, but the strait
and narrow one to life. ( [Matt. 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="v.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>
.) If then it is possible to enter into life by that means, and is not
by any other, then all have entered in by the narrow \[way\], as many as
have departed unto life.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p16"></span> [Heb.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#007)<span id="v.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>
. “Ye endure chastisement”  <span id="fr_3379"></span>[3380](#fn_3379)
(he says); not for punishment, nor for vengeance, nor for suffering.
See, from that from which they supposed they had been deserted \[of
God\], from these he says they may be confident, that they have not been
deserted. It is as if he had said, Because ye have suffered so many
evils, do you suppose that God has left you and hates you? If ye did not
suffer, then it were right to suppose this. For if “He scourgeth every
son whom He receiveth,” he who is not scourged, perhaps is not a son.
What then, you say, do not bad men suffer distress? They suffer indeed;
how then? He did not say, Every one <span id="page_500">p. 500</span>
<span id="v.xxxiii-Page_500"></span> who is scourged is a son, but every
son is scourged. For in all cases He scourges His son: what is wanted
then is to show, whether any son is not scourged. But thou wouldest not
be able to say: there are many wicked men also who are scourged, such as
murderers, robbers, sorcerers, plunderers of tombs. These however are
paying the penalty of their own wickedness, and are not scourged as
sons, but punished as wicked: but ye as sons.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p18"></span>\[3.\] Then again \[he argues\] from the
general custom. Seest thou how he brings up arguments from all quarters,
from facts in the Scripture, from its words, from our own notions, from
examples in ordinary life? ( [Heb.
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#008)<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>
.) “But if ye be without chastisement” \[&c.\]. Seest thou that he said
what I just mentioned, that it is not possible to be a son without being
chastened? For as in families, fathers care not for bastards, though
they learn nothing, though they be not distinguished, but fear for their
legitimate sons lest they should be indolent, \[so here.\]. If then not
to be chastised is \[a mark\] of bastards, we ought to rejoice at
chastisement, if this be \[a sign\] of legitimacy. “God dealeth with you
as with sons”; for this very cause.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p19"></span> [Heb.
12.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009)<span id="v.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>
. “Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence.” Again, \[he reasons\] from their own
experiences, from what they themselves suffered. For as he says above,
“Call to mind the former days” ( [Heb.
10.32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span id="v.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>
), so here also “God” (he saith) “dealeth with you as with sons,” and ye
could not say, We cannot bear it: yea, “as with sons” tenderly beloved.
For if they reverence their “fathers of the flesh,” how shall not you
reverence your heavenly Father?

<span id="v.xxxiii-p20"></span>However the difference arises not from
this alone, nor from the persons, but also from the cause itself, and
from the fact. For it is not on the same grounds that He and they
inflict chastisement: but they \[did it\] with a view to “what seemed
good to them,” that is, fulfilling \[their own\] pleasure oftentimes,
and not always looking to what was expedient. But here, that cannot be
said. For He does this not for any interest of His own but for you, and
for your benefit alone. They \[did it\] that ye might be useful to
themselves also, oftentimes without reason; but here there is nothing of
this kind. Seest thou that this also brings consolation? For we are most
closely attached to those \[earthly parents\], when we see that not for
any interests of their own they either command or advise us: but their
earnestness is, wholly and solely, on our account. For this is genuine
love, and love in reality, when we are beloved though we be of no use to
him who loves us,—not that he may receive, but that he may impart. He
chastens, He does everything, He uses all diligence, that we may become
capable of receiving His benefits. ( [Heb.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#010)<span id="v.xxxiii-p20.1"></span>
.) “For they verily” (he says) “for a few days chastened us after their
own pleasure, but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of His
holiness.”

<span id="v.xxxiii-p21"></span>What is “of his holiness”? It is, of His
purity, so as to become worthy of Him, according to our power. He
earnestly desires that ye may receive, and He does all that He may give
you: do ye not earnestly endeavor that ye may receive? “I said unto the
Lord” (one says) “Thou art my Lord, for of my good things Thou hast no
need.” ( [Ps. xvi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p21.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxiii-p22"></span>“Furthermore,” he saith, “we have had
fathers of our flesh which corrected us and we gave them reverence:
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and
live?” (“To the Father of spirits,” whether of spiritual gifts, or of
prayers, or of the incorporeal powers.) If we die thus, then “we shall
live. For they indeed for a few days chastened us after their own
pleasure,” for what seems \[so\] is not always profitable, but “He for
our profit.”

<span id="v.xxxiii-p23"></span>\[4.\] Therefore chastisement is
“profitable”; therefore chastisement is a “participation of holiness.”
Yea and this greatly: for when it casts out sloth, and evil desire, and
love of the things of this life, when it helps the soul, when it causes
a light esteem of all things here (for affliction \[does\] this), is it
not holy? Does it not draw down the grace of the Spirit?

<span id="v.xxxiii-p24"></span>Let us consider the righteous, from what
cause they all shone brightly forth. Was it not from affliction? And, if
you will, let us enumerate them from the first and from the very
beginning: Abel, Noah himself; for it is not possible that he, being the
only one in that so great multitude of the wicked, should not have been
afflicted; for it is said, “Noah being” alone “perfect in his
generation, pleased God.” ( [Gen. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009) <span id="v.xxxiii-p24.1"></span> .)
For consider, I beseech you, if now, when we have innumerable persons
whose virtue we may emulate, fathers, and children, and teachers, we are
thus distressed, what must we suppose he suffered, alone among so many?
But should I speak of the circumstances of that strange and wonderful
rain? Or should I speak of Abraham, his wanderings one upon another, the
carrying away of his wife, the dangers, the wars, the famines? Should I
speak of Isaac,  <span id="fr_3380"></span>[3381](#fn_3380) what fearful
things he underwent, driven from every place, and laboring in vain, and
toiling for others? Or of Jacob? for indeed to enumerate all his
\[afflictions\] is not necessary, but it is reasonable to <span
id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span id="v.xxxiii-Page_501"></span> bring
forward the testimony, which he himself \[gave\] when speaking with
Pharaoh; “Few and evil are my days, and they have not attained to the
days of my fathers.” ( [Gen. xlvii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)
<span id="v.xxxiii-p25.9"></span> .) Or should I speak of Joseph
himself? Or of Moses? Or of Joshua? Or of David? Or of Elijah? Or of
Samuel? Or wouldest thou \[that I speak\] of all the prophets? Wilt thou
not find that all these were made illustrious from their afflictions?
Tell me then, dost *thou* desire to become illustrious from ease and
luxury? But thou canst not.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p26"></span>Or should I speak of the Apostles? Nay
but they went beyond all. And Christ said this, “In the world ye shall
have tribulation.” ( [John xvi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)
<span id="v.xxxiii-p26.1"></span> .) And again, “Ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice.” ( [John xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020) <span id="v.xxxiii-p26.2"></span>
.) And, that “Strait and narrow is the way  <span
id="fr_3381"></span>[3382](#fn_3381) that leadeth unto life.” ( [Matt.
vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p27.4"></span> .) The Lord of the way said, that it is
“narrow and strait”; and dost thou seek the “broad” \[way\]? How is this
not unreasonable? In consequence thou wilt not arrive at life, going
another \[way\], but at destruction, for thou hast chosen the \[path\]
which leads thither.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p28"></span>Wouldst thou that I bring before you
those \[that live\] in luxury? Let us ascend from the last to the first.
The rich man who is burning in the furnace; the Jews who live for the
belly, “whose god is their belly” ( [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019) <span id="v.xxxiii-p28.1"></span>
), who were ever seeking ease in the wilderness, were destroyed; as also
those in Sodom, on account of their gluttony; and those in the time of
Noah, was it not because they chose this soft and dissolute life? For
“they luxuriated,” it says, “in fullness of bread.” ( [Ezek. xvi.
49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049) <span id="v.xxxiii-p28.2"></span>
.) It speaks of those in Sodom. But if “fullness of bread” wrought so
great evil, what should we say of other delicacies? Esau, was not he in
ease? And what of those who being of “the sons of God” ( [Gen. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002) <span id="v.xxxiii-p28.3"></span> ),
looked on women, and were borne down the precipice? And what of those
who were maddened by inordinate lust? and all the kings of the nations,
of the Babylonians, of the Egyptians, did they not perish miserably? Are
they not in torment?

<span id="v.xxxiii-p29"></span>\[5.\] And as to things now, tell me, are
they not the same? Hear Christ saying, “They that wear soft clothing are
in kings’ houses” ( [Matt. xi. 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p29.1"></span> ), but they who do not \[wear\] such things,
are in Heaven. For the soft garment relaxes even the austere soul,
breaks it and enervates it: yea, even if it meet with a body rough and
hard, it speedily by such delicate treatment makes it soft and weak.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p30"></span> For, tell me, for what other reason do
you suppose women are so weak? Is it from their sex only? By no means:
but from their way of living, and their bringing up. For their avoiding
exposure,  <span id="fr_3382"></span>[3383](#fn_3382) their inactivity,
their baths, their unguents, their multitude of perfumes, the delicate
softness of their couches, makes them in the end such as they are.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p32"></span> And that thou mayest understand, attend
to what I say. Tell me; take from a garden a tree from those standing in
the uncultivated  <span id="fr_3383"></span>[3384](#fn_3383) part and
beaten by the winds, and plant it in a moist and shady place, and thou
wilt find it very unworthy of that from which thou didst originally take
it. And that this is true, \[appears from the fact that\] women brought
up in the country are stronger than citizens of towns: and they would
overcome many such in wrestling. For when the body becomes more
effeminate, of necessity the soul also shares the mischief, since, for
the most part, its energies are affected in accordance with the
\[body\]. For in illness we are different persons owing to weakness, and
when we become well, we are different again. For as in the case of a
string when the tones  <span id="fr_3384"></span>[3385](#fn_3384) are
weak and relaxed, and not well arranged, the excellence of the art is
also destroyed, being obliged to serve the ill condition of the strings:
so in the case of the body also, the soul receives from it many hurts,
many necessities.  <span id="fr_3385"></span>[3386](#fn_3385) For when
it needs much nursing, the other endures a bitter servitude.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p36"></span> \[6.\] Wherefore, I beseech you, let us
make it strong by work, and not nurse it as an invalid.  <span
id="fr_3386"></span>[3387](#fn_3386) My discourse is not to men only but
to women also. For why dost thou, O woman, continually enfeeble  <span
id="fr_3387"></span>[3388](#fn_3387) \[thy body\] with luxury and
exhaust it?  <span id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) Why dost thou
ruin thy strength with fat? This fat is flabbiness, not strength.
Whereas, if thou break off from these things, and manage thyself
differently, then will thy personal beauty also improve according to thy
wish, when strength and a good habit of body are there. If however thou
beset it with ten thousand diseases, there will neither be bloom of
complexion, nor good health; for thou wilt always be in low spirits. And
you know that as when the air is smiling it makes a beautiful house look
splendid, so also cheerfulness of mind when added to a fair countenance,
makes it better: but if \[a woman\] is in low spirits and in pain she
becomes more ill-looking. But diseases and pains produce low spirits;
and diseases are produced from the body too delicate through great
luxury. So that even for this you will flee luxury, if you take my
advice.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p40"></span>‘But, you will say, luxury gives
pleasure.’ Yes, but not so great as the annoyances. And besides, the
pleasure goes no further than the <span id="page_502">p. 502</span>
<span id="v.xxxiii-Page_502"></span> palate and the tongue. For when the
table has been removed, and the food swallowed, thou wilt be like one
that has not partaken, or rather much worse, in that thou bearest thence
oppression, and distension, and headache, and a sleep like death, and
often too, sleeplessness from repletion, and obstruction of the
breathing, and eructation. And thou wouldest curse bitterly thy belly,
when thou oughtest to curse thy immoderate eating.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p41"></span>\[7.\] Let us not then fatten the body,
but listen to Paul saying, “Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof,” ( [Rom. xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)
<span id="v.xxxiii-p41.1"></span> .) As if one should take food and
throw it into a drain, so is he who throws it into the belly: or rather
it is not so, but much worse. For in the one case he uses  <span
id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) the drain without harm to himself:
but in the other he generates innumerable diseases. For what nourishes
is a sufficiency which also can be digested: but what is over and above
our need, not only does not nourish, but even spoils the other. But no
man sees these things, owing to some prejudice and unseasonable
pleasure.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p43"></span> Dost thou wish to nourish the body? Take
away what is superfluous; give what is sufficient, and as much as can be
digested. Do not load it, lest thou overwhelm it. A sufficiency is both
nourishment and pleasure. For nothing is so productive of pleasure, as
food well digested: nothing so \[productive of\] health: nothing \[so
productive of\] acuteness of the faculties, nothing tends so much to
keep away disease. For a sufficiency is both nourishment, and pleasure,
and health; but excess is injury, and unpleasantness and disease. For
what famine does, that also satiety does; or rather more grievous evils.
For the former indeed within a few days carries a man off and sets him
free; but the other eating into and putrefying the body, gives it over
to long disease, and then to a most painful death. But *we* , while we
account famine a thing greatly to be dreaded, yet run after satiety,
which is more distressing than that.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p44"></span> Whence is this disease? Whence this
madness? I do not say that we should waste ourselves away, but that we
should eat as much food as also gives us pleasure, that is really
pleasure, and can nourish the body, and furnish it to us well ordered
and adapted for the energies of the soul, well joined and fitted
together. But when it comes to be water-logged  <span
id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) by luxury, it cannot in the
flood-wave, keep fast the bolts  <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391) themselves, as one may say, and
joints which hold the frame together. For the flood-wave coming in, the
whole breaks up and scatters.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p47"></span>“Make not provision for the flesh” (he
says) “to fulfill the lusts thereof.” ( [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014) <span id="v.xxxiii-p47.1"></span>
.) He said well. For luxury is fuel for unreasonable lusts; though the
luxurious should be the most philosophical of all men, of necessity he
must be somewhat affected by wine, by eating, he must needs be relaxed,
he must needs endure the greater flame. Hence \[come\] fornications,
hence adulteries. For a hungry belly cannot generate lust, or rather not
one which has used just enough. But that which generates unseemly lusts,
is that which is relaxed  <span id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392) by
luxury. And as land which is very moist and a dung-hill which is wet
through and retains much dampness, generates worms, while that which has
been freed from such moistness bears abundant fruits, when it has
nothing immoderate: even if it be not cultivated, it yields grass, and
if it be cultivated, fruits: \[so also do we\].

<span id="v.xxxiii-p49"></span>Let us not then make our flesh useless,
or unprofitable, or hurtful, but let us plant in it useful fruits, and
fruit-bearing trees; let us not enfeeble them by luxury, for they too
put forth worms instead of fruit when they are become rotten. So also
implanted desire, if thou moisten it above measure, generates
unreasonable pleasures, yea the most exceedingly unreasonable. Let us
then remove this pernicious evil, that we may be able to attain the good
things promised us, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory now and ever and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[499:3374](1140127.htm#fr_3373) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>accepteth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[499:3375](1140127.htm#fr_3374) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.2"></span>πιστρέφει</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.3"></span>, or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.4"></span>turns, converts to God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3375"></span>[499:3376](1140127.htm#fr_3375) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>τὸ καύχημα τοῦ Χριστοῦ τὰ παθήματα</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p7.2"></span>, or,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p7.3"></span>our glory—our boast—the
sufferings of Christ.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[499:3377](1140127.htm#fr_3376) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>σφόδρα πνέουσαν</span>

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[499:3378](1140127.htm#fr_3377) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>\[There is a paronomasia here</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>Τὸ ἀντικατέστητε, πρὸς
τοὺς ἑστῶτας εἴρηται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p11.3"></span>, which cannot easily be reproduced in
English.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3378"></span>[499:3379](1140127.htm#fr_3378) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>τὸ τοιαῦτα δυνηθ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>ΣΨΜΒΟΛ 210 \\φ ̈ΣΙΛ
Γαλατια̈ \\σ 12</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p14.3"></span>ναι</span>

<span id="fn_3379"></span>[499:3380](1140127.htm#fr_3379) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>εἰς παιδείαν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p17.2"></span> εἰς παιδείαν ὑπομένετε</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p17.3"></span>is the reading of the
best <span class="c11"><span id="v.xxxiii-p17.4"></span>mss.</span> &c.
of St. Chrys. as it is the approved reading of the Epistle. The later
\[printed\] texts have the later reading</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p17.5"></span>εἰ π. ὑπ</span>

<span id="fn_3380"></span>[500:3381](1140127.htm#fr_3380) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p25.1"></span>The common texts substitute Jacob for Isaac
here, omitting the following clause where Jacob is mentioned (as they
also in the preceding sentence have</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p25.2"></span>temptations</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p25.3"></span>instead of</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p25.4"></span>families</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p25.5"></span>); to correct the
apparent inaccuracies of the text. But Mr. Field shows from other
passages of St. Chrys. that he really means Isaac, having in view</span>
<span id="v.xxxiii-p25.6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p25.7"></span>[Gen. xxvi.
18-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#018)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p25.8"></span>, 27</span>

<span id="fn_3381"></span>[501:3382](1140127.htm#fr_3381) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p27.1"></span>St. Chrys. seems to have read this text
without the words</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p27.2"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p27.3"></span>πύλη</span>

<span id="fn_3382"></span>[501:3383](1140127.htm#fr_3382) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p31"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p31.1"></span>to the heat,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p31.2"></span>σκιατροφία</span>

<span id="fn_3383"></span>[501:3384](1140127.htm#fr_3383) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p33.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p33.2"></span>ν τῇ ἐρήμῳ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p33.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p33.4"></span>dry and open part?</span> ”

<span id="fn_3384"></span>[501:3385](1140127.htm#fr_3384) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p33.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p34.1"></span>φθόγγοι</span>

<span id="fn_3385"></span>[501:3386](1140127.htm#fr_3385) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p35.2"></span>νάγκας</span>

<span id="fn_3386"></span>[501:3387](1140127.htm#fr_3386) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p37.1"></span>νοσηλεύωμεν</span>

<span id="fn_3387"></span>[501:3388](1140127.htm#fr_3387) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.2"></span>κπλύνεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.3"></span>…</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.5"></span>ξίτηλον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.6"></span>, lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.7"></span>washed out,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p38.8"></span>and</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p38.9"></span>faded,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p38.10"></span>as when colors are
washed out of dresses.</span>

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[501:3389](1140127.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p38.11"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.2"></span>κπλύνεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.3"></span>…</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.5"></span>ξίτηλον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.6"></span>, lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p39.7"></span>washed out,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p39.8"></span>and</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p39.9"></span>faded,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxiii-p39.10"></span>as when colors are
washed out of dresses.</span>

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[502:3390](1140127.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p42.2"></span>ργάζεται</span>

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[502:3391](1140127.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p45.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p45.2"></span>πέραντλον</span>

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[502:3392](1140127.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p46.1"></span>γόμφους</span>

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[502:3393](1140127.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p48.1"></span>πλαδῶσα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p48.2"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxiii-p48.3"></span>wet and soft.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXX](1140128)
