[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140096)  [Next](1140098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span> <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_341"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span> <span class="c43"><span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>by the american reviser.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>In</span> the following Homilies St. Chrysostom
assumes throughout St. Paul’s authorship of the Epistle, and in his
opening Homily deals with considerable ingenuity with several of the
most obvious objections to the Pauline authorship.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>The Epistle, however, is anonymous, and is
not attributed to St. Paul by the most ancient historical testimony
which has come down to us, nor is his authorship generally recognized by
modern criticism. It is interesting, therefore, to enquire whether St.
Chrysostom, in adopting the prevailing view of his time, did so on
sufficient grounds.

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> The history of the matter is very curious.
At the close of the second century Tertullian speaks positively and
unhesitatingly of the Epistle to the Hebrews as written by Barnabas, the
early and long-continued companion of St. Paul.  <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) But there happened to be current in
the ancient Church another epistle ascribed to Barnabas, and then
commonly received as his, though generally considered spurious. The two
epistles were so entirely unlike that no one could well receive them
both as from the same author. The result was different in different
parts of the Church. In the West, although the Epistle to the Hebrews
had been used very largely by Clement of Rome, it came to be discredited
altogether, and did not secure general recognition until the fourth
century; it was then gradually acknowledged and attributed, at first
doubtfully, but afterwards by common consent, to St. Paul. In the East,
on the other hand, the Epistle itself was firmly accepted from the
first, but with no certain tradition and much questioning in regard to
its author. The suggestion of its Pauline authorship seems to have been
made by Pantænus, the teacher of Clement of Alexandria, and a
contemporary of Tertullian.  We have his opinion, however, only at third
hand, in a quotation preserved by Eusebius  <span
id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) from a lost work of Clement, and it
is impossible to tell on what grounds he rested his opinion, or whether
it was a mere personal speculation, like the reason he gives for the
omission of the name of St. Paul in connection with the Epistle.

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span> His disciple Clement adopted the suggestion
not without hesitation. No one familiar with Greek, which was still the
current language of the East, and especially of Alexandria, could fail
to be struck by the extreme difference of style between this Epistle and
those of St. Paul. Clement, therefore, conjectured that it might have
been originally written by St. Paul in Hebrew and translated into Greek
by St. Luke. This again is second-hand opinion preserved to us by
Eusebius.  <span id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) Nevertheless, in
other works, which are still extant, he frequently cites the Epistle as
St. Paul’s.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_342"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> Clement was succeeded in his catechetical
office at Alexandria by Origen, a profound thinker and scholar. He was
strongly impressed with the difference between the Greek of this and of
the Pauline Epistles, and speaks of the matter in different parts of his
voluminous works, sometimes suggesting the Clementine hypothesis,
sometimes speaking of the variety of opinions and traditions on the
subject, sometimes speaking of St. Luke or of Clement of Rome as the
probable author, but summing up his perplexity (in language, quoted
fully by Eusebius), by saying that who really was the author, God only
knows.  <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651)

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span>Thus far the question of authorship was
evidently an open one on which everyone was free to hold his own
opinion, or uncertainty of opinion. Tertullian speaks of the authorship
of Barnabas simply as a fact, without an allusion to any doubt on the
matter. But as the time went on, the attention of the masters of thought
in the Church became more and more engrossed with doctrinal questions,
while those of exegesis and criticism more and more lost their interest,
especially in the East. In the West there is no trace of any reference
of the authorship of the Epistle to St. Paul until the middle of the
fourth century; but after this the opinion spread rapidly, and under the
influence of Augustine, in the year 393 somewhat hesitatingly, but in
419 positively, the provincial council of Carthage reckoned it among the
Pauline Epistles. Augustine himself, however, sometimes expressed
himself doubtfully, and although it had now become customary to quote
the Epistle as St. Paul’s, yet scholars like Jerome, when distinctly
treating of the question, express the old doubts and uncertainties of
Origen. The assumption of the Pauline authorship was a convenience in
maintaining the authority of the Epistle, and there being almost no one
to call it in question, had come to be generally adopted in St.
Chrysostom’s time, and remained almost unquestioned until the revival of
learning at the period of the Reformation. Since then, while still
remaining a popular impression, it has come to be rejected by the great
majority of careful students.

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>In this variety of opinion from the earliest
times, and in the absence of any consistent external evidence, we are
plainly left free to form our own conclusions from internal evidence.
Among the great number of authors suggested by different writers, the
only names entitled to especial consideration are those of St. Paul
(Chrysostom, Augustine, and later writers generally until modern times,
but at present the only scholar of weight is Hofmann), St. Luke (besides
the views of ancients given above, Calvin, Ebrard, Döllinger, and to a
certain extent Delitzsch), Clement of Rome (Erasmus, Reithmaier,
Bisping), Silas (Mynster, Böhme, Godet), Apollos (Luther, Semler, De
Wette, Tholuck, Bunsen, Kurtz, Farrar, De Pressensé, Bleek, Hilgenfeld,
Lünemann, Alford), and Barnabas (Ullmann, Wieseler, Ritschl, Grau,
Thiersch, Weiss, Renan, Keil). Of the three first we have genuine
writings with which to make a comparison; of the three last—assuming the
spuriousness of the so-called Epistles of Barnabas—nothing remains.

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span>The supposition of the authorship of St.
Paul, although so long carelessly held, seems almost forbidden by an
expression in the Epistle itself. St. Paul was always most strenuous in
asserting that he had received his apostleship and his knowledge of the
truth “not of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father” ( [Gal. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001) <span
id="v.iii-p15.1"></span> ), while the author of this Epistle ranks
himself among those who had received through the medium of others that
Gospel “which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard Him” ( [Heb.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003)<span id="v.iii-p15.2"></span> ).
All attempts to weaken the force of this evidence by considering the
passage as merely an instance of the rhetorical figure *koinosis* , in
which the writer identifies himself with his readers, and thus
attributes to himself what properly belongs only to them, have been
unsuccessful. Delitzsch considers that if the Epistle were the joint
work of St. Paul and St. Luke, in which the former only supplied the
general course of thought, leaving its expression entirely to <span
id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_343"></span> the
latter, even this expression, so singularly like [Luke
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002)<span id="v.iii-p15.3"></span> ,
might have been used; but this can only be by a practical surrender of
the Pauline authorship. St. Paul everywhere lays such emphasis on the
fact that his presentation of Christian truth was in no way whatever
derived from man, but was from express divine instruction given to
himself personally, that this passage must form a presumption against
the Pauline authorship so strong as to be set aside only by clear and
positive evidence. It has already appeared that there is no such
external evidence; the internal will be examined below.

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span>The authorship of Clement of Rome may also
be set aside on two grounds: (1) That he quotes largely from this
Epistle with the whole air of one citing from a higher authority to
confirm his own teachings; and (2) that his own manner and style, as
well as intellectual power, is so unlike as to make the supposition of a
common authorship scarcely conceivable.

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span> The early suggestion that the Epistle may
have been written in Hebrew by St. Paul, more or less fully, and
translated by St. Luke or St. Clement, or some other of his companions
more or less paraphrastically, can find no favor with the modern
scholar. If such a supposition is meant to leave the work essentially a
translation, it encounters all the difficulties already mentioned
against the Pauline authorship, and besides is opposed to abundant
evidence that the work was originally written in Greek. “It abounds in
compound words which are essentially Greek, which have no analogues in
Aramaic or in Hebrew,”  <span id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) and
it contains *paronomasia* , entering into the thought, which could only
be possible in Greek. If, on the other hand, it is meant to express
merely some connection of St. Paul with the thought and line of argument
of the Epistle, it really gives up the Pauline authorship, and even this
thread of connection may be found in the sequel difficult to retain.

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span> In favor of the authorship of St. Paul so
far as the ideas and essential argument of the Epistle are concerned,
Origen urges the beauty of the thoughts, and there must be some force in
this argument, or the Epistle could hardly have been so long and so
widely attributed to him. Perhaps it may be summed up in the words of an
eminent and now departed divine,  <span
id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) “If the Epistle were not written by
St. Paul, then we have the remarkable phenomenon that there were two men
among the Christians of that age who were capable of writing it.” The
theory has also a certain *primâ facie* probability, and offers a
convenient way of reconciling the conflict of the external evidence. But
of course it cannot be accepted merely on these grounds.

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span>At the outset, on a general view of the
Epistle, every one must be struck with the marked difference in its
construction from any of St. Paul’s Epistles. The omission of his name
at the beginning has been more or less satisfactorily accounted for from
ancient times, but the reasons for this do not apply to the absence of
any sort of salutation, “any heading or introductory thanksgiving,” by
which St. Paul always takes pains to conciliate his readers, and of
which there was especial need if he were writing to Hebrews disposed to
prejudice against him. On the contrary, after the manner of St. Mark in
his Gospel, the writer strikes directly into his subject, without any
sort of preface. Another striking feature of difference is, that St.
Paul always keeps close to his argument until it is complete, and then
adds practical exhortations founded upon it, while in our Epistle each
short division of the argument is separated from that which follows by
its appropriate practical application. This indicates quite a different
habit of mind, and it is difficult to fancy such a severely logical
reasoner as St. Paul thus pausing in the flow of his argument. The style
of the Epistle is so markedly different from that of St. Paul that
attention has been drawn to this point from the time of Origen down. The
“rounded oratorical periods” of the Hebrews are very unlike the
“unstudied, broken, abrupt phraseology” of St. Paul. This difference
might, in part at least, be accounted for as the work of the translator;
only in that case, the translator could have been neither St. Luke,
whose style is clear and smooth enough, but not at all oratorical, nor
Clement, whose style is very unlike.

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span> <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_344"></span> When we come to details, there are two
passages which have been thought to favor a Pauline authorship. There is
a quotation in [Heb. x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030) <span
id="v.iii-p22.1"></span> , which, it is alleged, agrees precisely with
the same quotation in [Rom. xii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)
<span id="v.iii-p22.2"></span> , but differs from either the Hebrew or
the Greek of [Deut. xxxii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035) <span
id="v.iii-p22.3"></span> . The A.V. makes a slight variation in language
between Romans and Hebrews, but the *Textus Receptus* of the original is
the same: “Vengeance is mine; I will recompense, saith the Lord.” Now
the LXX reads, “In the day of vengeance I will recompense”; the Hebrew,
“mine \[are\] vengeance and recompense.” If, however, we examine any
critical text, we shall find that the clause “saith the Lord,” is
rejected as a gloss in this Epistle, while undisputed in Romans, thus
constituting a difference between them. It is still true, however, that
they both differ in the same way from the Hebrew and the LXX. This might
be a difficulty were it not that the quotation as it is in this Epistle
is found exactly in the Targum, and from that had probably passed into
familiar use. Everywhere else the author of Hebrews quotes very closely
from the LXX, and from that in what is known as its Alexandrine form,
while St. Paul uses the Vatican text, quotes far more loosely, and often
follows the Hebrew rather than the Greek.

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span>The other passage really gives no clear
indication at all, and as far as it goes, is rather at variance with
Pauline authorship. In [Heb.
12.23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)<span id="v.iii-p23.1"></span>
the writer says, “Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty;
with whom, (if he come shortly,) I will see you.” It is of course
possible that Timothy may have been imprisoned, at Rome or elsewhere,
when St. Paul was with him; but as far as we know the history of the
two, it seems unlikely. The passage might quite as well have been
written by almost any of the companions of St. Paul who were also
associated with Timothy.

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span>When now, enquiry is made as to the
indications to be found in the choice of words and construction of
sentences, there is certainly room for some difference of opinion.
Delitzsch has endeavored throughout his commentary on this Epistle to
show that there is such a striking similarity between it and the
writings of St. Luke as to favor decidedly the view that it was written
by him; Lünemann, on the other hand, in the introduction to his
commentary, has collected the instances of Delitzsch and remarks upon
them, “So soon as we separate therefrom that which is not exclusively
peculiar to Luke and the Epistle to the Hebrews; so soon as we also put
out of the account that which Luke has only taken up out of the sources
employed by him, and cease to lay any weight upon isolated expressions
and turns of discourse which were the common property either of the
Greek language in general, or of the later Greek in particular, and are
only accidentally present in Luke and the Epistle to the Hebrews,—there
is nothing whatever left of an actual affinity, such as must of
necessity admit of being traced out between the works of the same
author.” The fact seems to be that there is between these two writers as
compared with the other New Testament writers a certain similarity, not
so much of particular words and constructions, as of the general cast,
both of the phraseology and the structure of the sentences; but that
this similarity arises, not from the identity of the writers, but from
the fact that both wrote in somewhat better Greek than is found in the
rest of the New Testament. The grammars of the New Testament Greek
continually refer to the fact, that certain classical constructions are
found only, or at least more frequently, in these writers than
elsewhere. But this does not prove more than that the author of this
Epistle, as might easily have been the case with several of the
companions of St. Paul, like St. Luke, was more accustomed to classical
Greek usage than most of the earliest Christian writers.

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span> An examination of the vocabulary of this
Epistle in comparison with that of St. Paul, St. Luke, and the other New
Testament writers will throw some light upon the question. In another
place  <span id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) I have made such an
examination with some care, and will here give a summary of its results.
It is to be borne in mind that this Epistle is much shorter than the
collective writings of St. Paul, or St. Luke, or of the other New
Testament writers taken together. By a careful <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_345"></span> estimate of the actual
length of these four groups it is found that, taking the longest as the
standard, in order to determine the relative use of any word in them, it
is necessary to multiply the number of its occurrences in St. Luke by
1.57, in St. Paul by 1.86, in Hebrews by 11.56. The results may in many
instances prove fallacious. Any writer may use a word several times,
even in a short passage, which he would not have used again had his
writing been greatly extended; or he may not use a particular word once
in twenty pages, when he will employ it several times in the
twenty-first. Such facts must be borne in mind, but the above process
seems to be the only means of making a comparative statement in figures;
and when it is applied to a large number of words, and especially to
whole groups of words which correspond to certain classes of ideas, the
general result must have a decided bearing upon the question of
authorship.

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span> It has often been noticed that the number
of words peculiar to any New Testament writer is an index of the number
freely at his command. Peculiar words, it is true, are often required by
peculiarity of subject, and may sometimes be what is called accidental.
Still, when the number of them in any writer is unusually large, the
fact has its value, and such words do abound in the writings of St. Luke
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews above all others.  <span
id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) No great importance perhaps should
be attached to this point; yet as it is often brought forward, the exact
facts should be ascertained. Excluding words occurring only in
quotations from the LXX (which can have no bearing upon the
characteristics of the writer), and also excluding words which depend on
doubtful readings, the number of words found in the New Testament only
in the Gospel of St. Luke is 249, in the Acts 414<span
id="v.iii-p28.2"></span>, in both taken together 724; the similar number
in the much shorter Epistle to the Hebrews is 147, while even the
Apocalypse, with all its peculiar subjects and imagery, has but 116, and
none of the other books (except Matthew 114<span
id="v.iii-p28.3"></span>) reach as high as 100. This suggests that the
writer of this Epistle was like St. Luke in having at his command a
peculiarly rich vocabulary. But if the facts be looked at in another
way, and the comparative length of the various books taken into
consideration, a different result is reached. St. Luke’s Gospel has one
peculiar word to every 9.76 lines; Acts, one to every 5.77; Hebrews, one
to 4.45; but 1 Timothy has one to every three lines; 2 Timothy, one to
3.22; Titus, one to 2.97; James, one to 3.5; and so on with several of
the shorter epistles. The result of such statistics appears to depend
much upon how they are manipulated. Nevertheless, in no book of nearly
equal, or of greater length, is the proportion so large as in this
Epistle, except in the Acts. If the writings of various authors be taken
collectively,—

<span id="v.iii-p29"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p30"></span>   St. Luke has 724 peculiar words   = 1 to
every 6.66 lines.

<span id="v.iii-p31"></span>St. Paul has   777 peculiar words   = 1 to
every 5.25 lines.

<span id="v.iii-p32"></span>  Hebrews has 147 peculiar words   = 1 to
every 4.45 lines.

<span id="v.iii-p33"></span>St. John has 244 peculiar words   = 1 to
every     13.46 lines.

<span id="v.iii-p34"></span>  All others taken together have         378
peculiar words    = 1 to every    11.38 lines.

<span id="v.iii-p35"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p36"></span>On the whole, then, the first impression of
every reader is confirmed: St. Paul, St. Luke, and the author of Hebrews
are alike distinguished from the other New Testament writers by the
comparative richness of their vocabulary; yet, in view of the peculiar
subjects treated in this Epistle, this fact has less significance than
it might be entitled to under other circumstances.

<span id="v.iii-p37"></span>Another question may be asked of the same
kind. May not some indication of authorship be found in the number and
character of the words common only to the Hebrews with St. Paul, with
St. Luke, and with the other writers respectively? There are 34 words
common to St. Luke and Hebrews, and found nowhere else; to St. Paul and
Hebrews, 46; to all others and Hebrews, 28. Or, proportioning these
numbers to the length of the several books, common to Luke and Hebrews,
53.5; to St. Paul and Hebrews, 85.56; to other writers and Hebrews, 28;
or nearly twice as many common to Hebrews with St. Luke, and more than
three times as many <span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_346"></span> common to Hebrews with St. Paul, as there
are common to Hebrews with other writers. This examination tends like
the other, but much more strongly, to connect this Epistle both with St.
Luke and St. Paul, but especially with the latter. It falls in with the
vacillating opinion of Origen, already given, and with his report of the
current traditions of his time.

<span id="v.iii-p38"></span>But much more important than the mere
numerical statement, is the character of some of these words, used in
common by these writers and by no others. Most of them, indeed, have
nothing characteristic, and many are used but once by each of the
writers, and that apparently without any special design. There are
several, however, worthy of more consideration. The noun καταπαύσις and
the verb καταπαύω , which might be expected to be common enough, are
used only in Luke and Hebrews, the noun once in Luke, eight times in
Hebrews; the verb 11 times in Luke, three times in Hebrews; or together,
12 times and 11 times. The noun μέτοχος is used once in Luke, five times
in Hebrews, and nowhere else, while the verb μετέχω is used five times
by St. Paul, three times in Hebrews, and by no other writer. Διατίθεμαι
occurs three times in Luke, twice in Hebrews, and nowhere else. Συναντάω
is used four times in Luke, twice in Hebrews, and not elsewhere. The
word for *star* in Greek has either form, ἄ στρον or ἀ στήρ , and both
are common in the LXX; but the former is used exclusively by St. Luke
(three times) and also in Hebrews, where, however, it occurs but once;
but ἀ στήρ is used exclusively by all the other New Testament writers,
by St. Paul three times, by others 21 times. On the other hand, ἐ
νδείκνυμι occurs twice in Hebrews, nine times in St. Paul, and in no
other writer. The verb εὐαρεστέω (occurring three times) is peculiar to
Hebrews, as is also the adverb εὐαρέστεως , while the adjective
εὐάρεστος occurs once in Hebrews, and seven times in St. Paul, being
found nowhere else in the New Testament. The striking adverb ἐ φάπαξ ,
not found in any other New Testament writer, occurs three times in
Hebrews and twice in St. Paul. The verb λειτουγέω with the nouns
λειτουγία and λειτουργός and the adjective λειτουργικός , though common
enough in the LXX, and apparently sufficiently often called for, are
used in the New Testament only by St. Luke, St. Paul, and in Hebrews.
The verb occurs once in each of them; λειτουργία is used once by St.
Luke, three times by St. Paul, twice in Hebrews; λειτουργός three times
by St. Paul, twice in Hebrews; while the adjective occurs only once in
the last; *i.e.* taking the whole group together, it is employed twice
by St. Luke, seven times by St. Paul, and six times in Hebrews, and
never elsewhere. The much more important word μεσίτης is used only in
St. Paul and Hebrews, three times in each. The same is true of ὁ μολογία
, a word which might have been expected more frequently. There seems to
be nothing peculiar about ὀ νειδίσμος which yet happens to be found only
in St. Paul (three times) and in Hebrews (twice). The words παιδεία and
παιδευτής also occur only in these writers, the former four times, the
latter once in St. Paul; the former twice, the latter once in Hebrews;
or together, five times and three times. We are surprised to find such a
word as πληροφορία only in these writers, in each of them twice. The
remarkable word ὑ πόστασις , afterwards in another sense of so much
importance theologically, is found only in these writers, in St. Paul
three times, in Hebrews twice.

<span id="v.iii-p39"></span>The results of this comparison have a
positive value, unless they can be, at least in some good degree,
paralleled by words common to Hebrews and the other New Testament
writers. I do not find this to be the case. There seem to be but two
words common only to Hebrews and to any of them occurring more than once
in each. One of these is the purely accidental word ἕ βδομος , used
twice in Hebrews, and seven times elsewhere (five times in Revelation);
and the other is the more important word βαπτισμός (always in the plural
= purifying ablutions) used twice each in Mark and Hebrews. Whatever
value, therefore, there may be in this examination of common words, it
is much increased by the almost entire absence of any such relation
between this Epistle and the other writings of the New Testament. It
certainly points, as far as it goes, to some sort of relation between
the three writers, St. Luke, St. Paul, and the author of Hebrews, and
especially between the two last.

<span id="v.iii-p40"></span> <span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_347"></span> We now turn to common words of wider range
which yet have something in their usage tending to show the style of the
writer. The verb ἔ ρχομαι with its compounds ἀ π̓ -, ἐ π̓ -, ἐ ξ -, εἰσ -,
κατ -, παρ -, and προσ -, is naturally more common in narrative. Making
allowance for this, we are surprised at its relative frequency in
Hebrews and infrequency in the Pauline Epistles, while the word is in
such common use as to make this difference significant. The
proportionate numbers are: Hebrews, 519; St. Luke, 656; St. Paul, 169;
all others, 708. For the particular compound εἰσέρχομαι , the same
numbers are: Hebrews, 196; St. Luke, 133; St. Paul, 7; all others, 91.
While it is relatively much the most frequent in Hebrews, it is yet
common in St. Luke, but almost entirely avoided by St. Paul.

<span id="v.iii-p41"></span> Λαμβάνω with its compounds ἐ πι -, παρα -,
and ὑ πο -, have a similar variable usage. They are all relatively much
more frequent in Hebrews than elsewhere, less common in St. Luke, and
still less so in St. Paul; taking the simple verb and its compounds
separately, St. Luke alone uses that with ὑ πό (four times actually, or
relatively, six times), and almost entirely avoids that with παρά , and
St. Paul, like the other writers, that with ἐ πί ; while Hebrews uses
them all (except ὑ πό ) with peculiar frequency. The proportionate
numbers are:—

<span id="v.iii-p42"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p43"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p43.1"></span>    Hebrews.  St. Luke.  St. Paul.  All
Others.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p44"></span> λαμβάνω .. 196.... 80.... 61 157

<span id="v.iii-p45"></span> ἐ πι - 34.... 19...... 4.... 4

<span id="v.iii-p46"></span> παρα - 139...... 1.... 20.. 25

<span id="v.iii-p47"></span> ὑ πο - —...... 6.... —.. —

<span id="v.iii-p48"></span>—— —— —— ——

<span id="v.iii-p49"></span>Total........... 369...........
106........... 85........... 186

<span id="v.iii-p50"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p51"></span> The verbs employed for *request* or
*prayer* are numerous, and their employment by the different writers
varies much. The following list of their relative frequency shows the
principal facts:—

<span id="v.iii-p52"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p53"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p53.1"></span>                            Hebrews.     St.
Luke.  St. Paul. All Others.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p54"></span> αἰτέω . 11..... 330......... 7..... 46

<span id="v.iii-p55"></span> ἀ π -....... —......... 3....... —..... —

<span id="v.iii-p56"></span> ἐ ξ -....... —......... 2....... —..... —

<span id="v.iii-p57"></span> ἐ π -....... —......... 3....... —..... —

<span id="v.iii-p58"></span> παρ -..... 35......... 6......... 7..... —

<span id="v.iii-p59"></span> προσ -.... —......... 1....... —....... 2

<span id="v.iii-p60"></span> δεόμαι. —......... 8......... 9....... 1

<span id="v.iii-p61"></span> ἐ πιθυμέω . 11....... 23....... 11....... 5

<span id="v.iii-p62"></span> ἐ ρωτάω ....... —....... 31......... 7.....
37

<span id="v.iii-p63"></span> εὐχόμαι —......... 3......... 6....... 2

<span id="v.iii-p64"></span>   ——   ——   —— ——

<span id="v.iii-p65"></span>Total........... 57...........
410........... 47........... 93

<span id="v.iii-p66"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p67"></span> While St. Matthew habitually designates
heavenly things by the *plural* (gen. or dat.) of οὐρανός , and is
somewhat followed by the other writers, the author of Hebrews and St.
Paul employ these forms very little and are almost alone in availing
themselves of the compound adjective ἐ πουράνιος for the same purpose.
St. Luke uses this word only once; Hebrews, six times; St. Paul, twelve
times; all others, twice. On the other hand, the simple οὐράνιος is not
used at all in Hebrews and St. Paul, but occurs twice in St. Luke, and
four times elsewhere.

<span id="v.iii-p68"></span>The words λαλεῖν and λέγειν are both common
enough, and the distinction between them is well recognized. The point
to be noticed is the frequency of their use relatively to each other.
Hebrews uses them in the proportion of 1:2; St. Paul the same; St. Luke,
1:3½; all others, 1:7 nearly. St. Luke here varies considerably from
Hebrews and St. Paul, but far less than the others.

<span id="v.iii-p69"></span> <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_348"></span> The Hebraistic πρόσωπον , so frequent in the
LXX, is found but once in Hebrews, and then in an allusion to the LXX;
but curiously occurs 27 times in St. Luke, as many in St. Paul, and in
all others 22. So also ῥ ῆ μα is a common enough word; but in its
Hebraistic sense, corresponding to *dabar* , *a thing* , the
subject-matter of speech or command, its use is confined to St. Luke,
and it does not occur either in Hebrews or elsewhere. Both ὑ πάρχω and ὑ
ποστρέφω are favorite words with St. Luke. The former occurs in his
writings 34 times, is not found at all in Hebrews; is used by St. Paul
11 times, and only four times elsewhere; the latter is used by St. Luke
31<span id="v.iii-p69.1"></span> times, and elsewhere only once each in
Hebrews, St. Paul, and St. Mark. Κατεργάζομαι is a Pauline word (21
times), never used in Hebrews, and but three times elsewhere ([Jas.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#000)<span id="v.iii-p69.2"></span>, Pet.
1). On the other hand, the use of the comparatives κρείσσων and πλείων ,
with the superlative πλεῖστος , is far more common in Hebrews. The
comparative numbers are: for κρείσσων , Hebrews, 150; St. Luke, 0; St.
Paul, 7 (he also used the adverb κρεῖσσον once); all others, 2. For
πλείων πλεῖστος , Heb., 46; St. Luke, 42; St. Paul, 19; all others, 17.

<span id="v.iii-p70"></span>I do not recall any other words of this
kind, the usage of which affects our enquiry. Such inferences as may be
drawn from this examination are somewhat contradictory. They certainly
do not point to the author of this Epistle as either St. Paul or St.
Luke, as they might be expected to do if such were the fact. There are
some striking similarities of diction; but the differences are, at
least, quite as important.

<span id="v.iii-p71"></span> It is time now to turn to those adverbs,
particles and prepositions, which bring out the grammatical form in
which a writer is accustomed to clothe his ideas. But before speaking of
these, mention must be made of one grammatical form peculiarly
characteristic of the nicety and subtlety of thought of the classic
Greek writers—the optative mood. This subject has been investigated by
Dr. Harman with great care. He finds that this mode is used in the whole
New Testament 66 times, 32 of them in the Pauline Epistles, 28 in the
writings of St. Luke, once in Hebrews, and five times in all other
writers. “In nearly all the cases in which the optative occurs in the
New Testament it is used to express a *wish* or *prayer* , except in the
writings of Luke.” “In the *Epistle to the Hebrews* we find one instance
of the optative, καταρτίσαι , ‘ *May* God *make* you perfect’ ( [Heb.
13.21](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#021)<span id="v.iii-p71.1"></span> ).
This is presumptive proof that an Alexandrian did not write this
Epistle, as it is not likely that the use of this mode in but one
instance would have satisfied his fine Greek taste.”  <span
id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)

<span id="v.iii-p73"></span>The usage of the particles, adverbs and
prepositions, require so much detail that only a summary can here be
given with a reference to the paper on the “Language of the Epistles to
the Hebrews,” already mentioned.

<span id="v.iii-p74"></span>The particles μέν and δέ would naturally be
more common in narrative; but as between Hebrews, St. Paul, and the
other Epistles, they are relatively most frequent in Hebrews. The same
is true of the conjunction τε , which is more common in St. Luke and St.
Paul than in other New Testament writers. The adversative ἀ λλά is
common enough everywhere, not even the shortest epistle being without
more than one instance of its use. St. Luke and Hebrews employ it very
much more seldom; but again, St. Luke uses it far less than Hebrews. The
three writers, St. Luke, St. Paul, and the author of Hebrews, are
distinguished from the other writers by the (comparatively) sparing use
of ἄ ν and ἐ ά ν , but of the three, St. Luke employs it most, and St.
Paul least. Hebrews alone uses ἐ ά νπερ , but never ἐ ά ν μή , which is
employed in St. Luke with moderate freedom, by St. Paul twice as often,
and still more frequently by the other writers. In the case of διό , St.
Paul uses it relatively only half as often as Hebrews, but three times
as often as St. Luke, and the last more than twice as often as the other
writers. In the use of διότι , a much less common word, there is a less
difference, but still a marked one and in the same order.

<span id="v.iii-p75"></span> <span id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_349"></span> The pronouns of the first and second person
are used, as might be expected, most abundantly by St. Paul; but Hebrews
is singularly shy of them. This fact has been noticed and an explanation
offered on the ground that the work has more the character of a treatise
than of a personal epistle; but this explains too much, since these
personal pronouns, though relatively infrequent, are still very common
in our epistle. The author was not disposed to bring forward the
personality of either himself or his hearers. St. Paul, on the contrary,
used these pronouns more than twice as often as our author, and indeed
far more frequently than any other New Testament writer.

<span id="v.iii-p76"></span>The case of the third person of the pronoun
is peculiar, since its frequent redundant use is one of the marked
characteristics of the New Testament diction; yet St. Paul uses it less
than half as often as Hebrews. The same is true of the demonstrative ἐ
κεῖνος ; but in the use of the reflective ἑ αυτός , St. Paul is largely
in excess. The difference in the use of these pronouns between Hebrews
and St. Luke is not very great; but, in regard to the two first
particularly, the difference from the other writers is marked, and St.
Paul’s usage of all of them is very different. On the other hand, in the
use of οὗτος , Hebrews is strongly separated from St. Luke and less so
from St. Paul.

<span id="v.iii-p77"></span>The words ἀ λλήλων , ἄ λλος , ἕ τερος , τίς
(interrog.), and τις (indef.) have marked peculiarities in their
frequency of employment by the different writers, but it is enough to
instance here ἄ λλος , employed oftener by St. Paul than by St. Luke and
Hebrews put together, and yet by the other writers collectively twice as
often as by him; and ἕ τερος used with exactly the same frequency by St.
Luke and St. Paul, less than one quarter as often by other writers, but
far oftener in Hebrews than in any of them. So also with ἕ καστος ,
τοιοῦτος , and τοσοῦτος : they are all used with exactly the same
frequency in Hebrews; but while the first is used by St. Paul much
oftener, the last is used only one-fourteenth as often. The usage of St.
Luke is markedly different from that of either.

<span id="v.iii-p78"></span>Further and more detailed examination of
words of this class would be out of place here. Suffice it to say that
such an examination shows a marked individuality in the usage of the
several writers; and it is to be remembered that Hebrews, Acts, and the
latter Epistles of St. Paul must have been written with no great
interval of time between them.

<span id="v.iii-p79"></span>The same things are true in whatever way we
test the forms of expression of these writers. If we take the particle
εἰ with its various combinations εἰ καί , εἰ μή , εἴγε , εἰ δὲ μή , εἰ
μή τε , εἴ περ , εἴ πῶς , εἴ τε , εἴ τις , we shall find that only the
first two of these combinations occur in Hebrews at all, and those only
once each, while all of them are found in the Pauline Epistles, and all
but three of them in the writings of St. Luke. The whole group together
is used more than twice as often by St. Paul as by any other writer.

<span id="v.iii-p80"></span>Adverbs of space are very sparingly used by
St. Paul, with an approach to equality between Hebrews and St. Luke, but
twice as often by other writers. In the various particles and adverbs of
negation, there do not seem to be, on the whole, very noticeable
peculiarities, although υηδείς and μηδέ occur but once each in Hebrews,
while the former is everywhere else common, and the latter also in St.
Paul and other writers, though less frequent in St. Luke. But the word
χωρίς is frequent enough in Hebrews to be considered characteristic, is
used far less by St. Paul, only once by St. Luke, and comparatively
seldom by other writers. Πάλιν is quite rare in St. Luke, equally common
in Hebrews and St. Paul, and a little less so in the other writers. The
use of ἤ is very rare in Hebrews whether as a disjunctive conjunction,
or as a term of comparison. In the latter sense it occurs but once, and
in the former only four times, two of which are in quotations from the
LXX, and a third in a more than doubtful reading. In all the other New
Testament writers it is very common, but most of all in St. Paul. In the
use of μᾶλλον , however, though St. Paul still exceeds, Hebrews most
nearly approaches his usage. The causal ἐ πεί is five times as frequent
in Hebrews as in St. Paul, and yet four times more frequent in his
writings than in the <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_350"></span> others, and is still less common in St. Luke
than in them. The word πῶς is used but once in Hebrews
(interrogatively), while it is common enough everywhere else. Both ἵ να
and ὅ τι are used very often by St. Paul and the other writers, and much
more sparingly in Hebrews; but St. Luke uses ἵ να much less than half as
often as Hebrews, while he employs ὅ τι much more than half as often
again. The un-Attic particle καθώς , the adverbs οὕτως , ὡ σεί , ὥ σπερ
, and the conjunction ὥ στε , are all appropriate to trains of
reasoning, but their usage in the different writers, particularly in the
three we are especially considering, is very various. The same may be
said of the prepositions, among which σύν is never used in Hebrews
(except in composition), while it is employed much oftener by St. Luke
than by St. Paul or any other writer.

<span id="v.iii-p81"></span>It may be thought that all this
examination—still tedious, though much condensed—is not worth the
trouble. It goes to show, what has always been noticed by every reader,
that the style of this Epistle is unlike that of St. Paul; but if it
show, as it seems to do quite as clearly, that it is unlike that of St.
Luke as well, something has been gained. It makes it at least improbable
that St. Luke wrote the Epistle to give expression to the ideas of St.
Paul.

<span id="v.iii-p82"></span>It remains to examine some words of another
class. There are many words and groups of words so peculiarly
appropriated to certain ideas or shades of thought, that the use or
non-use of them becomes a fair index of the habitual tone of thought of
the writer. If he use them frequently, the phase of truth which they
represent must have been prominent in his mind; or if he seldom employ
them, then that aspect of truth was not the predominant one from his
point of view.  Such words or groups of words may be of different
degrees of importance; but even those of inferior significance help to
complete the picture of the writer’s mental habits, and it is therefore
well to examine all that are at all characteristic. As the force of the
evidence from these words can only be brought out by a more careful
examination of them, I venture to copy some pages of the paper referred
to above.

<span id="v.iii-p83"></span>The group ἀ γαπάω , ἀ γάπη , and ἀ γαπήτος
is noteworthy. They are very common in the Pauline writings, but are
rare both in St. Luke and in Hebrews. In fact only one of them, ἀ
γαπήτος , occurs at all in the Acts, and none of them are ever used by
St. Luke except in recording the words of others. So also of the
Hebrews. Of the five instances of their use, two are in quotations from
the LXX. They are common enough in other writers, but are special
favorites of St. John. Of the 154 instances in “other writers,” 109 are
in St. John, so that the words may be called Pauline and Johannean.
Their rarity in St. Luke and Hebrews may be partly explained by the fact
that ἀ γάπη is an exclusively biblical word, and that ἀ γαπάω also is
used in a higher sense in the sacred than in profane writings. Still
they were common words in the Christian community, and they mark a
distinction in thought between St. Luke and Hebrews on the one side, and
St. Paul and the rest of the new Testament on the other. The actual
number of instances of their use is: Hebrews, 5 times; St. Luke, 15; St.
Paul, 135; all others (John, 109), 154; but if we exclude from the
enumeration all quotations from the LXX, and all record of the words of
others, the numbers become: Hebrews, 3; St. Luke, 0; St. Paul, 132; all
others (John, 43), 87. The comparison is too obvious to call for
proportionate numbers. As an appendix to this group it may be mentioned
that φιλέω never occurs in Hebrews, is used only twice by St. Luke,
twice by St. Paul, and 21 times elsewhere, 15 of which are in St. John.

<span id="v.iii-p84"></span>A word especially appropriate to Hebrews,
and one which might have been expected there very often, ἁ γιασμός ,
occurs but once, while it is used eight times by St. Paul, and is not
found in the rest of the New Testament. On the other hand, αἷμα , which
we might have expected frequently in St. Paul as well as in Hebrews, is
very common in the latter and not at all so in the former. Proportionate
numbers are: Hebrews, 231 times; St. Luke, 31; St. Paul, 24; all others,
44. Here, from the nature of the writings, we may not be surprised at
the commonness of the word in Hebrews; but its comparative rarity in St.
Paul is remarkable. His subjects led to it, and had it come to his mind
as readily as it did to that of the author of Hebrews, it must have
occurred in his writings much oftener.

<span id="v.iii-p85"></span> <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_351"></span> The group of words, ἀ λήθεια , ἀ ληθής , ἀ
ληθινός , ἀ ληθῶς , and ἀ ληθεύω , which we are accustomed to consider
peculiarly Johannean, is also very frequent in St. Paul, but
comparatively rare in St. Luke and Hebrews. The actual numbers are:
Hebrews, 4 ( ἀ ληθινός three times, ἀ λήθεια once); St. Luke, 12; St.
Paul, 55; all others, 114 (of which St. John, 95).

<span id="v.iii-p86"></span>Of the group ἀ σθενεία , ἀ σθενέω , ἀ
σθένημα , and ἀ σθενής , only two occur in Hebrews— ἀ σθενεία (four
times) and ἀ σθενής (once). The actual occurrences of the whole together
are: Hebrews, 5 times; St. Luke, 15; St. Paul, 43; all others, 21; or
proportionately, Hebrews, 58; St. Luke, 23; St. Paul, 90; all others,
21. This is evidently an especially Pauline class of words.

<span id="v.iii-p87"></span>The words of opposite signification, βέβαιος
, βεβαιόω , βεβαίωσις ,—very infrequent in the LXX,—do not occur at all
in St. Luke, and are relatively far more frequent in Hebrews than
anywhere else. The proportionate numbers are: Hebrews, 92 times; St.
Luke, 0; St. Paul, 15; elsewhere, 3. Evidently St. Paul preferred to
dwell upon weakness, the author of Hebrews upon strength.

<span id="v.iii-p88"></span>There is a similar contrast between the verb
ἐ λπίζω and the noun ἐ λπίς on the one hand, and the verb ἐ παγγέλλομαι
and the noun ἐ παγγελία on the other. Κληρονομέω , κληρονομία , and
κληρονόμος are most common in Hebrews. The proportionate numbers are:—

<span id="v.iii-p89"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p90"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p90.1"></span>                      
                                                             Hebrews. 
St. Luke.  St. Paul.  All Others.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p91"></span> ἐ λπίζω and ἐ λπίς . 69...................
20................. 100................. 10

<span id="v.iii-p92"></span> ἐ παγγέλλομαι and ἐ παγγελία ..
208................... 16................... 57................... 9

<span id="v.iii-p93"></span> κληρονομέω , κληρονομία , κληρονόμος ..
104................... 11................... 33................... 8

<span id="v.iii-p94"></span>         ——               ——              
——               ——                     

<span id="v.iii-p95"></span>Together........... 381...........
47........... 190........... 27

<span id="v.iii-p96"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p97"></span> It is plain that while the author of
Hebrews dwelt much more upon the brightness of the future than any other
writer, he preferred to speak of it in the light of *promise* and of
*inheritance* , while it rested in St. Paul’s mind more as a *hope* .
This is the more noteworthy because the ideas of sonship and of adoption
are very common in St. Paul. He alone uses the word υἱοθεσία five times.

<span id="v.iii-p98"></span>The words ἡ μέρα and σήμερον are curiously
infrequent in a writer of the present urgency of St. Paul, and are
relatively most common in St. Luke and Hebrews, but most so in the last.
In proportion the numbers are: Hebrews, 278; St. Luke, 207; St. Paul,
100; all others, 153. That is, Hebrews uses them nearly three times as
often as St. Paul.

<span id="v.iii-p99"></span>The names for God and for our Lord are used
by the various writers with much difference, and with an evident
preference in each of them for his own accustomed word. The
proportionate numbers (which can take no note of periphrases) are as
follows:—

<span id="v.iii-p100"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p101"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p101.1"></span>                            Hebrews.     St.
Luke.  St. Paul. All Others.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p102"></span> θεός .................
774................. 463............... 1016............... 419

<span id="v.iii-p103"></span> Κύριος ............. 185.................
335................. 524............... 213

<span id="v.iii-p104"></span> ̓ Ιησοῦς .......... 150.................
255................. 405............... 519

<span id="v.iii-p105"></span> Χριστός ......... 150...................
69................. 562............... 102

<span id="v.iii-p106"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p107"></span>In all cases St. Paul uses these words most
freely (about twice as often as anybody else), except that in the case
of ᾽ Ιησοῦς he is exceeded by “other writers” as a result of the large
amount of narrative contained in them. Θεός is used in Hebrews next in
frequency to St. Paul, but with a long interval between them, and very
much more often than elsewhere. Κύριος is used least frequently in
Hebrews, while ᾽ Ιησοῦς and Χριστός are employed there, one with exactly
the same frequency as the other, though St. Luke, St. Paul, and the
other writers employ them very unequally, one preferring one and another
the other. The use of these words is so much a matter of habit, habit
alike of writing and of mode of thinking, that these go far to
differentiate the writers.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_352"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p108"></span> Κήρυγμα , κήρυξ , and κηρύσσω are none of
them ever used in Hebrews. For the others proportionate numbers are: St.
Luke, 27 times; St. Paul, 35; all others, 20.

<span id="v.iii-p109"></span>The group καυχάομαι , καύχημα , and
καύχησις is almost exclusively Pauline, occurring in his writings 58
times, while it is nearly absent from Hebrews, only καύχημα being used,
and that but once. These words do not occur in the other New Testament
writers except three times in James. So also λογίζομαι and μακροθυμία
are especially Pauline. They each occur only once in Hebrews. The first
is found twice, the second not at all in St. Luke; but λογίζομαι occurs
34 times in St. Paul, four times in other writers, while μακροθυμία is
used by St. Paul ten times, and only three times elsewhere.

<span id="v.iii-p110"></span> Μανθάνω is used 16 times by St. Paul, only
once each by Hebrews and St. Luke, and seven times elsewhere. Παρακαλέω
and παράκλησις are much more frequent in St. Paul’s writings than
elsewhere, but in this case he is more nearly approached by Hebrews than
by others—yet with a great difference. Proportionate numbers are:
Hebrews, 81; St. Luke, 54; St. Paul, 137; all others, 22. The word
προσεύχή occurs in Hebrews but once, and προσεύχομαι not at all. This is
a noteworthy omission in our epistle, although it is also true that they
are not used by St. John, except προσευχή three times in Revelation. The
two words are found in St. Luke and St. Paul each 33 times, and in the
other writers 43 times. The words σάρξ and σαρκικός are favorites of St.
Paul. They occur seven times in Hebrews, six times in St. Luke, 102
times in St. Paul, and 46 times (of which one-half are in St. John)
elsewhere. Proportionately Hebrews uses them about two-thirds as often
as St. Paul, and nearly twice as often as all other writers together.
The group φρονέω , φρόνημα , and φρόνησις is characteristic. None of
them are found at all in Hebrews, and they occur but twice in St. Luke,
and twice in the other writers (Matthew, 1, Mark, 1, in parallel
passages), both in the record of the words of others; but St. Paul uses
them 31 times. (He uses φρόνημα , however, only in Romans—four times.) A
word used in a figurative sense especially characteristic of St. John
(31 times), φῶς , never occurs in Hebrews. It is used 16 times by St.
Luke, 12 times by St. Paul, and ten times by other writers. It is more
or less used by every New Testament writer except the author of Hebrews,
and St. Jude in his very short epistle. Χαίρω is also used by every
other writer (St. Luke, 19 times; St. Paul, 27 times), except Hebrews
and St. Jude. St. Paul greatly delights in the word χάρις , and in the
idea conveyed by it; he never wrote an epistle without it, and uses it
101 times. In Hebrews it is found eight times, in St. [Luke
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#000)<span id="v.iii-p110.1"></span>, and
in all others 22, not occurring in the first two Gospels.

<span id="v.iii-p111"></span>The foregoing list is somewhat long of
words characteristic of phases of thought which are especially favorite
with St. Paul, and either wholly unused or much less frequently employed
in Hebrews. A corresponding list may be made of other words especially
common in Hebrews, but less used by St. Luke and St. Paul. Before going
to this, however, a few words are to be considered which in their
frequency of usage are characteristic of all three, or of two of these
writers as distinguished from others, although with some differences
between them.

<span id="v.iii-p112"></span>Most prominent in this latter class is
νόμος , which we are accustomed to think especially Pauline.  It is
indeed used much oftener by St. Paul than by any other writer, yet it
also occurs in Hebrews with a frequency distinguishing that Epistle from
any other writing. The proportionate numbers are: Hebrews, 162; St.
Luke, 44; St. Paul, 227; all others, 33. Nevertheless, the assimilation
here is more apparent than real; for St. Paul employs it chiefly of a
method of salvation, while it refers in Hebrews mostly to a definite
collection of statutes. In the same way πίστις is usually regarded as a
characteristically Pauline word. It is relatively much more common in
Hebrews; for the proportionate numbers are: Hebrews, 369; St. Luke, 42;
St. Paul, 262; all others, 43. But here also there is a shade of
distinction in the force of the word as used by the two writers; St.
Paul’s πίστις is reliance upon Christ as the means of salvation in
opposition to the law and the works of the law, while in the Hebrews it
is only a general reliance on God’s grace and promises. Of course, it is
not denied that St. Paul sometimes uses a word, so common, in such
varied shades of meaning, in a more general way as in [1 Cor.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013), [1 Cor.
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013), [2 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii-p112.1"></span><span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_353"></span> , etc.; but the distinction in the shade of
meaning between his habitual employment of the word, and that common in
the Epistle to the Hebrews is easily recognized. In this connection
πιστεύω must be mentioned, though belonging in the former category. The
proportionate instances of its use are: Hebrews, 23; St. Luke, 76; St.
Paul, 100; all others (of which St. John, 99), 143. It is therefore a
comparatively rare word in Hebrews. The adjective πιστός , which ought
perhaps hardly to be considered in this connection, is used
proportionately, in Hebrews, 58 times; St. Luke, 6; St. Paul, 61; all
others, 23. Πείθω somewhat associates the three writers together,
although most frequent in Hebrews, occurring proportionately, in
Hebrews, 58 times; St. Luke, 33; St. Paul, 43; all others, 6.  Συνειδέω
and συνείδησις are used proportionately: Hebrews, 58; St. Luke, 8 (all
in Acts); St. Paul, 37 (but συνειδέω only once); all others, 4. The word
σωτήρ , though used by St. Luke four times, St. Paul 12, and by others
eight times, never occurs in Hebrews; but this is not remarkable, as it
is not found in the much larger books of Matthew, Mark, and Revelation;
moreover, it should be taken in connection with σωτηρία and σωτήριον ,
which also do not occur in the first two Gospels, but are found in
[Hebrews 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#000)<span
id="v.iii-p112.2"></span> times, St. [Luke
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#000)<span id="v.iii-p112.3"></span>, St.
Paul 19, and all others 9 times. This would give them a relatively
greater frequency in Hebrews; but they are also common words in St. Luke
and St. Paul. The word ψυχή , while a little more common relatively in
Hebrews, is yet frequent enough in St. Luke and other writers, though
not a favorite with St. Paul. Proportionate numbers are: Hebrews, 69;
St. Luke, 57; St. Paul, 29; all others, 54.

<span id="v.iii-p113"></span> This leads to the third class of
words—those which, embodying certain sets of ideas, are characteristic
of Hebrews in distinction from other writers, especially St. Luke and
St. Paul. One of these is the idea of *witness* , expressed by μάρτυρ ,
μάρτυς , μαρτυρία , μαρτύριον , μαρτυρέω , and μαρτύρομαι . This group
of words is especially common in Hebrews, and much less frequent in St.
Luke and St. Paul. It is also very common in St. John. The proportionate
numbers are: Hebrews, 127; St. Luke, 45; St. Paul, 50; all others (of
which St. John, 80), 96. The word τάξις is so naturally called for in
the argument of Hebrews that there is nothing remarkable in its
occurring there seven times, while in all the rest of the New Testament
it is found but three times (St. Paul twice, St. Luke once). The
perfection and finality of Christian truth as set forth in this epistle
comes out in the frequency of the use of these words as clearly as in
its general scope; it is difficult to suppose that the Epistle to the
Galatians, e.g., which does not contain any of these words, could have
been written by the same author.

<span id="v.iii-p114"></span>But by far the most important word in this
connection is ἱ ερεύς , with its various derivatives, ἀ ρχιερεύς , ἱ
ερατεία , ἱ εράτευμα , and ἀ ρχιερατικός . The last two of these are of
little importance, as ἱ εράτευμα occurs only twice, in St. Peter, and ἀ
ρχιερατικός only once, in Acts; also ἱ ερατεία occurs only once each in
St. Luke and Hebrews, and nowhere else. Altogether, ἱ ερεύς and its
compounds and derivatives occur 159 times, but are never once used by
St. Paul.  <span id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) The actual numbers
are, for ἱ ερεύς : Hebrews, 14 times; St. Luke, 9; St. Paul, 0; all
others, 9; for ἀ ρχιερεύς , Hebrews, 17; St. Luke, 37; St. Paul, 0; the
other Gospels, 68, but never elsewhere. This is a remarkable fact. In
view of St. Paul’s arguments in the epistles to the Romans and to the
Galatians, and in view of the frequency and emphasis with which he
insists in all his Epistles, upon the sacrificial character of Christ’s
death, it seems to show that his mind was so absorbed in dwelling upon
the value and power of the sacrifice that he was not in the habit of
thinking or speaking of Christ as also Himself the Sacrificer.
Redemption came to his thought through the medium of the Victim by whom
it was obtained, but not through that of the Priest who offered the
Victim. This is the more <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_354"></span> striking from the fact that he often speaks
of Christ as giving Himself, offering Himself, and the like; but always
for the purpose of bringing out the voluntariness and the love of the
act, and never with any allusion to its priestly character. The line of
reasoning in the Epistle to the Hebrews was thus quite foreign to the
habitual thought of St. Paul. Such similarity of language to his
acknowledged writings as exists must be accounted for in some other way.

<span id="v.iii-p116"></span>On looking back over these various words,
with their difference of usage, it is plain that they are not perfectly
of accord in their indications. This was to be expected. I have
endeavored, in this part of the examination, to select only words
characteristic of thought, and to note every word of this kind in regard
to which there is any considerable difference of usage; yet so many
words are used by every writer accidentally, as it were, and not because
they are characteristic, that much allowance is to be made. Still, the
investigation seems to me to afford a sufficient basis for some probable
conclusions. The Epistle contains both style-words and thought-words,
characteristic alike of St. Luke and St. Paul, sometimes of one,
sometimes of the other, sometimes of both; and these must be taken into
account in any theory of the authorship. But they are not more than
might be expected in any writer belonging among the companions of a
leader of such magnetism and power as St. Paul. I see nothing in them to
prove, hardly even to suggest, actual authorship. On the other hand,
there are many words and groups of words expressing ideas very
prominently in the mind of the author of this Epistle, which must have
appeared also in the writings of St. Paul had the thoughts of this
Epistle been derived from him, but which are not found there. Of course,
no man expresses all his ideas in any one epistle, nor the same ideas in
every one he writes; but the difference here is more radical. As one
mind now is affected by one, and another by another of the various
aspects of Christian truth, so the differences here go to show that the
mind of the author of Epistle to the Hebrews was not affected in the
same way as St. Paul; for Hebrews is scarcely more unlike the Epistles
in which St. Paul addressed believing Jews than the speeches recorded in
<span id="v.iii-p116.1"></span> Acts xiii., xxii., and xxviii ., in
which he spoke to his still unbelieving countrymen. This leaves us free
to accept the author’s own statement, that instead of being, like St.
Paul, one who had received his apostleship “not of man, neither by man,
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father” ( [Gal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001) <span id="v.iii-p116.2"></span> ),
he was of that number who had received through the medium of others that
Gospel “which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard Him” ( [Heb. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003) <span id="v.iii-p116.3"></span> ).

<span id="v.iii-p117"></span>It thus appears that neither are the
thoughts of this Epistle Pauline, nor is its language that of St. Luke.
It may be well to say a few words in conclusion as to the person to whom
such facts as we have point as the probable author.

<span id="v.iii-p118"></span>It is plain from what has been said, as
well as from the common consent of students, that the author must be
looked for among those companions of St. Paul who, through prolonged
intercourse, were likely to have their modes of expression somewhat
affected by his language. The number of these is considerable, and after
so many ages of uncertainty, beginning with the earliest discussion of
the subject, it is not likely that the right one can ever be pointed out
with certainty. Many modern critics have selected Apollos as the most
probable author, chiefly because of the facts recorded of him in [Acts
xviii. 24-28](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024) <span
id="v.iii-p118.1"></span> , that he “was born at Alexandria, an eloquent
man and mighty in the Scriptures,” and that after receiving further
instruction from Aquila and Priscilla, “he mightily convinced the Jews,
and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.” He
was certainly personally known to St. Paul ( [1 Cor. xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012) <span id="v.iii-p118.2"></span> ),
although of the length of time they may have been together we have no
information. His being an Alexandrian is thought to explain what some
are pleased to consider an Alexandrian tone of thought in the Epistle,
and also the fact that its quotations are from the LXX, and accord
rather with its Alexandrian than its Vatican recension. The force of the
last point is not obvious. In the meagreness of our knowledge of the
original LXX, it appears probable that the so-called Alexandrian
recension was the one generally current in the Levant, and therefore
that this indication, whatever it may be worth, simply points to an
Oriental author. And so also whatever there may <span id="page_355">p.
355</span> <span id="v.iii-Page_355"></span> be of an Alexandrian caste
of thought in the Epistle only indicates some one familiar with
Jewish-Alexandrian literature, and this would include almost every
educated Jew living in the Levant.  <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) At all events, neither of these
considerations seemed to have occurred to any of those early Alexandrian
scholars, Pantænus, Clement, or Origen, who all speak of the authorship,
the last at some length and with discrimination. The theory of Apollos’
authorship has, however, this great advantage: that no line of his
remains to compare with our Epistle. It has also these disadvantages:
that it never occurred to any ancient author, but was first suggested by
Luther; that there is no evidence of any prolonged personal intercourse
between him and St. Paul; and that there is nothing to connect him with
any especial interest in, or familiarity with, the Jewish ritual and
temple beyond the simple fact that he was a Jew, as was also almost
every other writer who has ever been suggested. The non-use of the
optative is also strongly against the authorship of the Alexandrian
Apollos. Moreover, it is clear from such passages as [Heb.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012), [Heb.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032), [Heb.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023)<span id="v.iii-p119.2"></span> ,
that this Epistle was addressed to some particular community, a fact now
generally recognized, and that the author was personally and favorably
known to his readers. There is a difference of opinion in regard to the
locality of that community; but if, as seems altogether probable, it was
Palestinian, we have no reason to suppose that Apollos was ever known to
them; and although this evidence is only negative, it suggests looking
for some other names positively in accord with it.

<span id="v.iii-p120"></span> Of the other names suggested in ancient
and modern times St. Luke and St. Clement of Rome seem to be
sufficiently excluded by a comparison of the Epistle with their
acknowledged writings; the former also by the probability that he was a
Gentile, the latter by the very use he makes of the Epistle, apparently
as quoting words of another.  <span id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659)

<span id="v.iii-p122"></span>Silas has also been suggested as a possible
author. Of him we know even less than of Apollos. He was a prophet in
the early Church at Jerusalem ( [Acts xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032) <span id="v.iii-p122.1"></span> ),
and was the companion of St. Paul on his second missionary journey and
subsequently in his labors at Corinth, and was also associated with the
work of St. Peter ( [1 Pet. v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)
<span id="v.iii-p122.2"></span> ). In all this there is nothing to mark
him out as the one likely to have written this Epistle beyond several
others of the companions of St. Paul. The only point which really gives
plausibility to the suggestion of his authorship is the fact that he was
much associated with Timothy ( [1 Thess.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001), [2 Thess.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001), [2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019)<span id="v.iii-p122.3"></span> ),
and this may explain the reference to Timothy in [Hebrews xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023) <span id="v.iii-p122.4"></span> .
On that ground the suggestion of his name might be adopted if there were
not much more to be said in favor of another, and also if there were not
the same very serious objection as in the case of Apollos—that he was
never so much as named in all antiquity.

<span id="v.iii-p123"></span> There is a person, however, to whose
authorship one of the very earliest witnesses, Tertullian, as already
noted, positively and unhesitatingly testifies,—Barnabas.  <span
id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) He has the same advantage with
Apollos in having transmitted to us no writing with which to institute a
comparison <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_356"></span> (the spuriousness of the epistle attributed
to him being admitted,)  <span id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) and
in having been a Hellenistic Jew, likely to have written somewhat better
Greek than St. Paul. His birthplace also was in the Levant, in Cyprus,
where he could have had the full benefit of Alexandrian literature.
Being at Jerusalem he became one of the very early converts to
Christianity, long before St. Paul, and he was a man of property and
benevolence; for although a Cypriote, he had land in Jerusalem and sold
it to relieve the necessities of the early Christian community ( [Acts
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037)<span id="v.iii-p127.3"></span> ).
He must have been known from the first very generally in the
Hebrew-Christian community, and he must have been endeared to them, not
merely by this act of benevolence, but by that kindly sympathy which led
to his surname, “Son of consolation.” A very few writers, indeed, have
identified him with “Joseph called Barsabas, who was surname Justus,” of
[Acts i. 23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023) <span
id="v.iii-p127.4"></span> , and this is countenanced by the Codex Bezæ
and the Æthiopic reading βαρνάβαν ; and in this case he must have been
an original disciple, and would be excluded by the language of [Heb. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003) <span id="v.iii-p127.5"></span> .
But there seems to be no ground for the identification. In [Acts iv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036) <span id="v.iii-p127.6"></span> the
language implies that Barnabas is there spoken of for the first time,
the names themselves are different, and Barsabas was known by the
surname of Justus, which does not appear to have been ever given to
Barnabas. He is next heard of as bringing Saul, of whom all were afraid,
to the apostles, and telling the story of his conversion ( [Acts
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)<span id="v.iii-p127.7"></span> ),
showing at once the position he occupied and his own moral courage. When
tidings of the conversion of many Gentiles at Antioch came to the Church
at Jerusalem, they sent forth Barnabas to take charge of the matter, and
by his labors “much people was added to the Lord.” The work growing too
great for him, he sought out Saul at Tarsus and brought him to his
assistance ( [Acts 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="v.iii-p127.8"></span> ).
Then after a year, the Church at Antioch sent Barnabas and Saul to carry
their alms to the Church at Jerusalem. Having returned to Antioch, they
were divinely selected to go forth upon a wider missionary work, in the
course of which they visited “Lystra and Derbe,” when probably the young
Timothy received his first knowledge of Christianity. On St. Paul’s
second visit to these cities he is spoken of as already “a disciple.”
Barnabas must, therefore, have known him from the very beginning of his
Christian life, and it is, therefore, entirely natural that he should
speak of him in the way recorded in [Heb. xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023) <span id="v.iii-p127.9"></span> .
After Barnabas and Paul returned from this, when disputes arose between
the Jews and Gentiles, they were sent to Jerusalem together, and having
obtained a favorable hearing before the Council again returned to
Antioch. Here are years of closest companionship between Barnabas and
St. Paul, during all the earlier part of which Barnabas appears as the
leader, Paul as the assistant. They had often stood together in the
synagogue to tell to their fellow-countrymen the story of the cross, and
probably had often discussed with one another the numerous Jewish
converts. Barnabas must have been a man of dignity, for when the people
of Lystra took them for gods, they selected Barnabas as Jupiter ( [Acts
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)<span id="v.iii-p127.10"></span> ).
The companionship was broken up at the entrance upon another missionary
journey, by a difference of opinion about taking Mark with them. In this
case Barnabas, although doubtless influenced by his kinship, appears to
have been the better judge of character, since at a later day St. Paul
writes from Rome to Timothy, “Take Mark and bring him with thee; for he
is profitable to me in the minis <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_357"></span> try” ( [2 Tim. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011) <span id="v.iii-p127.11"></span> );
but however this may be, Barnabas showed in the matter independence and
determination. He is called by the name of “Apostle” ( [Acts xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014) <span id="v.iii-p127.12"></span> ),
and altogether held such a position in the Christian community as would
make his writing such an Epistle a proper act. In all that is related of
him there is but one faulty act, and even this points him out as
especially interested in the Hebrews. When St. Peter behaved so ill at
Antioch and received the sharp reproof of St. Paul, in his account of
the matter St. Paul says, “the other Jews dissembled likewise with him”;
and adds as evidence of the strength and danger of the defection,
“insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation”
( [Gal. 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span id="v.iii-p127.13"></span> ).
Barnabas then was not only a Jew by birth, but had strong sympathies
with his race.

<span id="v.iii-p128"></span>More than this: he was a Levite. The
particular line of argument adopted in the main part of the Epistle to
the Hebrews is one which would have occurred to few, and scarcely to any
who was not familiar with the temple ritual. There is no evidence that
this was the case with Apollos; but with Barnabas the temple service was
a matter of professional duty, as well as the prompting of his devout
heart. Indeed, an objection to the authorship of Barnabas has been based
on this very point;—it is said that the author does not show that nicely
accurate precision in his statements which might be expected from one
personally familiar with the temple. The points referred to admit of
easy explanation on other grounds; but were they better taken,
considering that the service of the Levites was altogether subordinate
to that of the priests, and did not lead them into the νάος itself, the
objection seems hypercritical. But one of the actual duties of the
Levites, and a very prominent one, was that of chanting in the Levitical
choirs in the courts of the temple. This would have led to a special
familiarity with the Psalms. Now it is a curious fact that about
one-half of all the quotations from the Old Testament in the Epistle to
the Hebrews are taken from the Psalms, and that the author cites that
book, relatively, nearly four times as often as St. Paul, and eight
times as often as St. Luke or the other writers.  This fact is at once
explained by the supposition that the author of the Epistle was a
Levite.  <span id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) It is not unlikely
that when that “great company of the priests were obedient to the faith”
( [Acts vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007) <span
id="v.iii-p129.2"></span> ), Barnabas, as one of their attending
Levites, was influenced by their example and with them accepted the
faith of Christ.

<span id="v.iii-p130"></span>The only important objection urged against
the authorship of Barnabas is, that since the time of Tertullian until
recently, there has never been any considerable weight of opinion in its
favor. But this is accounted for by the almost universal acceptance in
the meantime of the spurious Epistle of Barnabas as his genuine work.
The two certainly could not have been written by the same person. The
fact, however, that the spurious Epistle was attributed to him may be an
indication of a belief that he had left to the Church some legacy of
written teaching. Since that Epistle has been found not to be his, and
is probably of a somewhat later day, there remains nothing to hinder the
belief that the devout Levite of Cyprus, the early convert to
Christianity while still in strong sympathy with the Christian Jews, the
man of benevolence and wealth, and therefore probably of education, by
birth the appointed servant of the temple, the man of independence and
dignity, and yet of such tender sympathy as to be surnamed “Son of
consolation,” the long and intimate companion of St. Paul, and for years
in the position of his superior,—there is nothing to hinder the
acceptance of the early ecclesiastical statement that he was also the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

<span id="v.iii-p131"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p132"></span>                                        
                                              <span class="c11"><span
id="v.iii-p132.1"></span>           Frederic Gardiner.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[341:2649](1140097.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>Tertull. *De Pud* . c. 20, Ed. Migne, 1021.
*Exstat enim et Barnabae titulus ad Hebraeos, adeo satis auctoritatis
viro* \[ *viri* \], *ut quem Paulus juxta se constituerit in
abstinentiae tenore* :…\[1 Cor. ix. 6\]…. *Et utique receptior apud
Ecclesias Epistola Barnabae illo apocrypho Pastore moechorum. Monens
itaque discipulos, omissis omnibus initiis, ad perfectionem magis
tendere* ,…\[After quoting [Heb. vi.
4-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)<span id="v.iii-p7.2"></span>, he
goes on\] *Hoc qui ab Apostolis didicit et cum Apostolis docuit* ,
etc.</span>

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[341:2650](1140097.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="v.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>Eusebius’ *Eccl. Hist* . vi. 14 (Crusé’s
translation, p. 213). “But now, as the blessed presbyter used to say,
‘since the Lord who was the Apostle of the Almighty, was sent to the
Hebrews, Paul by reason of his inferiority, as if sent to the Gentiles,
did not subscribe himself an apostle of the Hebrews; both out of
reverence for the Lord, and because he wrote of his abundance to the
Hebrews, as a herald and apostle of the Gentiles.’”</span>

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[341:2651](1140097.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span> *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>Ibid</span>* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p10.2"></span>. The Epistle to the Hebrews he asserts was
written by Paul to the Hebrews in the Hebrew tongue, but that it was
carefully translated by Luke and published among the Greeks. Therefore
one finds the same character of style and of phraseology in the Epistle
as in the Acts. “But it is probable that the title, Paul the Apostle,
was not prefixed to it. For as he wrote to the Hebrews, who had imbibed
prejudices against him and suspected him, he wisely guards against
diverting them from the perusal by giving his name.”</span>

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[342:2652](1140097.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>Eusebius’ *Eccl. Hist* . vi. 25. Extended
quotations from the various writers above referred to, and from many
others, may be found in almost any of the innumerable treatises on the
subject, and are given with especial fullness and clearness in Alford’s
*Prolegomena* .</span>

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[343:2653](1140097.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="v.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p18.1"></span>Godet in *The Expositor* , April, 1888, p.
262.</span>

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[343:2654](1140097.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p20.1"></span>Bp. George Burgess.</span>

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[344:2655](1140097.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="v.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span> *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>Journal of the Soc. of Bibl. Literature and
Exegesis</span>* <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii-p26.2"></span>for
June, 1887, pp. 1–27.</span>

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[345:2656](1140097.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p28.1"></span>See Thayer’s *Grimm’s N.T. Lexicon* , Appendix
iv. pp. 698–710, for lists of words peculiar to each New Testament
writer.</span>

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[348:2657](1140097.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="v.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p72.1"></span>“The Optative Mode in Hellenistic Greek,” by
Prof. H. M. Harman, D.D., LL.D. *Journal of Soc. of Bibl. Lit. and
Exegesis* , Dec. 1886, p. 10.</span>

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[353:2658](1140097.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="v.iii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p115"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.1"></span>The word</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.2"></span>ἱ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.3"></span>ερουργοῦντα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.4"></span>(</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.5"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.6"></span>π. λεγ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.7"></span>.) in the highly figurative passage, [Rom. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span id="v.iii-p115.8"></span>, is
no exception, being derived not from</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.9"></span>ἱ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.10"></span>ερεύς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.11"></span>, but from</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.12"></span>ἱ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p115.13"></span>ερός</span>

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[355:2659](1140097.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="v.iii-p118.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p119"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p119.1"></span>But that the *style* indicates that the Epistle
was not actually written by an Alexandrian may be gathered from the
non-use of the optative mood. See the reference to Dr. Harman on p.
348.</span>

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[355:2660](1140097.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="v.iii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p121"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p121.1"></span>If the question be asked how Clement of Rome
should have been so familiar with this Epistle, the sufficient answer
is, that if this Clement be the same with the Clement mentioned
in</span> <span id="v.iii-p121.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p121.3"></span>[Philip. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span
id="v.iii-p121.4"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p121.5"></span>, as is altogether probable and as is generally
asserted in the fathers, they were both companions of St. Paul, though
whether they were with him at the same time is not known, and so one of
them was likely to know and value the work of the other. Moreover,
nearly all the varying traditions about Barnabas concur in speaking of
his preaching at Rome, where he would have become personally known to
Clement, and whence he may have written this Epistle. If he planted the
Church at Milan, as is asserted in the title and proper preface for St.
Barnabas Day, in the Ambrosian liturgy, he must have passed through Rome
on his way.</span>

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[355:2661](1140097.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="v.iii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p124"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p124.1"></span>Tertullian *De Pudicitia* , c. 20, Tom. II.,
fol. 1021, ed. Migne. It is well known that the Pauline authorship of
the Epistle was rejected by many of the ancients. Eusebius ( *Eccl.
Hist* . vi. 20) mentions that in the list of Caius, Presbyter at Rome
(cir. 200), only thirteen epistles of Paul are enumerated, and this is
omitted. It is also omitted in the Muratonian fragment, if that be not
the same. The *Codex Claromontanus* (6th cent.) was copied from a <span
class="c11"><span id="v.iii-p124.2"></span>ms</span> . not containing
Hebrews, but gives at the end of Philemon a stichometrical catalogue of
all the books of the Old and New Testaments, and then gives our Epistle.
In the catalogue, however, before Revelations and Acts, and immediately
after Jude, is mentioned the “Epistle of Barnabas,” having 850 lines. It
has been conjectured that by this may be meant the Epistle to the
Hebrews; for 1 Corinthians is put down at 1060 lines, and this would
give, in proportion, very nearly the right length for our Epistle,
making Hebrews 820<span id="v.iii-p124.3"></span> instead of 850 lines,
whereas the spurious “Epistle of Barnabas” is nearly one-half longer.
(See Salmon, *Introd. to the N.T* ., note at end of xxi., 2d ed., pp.
453, 454.) This conclusion is controverted by Lünemann, *Introd. to Heb*
., sect. i., p. 23, ed. T. & T. Clark.</span>

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[356:2662](1140097.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="v.iii-p124.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p125"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p125.1"></span>The following memorandum of the authorities for
and against the genuineness of the Epistle of Barnabas, and for its
date, has been kindly furnished by the Rev. E. C. Richardson, Librarian
of the Hartford Theological Seminary:—</span>

<span id="v.iii-p126"></span> *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p126.1"></span>Genuineness, etc</span>* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii-p126.2"></span>. *For* : Origen, Clement
of A., Eusebius, Hieron., Apost. const., Voss, Hammond, Pearson, Bull,
Cave, Du Pin, Grynaeus, Wake, Lardner, Fleury, Le Nourry, Russel,
Galland, Less, Rosenmüller, Muenscher, Stäudlin, Danz, Bertholdt,
Hemsen, Schmidt, Henke, Bleek, Rördam, Gieseler, Näbe, Credner,
Bretschneider, Guericke, Francke, Gfrörer, Möhler, Baumgarten-Crusius,
De Wette (?), Rysewyk, Schneckenburger, Sprinzl, Alzog, Nirschl, Sharpe.
*Against* : Rivet, Usher, Menard, Daillé, Papebroch, Calmet, Cotelerius,
Le Moyne, Tenzel, Natalis Alex., Ittig, Spanheim, Tillemont, Basnage,
Oudin, Ceillier, Stolle, Pertsch, Baumgarten, Walch, Mosheim, Semler,
Schroekh, Rössler, Starke, Lumper, Michaelis, Gaab, Lange, Hänlein,
Winter, Neander, Ullmann, Mynster, Hug, Baur, Winer, Hase, Ebrard,
Semisch, Kayser, Reithmayr, Hefele, MacKenzie, Lipsius, Weizäcker,
Donaldson, Roberts and D., Riggenbach, Westcott, Braunsberger,
Cunningham, Funk, Alford. *Interpolated* : Schenkel, Heydecke.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p127"></span> *<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p127.1"></span>Date</span>* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p127.2"></span>: Reign of Vespasian, Menardus, Ewald,
Weizäcker, Milligan; 71–73, Galland; 70–100, Tischendorf (at first);
reign of Domitian, Wieseler, Hilgenfeld, Riggenbach. Donaldson, Reuss,
Ewald, Dressel, and Ritschl also put it in the first century. Papebroch
pronounces for some time later than 97, Hefele for 107–120. Volkmar,
Tischendorf (later), Baur, and others, for 119; Tentzel for the reign of
Trajan; and Hug, Ullmann, Lücke, Neander, Winer, Zeller, and Köstlin for
some time early in the 2d century, while Heydecke distinguishes into a
genuine B., 70–71, and an interpolator, 119–121.</span>

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[357:2663](1140097.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="v.iii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p129"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p129.1"></span>The large proportion of quotations from the
Psalms in this Epistle is noticed in the article upon it in Smith’s
Bible Dictionary (where the proportion is stated as 16 out of 32); but
my attention was first called to the bearing of this upon the question
of authorship by the quick observation of Rev. Hermann Lilienthal. It is
not easy to give a precise numerical statement of the proportion because
of the large number of historical allusions which can hardly be reckoned
as quotations, and also because the New Testament writers often clothe
their thoughts in the familiar words of the Old Testament, apparently
without any conscious quotation. This matter, however, which cannot be
tabulated, is quite in accord with the rest, and the whole Epistle is
saturated with the language and the historical allusions of the Psalms.
Taking only what may fairly be considered as designed quotations, the
relative numbers taken from the Psalms are:  Hebrews, 200; St. Luke, 25;
St. Paul, 39; all others, 25. The Apocalypse is omitted from the
calculation. In the comparatively few quotations in St. Luke less than
one-third (17 out of 55) are from the Psalms, and every one of these in
recording the words of others; less than one-fifth in St. Paul (16 out
of 89); and in the others 22 out of 116. In Hebrews almost exactly
one-half.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument.](1140098)
