[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140033)  [Next](1140035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxi"></span> <span id="iv.xxxi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxi-p2.2"></span>[John iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xxxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p3"></span>“And He came and His disciples into the
land of Judæa, and there He tarried with them (and baptized).”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> can be clearer or mightier than
the truth, just as nothing is weaker than falsehood, though it be shaded
by ten thousand veils. For even so it is easily detected, it easily
melts away. But truth stands forth unveiled for all that will behold her
beauty; she seeks no concealment, dreads no danger, trembles at no
plots, desires not glory from the many, is accountable to no mortal
thing, but stands above them all, is the object of ten thousand secret
plots, yet remaineth unconquerable, and guards as in a sure fortress
these who fly to her by her own exceeding might, who avoids secret
lurking places, and setteth what is hers before all men. And this Christ
conversing with Pilate declared, when He said, “I ever taught openly,
and in secret have I said nothing.” ( [John
18.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxxi-p4.2"></span>
.) As He spake then, so He acted now, for, “After this,” saith the
Evangelist, “He went forth and His disciples into the land of Judæa, and
there He tarried with them and baptized.” At the feasts He went up to
the <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_99"></span>
City to set forth in the midst of them His doctrines, and the help of
His miracles; but after the feasts were over, He often went to Jordan,
because many ran together there. For He ever chose the most crowded
places, not from any love of show or vainglory, but because He desired
to afford His help to the greatest number.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p5"></span>Yet the Evangelist farther on says, that
“Jesus baptized not, but His disciples”; whence it is clear that this is
his meaning here also. And why did Jesus not baptize? The Baptist had
said before, “He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.”
Now he had not yet given the Spirit, and it was therefore with good
cause that he did not baptize. But His disciples did so, because they
desired to bring many to the saving doctrine.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p6"></span>“And why, when the disciples of Jesus were
baptizing, did not John cease to do so? why did he continue to baptize,
and that even until he was led to prison? for to say,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p7"></span> [John
3.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)<span id="iv.xxxi-p7.1"></span> .
‘John also was baptizing in Ænon’; and to add,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p8"></span> [John
3.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024)<span id="iv.xxxi-p8.1"></span> .
‘John was not yet cast into prison,’ was to declare that until that time
he did not cease to baptize. But wherefore did he baptize until then?
For he would have made the disciples of Jesus seem more reverend had he
desisted when they began. Why then did he baptize?” It was that he might
not excite his disciples to even stronger rivalry, and make them more
contentious still. For if, although he ten thousand times proclaimed
Christ, yielded to Him the chief place, and made himself so much
inferior, he still could not persuade them to run to Him; he would, had
he added this also, have made them yet more hostile. On this account it
was that Christ began to preach more constantly when John was removed.
And moreover, I think that the death of John was allowed, and that it
happened very quickly, in order that the whole attention  <span
id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) of the multitude might be shifted to
Christ, and that they might no longer be divided in their opinions
concerning the two.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p10"></span>Besides, even while he was baptizing, he
did not cease continually to exhort them, and to show them the high and
awful nature of Jesus. For He baptized them, and told them no other
thing than that they must believe on Him that came after him. Now how
would a man who acted thus by desisting have made the disciples of
Christ seem worthy of reverence? On the contrary, he would have been
thought to do so through envy and passion. But to continue preaching
gave a stronger proof; for he desired not glory for himself, but sent on
his hearers to Christ, and wrought with Him not less, but rather much
more than Christ’s own disciples, because his testimony was unsuspected
and he was by all men far more highly esteemed than they. And this the
Evangelist implies, when he says, “all Judæa and the country around
about Jordan went out to him and were baptized.” ( [Matt. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005) <span id="iv.xxxi-p10.1"></span> .)
Even when the disciples were baptizing, yet many did not cease to run to
him.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p11"></span>If any one should enquire, “And in what
was the baptism of the disciples better than that of John?” we will
reply, “in nothing”; both were alike without the gift of the Spirit,
both parties alike had one reason for baptizing, and that was, to lead
the baptized to Christ. For in order that they might not be always
running about to bring together those that should believe, as in Simon’s
case his brother did, and Philip to Nathanael, they instituted baptism,
in order by it to bring all men to them easily, and to prepare a way for
the faith which was to be. But that the baptisms had no superiority one
over the other, is shown by what follows. What is that?

<span id="iv.xxxi-p12"></span> [John
3.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)<span id="iv.xxxi-p12.1"></span> .
“There arose,” saith the Evangelist, “a question (between some) of
John’s disciples and the Jews about purifying.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p13"></span> For the disciples of John being ever
jealously disposed towards Christ’s disciples and Christ Himself, when
they saw them baptizing, began to reason with those who were baptized,
as though their baptism was in a manner superior to that of Christ’s
disciples; and taking one of the baptized, they tried to persuade him of
this; but persuaded him not. Hear how the Evangelist has given us to
understand that it was they who attacked him, not he who set on foot the
question. He doth not say, that “a certain Jew questioned with them,”
but that, “there arose a questioning from the disciples of John with a
certain Jew,  <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) concerning
purification.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p15"></span>\[2.\] And observe, I pray you, the
Evangelist’s inoffensiveness. He does not speak in the way of invective,
but as far as he is able softens the charge, merely saying, that “a
question arose”; whereas the sequel (which he has also set down in an
inoffensive manner) makes it plain that what was said was said from
jealousy.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p16"></span> [John
3.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026)<span id="iv.xxxi-p16.1"></span> .
“They came,” saith he, “unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, He that was
with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold the same
baptizeth, and all men come to Him.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p17"></span>That is, “He whom thou didst baptize”; for
this they imply when they say, “to whom thou barest witness,” as though
they had said, “He whom thou didst point out as illustrious, and <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_100"></span> make
remarkable, dares to do the same as thou.” Yet they do not say, “He whom
thou didst baptize” baptizeth; (for then they would have been obliged to
make mention of the Voice that came down from heaven, and of the descent
of the Spirit;) but what say they? “He that was with thee beyond Jordan,
to whom thou barest witness”; that is, “He who held the rank of a
disciple, who was nothing more than we, this man hath separated himself,
and baptizeth.” For they thought to make him jealous,  <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) not only by this, but by asserting
that their own reputation was now diminishing. “All,” say they, “come to
Him.” Whence it is evident, that they did not get the better of the Jew
with whom they disputed; but they spoke these words because they were
imperfect in disposition, and were not yet clear from a feeling of
rivalry. What then doth John? He did not rebuke them severely, fearing
lest they should separate themselves again from him, and work some other
mischief. What are his words?  <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743)

<span id="iv.xxxi-p20"></span> [John
3.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027)<span id="iv.xxxi-p20.1"></span> .
“A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from above.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p21"></span>Marvel not, if he speak of Christ in a
lowly strain; it was impossible to teach all at once, and from the very
beginning, men so pre-occupied by passion. But he desires to strike them
for a while with awe and terror, and to show them that they warred
against none other than God Himself, when they warred against Christ.
And here he secretly establishes that truth, which Gamaliel asserted,
“Ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against
God.” ( [Acts v. 39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p21.1"></span> .) For to say, “None can receive anything,
except it be given him from heaven,” was nothing else than declaring
that they were attempting impossibilities, and so would be found to
fight against God. “Well, but did not Theudas and his followers
‘receive’ from themselves?” They did, but they straightway were
scattered and destroyed, not so what belonged to Christ.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p22"></span>By this also he gently consoles them,
showing them that it was not a man, but God, who surpassed them in
honor; and that therefore they must not wonder if what belonged to Him
was glorious, and if “all men came unto Him”: for that this was the
nature of divine things, and that it was God who brought them to pass,
because no man ever yet had power to do such deeds. All human things are
easily seen through, and rotten, and quickly melt away and perish; these
were not such, therefore not human. Observe too how when they said, “to
whom thou barest witness,” he turned against themselves that which they
thought they had put forward to lower Christ, and silences them after
showing that Jesus’ glory came not from his testimony; “A man cannot,”
he saith, “receive anything of himself, except it be given him from
heaven.” “If ye hold at all to my testimony, and believe it to be true,
know that by that testimony ye ought to prefer not me to Him, but Him to
me. For what was it that I testified? I call you yourselves to witness.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p23"></span> [John
3.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#028)<span id="iv.xxxi-p23.1"></span> .
“Ye yourselves bear me witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but
that I am sent before Him.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p24"></span> “If then ye hold to my testimony, (and ye
even now produce it when ye say, ‘to whom thou barest witness,’) He is
not only not diminished by receiving my witness, but rather is increased
by it; besides, the testimony was not mine, but God’s. So that if I seem
to you to be trustworthy, I said this among other things, that ‘I am
sent before Him.’” Seest thou how he shows little by little that this
Voice was divine? For what he saith is of this kind: “I am a servant,
and say the words of Him that sent me, not flattering Christ through
human favor, but serving His Father who sent me. I gave not the
testimony as a gift,  <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) but what I
was sent to speak, I spake. Do not then because of this suppose that I
am great, for it shows that He is great. He is Lord of all things.” This
he goes on to declare, and says,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p26"></span> [John
3.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="iv.xxxi-p26.1"></span> .
“He that hath the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the
bridegroom which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of
the bridegroom’s voice.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p27"></span> “But how doth he who said, ‘whose shoe’s
latchet I am not worthy to unloose,’  <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) now call himself His ‘friend’?” It is
not to exalt himself, nor boastingly, that he saith this, but from
desire to show that he too most forwards this, (i.e. the exaltation of
Christ,) and that these things come to pass not against his will or to
his grief, but that he desires and is eager for them, and that it was
with a special view to them that all his actions had been performed; and
this he has very wisely shown by the term “friend.” For on occasions
like marriages, the servants of the bridegroom are not so glad and
joyful as his “friends.” It was not from any desire to prove equality of
honor, (away with the thought,) but only excess of pleasure, and
moreover from condescension to their weakness that he calleth himself
“friend.” For his service he before declared  <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) by saying, “I am sent before Him.” On
this account, and because they thought that he was vexed at what had
taken place, he called himself the “friend of the Bridegroom,” to show
that he was not only not vexed, but that he even greatly rejoiced.
“For,” saith he, “I came to effect this, and am so far from grieving at
what <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="iv.xxxi-Page_101"></span> has been done, that had it not come to
pass, I should then have been greatly grieved. Had the bride not come to
the Bridegroom, then I should have been grieved, but not now, since my
task has been accomplished. When His servants  <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) are advancing, we are they who gain
the honor; for that which we desired hath come to pass, and the bride
knoweth the Bridegroom, and ye are witnesses of it when ye say, ‘All men
come unto Him.’ This I earnestly desired, I did all to this end; and now
when I see that it has come to pass, I am glad, and rejoice, and leap
for joy.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p31"></span>\[3.\] But what meaneth, “He which
standeth and heareth Him rejoiceth greatly, because of the Bridegroom’s
voice”? He transfers the expression from the parable to the subject in
hand; for after mentioning the bridegroom and the bride, he shows how
the bride is brought home, that is, by a “Voice” and teaching. For thus
the Church is wedded to God; and therefore Paul saith, “Faith cometh by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” ( [Rom. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017) <span id="iv.xxxi-p31.1"></span> .)
“At this ‘Voice,’” saith he, “I rejoice.” And not without a cause doth
he put “who standeth,” but to show that his office had ceased, that he
had given over to Him “the Bride,” and must for the future stand and
hear Him; that he was a servant and minister; that his good hope and his
joy was now accomplished. Therefore he saith,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p32"></span>“This my joy therefore is fulfilled.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p33"></span> That is to say, “The work is finished
which was to be done by me, for the future I can do nothing more.” Then,
to prevent increase of jealous feeling, not then only, but for the
future, he tells them also of what should come to pass, confirming this
too by what he had already said and done.  <span
id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) Therefore he continues,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p35"></span> [John
3.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="iv.xxxi-p35.1"></span> .
“He must increase, but I must decrease.”

<span id="iv.xxxi-p36"></span> That is to say, “What is mine has now
come to a stand, and has henceforth ceased, but what is His increaseth;
for that which ye fear shall not be now only, but much more as it
advances. And it is this especially which shows what is mine the
brighter; for this end I came, and I rejoice that what is His hath made
so great progress, and that those things have come to pass on account of
which all that I did was done.” Seest thou how gently and very wisely he
softened down their passion, quenched their envy, showed them that they
were undertaking impossibilities, a method by which wickedness is best
checked? For this purpose it was ordained, that these things should take
place while John was yet alive and baptizing, in order that his
disciples might have him as a witness of the superiority of Christ, and
that if they should not believe,  <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) they might be without excuse. For John
came not to say these words of his own accord, nor in answer to other
enquirers, but they asked the question themselves, and heard the answer.
For if he had spoken of himself, their belief would not have been equal
to the self-condemning  <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) judgment
which they received when they heard him answer to their question; just
as the Jews also, in that they sent to him from their homes, heard what
they did, and yet would not believe, by this especially deprived
themselves of excuse.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p39"></span> What then are we taught by this? That a
mad desire of glory  <span id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) is the
cause of all evils; this led them to jealousy, and when they had ceased
for a little, this roused them to it again. Wherefore they come to
Jesus, and say, “Why do thy disciples fast not?” ( [Matt. ix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014) <span id="iv.xxxi-p40.3"></span> .)
Let us then, beloved, avoid this passion; for if we avoid this we shall
escape hell. For this vice specially kindles the fire of hell, and
everywhere extends  <span id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) its role,
and tyrannically occupies every age and every rank.  <span
id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) This hath turned churches upside down,
this is mischievous in state matters, hath subverted houses, and cities,
and peoples, and nations. Why marvelest thou? It hath even gone forth
into the desert, and manifested even there its great power. For men who
have bidden an entire farewell to riches and all the show of the world,
who converse with no one, who have gained the mastery over the more
imperious desires after the flesh, these very men, made captives by
vainglory, have often lost all. By reason of this passion, one who had
labored much went away worse off than one who had not labored at all,
but on the contrary had committed ten thousand sins; the Pharisee than
the Publican. However, to condemn the passion is easy enough, (all agree
in doing that,) but the question is, how to get the better of it. How
can we do this? By setting honor against honor. For as we despise the
riches of earth when we look to the other riches, as we contemn this
life when we think of that far better than this, so we shall be enabled
to spit on this world’s glory, when we know of another far more august
than it, which is glory indeed. One is a thing vain and empty, has the
name without the reality; but that other, which is from heaven, is true,
and has to give its praise Angels, and Archangels, and the Lord of
Archangels, or rather I should say that it has men as well. Now if thou
lookest to that theater, learnest what crowns are there, transportest
thyself into the applauses which come thence, never <span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="iv.xxxi-Page_102"></span> will
earthly things be able to hold thee, nor when they come wilt thou deem
them great, nor when they are away seek after them. For even in earthly
palaces none of the guards who stand around the king, neglecting to
please him that wears the diadem and sits upon the throne, troubles
himself about the voices of daws, or the noise of flies and gnats flying
and buzzing about him; and good report from men is no better than these.
Knowing then the worthlessness of human things,  <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) let us collect our all into treasuries
that cannot be spoiled, let us seek that glory which is abiding and
immovable; which may we all attain, through the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom, and with whom to the
Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[99:741](1140034.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p9.1"></span>διάθεσιν</span>

<span id="fn_741"></span>[99:742](1140034.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p14.1"></span>̓</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p14.2"></span>Ιουδαίου τινός</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxi-p14.3"></span>. This reading is found in
the Complut. and in most of the Greek commentators: the plural in G. T.,
Vulgate, and Latin writers.</span>

<span id="fn_742"></span>[100:743](1140034.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p18.1"></span>παρακνίζειν</span>

<span id="fn_743"></span>[100:744](1140034.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p19.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p19.2"></span>but he speaks in a manner reservedly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_744"></span>[100:745](1140034.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p25.2"></span>χαρισάμην</span>

<span id="fn_745"></span>[100:746](1140034.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p28"></span> [John
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xxxi-p28.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p28.2"></span></span>

<span id="fn_746"></span>[100:747](1140034.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p29.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p29.2"></span>implied.</span> ”

<span id="fn_747"></span>[101:748](1140034.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p30.1"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p30.2"></span>affairs.</span> ”

<span id="fn_748"></span>[101:749](1140034.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p34.1"></span>So Savile and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p34.2"></span>mss.</span> Morel.’s reading has the same
sense, but is less clear and concise.</span>

<span id="fn_749"></span>[101:750](1140034.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p37.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p37.2"></span>obey.</span> ”

<span id="fn_750"></span>[101:751](1140034.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p38.1"></span>i.e.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p38.2"></span>if they believed not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_751"></span>[101:752](1140034.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p40.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p40.2"></span>vainglory.</span> ”

<span id="fn_752"></span>[101:753](1140034.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p40.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p41.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p41.2"></span>so does it everywhere extend.</span> ”

<span id="fn_753"></span>[101:754](1140034.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p42.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p42.2"></span>ξίαν</span>

<span id="fn_754"></span>[102:755](1140034.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iv.xxxi-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxi-p43.2"></span>of men.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 3.31](1140035)
