[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140031)  [Next](1140033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxix"></span> <span id="iv.xxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxix-p2.2"></span>[John
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p3"></span>“If I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? And
no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven,
even the Son of Man which is in heaven.”

<span id="iv.xxix-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxix-p4.1"></span>What</span> I have often said I shall now
repeat, and shall not cease to say. What is that? It is that Jesus, when
about to touch on sublime doctrines, often contains Himself by reason of
the infirmity of His hearers, and dwells not for a continuance on
subjects worthy of His greatness, but rather on those which partake of
condescension. For the sublime and great, being but once uttered, is
sufficient to establish that character, as far as we are able to hear
it; but unless more lowly sayings, and such as are nigh to  <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696) the comprehension of the hearers, were
continually uttered, the more sublime would not readily take hold on a
groveling listener. And therefore of the sayings of Christ more are
lowly than sublime. But yet that this again may not work another
mischief, by detaining the disciple here below, He does not merely set
before men His inferior sayings without first telling them why He utters
them; as, in fact, He has done in this place. For when He had said what
He did concerning Baptism, and the Generation by grace which takes place
on earth, being desirous to admit  <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697) them to that His own mysterious and
incomprehensible Generation, He holds it in suspense for a while, and
admits them not, and then tells them His reason for not admitting them.
What is that? It is, the dullness and infirmity of His hearers. And
referring to this He added the words, “If I have told you earthly
things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things?” so that wherever He saith anything ordinary and
humble, we must attribute this to the infirmity of His audience.

<span id="iv.xxix-p7"></span> The expression “earthly things,” some say
is here used of the wind; that is, “If I have given you an example from
earthly things, and ye did not even so believe, how shall ye be able to
learn sublimer things?” And wonder not if He here call Baptism an
“earthly” thing, for He calls it so, either from its being performed on
earth, or so naming it in comparison with that His own most awful
Generation. For though this Generation of ours is heavenly, yet compared
with that true <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxix-p7.1"></span>Generation</span> which is from the Substance
of the Father, it is earthly.

<span id="iv.xxix-p8"></span> He does not say, “Ye have not understood,”
but, “Ye have not believed”; for when a man is ill disposed towards
those things which it is possible to apprehend by the intellect, and
will not readily receive them, he may justly be charged with want of
understanding; but when he receives not things which cannot be
apprehended by reasoning, but only by faith, the charge against him is
no longer want of understanding, but unbelief. Leading him therefore
away from enquiring by reasonings into what had been said, He touches
him more severely by charging him with want of faith. If now we must
receive our own Generation  <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698) by
faith, what do they deserve who are busy with their reasonings about
that of the Only-Begotten?

<span id="iv.xxix-p10"></span>But perhaps some may ask, “And if the
hearers were not to believe these sayings, wherefore were they uttered?”
Because though “they” believed not, those who came after would believe
and profit by them. Touching him therefore very severely, Christ goes on
to show that He <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="iv.xxix-Page_93"></span> knoweth not these things only, but others
also, far more and greater than these. And this He declared by what
follows, when He said, “And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He
that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven.”

<span id="iv.xxix-p11"></span> “And what manner of sequel is this?”
 <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699) asks one. The very closest, and
entirely in unison with what has gone before. For since Nicodemus had
said, “We know that Thou art a teacher come from God,” on this very
point He sets him right, all but saying, “Think Me not a teacher in such
manner as were the many of the prophets who were of earth, for I have
come from heaven (but) now. None of the prophets hath ascended up
thither, but I dwell there.” Seest thou how even that which appears very
exalted is utterly unworthy of his greatness? For not in heaven only is
He, but everywhere, and He fills all things; but yet He speaks according
to the infirmity of His hearer, desiring to lead him up little by
little. And in this place He called not the flesh “Son of Man,” but He
now named, so to speak, His entire Self from the inferior substance;
indeed this is His wont, to call His whole Person  <span
id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700) often from His Divinity, and often
from His humanity.

<span id="iv.xxix-p14"></span> [John
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span id="iv.xxix-p14.1"></span> .
“And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of Man be lifted up.”

<span id="iv.xxix-p15"></span>This again seems to depend upon what has
gone before, and this too has a very close connection with it. For after
having spoken of the very great benefaction that had come to man by
Baptism, He proceeds to mention another benefaction, which was the cause
of this, and not inferior to it; namely, that by the Cross. As also Paul
arguing with the Corinthians sets down these benefits together, when he
says, “Was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the name of
Paul?” for these two things most of all declare His unspeakable love,
that He both suffered for His enemies, and that having died for His
enemies, He freely gave to them by Baptism entire remission of their
sins.

<span id="iv.xxix-p16"></span> \[2.\] But wherefore did He not say
plainly, “I am about to be crucified,” instead of referring His hearers
to the ancient type? First, that you may learn that old things are akin
to new, and that the one are not alien to the other; next, that you may
know that He came not unwillingly to His Passion; and again, besides
these reasons, that you may learn that no harm arises to Him from the
Fact,  <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701) and that to many there
springs from it salvation. For, that none may say, “And how is it
possible that they who believe on one crucified should be saved, when he
himself is holden of death?” He leads us to the ancient story. Now if
the Jews, by looking to the brazen image of a serpent, escaped death,
much rather will they who believe on the Crucified, with good reason
enjoy a far greater benefit. For this  <span
id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702) takes place, not through the weakness
of the Crucified, or because the Jews are stronger than He, but because
“God loved the world,” therefore is His living Temple fastened to the
Cross.

<span id="iv.xxix-p19"></span> [John
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxix-p19.1"></span> .
“That whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal
life.”

<span id="iv.xxix-p20"></span> Seest thou the cause of the Crucifixion,
and the salvation which is by it? Seest thou the relationship of the
type to the reality? there the Jews escaped death, but the temporal,
here believers the eternal; there the hanging serpent healed the bites
of serpents, here the Crucified Jesus cured the wounds inflicted by the
spiritual  <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) dragon; there he who
looked with his bodily eyes was healed, here he who beholds with the
eyes of his understanding put off all his sins; there that which hung
was brass fashioned into the likeness of a serpent, here it was the
Lord’s Body, builded by the Spirit; there a serpent bit and a serpent
healed, here death destroyed and a Death saved. But the snake which
destroyed had venom, that which saved was free from venom; and so again
was it here, for the death which slew us had sin with it, as the serpent
had venom; but the Lord’s Death was free from all sin, as the brazen
serpent from venom. For, saith Peter, “He did no sin, neither was guile
found in His mouth.” ( [1 Pet. ii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)
<span id="iv.xxix-p21.2"></span> .) And this is what Paul also declares,
“And having spoiled principalities and powers, He made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.” ( [Col. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016) <span id="iv.xxix-p21.3"></span> .)
For as some noble champion by lifting on high and dashing down his
antagonist, renders his victory more glorious, so Christ, in the sight
of all the world, cast down the adverse powers, and having healed those
who were smitten in the wilderness, delivered them from all venomous
beasts  <span id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) that vexed them, by
being hung upon the Cross. Yet He did not say, “must hang,” but, “must
be lifted up” ( [Acts xxviii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004) <span
id="iv.xxix-p22.2"></span> ); for He used this which seemed the milder
term, on account of His hearer, and because it was proper to the type.
 <span id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705)

<span id="iv.xxix-p24"></span> [John
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxix-p24.1"></span> .
“God,” He saith, “so loved the world that He gave His Only-begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.”

<span id="iv.xxix-p25"></span>What He saith, is of this kind: Marvel not
that I am to be lifted up that ye may be saved, for this seemeth good to
the Father, and He hath so loved you as to give His Son for slaves, and
ungrateful slaves. Yet a man would not do this even for a friend, nor
readily even for a <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="iv.xxix-Page_94"></span> righteous man; as Paul has declared when he
said, “Scarcely for a righteous man will one die.” ( [Rom. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007) <span id="iv.xxix-p25.1"></span> .)
Now he spoke at greater length, as speaking to believers, but here
Christ speaks concisely, because His discourse was directed to
Nicodemus, but still in a more significant manner, for each word had
much significance. For by the expression, “so loved,” and that other,
“God the world,” He shows the great strength of His love. Large and
infinite was the interval between the two. He, the immortal, who is
without beginning, the Infinite Majesty, they but dust and ashes, full
of ten thousand sins, who, ungrateful, have at all times offended Him;
and these He “loved.” Again, the words which He added after these are
alike significant, when He saith, that “He gave His Only-begotten Son,”
not a servant, not an Angel, not an Archangel. And yet no one would show
such anxiety for his own child, as God did for His ungrateful servants.

<span id="iv.xxix-p26"></span> His Passion then He sets before him not
very openly, but rather darkly; but the advantage of the Passion He adds
in a clearer manner,  <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706) saying,
“That every one that believeth in Him. should not perish, but have
everlasting life.” For when He had said, “must be lifted up,” and
alluded to death, lest the hearer should be made downcast by these
words, forming some mere human opinions concerning Him, and supposing
that His death was a ceasing to be,  <span
id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) observe how He sets this right, by
saying, that He that was given was “The Son of God,” and the cause of
life, of everlasting life. He who procured life for others by death,
would not Himself be continually in death; for if they who believed on
the Crucified perish not, much less doth He perish who is crucified. He
who taketh away the destitution of others much more is He free from it;
He who giveth life to others, much more to Himself doth He well forth
life. Seest thou that everywhere there is need of faith? For He calls
the Cross the fountain of life; which reason cannot easily allow, as the
heathens now by their mocking testify. But faith which goes beyond the
weakness of reasoning, may easily receive and retain it. And whence did
God “so love the world”? From no other source but only from his
goodness.

<span id="iv.xxix-p29"></span> \[3.\] Let us now be abashed at His love,
let us be ashamed at the excess of His lovingkindness, since He for our
sakes spared not His Only-begotten Son, yet we spare our wealth to our
own injury; He for us gave His Own Son, but we for Him do not so much as
despise money, nor even for ourselves. And how can these things deserve
pardon? If we see a man submitting to sufferings and death for us, we
set him before all others, count him among our chief friends, place in
his hands all that is ours, and deem it rather his than ours, and even
so do not think that we give him the return that he deserves. But
towards Christ we do not preserve even this degree of right feeling. He
laid down His life for us, and poured forth His precious Blood for our
sakes, who were neither well-disposed nor good, while we do not pour out
even our money for our own sakes, and neglect Him who died for us, when
He is naked and a stranger; and who shall deliver us from the punishment
that is to come? For suppose that it were not God that punishes, but
that we punished ourselves; should we not give our vote against
ourselves? should we not sentence ourselves to the very fire of hell,
for allowing Him who laid down His life for us, to pine with hunger? But
why speak I of money? had we ten thousand lives, ought we not to lay
them all down for Him? and yet not even so could we do what His benefits
deserve. For he who confers a benefit in the first instance, gives
evident proof of his kindness, but he who has received one, whatever
return he makes, he repays as a debt, and does not bestow as a favor;
especially when he who did the first good turn was benefiting his
enemies. And he who repays both bestows his gifts on a benefactor, and
himself reaps their fruit besides.  <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708) But not even this induces us; more
foolish are we than any, putting golden necklaces about our servants and
mules and horses, and neglecting our Lord who goes about naked, and
passes from door to door, and ever stands at our outlets, and stretches
forth His hands to us, but often regarding Him with unpitying eye; yet
these very things He undergoeth for our sake. Gladly  <span
id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) doth He hunger that thou mayest be
fed; naked doth He go that He may provide for thee the materials  <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710) for a garment of incorruption, yet not
even so do ye give up any of your own. Some of your garments are
moth-eaten, others are a load to your coffers, and a needless trouble to
their possessors, while He who gave you these and all else that you
possess goeth naked.

<span id="iv.xxix-p33"></span>But perhaps you do not lay them by in your
coffers, but wear them and make yourself fine with them. And what gain
you by this? Is it that the street people may see you? What then? They
will not admire thee who wearest such apparel, but the man who supplies
garments to the needy; so if you desire to be admired, by clothing
others, you will the rather get infinite applause. Then too God as well
as man shall praise thee; now none can praise, but all will grudge at
thee, seeing thee with a body well arrayed, but having a neglected soul.
So harlots <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="iv.xxix-Page_95"></span> have adornment, and their clothes are often
more than usually expensive and splendid; but the adornment of the soul
is with those only who live in virtue.

<span id="iv.xxix-p34"></span> These things I say continually, and I
will not cease to say them, not so much because I care for the poor, as
because I care for your souls. For they will have some comfort, if not
from you, yet from some other quarter; or even if they be not comforted,
but perish by hunger, the harm to them will be no great matter. What did
poverty and wasting by hunger injure Lazarus! But none can rescue you
from hell, if you obtain not the help of the poor;  <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) we shall say to you what was said to
the rich man, who was continually broiling, yet gained no comfort. God
grant that none ever hear those words, but that all may go into the
bosom of Abraham; by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_696"></span>[92:697](1140032.htm#fr_696) <span
id="iv.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p5"></span> al. “touch.”

<span id="fn_697"></span>[92:698](1140032.htm#fr_697) <span
id="iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p6.1"></span>καθεῖναι</span> .

<span id="fn_698"></span>[92:699](1140032.htm#fr_698) <span
id="iv.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p9"></span> i.e. the new Birth.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[93:700](1140032.htm#fr_699) <span
id="iv.xxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p12"></span> i.e. how is this connected with what has
gone before?

<span id="fn_700"></span>[93:701](1140032.htm#fr_700) <span
id="iv.xxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p13.1"></span>τὸ πᾶν</span> .

<span id="fn_701"></span>[93:702](1140032.htm#fr_701) <span
id="iv.xxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p17"></span> i.e. of the Passion.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[93:703](1140032.htm#fr_702) <span
id="iv.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p18"></span> i.e. the Crucifixion.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[93:704](1140032.htm#fr_703) <span
id="iv.xxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p21.1"></span>νοητοῦ</span> .

<span id="fn_704"></span>[93:705](1140032.htm#fr_704) <span
id="iv.xxix-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p22.1"></span>θηρίων</span> .

<span id="fn_705"></span>[93:706](1140032.htm#fr_705) <span
id="iv.xxix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p23.2"></span>γγὺς τοῦ τύπου</span> .

<span id="fn_706"></span>[94:707](1140032.htm#fr_706) <span
id="iv.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p27"></span> al. “clearly and openly.”

<span id="fn_707"></span>[94:708](1140032.htm#fr_707) <span
id="iv.xxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p28.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p28.2"></span>νυπαρξιὰν</span> .

<span id="fn_708"></span>[94:709](1140032.htm#fr_708) <span
id="iv.xxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p30.1"></span>πάλιν</span> .

<span id="fn_709"></span>[94:710](1140032.htm#fr_709) <span
id="iv.xxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p31"></span> lit. “sweetly.”

<span id="fn_710"></span>[94:711](1140032.htm#fr_710) <span
id="iv.xxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p32.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxix-p32.2"></span>πόθεσιν</span> .

<span id="fn_711"></span>[95:712](1140032.htm#fr_711) <span
id="iv.xxix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p35"></span> al. “the hungry.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 3.17](1140033)
