[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140041)  [Next](1140043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxix"></span> <span id="iv.xxxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxix-p2.2"></span>[John
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xxxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p3"></span>“Jesus saith unto him, Wilt thou be made
whole? The impotent man answered Him, Yea, Sir, but I have no man, when
the water is troubled, to put me into the pool.”

<span id="iv.xxxix-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p4.1"></span>Great</span> is the profit of the divine
Scriptures, and all-sufficient is the aid which comes from them. And
Paul declared this when he said, “Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written aforetime for our admonition upon whom the ends
of the world are come, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.” ( [Rom.
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004), [1 Cor.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxxix-p4.2"></span>
.) For the divine oracles are a treasury of all manner of medicines, so
that whether it be needful to quench pride, to lull desire to sleep, to
tread under foot the love of money, to despise pain, to inspire
confidence, to gain patience, from them one may find abundant resource.
For what man of those who struggle with long poverty or who are nailed
to  <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) a grievous disease, will
not, when he reads the passage before us, receive much comfort? Since
this man who had been paralytic for thirty and eight years, and who saw
each year others delivered, and himself bound by his disease, not even
so fell back and despaired, though in truth not merely despondency for
the past, but also hopelessness for the future, was sufficient to
over-strain  <span id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) him. Hear now what
he says, and learn the greatness of his sufferings.  <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) For when Christ had said, “Wilt thou
be made whole?” “Yea, Lord,” he saith, “but I have no man, when the
water is troubled, to put me into the pool.” What can be more pitiable
than these words? What more sad than these circumstances? Seest thou a
heart  <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) crushed through long
sickness? Seest thou all violence subdued? He uttered no blasphemous
word, nor such as we hear the many use in reverses, he cursed not his
day, he was not angry at the question, nor did he say, “Art Thou come to
make a mock and a jest of us, that Thou asketh whether I desire to be
made whole?” but replied gently, and with great mildness, “Yea, Lord”;
yet he knew not who it was that asked him, nor that He would heal him,
but still he mildly relates all the circumstances and asks nothing
further, as though he were speaking to a physician, and desired merely
to tell the story of his sufferings. Perhaps he hoped that Christ might
be so far useful to him as to put him into the water, and desired to
attract Him by these words. What then saith Jesus?

<span id="iv.xxxix-p9"></span> [John
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxix-p9.1"></span> .
“Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.”  <span
id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980)

<span id="iv.xxxix-p11"></span>Now some suppose that this is the man in
Matthew who was “lying on a bed” ( [Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002) <span id="iv.xxxix-p11.1"></span> );
but it is not so, as is clear in many ways. First, from his wanting
persons to stand forward for him. That man had many to care for and to
carry him, this man not a single one; wherefore he said, “I have no
man.” Secondly, from the manner of answering; the other uttered no word,
but this man relates his whole case. Thirdly, from the season and the
time; this man was healed at a feast, and on the Sabbath, that other on
a different day. The places too were different; one was cured in a
house, the other by the pool. The manner also of the cure was altered;
there Christ said, “Thy sins be forgiven thee,” <span id="page_128">p.
128</span> <span id="iv.xxxix-Page_128"></span> but here He braced
 <span id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) the body first, and then cared
for the soul. In that case there was remission of sins, (for He saith,
“Thy sins be forgiven thee,”) but in this, warning and threats to
strengthen the man for the future; “Sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee.” ( [John 5.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxxix-p12.3"></span> .) The charges also of the Jews are
different; here they object to Jesus, His working on the Sabbath, there
they charge Him with blasphemy.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p13"></span> Consider now, I pray you, the exceeding
wisdom of God. He raised not up the man at once, but first maketh him
familiar by questioning, making way for the coming faith; nor doth He
only raise, but biddeth him “take up his bed,” so as to confirm the
miracle that had been wrought, and that none might suppose what was done
to be illusion or a piece of acting. For he would not, unless his limbs
had been firmly and thoroughly compacted, have been able to carry his
bed. And this Christ often doth, effectually silencing those who would
fain be insolent. So in the case of the loaves, that no one might assert
that the men had been merely  <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982)
satisfied, and that what was done was an illusion, He caused that there
should be many relics of the loaves. So to the leper that was cleansed
He said, “Go, show thyself to the priest” ( [Matt. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004) <span id="iv.xxxix-p14.4"></span> );
at once providing most certain proof of the cleansing, and stopping the
shameless mouths of those who asserted that He was legislating in
opposition to God. This also He did in like manner in the case of the
wine; for He did not merely show it to them, but also caused it to be
borne to the governor of the feast, in order that one who knew nothing
of what had been done, by his confession might bear to Him unsuspected
testimony; wherefore the Evangelist saith, that the ruler of the feast
“knew not whence it was,” thus showing the impartiality of his
testimony. And in another place, when He raised the dead, He said, “Give
ye him to eat”;  <span id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) supplying this
proof of a real resurrection, and by these means persuading even the
foolish that He was no deceiver, no dealer in illusions,  <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) but that He had come for the salvation
of the common nature of mankind.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p17"></span> \[2.\] But why did not Jesus require
faith of this man, as He did in the case of others, saying, “Believest
thou that I am able to do this?”  <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) It was because the man did not yet
clearly know who He was; and it is not before, but after the working of
miracles that He is seen so doing. For persons who had beheld His power
exerted on others would reasonably have this said to them, while of
those who had not yet learned who He was, but who were to know
afterwards by means of signs, it is after the miracles that faith is
required. And therefore Matthew doth not introduce Christ as having said
this at the beginning of His miracles, but when He had healed many, to
the two blind men only.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p19"></span> Observe however in this way the faith of
the paralytic. When he had heard,  <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) “Take up thy bed and walk,” he did not
mock, nor say, “What can this mean? An Angel cometh down and troubleth
the water, and healeth only one, and dost Thou, a man, by a bare command
and word hope to be able to do greater things than Angels? This is mere
vanity, boasting, mockery.” But he neither said nor imagined anything
like this, but at once he heard and arose, and becoming whole, was not
disobedient to Him that gave the command;  <span
id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) for immediately he was made whole, and
“took up his bed, and walked.” What followed was even far more
admirable. That he believed at first, when no one troubled him, was not
so marvelous, but that afterwards, when the Jews were full of madness
and pressed upon him on all sides, accusing  <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) and besieging him and saying, “It is
not lawful for thee to take up thy bed,” that then he gave no heed to
 <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) their madness, but most boldly
in the midst of the assembly  <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990)
proclaimed his Benefactor and silenced their shameless tongues, this, I
say, was an act of great courage. For when the Jews arose against him,
and said in a reproachful and insolent manner to him,

<span id="iv.xxxix-p25"></span> [John
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)<span id="iv.xxxix-p25.1"></span>
. “It is the Sabbath day, it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed”;
hear what he saith:

<span id="iv.xxxix-p26"></span> [John
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxxix-p26.1"></span>
. “He that made me whole, the Same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and
walk.”

<span id="iv.xxxix-p27"></span> All but saying, “Ye are silly and mad
who bid me not to take Him for my Teacher who has delivered me from a
long and grievous malady, and not to obey whatever He may command.”
 <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) Had he chosen to act in an
unfair manner, he might have spoke differently, as thus, “I do not this
of my own will, but at the bidding of another; if this be a matter of
blame, blame him who gave the order, and I will set down the bed.” And
he might have concealed the cure, for he well knew that they were vexed
not so much at the breaking of the Sabbath, as at the curing of his
infirmity. Yet he neither concealed this, nor said that, nor asked for
pardon, but with loud voice confessed and proclaimed the benefit. Thus
did the paralytic; but consider how unfairly they acted. For they said
<span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span id="iv.xxxix-Page_129"></span>
not, “Who is it that hath made thee whole?” on this point they were
silent, but kept on bringing forward the seeming transgression.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p29"></span> [John
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxxix-p29.1"></span> .
“What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed and walk? And he
that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed Himself
away,  <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) a multitude being in that
place.”

<span id="iv.xxxix-p31"></span> And why did Jesus conceal Himself?
First, that while He was absent, the testimony of the man might be
unsuspected, for he who now felt himself whole was a credible witness of
the benefit. And in the next place, that He might not cause the fury of
the Jews to be yet more inflamed, for the very sight of one whom they
envy is wont to kindle not a small spark in malicious persons. On this
account He retired, and left the deed by itself to plead its cause among
them, that He might not say anything in person respecting Himself, but
that they might do so who had been healed, and with them also the
accusers. Even these last for a while testify to the miracle, for they
said not, “Wherefore hast thou commanded these things to be done on the
Sabbath day?” but, “Wherefore doest thou these things on the Sabbath
day?” not being displeased at the transgression, but envious at the
restoration of the paralytic. Yet in respect of human labor, what the
paralytic did was rather a work, for the other  <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) was a saying and a word. Here then He
commandeth another to break the Sabbath, but elsewhere He doth the same
Himself, mixing clay and anointing a man’s eyes ( [John
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#000)<span id="iv.xxxix-p32.2"></span> );
yet He doth these things not transgressing, but going beyond the Law.
And on this we shall hereafter speak. For He doth not, when accused by
the Jews respecting the Sabbath, always defend Himself in the same
terms, and this we must carefully observe.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p33"></span> \[3.\] But let us consider awhile how
great an evil is envy, how it disables the eyes of the soul to the
endangering his salvation who is possessed by it. For as madmen often
thrust their swords against their own bodies, so also malicious persons
looking only to one thing, the injury  <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) of him they envy, care not for their
own salvation. Men like these are worse than wild beasts; they when
wanting food, or having first been provoked by us, arm themselves
against us; but these men when they have received kindness, have often
repaid their benefactors as though they had wronged them. Worse than
wild beasts are they, like the devils, or perhaps worse than even those;
for they against us indeed have unceasing hostility, but do not plot
against those of their own nature, (and so by this Jesus silenced the
Jews when they said that He cast out devils by Beelzebub,) but these men
neither respect their common nature, nor spare their own selves. For
before they vex those whom they envy they vex their own souls, filling
them with all manner of trouble and despondency, fruitlessly and in
vain. For wherefore grievest thou, O man, at the prosperity of thy
neighbor? We ought to grieve at the ills we suffer, not because we see
others in good repute.  Wherefore this sin is stripped of all excuse.
The fornicator may allege his lust, the thief his poverty, the
man-slayer his passion, frigid excuses and unreasonable, still they have
these to allege. But what reason, tell me, wilt thou name? None other at
all, but that of intense wickedness. If we are commanded to love our
enemies, what punishment shall we suffer if we hate our very friends?
And if he who loveth those that love him will be in no better a state
than the heathen, what excuse, what palliation shall he have who injures
those that have done him no wrong? Hear Paul, what he saith, “Though I
give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing” ( [1 Cor. xiii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p34.3"></span> ); now it is clear to every one that where
envy and malice are, there charity is not. This feeling is worse than
fornication and adultery, for these go no farther than him who doeth
them, but the tyranny of envy hath overturned entire Churches, and hath
destroyed the whole world. Envy is the mother of murder. Through this
Cain slew Abel his brother; through this Esau (would have slain) Jacob,
and his brethren Joseph, through this the devil all mankind. Thou indeed
now killest not, but thou dost many things worse than murder, desiring
that thy brother may act unseemly, laying snares for him on all sides,
paralyzing his labors on the side of virtue, grieving that he pleaseth
the Master of the world. Yet thou warrest not with thy brother, but with
Him whom he serves, Him thou insultest when thou preferest thy glory to
His. And what is in truth worst of all, is that this sin seems to be an
unimportant one, while in fact it is more grievous than any other; for
though thou showest mercy and watchest and fastest, thou art more
accursed than any if thou enviest thy brother. As is clear from this
circumstance also. A man of the Corinthians was once guilty of adultery,
yet he was charged with his sin and soon restored to righteousness; Cain
envied Abel; but he was not healed, and although God Himself continually
charmed  <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) the wound, he became
more pained and wave-tossed, and was hurried on to murder. Thus this
passion is worse than that other, and doth not easily permit itself to
be cured except we give heed. Let us then by all means tear it up by the
roots, considering this, that as we offend God when we waste with envy
at other men’s blessings, so <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="iv.xxxix-Page_130"></span> when we rejoice with them we are well
pleasing to Him, and render ourselves partakers of the good things laid
up for the righteous.  Therefore Paul exhorteth us to “Rejoice with them
that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep” ( [Rom. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015) <span id="iv.xxxix-p35.3"></span>
), that on either hand we may reap great profit.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p36"></span>Considering then that even when we labor
not, by rejoicing with him that laboreth, we become sharers of his
crown, let us cast aside all envy, and implant charity in our souls,
that by applauding those of our brethren who are well pleasing unto God,
we may obtain both present and future good things, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_976"></span>[127:977](1140042.htm#fr_976) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p5.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p5.2"></span>held by.</span> ”

<span id="fn_977"></span>[127:978](1140042.htm#fr_977) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p6.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p6.2"></span>throw him down.</span> ”

<span id="fn_978"></span>[127:979](1140042.htm#fr_978) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p7.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p7.2"></span>the tragedy.</span> ”

<span id="fn_979"></span>[127:980](1140042.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p8.2"></span>endurance.</span> ”

<span id="fn_980"></span>[127:981](1140042.htm#fr_980) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p10.2"></span>and go to thine house.</span> ”

<span id="fn_981"></span>[128:982](1140042.htm#fr_981) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p12.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p12.2"></span>σφιγξε</span>

<span id="fn_982"></span>[128:983](1140042.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p14.1"></span>i.e. not by real eating,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p14.2"></span>ἁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p14.3"></span>πλῶς</span>

<span id="fn_983"></span>[128:984](1140042.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p14.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p15.1"></span>The reference seems to be to</span> <span
id="iv.xxxix-p15.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p15.3"></span>[Luke viii.
55](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#055)<span
id="iv.xxxix-p15.4"></span></span>

<span id="fn_984"></span>[128:985](1140042.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p16.1"></span>φαντασιοκόπος</span>

<span id="fn_985"></span>[128:986](1140042.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p18.1"></span>Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p18.2"></span>mss.</span> read,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p18.3"></span>as He did in the case of
the blind men, (</span> <span id="iv.xxxix-p18.4"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p18.5"></span>[Matt. ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028)<span
id="iv.xxxix-p18.6"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p18.7"></span>,) saying,</span> ‘ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p18.8"></span>Believe ye,</span> ’” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p18.9"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_986"></span>[128:987](1140042.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p20.1"></span>Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p20.2"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. read,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p20.3"></span>for having heard that
with authority, and as one commanding, He said to him,</span> ‘ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p20.4"></span>Arise,</span> ’” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p20.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_987"></span>[128:988](1140042.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p20.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p21.1"></span>Morel and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p21.2"></span>ms.</span> </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p21.3"></span>who had commanded,</span>
‘ <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p21.4"></span>Arise,</span> ’”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p21.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_988"></span>[128:989](1140042.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p21.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p22.1"></span>Morel and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p22.2"></span>ms.</span> </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p22.3"></span>accusing, as the
Evangelist shows by what follows, saying,</span> ‘ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p22.4"></span>And on the same day was
the Sabbath. The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the
Sabbath day, it is not lawful,</span> ’” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p22.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_989"></span>[128:990](1140042.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p22.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p23.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p23.2"></span>not only disregarded.</span> ”

<span id="fn_990"></span>[128:991](1140042.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p24.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p24.2"></span>theater.</span> ”

<span id="fn_991"></span>[128:992](1140042.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p28.1"></span>see p. 132.</span>

<span id="fn_992"></span>[129:993](1140042.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p30.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p30.2"></span>ξέκλινεν ἐξένευσεν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxix-p30.3"></span>, G. T. and Mor.</span>

<span id="fn_993"></span>[129:994](1140042.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p32.1"></span>i.e. that which Jesus did.</span>

<span id="fn_994"></span>[129:995](1140042.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p34.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p34.2"></span>pain.</span> ”

<span id="fn_995"></span>[129:996](1140042.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iv.xxxix-p34.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p35.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxix-p35.2"></span>πᾴδοντος</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 5.14](1140043)
