[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140004)  [Next](1140006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Preface to the Homilies on the Gospel of St.
John.</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Benedictine editor has already noticed
the principal points in which these Homilies differ from others in which
St. Chrysostom comments upon Holy Scripture. They are far more
controversial than is usual with him, and the part devoted to moral
exhortation is shorter. This may be partly owing to the number of
passages in St. John which bear on the doctrine of our Lord’s Person and
His Divine and Human Natures. But it seems further that they were
delivered to a select audience at an early hour of the day. For toward
the latter part of Hom. XXXI. he contrasts the coolness of the morning,
in which they were assembled, with the mid-day heat, in which the woman
of Samaria listened to our Lord. And the character of the instruction
given almost unquestionably marks the hearers as having been less
miscellaneous, and less liable to be supposed wanting in points of
common duty, than those whom he generally addressed.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span>They do not give their own date, but are
referred to by the Author, while still at Antioch, as already published,
in Hom. VII. on [1 Cor. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii-p4.1"></span>. “However, the manner of this way of knowledge
and of that hath already been declared in the Gospel; and, not to be
continually handling the same topic, thither do we refer our readers.”
The place is St. [John viii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii-p4.2"></span> treated in Hom. XLIX.

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span>And since the three first years after St.
Chrysostom was ordained Priest, A.D. 386–8, seem completely filled up,
and the Homilies in St. Matthew were probably prior to these, it is most
likely that they were not begun before A.D. 390, while those on some of
the Epistles of St. Paul seem to have come after them, and still before
the year 398, in which he was removed to Constantinople.

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span> In either city there were numerous heretics
of the sect against which he is most careful to supply arguments, the
Anomœans, who held that the Son is not even of *like* \[much less of the
*same* \] substance with the Father. And even in his less generally
controversial works, we often meet with discussions of their tenets. But
in these Homilies he is continually meeting with texts which they
perverted to the maintenance of their heresy, and turning them into
weapons for its confutation. And this he usually does with great
success, since the Catholic doctrine of the true and perfect Godhead,
united in One Person with true and perfect Manhood, affords a key that
easily opens texts which most stubbornly resist any confused notion of
an inferior Divinity, or an unreal Humanity. The texts urged by the
heretic, put to this test, are found not really to belong to him. They
are not even arguments *so far* for his view of the case, but perfectly
consistent with the truth always held by the Church. There may remain a
few cases, after attentive study, in which it is difficult to be sure
what is the exact meaning, or even whether a given text speaks of the
Godhead or of the Manhood, but as to the general doctrine of the whole
Scripture, or the consistency of that doctrine with any and every text
therein contained, there is no reasonable doubt. There are those whose
faith seems to tremble on the balance when such a passage of Scripture
is under discussion, but this must be either from an inveterate habit of
doubting, or an imperfect apprehension of the real meaning of the
Catholic doctrine. The most skillful commentator may occasionally fall
into a critical error, but no one who has ever fully entered into the
sense of Holy Scripture will dream of the alternative being between such
and such an exposition and the acceptance of heresy. Enough is clear to
make us very sure what will be the doctrine of any difficult passage,
though we may be in doubt of its interpretation. St. Chrysostom is
usually right, and not only so, but most ingenious in detecting the
rhetorical <span id="page_i">p. i</span> <span id="iv.ii-Page_i"></span>
connection of sentiments and arguments. If anywhere he fails, it is from
some over-refinement in rhetorical analysis, and not from any want of
apprehension of the main truths concerned.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span> In the first volume of the Benedictine
edition there is a series of Homilies against the Anomœans, in the first
of which he states that he had been unwilling for some time to enter on
the controversy, for fear of driving away hearers who held those
opinions, but that he had now taken it up at their earnest request.
These Homilies were delivered some time before those on St. John,
beginning in the first year after his ordination with those “On the
Incomprehensible Nature of God,” in opposition to the pretensions of
that sect to the perfect knowledge of Divine things. And the Benedictine
Editor refers to them as containing a more complete array of the
*positive* evidence of St. John to the Catholic doctrines than even this
commentary affords.

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span> The history of the woman taken in adultery
is omitted in this commentary, and the Benedictine editor was not able
to trace it in any of the works of St. Chrysostom. It is suggested that
his copies may have wanted the passage, or that he may have omitted it
for fear it should be taken as an encouragement to vice. But he was not
the man to shrink from so slight a difficulty, nor would he have failed,
in commenting on it, to leave an impression on the hearer by no means
calculated to lessen his dread of sin. Such a reason may have prevailed
with some copyists to suppress the passage, and it is probable that it
was not found in the copy which he used. It is omitted in like manner by
St. Cyril of Alexandria.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>The text of Savile has been followed, except
where the Benedictine edition has supplied improvements. The Benedictine
sections are numbered throughout: where the division seemed to be
inconvenient, the number is given in the margin. In the earlier Homilies
a second series of numbers is employed to mark the sections in the
translation; this was discontinued as unnecessary, and the Benedictine
only retained. In some of the references to the Psalms, where the
Septuagint differs much from the Hebrew, the numbers given are those of
the Greek. Care will be taken in the Index of Texts to give always the
reference to the Psalm and Verse according to the Hebrew reckoning
followed in our own Version.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span> The editors are indebted for the present
translation to the Rev. <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>G. T. Stupart</span> , M.A., late Fellow of
Exeter College. It has been kindly carried through the Press by the Rev
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.ii-p11.2"></span>. J. G. Hickley</span> ,
B.D., Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. The translation of the
remaining Homilies is completed, and will shortly be in the Press.
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span>                       
                                                                    
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>           C.
M\[arriott\].</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii-p15.1"></span>Oriel College,</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span> *Feast of St. Andrew, 1848.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[i:1](1140005.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>\[The pericope</span> <span
id="iv.ii-p9.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii-p9.3"></span>[John vii.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#053)<span id="iv.ii-p9.4"></span>–viii.
11</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ii-p9.5"></span>is considered
by the best modern critics as an interpolation by a transcriber, but is
probably based on a genuine apostolic tradition, perhaps taken from the
lost work of Papias of Hierapolis, who collected from primitive
disciples various discourses of our Lord, among others “a narrative
concerning a woman maliciously accused before the Lord touching many
sins.” (Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl* . III. 39.) The section is omitted in the
oldest uncial and other Greek <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.ii-p9.6"></span>mss</span> . (</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii-p9.7"></span>א</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii-p9.8"></span>, B, etc.); it was unknown to Chrysostom and
other Greek and early Latin fathers; it interrupts the context; it
departs from the style of John, and presents an unusual number of
various readings. We find it first in Latin Gospel <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.ii-p9.9"></span>mss</span> . of the fourth
century, but in different places, sometimes at the end of the Gospel of
John as an appendix, sometimes at the end of [Luke
xxi.](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii-p9.10"></span> It
was also in the Gospel according to the Hebrews. The R.V. properly
retains it, but in brackets and with a marginal note. The story, though
no part of the Gospel of John, is eminently Christlike. For details see
Tischendorf (ed. viii.), Tregelles, Westcott and Hort, and the critical
commentaries.—P.S.\]</span>

<span id="fn_1"></span>[i:2](1140005.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iv.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii-p12.1"></span>\[The second volume of the Oxford edition,
containing Homilies 42–88 ([John
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ii-p12.2"></span>–xxi.), was published in 1852 without a
Preface.—P.S.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1140006)
