[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140022)  [Next](1140024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xx"></span> <span id="iv.xx-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xx-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xx-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xx-p2.2"></span>[John i.
35-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035)<span
id="iv.xx-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p3"></span>“Again the next day after John stood, and two
of his disciples; and looking upon Jesus as He walked, he saith, Behold
the Lamb of God. And the two disciples heard him speak, and they
followed Jesus.”

<span id="iv.xx-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xx-p4.1"></span>The</span> nature of man is somehow a thing
slothful, and easily declining to perdition, not by reason of the
constitution of the nature itself, but by reason of that sloth which is
of deliberate choice. Wherefore it needs much reminding. And for this
cause Paul, writing to the Philippians, said, “To write the same things
to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.” (
[Philip. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001) <span
id="iv.xx-p4.2"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xx-p5"></span>The earth when it has once received the seed,
straightway gives forth its fruits, and needs not a second sowing; but
with our souls it is not so, and one must be content, after having sown
many times, and manifested much carefulness, to be able once to receive
fruit. For in the first place, what is said settles in the mind with
difficulty, because the ground is very hard, and entangled with thorns
innumerable, and there are many which lay plots, and carry away the
seed; afterwards, when it has been fixed and has taken root, it still
needs the same attention, that it may come to maturity, and having done
so may remain uninjured, and take no harm from any. For in the case of
seeds, when the ear is fully formed and has gained its proper strength,
it easily despises rust, and drought, and every other thing; but it is
not so with doctrines; in their case after all the work has been fully
done, one storm and flood often comes on, and either by the attack of
unpleasant circumstances, or by the plots of men skilled to deceive, or
by various other temptations brought against them, brings them to ruin.

<span id="iv.xx-p6"></span> I have not said this without cause, but that
when you hear John repeating the same words, you may not condemn him for
vain talking;  <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) nor <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_62"></span> deem him
impertinent or wearisome. He desired to have been heard by once
speaking, but because not many gave heed to what was spoken from the
first, by reason of deep sleep, he again rouses them by this second
call. Now observe; he had said, “He that cometh after me, is preferred
before me”: and that “I am not worthy to unloose the latchet of His
shoe”; and that “He baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with fire”; and
that he “saw the Spirit descending like a dove, and it abode upon Him,”
and he “bare record that this is the Son of God.” No one gave heed, nor
asked, nor said, “Why sayest thou these things? in whose behalf? for
what reason?” Again he had said, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sin of the world”; yet not even so did he touch their
insensibility. Therefore, after this he is compelled to repeat the same
words again, as if softening by tillage  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) some hard and stubborn soil, and by
his word as by a  <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) plow,
disturbing the mind which had hardened into clods,  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) so as to put in the seed deep. For
this reason he does not make his discourse a long one either; because he
desired one thing only, to bring them over and join them to Christ. He
knew that as soon as they had received this saying, and had been
persuaded, they would not afterwards need one to bear witness unto Him.
As also it came to pass. For, if the Samaritans could say to the woman
after hearing Him, “Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we
know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world,” the
disciples would be much more quickly subdued,  <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) as was the case. For when they had
come and heard Him but one evening, they returned no more to John, but
were so nailed to Him, that they took upon them the ministry of John,
and themselves proclaimed Him. For, saith the Evangelist, “He findeth
his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messias,
which is, being interpreted, the Christ.” And observe, I pray you, this,
how, when he said, “He that cometh after me is preferred before me”; and
that, “I am not worthy to unloose the lachet of His shoe”; he caught no
one, but when he spoke of the Dispensation, and lowered his discourse to
a humbler tone, then the disciples followed Him.

<span id="iv.xx-p12"></span> And we may remark this, not only in the
instance of the disciples, but that the many are not so much attracted
when some great and sublime thing is said concerning God, as when some
act of graciousness and lovingkindness, something pertaining to the
salvation of the hearers, is spoken of. They heard that “He taketh away
the sin of the world,” and straightway they ran to Him. For, said they,
“if it is possible to wash away  <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469)
the charges that lie against us, why do we delay? here is One who will
deliver us without labor of ours. Is it not extreme folly to put off
accepting the Gift?” Let those hear who are Catechumens, and are putting
off their salvation  <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) to their
latest breath.

<span id="iv.xx-p15"></span>“Again,” saith the Evangelist, “John stood,
and saith, Behold, the Lamb of God.” Christ utters no word, His
messenger saith all. So it is with a bridegroom. He saith not for a
while anything to the bride, but is there in silence, while some show
him to the bride, and others give her into his hands; she merely
appears, and he departs not having taken her himself, but when he has
received her from another who gives her to him. And when he has received
her thus given, he so disposes her, that she no more remembers those who
betrothed her. So it was with Christ. He came to join to Himself the
Church; He said nothing, but merely came. It was His friend, John, who
put into His the bride’s right hand, when by his discourses he gave into
His hand the souls of men. He having received them, afterwards so
disposed them, that they departed no more to John who had committed them
to Him.

<span id="iv.xx-p16"></span> \[2.\] And here we may remark, not this
only, but something besides. As at a marriage the maiden goes not to the
bridegroom, but he hastens to her, though he be a king’s son, and though
he be about to espouse some poor and abject person, or even a servant,
so it was here. Man’s nature did not go up,  <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) but contemptible and poor as it was,
He came to it, and when the marriage had taken place, He suffered it no
longer to tarry here, but having taken it to Himself, transported it to
the house of His Father.

<span id="iv.xx-p18"></span>“Why then doth not John take his disciples
apart, and converse with them on these matters, and so deliver them over
to Christ, instead of saying publicly to them in common with all the
people, ‘Behold the Lamb of God’?” That it may not seem to be a matter
of arrangement; for had they gone away from him to Christ after having
been privately admonished by him, and as though to do him a favor, they
would perhaps soon have started away again; but now, having taken upon
them the following Him, from teaching which had been general, they
afterwards remained His firm disciples, as not having followed Him in
order to gratify the teacher, but as looking purely to their own
advantage.

<span id="iv.xx-p19"></span>The Prophets and Apostles then all preached
Him absent; the Prophets before His coming according to the flesh, the
Apostles after He was taken up; John alone proclaimed Him present. <span
id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_63"></span> Wherefore he
calls himself the “friend of the Bridegroom” ( [John
3.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="iv.xx-p19.1"></span> ),
since he alone was present at the marriage, he it was that did and
accomplished all, he made a beginning of the work. And “looking upon
Jesus walking, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God.” Not by voice alone,
but with his eyes also he bore witness to, and expressed his admiration
of, Christ, rejoicing and glorying. Nor does he for awhile address any
 <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) word of exhortation to his
followers, but only shows wonder and astonishment at Him who was
present, and declares to all the Gift which He came to give, and the
manner of purification. For “the Lamb” declares both these things. And
he said not, “Who shall take,” or “Who hath taken”; but, “Who taketh
away the sins of the world”; because this He ever doth. He took them not
then only when He suffered, but from that time even to the present doth
He take them away, not being repeatedly  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) crucified, (for He offered One
Sacrifice for sins,) but by that One continually purging them. As then
<span class="c11"><span id="iv.xx-p21.3"></span>The Word</span> shows us
His pre-eminence,  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) and <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xx-p22.2"></span>The Son</span> His superiority
in comparison with others, so “The Lamb, The Christ, that Prophet, the
True Light, the Good Shepherd,” and whatever other names are applied to
Him with the addition of the article, mark a great difference. For there
were many “Lambs,” and “Prophets,” and “Christs,” and “sons,” but from
all these John separates Him by a wide interval. And this he secured not
by the article only, but by the addition of “Only-Begotten”; for He had
nothing in common with the creation.

<span id="iv.xx-p23"></span>If it seems to any unseasonable that these
things should be spoken at “the tenth hour” (that was the time of day,
for he says, “It was about the tenth hour”—( [John
1.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039)<span id="iv.xx-p23.1"></span> ),
such an one seems to me to be much mistaken. In the case indeed of the
many, and those who serve the flesh, the season after feasting is not
very suitable for any matters of pressing moment, because their hearts
 <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) are burdened with meats: but
here was a man who did not even partake of common food, and who at
evening was as sober as we are at morning, (or rather much more so; for
often the remains of our evening food that are left within us, fill our
souls with imaginations, but he loaded his vessel with none of these
things;) he with good reason spake late in the evening of these matters.
Besides, he was tarrying in the wilderness by Jordan, where all came to
his baptism with great fear, and caring little at that time for the
things of this life; as also they continued with Christ three days, and
had nothing to eat. ( [Matt. xv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#032)
<span id="iv.xx-p24.1"></span> .) For this is the part of a zealous
herald and a careful husbandman, not to desist before he see that the
planted seed has got a firm hold.  <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) “Why then did he not go about all the
parts of Judæa preaching Christ, rather than stand by the river waiting
for Him to come, that he might point Him out when He came?” Because he
wished that this should be effected by His works; his own object being
in the mean time only to make Him known, and to persuade some to hear of
eternal life. But to Him he leaves the greater testimony, that of works,
as also He saith, “I receive not testimony of men. The works which My
Father hath given Me, the same bear witness of Me.” ( [John
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span id="iv.xx-p25.1"></span> .)
Observe how much more effectual this was; for when he had thrown in a
little spark, at once the blaze rose on high. For they who before had
not even given heed to his words, afterwards say, “All things which John
spake were true.” ( [John 10.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041)<span
id="iv.xx-p25.2"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xx-p26"></span> \[3.\] Besides, if he had gone about saying
these things, what was being done would have seemed to be done from some
human motive, and the preaching to be full of suspicion.  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477)

<span id="iv.xx-p28"></span>“And the two disciples heard him, and
followed Jesus.”

<span id="iv.xx-p29"></span>Yet John had other disciples, but they not
only did not “follow Jesus,” but were even jealously disposed towards
him. “Rabbi,” says one, “He that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom
thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come unto
him.” ( [John 3.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xx-p29.1"></span> .) And again  <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) they appear bringing a charge against
him; “Why do we fast, but thy disciples fast not?” ( [Matt. ix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014) <span id="iv.xx-p30.1"></span> .)
But those who were better than the rest had no such feeling, but heard,
and at once followed; followed, not as despising their teacher, but as
being most fully persuaded by him, and producing the strongest proof
that they acted thus from a right judgment of his reasonings. For they
did not do so by his advice, that might have appeared suspicious; but
when he merely foretold what was to come to pass, that “He should
baptize with the Holy Ghost, \[and with fire,\]” they followed. They did
not then desert their teacher, but rather desired to learn what Christ
brought with Him more than John. And observe zeal combined with modesty.
They did not at once approach and question Jesus on necessary and most
important matters, nor were they desirous to converse with Him publicly,
while all were present, at once and in an off-hand manner, but
privately; for they knew that the words of their teacher proceeded not
from humility, but from truth.

<span id="iv.xx-p31"></span> [John
1.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040)<span id="iv.xx-p31.1"></span> .
“One of the two who heard, and followed Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s
brother.”

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_64"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p32"></span> Wherefore then has he not made known the
name of the other also? Some say, because it was the writer himself that
followed; others, not so, but that he was not one of the distinguished
disciples; it behooved not therefore to say more than was necessary. For
what would it have advantaged us to learn his name, when the writer does
not mention the names even of the seventy-two? St. Paul also did the
same.  <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) “We have sent,” says he,
“with him the brother,” (who has often in many things been forward,)
“whose praise is in the Gospel.” ( [2 Cor. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018) <span id="iv.xx-p33.2"></span> .)
Moreover, he mentions Andrew for another reason. What is this?  It is,
that when you are informed that Simon having in company with him heard,
“Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men” ( [Matt. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019) <span id="iv.xx-p33.3"></span> ),
was not perplexed at so strange a promise, you may learn that his
brother had already laid down within him the beginnings of the faith.

<span id="iv.xx-p34"></span> [John
1.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038)<span id="iv.xx-p34.1"></span> .
“Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What
seek ye?”

<span id="iv.xx-p35"></span> Hence we are taught, that God does not
prevent our wills by His gifts, but that when we begin, when we provide
the being willing, then He gives us many opportunities of salvation.
“What seek ye?” How is this? He who knoweth the hearts of men, who
dwelleth  <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) in our thoughts, doth
He ask? He doth; not that He may be informed; how could that be? but
that by the question He may make them more familiar, and impart to them
greater boldness, and show them that they are worthy to hear Him; for it
was probable that they would blush and be afraid, as being unknown to
him, and as having heard such accounts of Him from the testimony of
their teacher. Therefore to remove all this, their shame and their fear,
he questions them, and would not let them come all the way to the house
in silence. Yet the event would have been the same had He not questioned
them; they would have remained by following Him, and walking in His
steps would have reached His dwelling. Why then did He ask? To effect
that which I said, to calm their minds,  <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) yet disturbed with shame and anxiety,
and to give them confidence.

<span id="iv.xx-p38"></span> Nor was it by their following only that
they showed their earnest desire, but by their question also: for when
they had not as yet learned or even heard anything from Him, they call
Him, “Master”; thrusting themselves as it were among His disciples, and
declaring what was the cause of their following, that they might hear
somewhat profitable. Observe their wisdom also. They did not say, “Teach
us of Thy doctrines, or some other thing that we need to know”; but
what? “Where dwellest Thou?” Because, as I before said, they wished in
quiet to say somewhat to Him, and to hear somewhat from Him, and to
learn. Therefore they did not defer the matter, nor say, “We will come
to-morrow by all means, and hear thee speak in public”; but showed the
great eagerness they had to hear Him, by not being turned back even by
the hour, for the sun was already near its setting, (“it was,” saith
John, “about the tenth hour.”) And therefore Christ does not tell them
the marks of His abode, nor its situation, but rather induces them to
follow Him by showing them that He had accepted them. For this reason He
did not say anything of this kind to them, “It is an unseasonable time
now for you to enter into the house, to-morrow you shall hear if you
have any wish, return home now”;  <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) but converses with them as with
friends, and those who had long been with Him.

<span id="iv.xx-p40"></span>How then saith He in another place, “But the
Son of Man hath not where to lay His head” ( [Luke ix.
58](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#058) <span id="iv.xx-p40.1"></span> ),
while here He saith, “Come and see” ( [John
1.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039)<span id="iv.xx-p40.2"></span> )
where I abide? Because the expression “hath not where to lay His head,”
signifies that He had no dwelling place of His own, not that He did not
abide in a house. And this too is the meaning of the comparison.  <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) The Evangelist has mentioned that
“they abode with Him that day,” but has not added wherefore, because the
reason was plain; for from no other motive did they follow Christ, and
He draw them to Him, but only that they might have instruction; and this
they enjoyed so abundantly and eagerly even in a single night, that they
both proceeded straightway to the capture  <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) of others.

<span id="iv.xx-p43"></span> \[4.\] Let us then also learn hence to
consider all things secondary  <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485)
to the hearing the word of God, and to deem no season unseasonable, and,
though a man may even have to go into another person’s house, and being
a person unknown to make himself known to great men, though it be late
in the day, or at any time whatever, never to neglect this traffic. Let
food and baths and dinners and the other things of this life have their
appointed time; but let the teaching of heavenly philosophy have no
separate time, let every season belong to it.  For Paul saith, “In
season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort” ( [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002) <span id="iv.xx-p44.2"></span> );
and the Prophet too saith,  <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) “In
His law will he meditate day and night” ( [Ps. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003) <span id="iv.xx-p45.2"></span> );
and Moses commanded the Jews to do this always. For the things of this
life, baths, I mean, and dinners, even if they are necessary, yet being
continually repeated, render the body feeble;  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) but the teaching of the soul <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_65"></span> the more it
is prolonged, the stronger it renders the soul which receives it. But
now we portion out all our time for trifles and unprofitable silly
talking, and we sit together idly during the morning and afternoon,
 <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) midday and evening besides, and
we have appointed places for this; but hearing the divine doctrines
twice or thrice in the week we become sick,  <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) and thoroughly sated. What is the
reason? We are in a bad state of soul; its faculty of desiring and
reaching after these things we have relaxed altogether. And therefore it
is not strong enough to have an appetite for spiritual food. And this
among others is a great proof of weakness, not to hunger nor thirst, but
to be disinclined to both. Now if this, when it takes place in our
bodies, is a sure sign of grievous disease, and productive of weakness,
much more is it so in the soul.

<span id="iv.xx-p49"></span> “How then,” says one, “shall we be able to
renew it, thus fallen and relaxed, to strength? what doing, what
saying?” By applying ourselves to the divine words of the prophets, of
the Apostles, of the Gospels, and all the others; then we shall know
that it is far better to feed on these than on impure food, for so we
must term our unseasonable idle talking and assemblies. For which is
best, tell me, to converse on things relating to the market, or things
in the law courts, or in the camp, or on things in heaven, and on what
shall be after our departure hence? Which is best, to talk about our
neighbor and our neighbor’s affairs, to busy ourselves in what belongs
to other people, or to enquire into the things of angels, and into
matters which concern ourselves? For a neighbor’s affairs are not thine
at all; but heavenly things are thine. “But,” says some one, “a man may
by once speaking finish these subjects altogether.” Why do you not think
this in matters on which you converse uselessly and idly, why though ye
waste your lives on this have ye never exhausted the subject? And I have
not yet named what is far more vile than this. These are the things
about which the better sort converse one with the other; but the more
indifferent and careless carry about in their talk players and dancers
and charioteers, defiling men’s ears, corrupting their souls, and
driving their nature into mad excesses by these narratives, and by means
of this discourse introducing every kind of wickedness into their own
imagination. For as soon as the tongue has uttered the name of the
dancer, immediately the soul has figured to itself his looks, his hair,
his delicate clothing, and himself more effeminate than all. Another
again fans the flame in another way, by introducing some harlot into the
conversation, with her words, and attitudes, and glances, her
languishing looks and twisted locks, the smoothness of her cheeks, and
her painted eyelids.  <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) Were you
not somewhat affected when I gave this description? Yet be not ashamed,
nor blush, for the very necessity of nature requires this, and so
disposes the soul according as the tendency of what is said may be. But
if, when it is I that speak, you, standing in the church, and at a
distance from these things, were somewhat affected at the hearing,
consider how it is likely that they are disposed, who sit in the theater
itself, who are totally free from dread, who are absent from this
venerable and awful assembly, who both see and hear those things with
much shamelessness. “And why then,” perhaps one of those who heed not
may say, “if the necessity of nature so disposes the soul, do you let go
that, and blame us?” Because, to be softened  <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) when one hears these things, is
nature’s work; but to hear them is not a fault of nature, but of
deliberate choice. For so he who meddles with fire must needs be
injured, so wills the weakness of our nature; yet nature does not
therefore draw us to the fire and to the injury thence arising; this can
be only from deliberate perversity. I beseech you, therefore, to remove
and correct this fault, that you may not of your own accord cast
yourself down the precipice, nor thrust yourselves into the pits of
wickedness, nor run of yourselves to the blaze, lest we place ourselves
in jeopardy of the fire prepared for the devil. May it come to pass,
that we all being delivered both from this fire and from that, may go to
the very bosom of Abraham, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and Holy Ghost,
be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_464"></span>[61:465](1140023.htm#fr_464) <span
id="iv.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p7"></span> al. “want of taste.”

<span id="fn_465"></span>[62:466](1140023.htm#fr_465) <span
id="iv.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p8.1"></span>νεώσει</span> .

<span id="fn_466"></span>[62:467](1140023.htm#fr_466) <span
id="iv.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p9"></span> al. “a kind of ”

<span id="fn_467"></span>[62:468](1140023.htm#fr_467) <span
id="iv.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p10.1"></span>πεπιλημένην</span> .

<span id="fn_468"></span>[62:469](1140023.htm#fr_468) <span
id="iv.xx-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p11"></span> Morel and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xx-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian, “much more would the
disciples have been thus affected, and when they had come would have
been subdued by His words.”

<span id="fn_469"></span>[62:470](1140023.htm#fr_469) <span
id="iv.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p13"></span> al. “to release ourselves from.”

<span id="fn_470"></span>[62:471](1140023.htm#fr_470) <span
id="iv.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p14"></span> i.e. their baptism.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[62:472](1140023.htm#fr_471) <span
id="iv.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p17"></span> al. “depart.”

<span id="fn_472"></span>[63:473](1140023.htm#fr_472) <span
id="iv.xx-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p20"></span> al. “even any.”

<span id="fn_473"></span>[63:474](1140023.htm#fr_473) <span
id="iv.xx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p21.2"></span>εὶ</span> .

<span id="fn_474"></span>[63:475](1140023.htm#fr_474) <span
id="iv.xx-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p22.1"></span>τὸ ἐξαίρετον</span> .

<span id="fn_475"></span>[63:476](1140023.htm#fr_475) <span
id="iv.xx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p24"></span> or, “stomachs.”

<span id="fn_476"></span>[63:477](1140023.htm#fr_476) <span
id="iv.xx-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p25"></span> al. “is retained.”

<span id="fn_477"></span>[63:478](1140023.htm#fr_477) <span
id="iv.xx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p27"></span> Morel. reads: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p27.1"></span>καὶ ὑποψίας ἦν μετὰ τὸ κήρυγμα λοιπόν</span> .

<span id="fn_478"></span>[63:479](1140023.htm#fr_478) <span
id="iv.xx-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p30"></span> al. “these same.”

<span id="fn_479"></span>[64:480](1140023.htm#fr_479) <span
id="iv.xx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p33"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xx-p33.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. “this also may be seen with
Paul.”

<span id="fn_480"></span>[64:481](1140023.htm#fr_480) <span
id="iv.xx-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p36.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p36.2"></span>υβατεύων</span> .

<span id="fn_481"></span>[64:482](1140023.htm#fr_481) <span
id="iv.xx-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p37.1"></span>λογισμὸν</span> .

<span id="fn_482"></span>[64:483](1140023.htm#fr_482) <span
id="iv.xx-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p39"></span> al. “for the present.”

<span id="fn_483"></span>[64:484](1140023.htm#fr_483) <span
id="iv.xx-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p41"></span> i.e. with the foxes and birds.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[64:485](1140023.htm#fr_484) <span
id="iv.xx-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p42"></span> al. “the door.”

<span id="fn_485"></span>[64:486](1140023.htm#fr_485) <span
id="iv.xx-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p44.1"></span>πάρεργα</span> .

<span id="fn_486"></span>[64:487](1140023.htm#fr_486) <span
id="iv.xx-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p45"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xx-p45.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. “and David also glances at
this, saying.”

<span id="fn_487"></span>[64:488](1140023.htm#fr_487) <span
id="iv.xx-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p46.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p46.2"></span>ξίτηλον</span> .

<span id="fn_488"></span>[65:489](1140023.htm#fr_488) <span
id="iv.xx-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p47.1"></span>δείλην</span> .

<span id="fn_489"></span>[65:490](1140023.htm#fr_489) <span
id="iv.xx-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p48.1"></span>ναυτιῶμεν</span> .

<span id="fn_490"></span>[65:491](1140023.htm#fr_490) <span
id="iv.xx-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p50.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p50.2"></span>πογραφὰς</span> .

<span id="fn_491"></span>[65:492](1140023.htm#fr_491) <span
id="iv.xx-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p51.1"></span>μαλάττεσθαι</span> .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.41,42](1140024)
