[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140054)  [Next](1140056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lii"></span> <span id="iv.lii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="iv.lii-Page_178"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lii-p1.1"></span>Homily L.</span>

<span id="iv.lii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lii-p2.2"></span>[John vii.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.lii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p3"></span>“Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not
this he, whom they seek to kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they
say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very
Christ? Howbeit we know this man whence he is.”

<span id="iv.lii-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lii-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> is placed in the Holy Scriptures
without a reason, for they were uttered by the Holy Ghost, therefore let
us enquire exactly into every point. For it is possible from one
expression to find out the entire meaning (of a passage), as in the case
before us. “Many of them of Jerusalem said, Is not this he, whom they
seek to kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto
him.” Now why is added, “them of Jerusalem”? The Evangelist by this
shows, that they who had most enjoyed His mighty miracles were more
pitiable than any; they who had beheld the greatest proof of His
Godhead, and yet committed all to the judgment of their corrupt rulers.
For was it not a great proof of it, that men furious and bent on murder,
who went about and sought to kill Him, should be quiet of a sudden, when
they had Him in their hands? Who could have effected this? who thus
quenched their absolute fury? Still after such proofs, observe the folly
and the madness of the men. “Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?”
See how they accuse themselves; “whom,” It saith, “they seek to kill,
and yet they say nothing to him.” And not only do they say nothing to
Him, but nothing even when He “speaketh boldly.” For one who spoke
boldly and with all freedom would naturally have the more angered them;
but they did nothing. “Do they know indeed that this is the very
Christ?” “What think ye? What opinion give ye?” The contrary, It saith.
On which account they said, “We know this man whence he is.” What
malice,  <span id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) what contradiction!
They do not even follow the opinion of their rulers, but bring forward
another, perverse, and worthy of their own folly; “We know him whence he
is.”

<span id="iv.lii-p6"></span>“But when Christ cometh, no man knoweth
whence He is.” ( [Matt. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004) <span
id="iv.lii-p6.1"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lii-p7"></span>“Yet your rulers when asked replied, that He
should be born in Bethlehem.” And others again said, “God spake unto
Moses, but as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is.” ( [John
9.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#029)<span id="iv.lii-p7.1"></span> .)
“We know whence he is,” and “we know not whence He is”; observe the
words of drunken men. And again, “Doth Christ come out of Galilee?” (
[John 7.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#041)<span
id="iv.lii-p7.2"></span> .) Is He not of “the town of Bethlehem”? Seest
thou that theirs is the decision of madmen? “We know,” and, “we know
not”; “Christ cometh from Bethlehem”; “When Christ cometh, no man
knoweth whence He is.” What can be plainer than this contradiction? For
they only looked to one thing, which was, not to believe. What then is
Christ’s reply?

<span id="iv.lii-p8"></span> [John
7.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)<span id="iv.lii-p8.1"></span> .
“Ye both know Me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of Myself,
but He that sent Me is true, whom ye know not.”

<span id="iv.lii-p9"></span>\[2.\] And again, “If ye had known Me, ye
should have known My Father also.” ( [John
8.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span id="iv.lii-p9.1"></span> .)
How then saith He, that they both “know Him,” and “whence He is,” and
then, “that they neither know Him, nor the Father”? He doth not
contradict, (away with the thought,) but is very consistent with
Himself. For He speaketh of a different kind of knowledge, when He
saith, “ye know not”; as when He saith, “The sons of Eli were wicked
sons, they knew not the Lord” ( [1 Sam. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012) <span id="iv.lii-p9.2"></span> );
and again, “Israel doth not know Me.” ( [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003) <span id="iv.lii-p9.3"></span> .) So
also Paul saith, “They profess that they know God, but in works they
deny Him.” ( [Tit. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016) <span
id="iv.lii-p9.4"></span> .) It is therefore possible, “knowing,” “not to
know.” This then is what He saith: “If ye know Me, ye know that I am the
Son of God.” For the “whence I am” doth not here denote place. As is
clear from what followeth, “I am not come of Myself, but He that sent Me
is true, whom ye know not,” referring here to the ignorance shown by
their works. \[As Paul saith, “They profess that they know God, but in
works they deny Him.”\] For their fault came not merely of ignorance,
but of wickedness, and an evil will; because even though they knew this,
they chose to be ignorant. But what manner of connection is there here?
How is it that He, reproving them, useth their own words? For when they
say, “We know this man whence he is,” He addeth, “ye both know Me.” Was
their expression, “We know him not”? Nay, they said, “We know him.” But
(observe), they by saying the, “We know whence he is,” declared nothing
else than that He was “of the earth,” and that He was “the carpenter’s
son”; but He led them up to heaven, saying, “Ye know whence I am,” that
is, not thence whence ye suppose, but from that place whence He that
<span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span id="iv.lii-Page_179"></span>
sent Me (hath sent Me). For to say, “I am not come of Myself,”
intimateth to them, that they knew that He was sent by the Father,
though they did not disclose it.  <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) So that He rebuketh them in a
twofold manner; first, what they said in secret He published aloud, so
as to put them to shame; after that He revealed also what was in their
hearts. As though He had said, “I am not one of the abjects, nor of
those who come for nothing, but He ‘that sent Me is true, whom ye know
not.’” What meaneth,“ He that sent Me is true”? “If He be true, He hath
sent Me for the truth; if He be true, it is probable that He who is sent
is true also.” This also He proveth in another way, vanquishing them
with their own words. For whereas they had said, “When Christ cometh, no
man knoweth whence He is,” He proveth from this that He Himself is the
Christ. They used the words, “No man knoweth,” with reference to
distinction of some definite locality; but from the same words He
showeth Himself to be the Christ, because He came from the Father; and
everywhere He witnesseth that He alone hath the knowledge of the Father,
saying, “Not that any man hath seen the Father, save He which is from
the Father.”  <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) ( [John
6.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="iv.lii-p11.3"></span> .)
And His words exasperated them; for to tell them, “Ye know Him not,” and
to rebuke them because knowing they pretended to be ignorant, was
sufficient to sting and annoy them.

<span id="iv.lii-p12"></span> [John
7.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)<span id="iv.lii-p12.1"></span> .
“Then they sought to take Him, and no man laid his hand upon Him,
because His hour was not yet come.”

<span id="iv.lii-p13"></span>Seest thou that they are invisibly
restrained, and their anger bridled? But wherefore saith It not, that He
had restrained them invisibly, but, “Because His hour was not yet come”?
The Evangelist was minded to speak more humanly and in a lowlier strain,
so that Christ might be deemed to be also Man. For because Christ
everywhere speaketh of sublime matters, he therefore intersperseth
expressions of this kind. And when Christ saith, “I am from Him,” He
speaketh not as a Prophet who learneth, but as seeing Him, and being
with Him.

<span id="iv.lii-p14"></span> [John
7.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#029)<span id="iv.lii-p14.1"></span> .
“I know Him,” He saith, “for I am from Him, and He hath sent Me.”

<span id="iv.lii-p15"></span>Seest thou how He continually seeketh to
prove the, “I am not come of Myself,” and, “He that sent Me is true,”
striving not to be thought an enemy of God? And observe how great is the
profit of the humility of His words; for, it saith, after this many
said,

<span id="iv.lii-p16"></span> [John
7.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#031)<span id="iv.lii-p16.1"></span> .
“When Christ cometh, will He do more miracles than these which this man
hath done?”

<span id="iv.lii-p17"></span> How many were the miracles? In truth,
there were three, that of the wine, that of the paralytic, and that of
the nobleman’s son; and the Evangelist hath related no more. From which
circumstance it is plain, as I have often said, that the writers pass by
most of them, and discourse to us of those alone on account of which the
rulers ill-treated Him. “Then they sought to take Him,” and kill Him.
Who “sought”? Not the multitude, who had no desire of rule, nor could be
made captives by malice; but the priests. For they of the multitude
said, “When Christ cometh, will He do more miracles?” Yet neither was
this sound faith, but, as it were, the idea of a promiscuous  <span
id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) crowd; for to say, “When He
cometh,” was not the expression of men firmly persuaded that He was the
Christ. We may either understand the words thus, or that they were
uttered by the multitudes when they came together. “Since,” they may
have said, “our rulers are taking every pains to prove that this man is
not the Christ, let us suppose that he is not the Christ; will the
Christ be better than he?” For, as I ever repeat, men of the grosser
sort are led in not by doctrine, nor by preaching, but by miracles.

<span id="iv.lii-p19"></span> [John
7.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032)<span id="iv.lii-p19.1"></span> .
“The Pharisees heard the people murmuring,  <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) and sent  <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) servants to take Him.”

<span id="iv.lii-p22"></span> Seest thou that the violation of the
Sabbath was a mere pretense? and that what most stung them was this
murmuring? For here, though they had no fault to find with Him for
anything said or done, they desired to take Him because of the
multitude. They dared not do it themselves, suspecting danger, but sent
their hired servants.  <span id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) Alas!
for their tyranny and their madness, or rather, I should say, for their
folly. After having often attempted themselves, and not prevailed, they
committed the matter to servants, simply satisfying their anger. Yet He
had spoken much at the pool ( [John
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#000)<span id="iv.lii-p23.7"></span> .),
and they had done nothing of the kind; they sought indeed occasion, but
they attempted not, while here they can endure it no longer, when the
multitude is about to run to Him. What then saith Christ?

<span id="iv.lii-p24"></span> [John
7.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033)<span id="iv.lii-p24.1"></span> .
“Yet a little while am I with you.” Having power to bow and terrify His
hearers, He uttereth words full of humility. As though He had said, “Why
are ye eager to persecute and kill Me? Wait a little while, and even
though you should be eager to keep Me back, I shall not endure it.” That
no one should (as they did) suppose that the, “Yet a little while am I
with you,” denoted a common death, that no one might suppose this, or
that He wrought  <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) nothing
after death, He added,

<span id="iv.lii-p26"></span> <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span
id="iv.lii-Page_180"></span>[John
7.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034)<span id="iv.lii-p26.1"></span> .
“And where I am, thither ye cannot come.”

<span id="iv.lii-p27"></span>Now had He been about to continue in death,
they might have gone to Him, for to that place we all depart. His words
therefore bent the simpler portion of the multitude, terrified the
bolder, made the more intelligent anxious to hear Him, since but little
time was now left, and since it was not in their power always to enjoy
this teaching. Nor did He merely say, “I am here,” but, “I am with you,”
that is, “Though ye persecute, though ye drive Me away, yet for a little
while I shall not cease dispensing what is for your good, saying and
recommending the things that relate to your salvation.”

<span id="iv.lii-p28"></span> [John
7.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033)<span id="iv.lii-p28.1"></span> .
“And I go unto Him that sent Me.” This was enough to terrify and throw
them into an agony. For that they should stand in need of Him, He
declareth also.

<span id="iv.lii-p29"></span> [John
7.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034)<span id="iv.lii-p29.1"></span> .
“Ye shall seek Me,” He saith, (not only “ye shall not forget Me,” but ye
shall even “seek Me,”) “and shall not find Me.”

<span id="iv.lii-p30"></span>\[3.\] And when did the Jews “seek Him”?
Luke saith that the women mourned over Him, and it is probable that many
others, both at the time and when the city was taken, remembered Christ
and His miracles, and sought His presence. ( [Luke xxiii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#049) <span id="iv.lii-p30.1"></span> .)
Now all this He added, desiring to attract them. For the facts that the
time left was short, that He should after His departure be regretfully
desired by them, and that they should not then be able to find Him, were
all together sufficient to persuade them to come to Him. For had it not
been that His presence should with regret be desired by them, He would
not have seemed to them to be saying any great thing; if, again, it was
about to be desired, and they able to find Him, neither so would this
have disturbed them.  Again, had He been about to stay with them a long
time, so also they would have been remiss. But now He in every way
compelleth and terrifieth them. And the, “I go to Him that sent Me,” is
the expression of one declaring that no harm will happen to Him from
their plotting, and that His Passion was voluntary. Wherefore now He
uttered two predictions, that after a little while He should depart, and
that they should not come to Him; a thing which belonged not to human
intelligence, the foretelling His own death. Hear for instance, David
saying, “Lord, make me to know mine end and the number of my days, what
it is, that I may know what time I have.”  <span
id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) ( [Ps. xxxix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004) <span id="iv.lii-p31.3"></span> .)
There is no man at all that knoweth this; and by one  <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) the other is confirmed. And I think
that He speaketh this covertly to the servants, and directeth His
discourse to them, thus specially attracting them, by showing them that
He knew the cause of their arrival. As though He had said, “Wait a
little, and I shall depart.”

<span id="iv.lii-p33"></span> [John
7.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035)<span id="iv.lii-p33.1"></span> .
“Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go?”

<span id="iv.lii-p34"></span>Yet they who had wished to be rid of Him,
who did all in their power not to see Him, ought not to have asked this
question, but to have said, “we are glad of it, when will the departure
take place?” but they were somewhat affected at His words, and with
foolish suspicion question one another, “whither will he go?”

<span id="iv.lii-p35"></span> “Will he go unto the dispersion of the
Gentiles?”  <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425)

<span id="iv.lii-p37"></span>What is, “the dispersion of the Gentiles”?
The Jews gave this name to other nations, because they were everywhere
scattered and mingled fearlessly with one another. And this reproach
they themselves afterwards endured, for they too were a “dispersion.”
For of old all their nation was collected into one place, and you could
not anywhere find a Jew, except in Palestine only; wherefore they called
the Gentiles a “dispersion,” reproaching them, and boasting concerning
themselves. What then meaneth, “Whither I go ye cannot come”? For all
nations at that time had intercourse with them, and there were Jews
everywhere. He would not therefore, if He had meant the Gentiles, have
said, “Where ye cannot come.” After saying, “Will he go to the
dispersion of the Gentiles?” they did not add, “and ruin,” but, “and
teach them.” To such a degree had they abated their anger, and believed
His words; for they would not, had they not believed, have enquired
among themselves what the saying was.

<span id="iv.lii-p38"></span>These words were spoken indeed to the Jews,
but fear there is lest they be suited to us also, that “where He is” we
“cannot come” on account of our life being full of sins. For concerning
the disciples He saith, “I will that they also be with Me where I am” (
[John 17.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span
id="iv.lii-p38.1"></span> ), but concerning ourselves, I dread lest the
contrary be said, that, “Where I am, ye cannot come.” For when we act
contrary to the commandments, how can we go to that place? Even in the
present life, if any soldier act unworthily towards his king, he will
not be able to see the king, but being deprived of his authority will
suffer the severest punishment; if therefore we steal, or covet, if we
wrong or strike others, if we work not deeds of mercy, we shall not be
able to go thither, but shall suffer what happened to the virgins. For
where He was, they were not able to enter in, but retired, their lamps
having gone out, that is, grace having left them. For we can, if we
will, increase the brightness of that <span id="page_181">p. 181</span>
<span id="iv.lii-Page_181"></span> flame which we received straightway
 <span id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426) by the grace of the Spirit;
but if we will not do this, we shall lose it, and when that is quenched,
there will be nothing else than darkness in our souls; since, as while a
lamp is burning the light is strong, so when it is extinguished there is
nothing but gloom. Wherefore the Apostle saith, “Quench not the Spirit.”
( [1 Thess. v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019) <span
id="iv.lii-p39.2"></span> .) And It is quenched when It hath not oil,
when there is any violent gust of wind, when It is cramped and confined,
(for so fire is quenched,) and It is cramped by worldly cares, and
quenched by evil desires. In addition to the causes we have mentioned,
nothing quencheth It so much as inhumanity, cruelty, and rapine. For
when, besides having no oil, we pour upon it cold water, (for
covetousness is this, which chills with despondency the souls of those
we wrong,) whence shall it be kindled again? We shall depart, therefore,
carrying dust and ashes with us, and having much smoke to convict us of
having had lamps and of having extinguished them; for where there is
smoke, there needs must have been fire which hath been quenched. May
none of us ever hear that word, “I know you not.” ( [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012) <span id="iv.lii-p39.3"></span> .)
And whence shall we hear that word, but from this, if ever we see a poor
man, and are as though we saw him not? If we will not know Christ when
He is an hungered, He too will not know us when we entreat His mercy.
And with justice; for how shall he who neglects the afflicted, and gives
not of that which is his own, how shall he seek to receive of that which
is not his own? Wherefore, I entreat you, let us do and contrive
everything, so that oil fail not us, but that we may trim our lamps, and
enter with the Bridegroom into the bride-chamber. To which may we all
attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[178:1416](1140055.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.lii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p5.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p5.2"></span>perplexity.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[179:1417](1140055.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.lii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p10.2"></span>ξεκάλυπτον</span>

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[179:1418](1140055.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.lii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p11"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p11.1"></span>of God,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p11.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[179:1419](1140055.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iv.lii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p18.1"></span>χυδαίου</span>

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[179:1420](1140055.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iv.lii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p20"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p20.1"></span>murmuring such things concerning Him,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p20.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[179:1421](1140055.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iv.lii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p21"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p21.1"></span>the Pharisees and Chief Priests sent,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p21.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[179:1422](1140055.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iv.lii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p23.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p23.2"></span>sent their s. to be exposed</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p23.3"></span>(</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p23.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p23.5"></span>κδότους</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lii-p23.6"></span>).</span>

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[179:1423](1140055.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iv.lii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p25.2"></span>νήργει</span>

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[180:1424](1140055.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iv.lii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p31.1"></span>τὶ ὑστερῶ ἐγὼ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p31.2"></span>, LXX., thus rendered in margin of E.V.</span>

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[180:1425](1140055.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iv.lii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p32.1"></span>i.e. one prediction.</span>

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[180:1426](1140055.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iv.lii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p36.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p36.2"></span>Greeks.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[181:1427](1140055.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="iv.lii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lii-p39.1"></span>i.e. in baptism.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 7.37,38](1140056)
