[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140076)  [Next](1140078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxiv"></span> <span id="iv.lxxiv-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span id="iv.lxxiv-Page_261"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxiv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p2.2"></span>[John xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p2.3"></span></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p2.4"></span>.  <span id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022)
</span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p4"></span>“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth Me: and He that receiveth Me,
receiveth Him that sent Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p5.1"></span>Great</span> is the recompense  <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) of care bestowed upon the servants
of God, and of itself  <span id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) it
yieldeth to us its fruits. For, “he that receiveth you,” it saith,
“receiveth Me, and he that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me.” (
[Matt. x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p7.3"></span> .) Now what can be equal to the receiving
Christ and His Father? But what kind of connection hath this with what
was said before? What hath it in common with that which He had said, “If
ye do these things happy are ye,” to add, “He that receiveth you”? A
close connection, and very harmonious.  <span
id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) Observe how. When they were about
to go forth and to suffer many dreadful things, He comforteth them in
two ways; one derived from Himself, the other derived from others. “For
if,” He saith, “ye are truly wise, ever keeping Me in mind, and bearing
about all both what I said, and what I did, ye will easily endure
terrible things. And not in this way only, but also from your enjoying
great attention from all men.” The first point He declared when He said,
“If ye do these things happy are ye”; the second when He said, “He that
receiveth you receiveth Me.” For He opened the houses of all men to
them, so that both from the sound wisdom of their manners, and the zeal
of those who would tend them, they might have twofold comfort. Then when
He had given these directions to them as to men about to run through all
the world, reflecting that the traitor was deprived of both of these
things, and would enjoy neither of them, neither patience in toils, nor
the service of kind entertainers, He again was troubled. And the
Evangelist to signify this besides, and to show that it was on his
 <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) account that He was
troubled, adds,

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p10"></span> [John
13.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p10.1"></span>
. “When Jesus had thus said, He was troubled in spirit, and testified,
and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p11"></span>Again He bringeth fear on all by not
mentioning (the traitor) by name.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p12"></span> [John
13.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#022)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p12.1"></span>
. “But they are in doubt”;  <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027)
although conscious to themselves of nothing evil; but they deemed the
declaration of Christ more to be believed than their own thoughts.
Wherefore they “looked one on another.” By laying the whole upon one,
Jesus would  <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) have cut short
their fear, but by adding, “one of you,” He troubled all. What then? The
rest looked upon one another; but the ever fervent Peter “beckoneth”
 <span id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) to John. Since he had been
before rebuked, and when Christ desired to wash him would have hindered
Him, and since he is everywhere found moved indeed by love, yet blamed;
being on this account afraid, he neither kept quiet, nor did he speak,
but wished to gain information by means of John. But it is a question
worth asking, why when all were distressed, and trembling, when their
leader was afraid, John like one at ease  <span
id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) leans on Jesus’ bosom, and not only
leans, but even (lies) on His breast? Nor is this the only thing worthy
of enquiry, but that also which follows. What is that? What he saith of
himself, “Whom Jesus loved.” Why did no one else say this of himself?
yet the others were loved too. But he more than any. And if no other
hath said this about him, but he about himself, it is nothing wonderful.
Paul too does the same,  <span id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) when
occasion calls, saying thus, “I knew a man fourteen years ago”; yet in
fact he  <span id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) has gone through
other no trifling praises of himself. Seems it to thee a small thing
that, when he had heard, “Follow Me,”  <span
id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033) he straightway left his nets, and
his father, and followed; and that Christ took him alone with Peter into
the mountain, ( [Matt. xvii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.5"></span> ,) and another time again when He went into
a house?  <span id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034) ( [Luke viii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#051) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p20.2"></span>
.) What high praise also has he himself passed on Peter without
concealment, telling us that Christ said, “Peter,  <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035) lovest thou Me more than these?” (
[c. xxi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p21.2"></span> ), and everywhere he showeth him warm, and
nobly disposed towards himself;  <span
id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036) for instance, when he said, “Lord,
and what shall this man do?” he spake from great love. But why did
 <span id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037) no other say (this  <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) ) concerning him? Because he would
not himself have said it, unless <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="iv.lxxiv-Page_262"></span> he had come to this passage.  <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) For if after telling us that Peter
beckoned to John to ask, he had added nothing more, he would have caused
considerable doubt, and have compelled us to enquire into the reason. In
order therefore himself to solve this difficulty, he saith, “He lay on
the bosom of Jesus.” Thinkest thou that thou hast learnt a little thing
when thou hast heard that “he lay,” and that their Master allowed such
boldness to them?  <span id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040) If thou
desirest to know the cause of this, the action was of love;  <span
id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041) wherefore he saith, “Whom Jesus
loved.”  <span id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042) I suppose also that
John doth this for another reason, as wishing to show that he was exempt
from the charge and so he speaks openly and is confident. Again, why did
he use these words, not at any other point of time,  <span
id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043) but only when the chief of the
Apostles beckoned? That thou mightest not deem that Peter beckoned to
him as being greater, he saith that the thing took place because of the
great love (which Jesus bare him). But why doth he even lie on His
bosom? They had not as yet formed any high surmises concerning Him;
besides, in this way He  <span id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044)
calmed their despondency; for it is probable that at this time their
faces were overclouded. If they were troubled in their souls, much more
would they be so in their countenances. Soothing them therefore by word
and by the question, He makes a way beforehand, and allows him to lean
on His breast. Observe too his modesty; he mentions not his own name,
but, “whom He loved.” As also Paul, when he said, “I knew a man about
fourteen years ago.” Now for the first time Jesus convicted the traitor,
but not even now by name; but how?

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p31"></span> [John
13.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p31.1"></span>
. “He it is, to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it.”  <span
id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p33"></span>Even the manner (of the rebuke) was
calculated to put him to shame. He respected not the table, though he
shared the bread; be it so; but the receiving the sop from His own hand,
whom would not that have won over? yet him it won not.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p34"></span> [John
13.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p34.1"></span>
. “Then  <span id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) Satan entered into
him.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p36"></span> Laughing at him for his shamelessness.
As long as he belonged to the band of disciples he dared not spring upon
him, but attacked  <span id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) him from
without; but when Christ made him manifest and separated him, then he
sprang upon him without fear. It was not fitting to keep within one of
such a character, and who so long had remained incorrigible. Wherefore
He henceforth cast him out, and then that other seized him when cut off,
and he leaving them went forth by night.  <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p39"></span> “Jesus saith unto him, Friend,  <span
id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) that thou doest, do quickly.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p41"></span> [John
13.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#028)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p41.1"></span>
. “Now no man at the table knew with what intent He spake this unto
him.”  <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p43"></span> \[3.\] Wonderful insensibility! How
could it be that he was neither softened nor shamed; but rendered yet
more shameless, “went out.” The “do quickly,” is not the expression of
one commanding, nor advising, but of one reproaching, and showing him
that He desired to correct him, but that since he was incorrigible, He
let him go. And this, the Evangelist saith, “no man of those that sat at
the table knew.” Some one may perhaps find here a considerable
difficulty, if, when the disciples had asked, “Who is it?” and He had
answered, “He to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it,” they
did not even so understand; unless indeed He spake it secretly, so that
no man should hear. For John on this very account, leaning by His
breast, asked Him almost close to His ear, so that the traitor might not
be made manifest; and Christ answered in like manner, so that not even
then did He discover him. And though He spake emphatically,  <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) “Friend, that thou doest, do
quickly,” even so they understood not. But he spake thus to show that
the things were true which had been said by Him to the Jews concerning
His death. For He had said to them, “I have power to lay down My life,
and I have power to take it again”: and, “No man taketh it from Me.” (
[John 10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p44.3"></span> .) As long then as He would retain it, no
man was able (to take it); but when He resigned it, then the action
became easy. All this He implied when He said, “That thou doest, do
quickly.” Yet not even then did He expose him,  <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) for perhaps the others might have
torn him in pieces, or Peter might have killed him. On this account “no
man at the table knew.” Not even John? Not even he: for he could not
have expected that a disciple would arrive  <span
id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) at such a pitch of wickedness. For
since they were far from such iniquity themselves, they could not
suspect such things concerning others. As before He had told them, “I
speak not of you all” ( [John
13.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p46.3"></span>
), yet did not reveal the person; so here, they thought that it was said
concerning some other matter.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p47"></span>“It was night,” saith the Evangelist,
when he went out. “Why tellest thou me the time?” That thou mayest learn
his forwardness, that not even the time restrained him from his purpose.
Yet not even did this make him quite manifest, <span id="page_263">p.
263</span> <span id="iv.lxxiv-Page_263"></span> for the others were at
this time in confusion, occupied by fear and great distress, and they
knew not the true reason of what had been said but supposed  <span
id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) that He spake thus, in order that
Judas might give somewhat to the poor. For He cared greatly for the
poor, teaching us also to bestow much diligence on this thing. But they
thought this, not without a cause, but “because he had the bag.” Yet no
one appears to have brought money to Him; that the female disciples
nourished Him of their substance, it has said, but this  <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055) it hath nowhere intimated. ( [Luke
viii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p49.2"></span> .) But how did He who bade His disciples
bear neither scrip, nor money, nor staff, Himself bear a bag to minister
to the poor? That thou mayest learn, that it behooveth even him who is
exceedingly needy and crucified, to be very careful on this point. For
many things He did in the way of dispensation  <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056) for our instruction. The disciples
then thought that He said this, that Judas should give something to the
poor; and not even this shamed him, His not being willing even to the
last day to make him a public example. We too ought to do the like, and
not parade the sins of our companions, though they be incurable. For
even after this He gave a kiss to the man who came to betray Him, and
endured,  <span id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057) such an action as
that was, and then proceeded to a thing of far greater daring,  <span
id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058) the Cross itself,  <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) to the death of shame, and there
again He manifested His lovingkindness. And here He calleth it “glory,”
showing us that there is nothing so shameful and reproachful which makes
not brighter him who goeth to it, if it be done according to the will of
God. At least after the going forth of Judas to the betraying, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p54"></span> [John
13.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p54.1"></span>
. “Now is the Son of Man glorified.”  <span
id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p56"></span> In this way rousing the dejected
thoughts of the disciples, and persuading them not only not to despond,
but even to rejoice. On this account He rebuked Peter at the first,
because for one who has been in death to overcome death, is great glory.
And this is what He said of Himself, “When I am lifted up,  <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061) then ye shall know that I Am” (
[John 8.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p57.3"></span> ); and again, “Destroy this Temple” ( [John
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p57.4"></span>
); and again, “No sign shall be given unto you  <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062) but the sign of Jonas.” ( [Matt.
xii. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p58.3"></span> .) For how can it be otherwise than great
glory, the being able even after death to do greater things than before
death? for in order that the Resurrection might be believed, the
disciples did work greater things. But unless He had lived, and had been
God, how could these men have wrought such things in His Name?

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p59"></span> [John
13.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p59.1"></span>
. “And God shall glorify Him.”  <span
id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p61"></span> What is, “And God shall glorify Him in
Himself”? It is “by means of  <span id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064)
Himself, not by means of another.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p63"></span>“And shall straightway glorify Him.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p64"></span> \[4.\] That is, “simultaneously with the
Cross.” “For it will not be after much time,” He saith, “nor will He
wait for the distant season of the Resurrection, nor will He then show
Him glorious, but straightway on the Cross itself His glories shall
appear.” And so the sun was darkened,  <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065) the rocks rent; the veil of the
temple was parted asunder, many bodies of saints that slept arose, the
tomb had its seals, the guards sat by, and while a stone lay over the
Body the Body rose; forty days passed by, and the Gift of the Spirit
came, and they all straightway preached Him. This is, “shall glorify Him
in Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him”; not by Angels or
Archangels, not by any other power, but by Himself. But how did He also
glorify Him by Himself? By doing all for the glory of the Son. Yet the
Son did all. Seest thou that He referreth to the Father the things done
by Himself?

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p66"></span> [John
13.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p66.1"></span>
. “Little children, yet a little while I am with you—and  <span
id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) as I said unto the Jews, Whither I
go ye cannot come, so now I say to you.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p68"></span> He now begins words of sorrow after the
supper. For when Judas went forth it was no longer evening, but night.
But since they  <span id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067) were about to
come shortly, it was necessary to set all things before the disciples,
that they might have them in remembrance; or rather, the Spirit recalled
all to their minds. For it is likely that they would forget many things,
as hearing for the first time, and being about to undergo such
temptations. Men who were weighed down to sleep, (as another Evangelist
saith,— [Luke xxii. 45](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#045) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p69.2"></span> ,) who were possessed by despondency, as
Christ saith Himself, “Because I have said these things unto you, sorrow
hath filled your hearts” ( [John
16.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#006)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p69.3"></span>
), how could they retain all these things exactly? Why then were they
spoken? It became no little gain to them with respect to their opinion
of  <span id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068) Christ, that in after
times when reminded  <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) they
certainly knew that they had long ago heard these things from Christ.
But wherefore doth He first cast down their souls, saying, “Yet a little
while I am with you”? “To the Jews indeed it was said with reason, but
wherefore dost Thou place us in just the same class with those obstinate
ones?”  He by no means did so. “Why then said He, ‘As I said to the
Jews’?” He reminded them that <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iv.lxxiv-Page_264"></span> He did not now, because troubles were
upon them, warn them of these things, but that He had foreknown them
from the first, and that they were witnesses who had heard that He had
said these things to the Jews. Wherefore He added also the word, “little
children,” that when they heard, “As I said to the Jews,” they might not
deem that the expression was used in like sense towards themselves. It
was not then to depress but to comfort them that He thus spake, that
their dangers might not, by coming upon them suddenly, trouble them to
excess.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p72"></span> “Whither I go, ye cannot come.” He
showeth that His death is a removal, and a change for the better  <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) to a place which admits not
corruptible bodies. This He saith, both to excite their love towards
Him, and to make it more fervent. Ye know that when we see any of our
dearest friends departing from us, our affection is warmest, and the
more so, when we see them going to a place to which it is not even
possible for us to go. These things then He said, terrifying the Jews,
but kindling longing in the disciples. “Such is the place, that not only
not they, but not even you, My best beloved, can come there.” Here He
showeth also His Own dignity.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p74"></span> “So now I say to you.” Why “now”? “In
one way to them, to you in another way”; that is, “not with them.” But
when did the Jews seek Him, when the disciples? The disciples, when they
fled the Jews, when they suffered miseries unendurable and surpassing
all description at the capture of their city, when the wrath of God was
borne down upon them from every side. To the Jews therefore He  <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) spake then, because of their
unbelief, “but to you now, that troubles might not come upon you
unexpected.”

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p76"></span> [John
13.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p76.1"></span>
. “A new commandment I give unto you.”  <span
id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p78"></span>For since it was likely that they would
be troubled when they heard these things, as though they were about to
be deserted, He comforteth them, investing them with that which was the
root of all blessings and a safeguard, love. As though He had said,
“Grieve ye at My departure? Nay, if ye love one another, ye shall be the
stronger.” Why then said He not this? Because He said what profited them
more than this.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p79"></span> [John
13.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="iv.lxxiv-p79.1"></span>
. “By this shall all men know that ye are My disciples.”  <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073)

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p81"></span> \[5.\] By this He at the same time
showed that the company  <span id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074)
should never be extinguished, when He gave them a distinguishing token.
This He said when the traitor was cut off from them. But how calleth He
that a new commandment which is contained also in the Old (covenant)? He
made it new Himself by the manner; therefore He added, “As I have loved
you.” “I have not paid back to you a debt of good deeds first done by
you, but Myself have begun,” He saith. “And so ought you to benefit your
dearest ones, though you owe them nothing”; and omitting to speak of the
miracles which they should do, He maketh their characteristic, love. And
why? Because it is this which chiefly shows men holy; it is the
foundation of all virtue; by this mostly we are all even saved. For
“this,” He saith, “is to be a disciple; so shall all men praise you,
when they see you imitating My Love.” What then? Do not miracles much
more show this? By no means. For “many will say, Lord, have we not in
Thy Name cast out devils?” ( [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p82.3"></span>
.) And again, when they rejoice that the devils obey them, He saith,
“Rejoice not that the devils obey  <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) you, but that your names are
written in heaven.” ( [Luke x. 20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)
<span id="iv.lxxiv-p83.3"></span> .) And  <span
id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) this indeed brought over the world,
because that  <span id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) was before it;
had not that been, neither would this have endured. This then
straightway made them perfect,  <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) the having  <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) all one heart and one soul. But had
they separated one from the other, all things would have been lost.

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p88"></span> Now He spake this not to them only, but
to all who should believe on Him; since even now, there is nothing else
that causes the heathen  <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) to
stumble, except that there is no love. “But,” saith some one, “they also
urge against us the absence of miracles.” But not in the same way. “But
where did the Apostles manifest their love?” Seest thou Peter and John
inseparable from one another, and going up to the Temple? ( [Acts iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p89.3"></span> .)
Seest thou Paul disposed in a like way towards them, and dost thou
doubt? If they had gained the other blessings, much more had they the
mother of them all. For this is a thing that springs from a virtuous
soul; but where wickedness is, there the plant withers away. For “when,”
 <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) it saith, “iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold.” ( [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p90.3"></span>
.) And miracles do not so much attract the heathen as the mode of life;
and nothing so much causes a right life as love. For those who wrought
miracles they often even called deceivers; but they could have no hold
upon a pure life. While then the message of the Gospel was not yet
spread abroad, miracles were with good reason marveled at, but now men
must get to be admired by their lives. For nothing so raises respect in
the heathen as virtue, nothing so offends them as vice. <span
id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span id="iv.lxxiv-Page_265"></span> And
with good reason. When one of them sees the greedy man, the plunderer,
exhorting others to do the contrary, when he sees the man who was
commanded to love even his enemies, treating his very kindred like
brutes, he will say that the words are folly. When he sees one trembling
at death, how will he receive the accounts of immortality? When he sees
us fond of rule, and slaves to the other passions, he will more firmly
remain in his own doctrines, forming no high opinion of us. We, we are
the cause of their remaining in their error. Their own doctrines they
have long condemned, and in like manner they admire ours, but they are
hindered by our mode of life. To follow wisdom in talk is easy, many
among themselves have done this; but they require the proof by works.
“Then let them look to the ancients of our profession.”  But about them
they by no means believe; they enquire concerning those now living. For,
“show me,” it saith, “thy faith by thy works”  <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) ( [Jas. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p91.2"></span>
); but this is not the case; on the contrary, seeing us tear our
neighbors worse than any wild beast, they call us the curse of the
world. These things restrain the heathen, and suffer them not to come
over to our side. So that we shall be punished for these also; not only
for what we do amiss ourselves, but because the name of God is
blasphemed. How long shall we be given up to wealth, and luxury, and the
other passions? For the future let us leave them. Hear what the Prophet
saith of certain foolish ones, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
die.” ( [Isa. xxii. 31](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#031) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p91.3"></span> .) But in the present case we cannot even
say this,  <span id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) so “many” gather
round themselves what belongs to all. So chiding them also, the Prophet
said, “Will ye dwell alone upon the earth?” ( [Isa. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008) <span id="iv.lxxiv-p92.4"></span> .)
Wherefore I fear lest some grievous thing come to pass, and we draw down
upon us heavy vengeance from God. And that this may not come to pass,
let us be careful of  <span id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) all
virtue, that we may obtain the future blessings, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory now and forever, and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[261:2023](1140077.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p3"></span> [John
13.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p3.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p3.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p3.3"></span>omitted. “Now I tell you before it come, that
when it is come to pass ye may believe that I am.”</span>

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[261:2024](1140077.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p6.2"></span>return.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[261:2025](1140077.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p7.2"></span>ντεῦθεν</span>

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[261:2026](1140077.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p8.2"></span>one may see even a close connection,
since,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p8.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[261:2027](1140077.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p9.1"></span>i.e. the traitor’s.</span>

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[261:2028](1140077.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p13"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p13.1"></span>Then the disciples looked one on another,
doubting of whom He spake.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p13.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[261:2029](1140077.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p14.2"></span>The laying, &c. would.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[261:2030](1140077.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p15"></span> [John
13.23-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p15.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p15.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p15.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p15.4"></span>Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of
His disciples, whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him,
that he should ask who it should be of whom He spake. He then, lying on
Jesus’ breast, saith unto Him, Lord, who is it?</span> ”

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[261:2031](1140077.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p16.2"></span>ντρυφῶν</span>

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[261:2032](1140077.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p17.1"></span>i.e. speaks of himself.</span>

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[261:2033](1140077.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p18.1"></span>St. John.</span>

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[261:2034](1140077.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.1"></span>not in St. John, but see</span> <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.3"></span>[Matt. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.4"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[261:2035](1140077.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p19.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p20.1"></span>of Jairus.</span>

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[261:2036](1140077.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p21"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p21.1"></span>Simon, son of Jonas.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[261:2037](1140077.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p22.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p22.2"></span>Christ,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p22.3"></span>αὐτόν</span>

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[261:2038](1140077.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p22.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p23.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p23.2"></span>on this account then.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[261:2039](1140077.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p24.1"></span>i.e. that Jesus loved him.</span>

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[262:2040](1140077.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p25.1"></span>i.e. in his Gospel history.</span>

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[262:2041](1140077.htm#fr_2040) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p26.1"></span>Sav. conject.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p26.2"></span>him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[262:2042](1140077.htm#fr_2041) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p27.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p27.2"></span>γάπης</span>

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[262:2043](1140077.htm#fr_2042) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p28.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p28.2"></span>φίλε</span>

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[262:2044](1140077.htm#fr_2043) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p29.1"></span>χωρίῳ</span>

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[262:2045](1140077.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p30.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p30.2"></span>Christ.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[262:2046](1140077.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p32"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p32.1"></span>And when He had dipped the sop, He gave it to
Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p32.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[262:2047](1140077.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p35"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p35.1"></span>after the sop,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p35.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[262:2048](1140077.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p37.2"></span>put forward.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[262:2049](1140077.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p38.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p38.2"></span>went forth out.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[262:2050](1140077.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p40"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p40.1"></span>unto him, That,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p40.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[262:2051](1140077.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p42"></span> [John
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030)<span
id="iv.lxxiv-p42.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p42.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p42.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p42.4"></span>For some of them thought, because Judas had
the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have
need of against the feast, or that he should give something to the poor.
He then having received the sop, went immediately out.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[262:2052](1140077.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p44.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p44.2"></span>more plainly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[262:2053](1140077.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p44.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p45.1"></span>Judas.</span>

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[262:2054](1140077.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p46.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p46.2"></span>have gone out.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[263:2055](1140077.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p48.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p48.2"></span>thought it saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[263:2056](1140077.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p49.1"></span>the carrying of money.</span>

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[263:2057](1140077.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p50.1"></span>οἰκονομῶν</span>

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[263:2058](1140077.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p51.1"></span>κατεδέξετο</span>

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[263:2059](1140077.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p52.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p52.2"></span>far more grievous.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[263:2060](1140077.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p53.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p53.2"></span>His Cross.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[263:2061](1140077.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p55"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p55.1"></span>And God is glorified in Him.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p55.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[263:2062](1140077.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p57"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p57.1"></span>When ye have lifted up the Son of Man.</span>
” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p57.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[263:2063](1140077.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p57.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p58"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p58.1"></span>this generation,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p58.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[263:2064](1140077.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p60"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p60.1"></span>If God be glorified in Him, God shall also
glorify,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p60.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[263:2065](1140077.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p62.1"></span>διὰ</span>

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[263:2066](1140077.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p65.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p65.2"></span>turned away.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[263:2067](1140077.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p67"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p67.1"></span>Ye shall seek Me, and,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p67.2"></span>&c., N.T. and Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[263:2068](1140077.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p69.1"></span>i.e. they who were to take Him.</span>

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[263:2069](1140077.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p69.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p70.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p70.2"></span>the glory of.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[263:2070](1140077.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p71.1"></span>i.e. by the Spirit.</span>

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[264:2071](1140077.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p73.1"></span>μετάθεσις ἀμείνων</span>

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[264:2072](1140077.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p75.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p75.2"></span>I.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[264:2073](1140077.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p77"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p77.1"></span>That ye love one another; as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p77.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[264:2074](1140077.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p80"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p80.1"></span>if ye have love one to another,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p80.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[264:2075](1140077.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p82.1"></span>i.e. of Christian people,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p82.2"></span>χορὸς</span>

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[264:2076](1140077.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p82.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p83"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p83.1"></span>are subject to,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p83.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[264:2077](1140077.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p83.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p84.1"></span>the working of miracles.</span>

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[264:2078](1140077.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p85"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p85.1"></span>love.</span>

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[264:2079](1140077.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p86"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p86.1"></span>καλοὺς κἀγαθοὺς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxiv-p86.2"></span>, beautiful and
good.</span>

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[264:2080](1140077.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p86.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p87.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p87.2"></span>and to have.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[264:2081](1140077.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p89.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p89.2"></span>Greeks.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[264:2082](1140077.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p89.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p90"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p90.1"></span>because,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p90.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[265:2083](1140077.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p90.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p91"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p91.1"></span>so read in some copies.</span>

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[265:2084](1140077.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p91.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p92"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p92.1"></span>i.e.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p92.2"></span>certain</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p92.3"></span>foolish ones.</span>

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[265:2085](1140077.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="iv.lxxiv-p92.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxiv-p93"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p93.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxiv-p93.2"></span>lay hold on.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 13.36](1140078)
