[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nass10)  [Next](nass12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

K\*?ĒLK

U

\[Told by Moses\]

A number of children played camping every day. Many played this game in
one large hollow log. They went into it and played that it was their
house. They made a fire in it and ate there. They took a large quantity
of provisions into the log. They ate salmon. They did so every day. One
day when they were playing camping, the tide rose high and the large
tree floated out to sea. The children did not know it. They were playing
inside. Now the log had drifted far out to sea. Then one child went out,
and he saw that the log had drifted

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

away. Then all the children went out, and they cried. The log was
drifting about in the ocean.

One of the children was wise. He saw gulls flying about, and then he
returned into the hollow log and said, "Gulls are always sitting on top
of us. What can we do to catch them?" Then one boy said, "Let us hit our
noses, and we will rub the blood all over the log, then the feet of the
gulls will stick to the log." They did so. They hit their noses until
they bled. Then they rubbed the blood on the log. Then they entered the
log again. Now many gulls came and sat down on the log. About noon their
feet dried to the log. Then one of the boys went out. The gulls tried to
fly away, but they could not do

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

so because their feet were glued to the log. Then the boy took hold of
them and twisted off their necks. He killed many gulls and took them
into the log. Then the boys were glad. They ate the meat of the gulls
and forgot that they were drifting about on the ocean.

The land was far away. They were on the edge of the ocean. One day they
heard a great noise. The boys went out and, behold, they were drifting
round in a whirlpool. Then they began to cry. The tree almost stood on
its end, because the whirlpool was swallowing it.

While it was drifting there on end a man ran out to it. He had only one
leg. He harpooned the great log and pulled it ashore. He hauled

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

it ashore. The boys were not dead. He had saved them. Then the boys went
up to the house of the man. There were many boys. One-leg gave them to
eat. The beach in front of the house smelled of seal. The man was
spearing seals all the time at the edge of the whirlpool. He watched for
seals, and therefore he stayed there. There was also another man living
there whose name was Hard-instep. He was much troubled, for he was
jealous because One-leg had saved the boys. One-leg was spearing seals
all the time, and he carried them up for the children. They ate, and
they grew up to be young men.

After a while the children remembered those whom they had left behind,
and they began to cry. Then One-leg asked the children why they cried,
and they told him. Then he said, "The town of your fathers

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

is not far. It is over there. To-morrow morning you shall start. You may
use my canoe, which is at the end of the village." Early the next
morning One-leg sent the boys, saying, "Take the cover off from my
canoe. It is near by yonder." The children went, and grew tired walking
about. They could not find the canoe. Finally they returned. Then
One-leg asked, "Did you find it?" The boys said, "No." He sent them
again, and they went; but again they grew tired walking about, but they
did not find it. Again they returned. Then One-leg himself went. He went
to a rotten tree that was there. It was covered with small branches. He
took off the branches and they beheld a large canoe. It was made in the
shape of a man, with a mouth at one end. It was the same at the other
end. Its name was "Wâ'sE-at-each-end." It did not allow anything to
cross its bow or its stern.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When a man crossed it, it ate him. Then One-leg
said, "Don't pass in front of the canoe." And they obeyed because they
were afraid. Then they put it into the water. It was a fine, large
canoe. They put many seals aboard, which were to serve as food for the
canoe. Then the boys went aboard. They fed the canoe. Its bow and its
stern ate five seals each. Then the canoe went. After it had finished
eating the seals it went very fast. Then they gave five seals more to
the bow and five to the stern, and it went on again.

Finally the children landed at the town of their fathers. They went
ashore. Their fathers and mothers and all their relatives were crying.
Then the boys came back. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sealion Hunters](nass12.md)
