[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass42)  [Next](nass44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ORIGIN OF THE G\*ISPAWADUWE'DA

There are two towns on opposite sides of Nass river. The eldest of four
brothers from one of these towns is killed while hunting. The reason for
his accident is the faithlessness of his wife, whose lover is the son of
the chief of the other village. The surviving brothers find the lover
with their sister-in-law. They cut off his head and hang it over the
doorway. When the young chief is missing his people send a slave girl
across the river to look for him, under the pretext that their fire has
gone out. She finds his head, and a battle ensues in which all the
people of the first village are killed except the woman whose lover had
been slain and her daughter. They hide in a hole under ground while the
town is being burned. When all is quiet, the mother shouts, "Who will
marry my daughter?" Various animals come, but she refuses them because
they are too weak. Finally a supernatural being from heaven comes and is
accepted. He tries to carry both women up to heaven, but is compelled to
leave the mother behind because, against his orders, she opens her eyes
on the way. He puts her into the branch of a tree, where she remains and
causes the noise produced by the wind. The daughter has several
children, who receive supernatural gifts and are sent back to earth.
Among these gifts is a club which, when turned, causes the earth to turn
over and bury the owner's enemies. The children come down at the old
village site. In a battle with their old enemies the brothers are
victorious by using their magical club. Not satisfied with taking
revenge, they continue to make war and thus excite the anger of the
chief in heaven, who makes them lose their club.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Asi-hwî'l](nass44)
