[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass22)  [Next](nass24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Grouses

### A LEGEND OF THE G\*ISPAWADUWE'DA

\[Told by Chief Mountain\]

A chief had a beautiful daughter. Many young men came to marry her, but
he refused her to all of them. Then the chief of the Grouses flew down
and alighted on the roof of the old chief's house. He assumed the shape
of a man who wore a blanket made of fox skins.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When it was dark, he entered the house without
the knowledge of the chief, and lay down with the girl, who accepted
him. The Grouse persuaded her to elope with him. At midnight they rose
and left the house. They crossed the river and came to a large town
which was inhabited by the Grouses. The young Grouse's father gave a
feast when he arrived with his wife. They stayed there all winter, and
in summer she gave birth to four children.

The old chief searched all over the country for his daughter, but he was
unable to find her. When the children began to grow up, their mother
said to them, "Don't you want to see your grandfather? He is a chief,
and lives on the other side of the river. He has a large house with many
steps, and a pole in front of it." The young Grouses wished to see him,
and crossed the river on the ice. While going across they said, "Ps, ps,
ps, ps!" The children in the chief's village heard the noise, and saw
four young Grouses coming. They threw stones at them. Then the Grouses
flew back. On the following day the young Grouses tried again, but were
driven back by the children. They tried every day. Then the people said
to one another, "Next time when the Grouses come, we will not disturb
them." On the following day they came again, and went right to the old
chief's house. The chief opened the door, and they entered. He spread a
mat for them and they sat down. All the people came to see the birds.
Finally an old man spoke to the chief, "Don't you remember that you lost
your daughter some years ago? The birds must be her children, because
they know your house." Then the old chief said to the birds, "Tell your
father that I invite him and all his people to a feast to-morrow, and
ask your mother also to come." Then the birds rose and left the house.
They returned over the ice.

On the following morning innumerable Grouses came across. The ice was
black with birds, and among them was the chief's daughter. Then they
entered the chief's house. They sat down on the floor; and many had to
sit on the posts and beams because there was not enough room on the
floor. When the boys saw this, they shook the posts, and the birds flew
from one side of the house to the other. The chief made a feast and gave
them dry salmon and berries. Then he spoke, "I am old, and unable to
split wood. Will not my son-in-law please stay here and help me?" His
daughter repeated his speech to her husband, who replied, "Ps, ps, ps,
ps!" and the other birds spoke to him in the same manner. Then the
chief's daughter said that the birds would go and split wood on the
following morning.

On the following morning the chief opened the smoke-hole of his house.
Then his son-in-law delivered a speech, and flew out, followed by all
the birds. When they had gone, the chief's daughter swept the house.
About noon the noise of the birds was heard again.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The chief had a fire in his house, and the birds
reentered through the smoke-hole. Each threw some fat into the fire, so
that it blazed up high. They brought a long pole as high as a mountain,
which was covered with fat. The chief of the birds gave this pole to his
father-in-law, who divided it among his tribe. Then the chief and his
people in return gave presents to the chief of the Grouses. They gave
him a feast, after which the birds left. The chief's daughter and her
children went back with them to the town of the Grouses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>](nass24)
