[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nass27)  [Next](nass29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TXÄ'MSEM

Txä'msEm is born, but can not be induced to eat. Two old men chew salmon
for him, and put a scab into it. Then he becomes voracious and is
deserted. He tries to catch a bullhead but can not, so he curses it and
makes its tail thin. Believing that he sees a beautiful dancing-blanket
in the woods, be tears his raven blanket and finds that what he believed
to be a blanket is moss. Then he takes a slave. They reach a chief's
house. The slave says that Txä'msEm does not like food that has been
offered, and eats it all himself. Txä'msEm induces his slave to cross a
canyon on a bridge made of the stalk of a skunk cabbage. The bridge
breaks, the slave falls down, his belly bursts, and Txä'msEm eats the
contents of his stomach. He finds children playing ball with a slice of
blubber, and eats it. The children tell him that they obtain blubber by
throwing themselves down from a tree and shouting "Piles of blubber!" He
does so and kills himself. He comes to life again and goes fishing with
Cormorant, takes a louse from his neck, and pretends that he wants to
put it on his tongue. He tears out Cormorant's tongue and steals the
fish that Cormorant has caught. He exchanges the chief's club for one of
rotten wood, and induces the chief to strike him with the club, but in
an ensuing fight he kills the chief with his own club. Seal invites
Txä'msEm into his house and lets grease drip from his hands into a dish.
A bird strikes its ankle and pulls out fish roe. Another bird makes
salmon berries by his song. Txä'msEm tries in vain to imitate his hosts.
He steals bait of the fishermen from their hooks. His jaw is caught and
torn off, but he recovers it. He calls a salmon and kills it. He is
advised by his excrements to steam the salmon in a hole. A stump sits
down on the hole and eats the salmon. Txä'msEm then invites Grizzly Bear
to go fishing with him. He pretends to use his own testicles for bait
and induces the bear to cut off his testicles for bait, thus killing
himself. He makes the wife of Grizzly Bear swallow red-hot stones to
secure good luck for her husband, and thus kills her. He asks Pitch to
go fishing and lets him melt in the hot sun. Pitch runs over a halibut
and makes one side black. When he reaches the town of the air, he tries
to steal provisions, but is beaten off by invisible hands. He asks Deer
to accompany him and split wood. He kills Deer by striking his head with
a hammer. He then enters the house of smoke-hole, who prevents his
escape by ordering the door and the smoke-hole to close. Txä'msEm,
caught in the smoke-hole, puts

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

his voice as an echo into a cliff and scolds the chief, who allows the
smoke-hole to open again. Txä'msEm flies away in the shape of a raven.
He catches seals and steams them. A stump eats them. Txä'msEm makes the
stump his slave, and finally he calls all the fish ashore and kills
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Stone and the Elderberry Bush](nass29.md)
