[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass11)  [Next](nass13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

# THE SEALION HUNTERS

\[Told by Moses\]

There were four men--one of the Wolf clan, one of the Raven clan, one of
the Eagle clan, and one of the Bear clan. They were great hunters. There
were four rocks. The men went out in their canoes to these rocks, and
when they arrived there they found the rocks full of sealions. The rock
of one of the men was not full. He caught only two. The men of the Raven
clan, of the Wolf clan, and of the Eagle clan caught a great many. Then
the one man was ashamed because he had caught only two. The next time
they started he came home

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

again almost empty handed. He had caught only one. Then he was sad.

One evening he started and stole the sealions that were on the rock of
the man of the Wolf clan. When, the next morning, this man started there
were no sealions on his rock. Then he knew that another person had
stolen them, Therefore he carved the figure of a sealion out of wood and
put it into the water. It was under water a short time and came up again
and floated. Then he carved a sealion out of another piece of wood. He
put it into the water, and again it floated. He tried four kinds of
wood, but they did not prove to be good. Then he took a piece of hard
wood, red in color like the skin of a sealion. He carved it and threw it
into the water. Now it was very good. It did not become weak. He laid it
on his own rock.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Now, the other person started again at night, intending to steal the
sealions. When he came to the. rock, he saw the sealion lying there. He
took his harpoon and speared it. Then the sealion dived and swam away.
(In former times harpoons were fastened to cedar-bark lines.) The man
held the line and paid it out. For a long time the sealion dragged the
canoe along, and the line was all paid out. Then the person tried to let
it go, but the line stuck to his hands and the sea lion swam away with
him.

It was four nights since he had left. For four days the sealion swam
through the water. The man and his companions had lost sight of the
mountains and they were far out at sea. The man was crying all the time.
They went on for a long time--for ten days and ten nights.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The sealion kept on going all the time. Now he
went ashore at a distant country and they landed on a sandy beach. They
pulled the canoe up and placed it under the trees. Then they sat down.
Behold, early in the morning a canoe was coming. One small man was in
the canoe, but he was using a large canoe. When he came opposite them,
he rose. He held a line. Then he jumped into the water. For a short time
he clubbed halibut under water, and then he took his line and strung
them up. He caught many halibut, and had a long string. Then he emerged
again. He took his canoe and went aboard. He put all the halibut that he
had caught tinder water into the canoe. The men who were sitting under
the trees saw what he was doing. He stayed in the canoe for a long time.
Then he took his line a second time and dived. Again he clubbed halibut

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

under water. Then the men who were sitting under the trees launched
their canoe and paddled up to the canoe of the little man. One of them
took two halibut, and they returned to the shore as quickly as they
could. There they sat down. They had been sitting there a long time when
the person emerged, holding in his hands a string of fish, which he had
caught. He put them into his canoe; but now he missed two halibut. He
put the fish into the canoe, and pulled up his anchor. Then he went
ashore. He landed on the sandy beach, went up and found the four men,
then he asked, "Who of you stole my halibut?" and three of the men said,
"This one took them." They said so, pointing to their companion. Then
the man took him by the feet, struck him against a stone, and killed
him, because

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

he had stolen the halibut. Now there were only three men left. Their
companion was dead.

Then the man returned and landed at his town. He carried his halibut up
to the house and said to his friends, "There are people on the other
side of the bay. I killed one of them because he stole two halibut." The
people said, "Call them." Then they sent a man to call them, and when
they came the people gave them to eat.

There were many people. They were all of the same size. They were very
small. The three men were by far the largest. They stayed there a long
time. Then the people made wooden clubs, and said, "To-morrow we shall
be attacked by warriors." The sky darkened, although it was not
extraordinarily dark. Now, there was a

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

great sandy point below the town. There was an open prairie there. Then
many birds came--swans, cranes, geese, gray cranes, laughing-geese,
ducks, blackbirds of the sea, ducks of Nass river, gulls, cormorants.
They alighted on the prairie. Then the people rose. They took their
wooden clubs and ran down right among the birds, and began to strike
them. The feathers of the birds were flying about, filling the mouths
and the noses of the people. Many of them died, and only a moderate
number returned.

The three men did not join in. They looked at the fight. Then they said,
"It is not difficult to fight with the birds. Let us try to-morrow."
They did so. At daybreak the birds arrived and sat

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

down on the prairie. They called it war. The birds did not come there to
feed. Then the three men ran down. They did not take any clubs, but just
took the birds and twisted off their necks. They did so and accomplished
a great deal. Not one of the men was dead, but they killed a great many
birds. Then the people were glad. They are called
G\*ilg\*inā'm<u>g</u>an. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) The three men
had killed almost one-half of the birds. The birds came there for one
month. Then they left. Now the people resolved to take pity on the three
men. They did so, and sent them back to their own town. They returned,
and that is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[115:1](nass12.htm#fr_6) The Kawkiutl have the
same legend. They call the tribe of dwarfs G\*ing\*inā'nEmis, i.e.,
children of the sea. The Tsimshian name is evidently a phonetic
distortion of the Kawkiutl word, so that it seems probable that this
whole tradition, which is so remarkably alike to the ancient legend of
the pygmies and the cranes, is of Kawkiutl origin. (see F. Boas,
Indianische Sagen von der nord-pacifischen Küste Amerikas, Berlin, 1895,
pp. 88, 192).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Smoke-hole](nass13)
