[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass09)  [Next](nass11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

# ROTTEN-FEATHERS

\[Told by Moses\]

There was a town, and a large prairie on which many children were
playing. They were always making a noise. They did so every morning all
the year round. Then the Heaven heard it. He was much annoyed, and
therefore he sent down feathers. They came down, soaring over the
children. One boy saw them. He was almost grown up and was very strong.
He took the feathers and put them on his head. Then he ran about.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

The children had a stick with which they struck a wooden ball. After a
little while that boy began to rise, his feet leaving the ground. Then
another one rushed up to him and took hold of his feet. His hands stuck
to the feet of the first boy, and his feet also left the ground. Then
another boy rushed up to him and took hold of his feet, but he also went
up. Still another one rushed up to them, taking hold of the feet. He
also was lifted upward. Still other ones ran up to them, until all the
children were gone. Then a man saw it and rushed up to the children. He
also hung onto them. Another one rushed up to them, and took hold of his
feet. They all went up to heaven, the whole town, and nobody was left.
The Heaven took them all up. He was annoyed on account of the noise of
the children.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Therefore the Heaven took them all up. Not even
one was left. The whole town disappeared. Only dogs were there, running
about howling.

Now there was a young menstruating girl who had been in a small house
behind the village. She was there with her little grandmother. When she
left her little house and went back to the village, she saw that the
whole great town was empty. Then the woman walked along the street
crying. Now she found an old wedge made of crabapple wood, one made of
sloe wood, one of spruce wood, and she found a little grindstone, a
little knife, and some snot. She put them into her belly and went to the
rear of the house. She did not put them aside. Then she lay down for
four days and four nights. Then she

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

came to be with child and gave birth to a boy, to another one, and to
still another one, and to two more. They were very strong. There were
three males and one stone and one knife and one snot. The one was named
Little-crab-apple-tree, the next one Little-sloe-bush, the next one
Little-spruce, the following Little-mountain, the next one Little-knife,
and one more was called Snot. The woman had six children.

The woman and her little grandmother suckled them. Now they were a
little older, and then they were grown up. Now they also began to play.
They took a stick and played ball. (In olden times the people called
this "ball-play.") Then the mother said to her children: "Stop,
children! Your grandfathers were killed on account of this

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

game. The Heaven took the whole tribe up. Long ago the children did the
same thing that you are doing now. Therefore do not do so."

One day the children did so again. Their mother and the little
grandmother were unable to stop them. Now they were young men. There
were five Young men and one girl. They were called
Little-crab-apple-tree, Little-sloe-bush, Little-spruce,
Little-grindstone, and Snot; but the little girl was called
Little-knife. They were playing all the time. They were very strong. The
little girl was the sixth one.

Now the Heaven heard them again when they started playing.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then he sent the feathers. They came down again,
soaring over the children. The eldest boy saw them and took them. He put
them on his head and ran about, playing. Then his feet began to rise
from the ground. The sky took him up. His younger brother,
Little-sloe-bush, ran up to him, but his feet were lifted from the
ground. He could not pull his brother down. When he felt that he was
getting weak, he said, "Break, my roots!" and his feet left the ground.
Then the Little-spruce-tree rushed up to them. He tried to keep his feet
to the ground, but when he grew weak, he also said, "Break, my roots!"
Then Little-grindstone rushed up to them, and suddenly there was a great
mountain. He also tried to keep his feet down while the Heaven was
pulling him upward. He did not move because the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

mountain was all stone, but after a while the mountain moved. Then Snot
rushed up to them. He also stuck to the ground. The little girl was
running about, rubbing her hands. She was called Little-knife. When
Snot's feet were also lifted from the ground, she rushed up to them and
climbed her brothers' heads until she reached the eldest one. Then she
cut the feathers over her eldest brother's head. She cut them right in
the middle, and the children fell down to the ground. They did not go up
to the sky. The feathers always stayed on the eldest brother's head, and
he was called Rotten-feathers.

Now Rotten-feathers and his younger brother went on all alone. They came
to a town, and there Rotten-feathers married a woman. Then he returned
to his own town, and there he stayed with her.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

They had a boy. When he was grown up, his father, Rotten-feathers, named
him. Then he went . . . . <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[101:1](nass10.htm#fr_5) For continuation, see
page [234](nass25.htm#page_234).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: K\*?ēLku](nass11)
