[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass04)  [Next](nass06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# TXÄ'MSEM

\[1-17, told by Philip; 18 to 20 and 3a told by Moses\]

1\. There was a chief who had a daughter who swallowed a leaf of a cedar
when drinking water. Then she had a pretty child, a boy. The child was
able to walk, but he did not eat. Then his grandfather worried. He
called two old men to chew some food for the child. The two old men did
so. They chewed some salmon and grease, and one of them scratched a scab
from his shin. He put it among the salmon that he had chewed. Then the
child ate what the old man had chewed; he ate very much. In the evening
he ate one salmon in the house of his grandfather. He was hungry all the
night, after the two old men who

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

had chewed for him left the house. Then he did not sleep, but he ate
until the day broke. Now his grandfather was glad; but the boy ate all
day, and after a short time all the food was gone. Then he ate all the
provisions in another house, and he ate all the provisions of the whole
village. Then his grandfather was troubled. He wanted to get rid of him
because he knew that the boy had done wrong. He said, "My grandchild has
eaten scabs of Wâ'sE, therefore I will get rid of him. Go, slave, and
tell the tribe." The slave ran out and said, "Great tribe, you shall
move to-morrow morning." On the following morning the people moved. They
deserted the prince.

2\. What was he to eat? He went toward the beach searching for some
food, but he did not find anything. Behold, there was a fish in

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the water. It was not moving. Then he called it ashore to talk to it.
The fish came toward the shore. Its name was Bullhead. The prince
thought he would kill it. Now it was almost within reach, but it swam
back into the water. Then the prince was much depressed because he was
hungry, The fish knew his intentions. It swam back from the shore
saying, "Do you think I do not know you, Giant?" Then he acted as though
he were taking bold of the image of the fish, and, stretching out his
band, said, "You shall have a thin tail. Only your head shall be thick."
Then it became the Bullhead. The bullhead used to be remarkably stout.
Txä'msEm cursed it, and therefore it is thin at one end.

3\. Then the prince put on his grandfather's dancing blanket. He went
on, not knowing where he went. He tore his dancing blanket and was

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

very poor. Then be caught a number of ravens, and used any means be
could invent to kill them. He took their skins and tied them together,
and put on the raven blanket. Then he went about dressed up nicely. Now
he saw a good dancing blanket like the one he had worn before. At once
he tore his raven blanket and took the dancing blanket that hung before
him. Behold it was no dancing blanket; there were only lichens on the
trees. Now he saw that there were nothing but lichens. He sat down
weeping. He took his raven blanket, tied it together again, and walked
on, hungry and weeping.

4\. Now he wanted to go to war. He mot a pretty slave whose name was
K\*?ixō'm. He took him along, and they came to the house of a chief. The
chief called to him, "Come in, my dear, if it is you who ate the scabs
of Wâ'sE." Then he was ashamed. He entered with his

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

slave, and they sat down. The chief (a small bird) fed them. First they
ate salmon, then the waiters served crab apples mixed with grease. When
Txä'msEm saw this he became very desirous of eating it; therefore with a
low voice be said to his slave, "Tell them that I like to eat what they
have there." The slave said, "Oh, chief! he says he does not like to eat
what you have there," and the slave ate it all alone, and Txä'msEm sat
there looking on. He did not eat anything. After they had finished
eating, they went out, Txä'msEm first.

5\. Then they came to a deep canyon. He took the dried stein of a
skunk-cabbage (?)and laid it across. He made a bridge. Then he himself
went across, and after he had done so he called K\*?ixō'm (that was the
name of his slave) to come across; but the slave was afraid to follow
Txä'msEm. After a while, however, he followed him, and when he

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

reached the middle of the bridge it broke. He fell down into the canyon,
and his belly burst. When Txä'msEm saw what had happened, and saw the
food of which he had not been able to partake, then he flew to the
bottom of the canyon and ate the contents of the slave's stomach. He
simply took the food with his hands. When he had finished eating, the
slave arose and said, "He eats excrements." Then Txä'msEm was ashamed.
The slave recovered and parted company with Txä'msEm.

Thus the slave found out that it was Txä'msEm. When the latter went
about murdering he heard himself called very bad names. First the
Bullhead called him Giant, and then the chief called him
Eating-scabs-of-Wâ'sE. He was again very hungry.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

6\. Then he arrived at another village, and saw little children playing
at the end of the town. They were throwing pieces of seal blubber at one
another. He stepped among them and ate the blubber. He ate all the
blubber which the children were throwing at one another. Then they
wondered what had become of it. Txä'msEm asked them, "Where do you get
that blubber?" And they told him where they got it. They said, "We climb
up a tree and throw ourselves down. When we strike the ground, we open
our eyes and say, 'High piles of our blubber,' and immediately there are
high piles of blubber." Therefore Txä'msEm also climbed the tree. He
threw himself down, saving, "High." Then the children looked and saw
that he

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

was dead. They laughed at him and left him. After a while Txä'msEm
opened his eyes. He did not find anything to eat.

7\. Txä'msEm found another house which belonged to Chief Cormorant. The
house was full of provisions, and he sat down and ate. 'Then he asked
the Cormorant to join him in catching halibut. Txä'msEm did not catch
anything, while Chief Cormorant caught a great many. Then Txä'msEm Went
up to him in the canoe. He took a louse from the Cormorant's neck, held
it up to him, and said, "Open your mouth and I will put your louse into
it." The Cormorant replied, "No! Put it overboard into the water." "You
will not catch anything if I put it into the water." Txä'msEm urged him,
"Put out your tongue and let me put it on." Then the Cormorant did so.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

He put out his tongue. Txä'msEm seized it and tore it out. Then the
chief was dumb. They returned to the shore and quitted fishing. The
Cormorant's wife went down to the beach, and Txä'msEm said to her, "The
chief fainted, and lost his speech." But Chief Cormorant said, "Gogogo!"
"Now you hear he says that he caught all this halibut, but I caught it."
Yet he had not caught it. In this way the Cormorant lost his speech.
Then they carried up the halibut, and Txä'msEm told how the chief had
lost his speech.

8\. Txä'msEm did another thing. He came to a chief, who called him into
his house. His name was TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx. The house stood

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

all alone. Txä'msEm was very glad because he saw much food there.

He ate there all the time. Then he saw TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx's club. It
hung on the house post and was inlaid with abalone shell. Txä'msEm said,
"He acts like a bad slave." He saw that the chief had large teeth. The
chief arose and took the club, intending to kill Txä'msEm, but he ran
out of the house. Then Txä'msEm spoke kindly, "I said you are acting
nicely, Chief." TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx said, "No, you said, 'He acts
like a bad slave.'" "I shall not say so again, Chief. Let me sit near
you." Then TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx agreed. Txä'msEm reentered the house
and stayed there a long time. Now Txä'msEm went into the woods near the
house. He made a club of rotten wood. He pounded mussel shells and
inlaid the rotten wood with it. Then he took TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx's
club

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and hung in its place the club of rotten wood which looked like it. Then
he hid TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx's club, and sat down, and said again, "How
bad acts that slave to whom I came!" Then TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx rose.
He took his club, and Txä'msEm ran out of the house. As soon as
TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx came outside he struck Txä'msEm on the head, who
said, "My brother is using a rotten wood club to kill me." Then he took
TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx's own club and killed him. He threw the body on
the beach. He stayed in the house and ate all of
TEnō'k<sup>u</sup>LEnx's food.

9\. Another time Txä'msEm came to the house of the Seal. The Seal
invited him in. He was eating salmon. He took a dish and placed it near
the fire; then he held up his hands near the fire so that they grew
warm. Then grease dripped from his fingers and ran into the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

dish. He gave it to Txä'msEm to dip the salmon in the grease. Txä'msEm
ate the salmon with the seal blubber. He ate very much, and was
satiated. Then he left. Now Txä'msEm made a house. He finished it and
invited the Seal to visit him. The Seal entered, and sat down in the
rear of the house, and Txä'msEm took a dish. He placed it near the fire
and held up his hands so that they grew warm, but his hands were
scorched. Then Txä'msEm turned back secretly, crying, "Mmmmmm!" When the
Seal saw that Txä'msEm was crying, he rose. There was no grease in the
dish. Then he said, "He tries to imitate what I do." Txä'msEm was
ashamed. He put pitch on his hand because it hurt. Then he said, "You
ought not to try such things. You would better get food for me that I
may eat." He was

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

greatly troubled, therefore he said so. He spoke to his hand. For that
reason the hands of man are bent (in old age) to this day.

Txä'msEm went on, and came to a nice house. There he found Chief
Ts?Enk?oa'ts, who had stores of provisions. The chief invited in
Txä'msEm, who sat down. Then he ate salmon, good salmon. After he had
eaten he drank water. Ts?Enk?oa'ts took a nice dish, and stretched his
foot out over the dish; then he took a stone, struck his ankle, and
pulled out fish roe. He placed it before Txä'msEm, who ate it. He was
very glad. He left the house of Ts?Enk?oa'ts when he had eaten enough.
Then Txä'msEm thought he would invite his friend to visit him. He made a
house and invited in Ts?Enk?oa'ts, who sat down. Then Txä'msEm took a
dish and stretched his foot out

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

over the dish. He took a stone and struck his ankle. He fell down
backward, and said, "Oh! I am dead; I am almost dead." Ts?Enk?oa'ts
said, "He tries to imitate me," and left the house. Then Txä'msEm was
ashamed. His foot was swollen.

He went on, not knowing which way to turn. He came to the house of
Salmon-berry-bird, who invited Txä'msEm in. Then he ate salmon. When he
had finished eating, he drank. Now, Salmonberry-bird took a nice dish.
He wiped it out. Then he rose and said, "Miyâ'! Miyâ'!" He said so very
often. Then the dish was full of salmon-berries. Txä'msEm saw them and
ate. Then he thought he would do the same. Secretly he took an unripe
salmon-berry and put

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

it into his hand. He left the house. Then he made a house and invited in
Chief Salmon-berry-bird. He imitated him. He arose after having placed
the unripe salmon-berry in his dish. Then he stood there and said,
"Miyâ'! Miyâ'!" He said so very often, but there remained just as many
unripe salmon-berries in the dish as he had put in. He placed the dish
before Chief Salmon-berry-bird, who rose, saying, "He tries to imitate
me." Then Txä'msEm was ashamed. He did not imitate any more.

10\. He went on, not knowing which way to turn. Behold, he came out of
the woods to a large town. There were people in front of the town
fishing for halibut. Txä'msEm thought, "They have much bait, and I will
eat it." He dived, and he saw the bait. He took it from

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the hook and ate it. He went from one hook to the other, eating all the
bait. Then the bait of all the fishermen had disappeared, but they did
not know how it had happened. Finally one of the men caught Txä'msEm's
jaw. His jaw was caught on one of the hooks. Then the fisherman pulled.
Txä'msEm was pulled up, although he was resisting. He could not take the
hook out of his mouth. He held on to the rocks at the bottom of the sea.
Then he was hauled up with the fish line. The fishermen came together
and they all hauled the fish line. Txä'msEm said to the rocks at the
bottom of the sea that they should help him, and finally he said to his
jaw, "Break off, jaw! I am getting tired." Then his jaw broke off. When
the fishermen saw the great jaw with a long beard, some of them laughed,
but others were scared. They went ashore, and all the people assembled
in the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

chief's house. There they looked at the great jaw. Txä'msEm went ashore,
coming out of the water. He was greatly worried. Then he repented and
said, "I am always doing this to myself." He arrived at the town while
the people were looking at the great jaw in the chief's house. Txä'msEm
entered and sat down near the door. He saw the people looking at the
great jaw. He held his blanket over his mouth to cover his lost jaw.
When he saw his own great jaw he stretched out his hand, saying, "Give
it to me." He took it and looked at it, turning it over and over,
examining it. Then he put it on and ran out, and the people said, "That
is Txä'msEm, the cheater!" Then Txä'msEm was well again.

11\. Txä'msEm went on. He was very hungry, and he saw a steelhead salmon
jumping in the river. hen he devised a plan. He

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

kicked a rock and made a deep hole. He said with a loud voice,
"Steel-head salmon, hit my heart." After he had said so he sat down
quietly. The steel-head salmon hit his heart, and Txä'msEm lay there
dead. After a little while he opened his eyes and he saw that the salmon
had jumped over the hole that he had made. Then he kicked the rock a
second time, and he again told the salmon to hit his heart. He sat down
again and the same was repeated. He told the salmon to hit his heart,
and it did so. Again he was dead. After a while he opened his eves and
saw the salmon lying in the hole near the water. He rushed down to catch
it, but he could not reach it. He kicked the rock a third time, and sat
down again. Then he told the salmon to bit his heart. It did so, and
again he was dead. His heart

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

was swollen. Then he opened his eyes again, and saw the salmon which lay
right in the, middle of the rock. He went down slowly and caught it.

12\. Now he did not know how to prepare his food. So he sat down and
defecated. Then he asked his excrements, "What shall I do, my
excrements?" They said, "Steam it in a hole." Then he cut wood, but
while he was doing so he forgot what he was to do. Then he sat down
again and defecated. Only a little came out. He asked, "What shall I do,
my excrements?" They said, "Steam it in a hole." They spoke in a low
voice. Now Txä'msEm gathered stones, and he said all the time, "Steam it
in a hole." He said it as though he was singing.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He made a song of the words, "Steam it in a
hole." When the hole was hot he went to gather leaves of the
skunk-cabbage to cover it. Then he cut the salmon lengthwise and put it
on top of the leaves in the, hole. A stump lay near the hole. Then he
took part of the salmon out and said to the stump, shaking the salmon,
"I am sure you envy me, Stump." Then he went to get some more leaves
which were to serve as his dish. After he had left, the Stump moved and
sat down on top of the hole. Now Txä'msEm returned to eat. Behold, the
Stump was sitting on the hole. Then he opened his mouth and cried on
account of his food. He took a long lever and turned the Stump over.
Behold, it had eaten all the salmon. Then he hit the Stump with stones,
and turned it all over with his lever until the Stump was broken. It was
quite rotten. He found a few small

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

pieces of fresh salmon. He put these into his mouth and he was very
hungry while doing so.

13\. He went on toward the sea and entered the house of the Grizzly
Bear. He asked him to join him in catching halibut, but the Grizzly Bear
said that he had no bait. Txä'msEm replied, "We will use our own bodies
as bait; we will use our testicles." He carried the tail of the
steel-head salmon. Txä'msEm went down to the water and took the canoe of
the Grizzly Bear. While he was doing so, the Bear rose and went into the
canoe, and they started for the fishing bank. Now they reached it, and
Txä'msEm pretended to cut off his penis and to tie it on to his hook for
bait. The Grizzly Bear saw the act, but was afraid to do the same. He
was surprised at what he saw Txä'msEm doing. The latter urged him,
saying, "Go on, do the same;" but the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Grizzly Bear was afraid to do so. Then Txä'msEm
pushed his knife along the canoe, handing), it to the Bear. Now the Bear
cut off his penis, and he fainted. When he felt that he was dying, he
made a rush at Txä'msEm, trying to kill him, but Txä'msEm jumped into
the water and dived. He clung to the bow of the canoe, and when he knew
that the Bear was dead, he boarded the canoe again. He went ashore and
stepped up to the Bear's wife.

He put stones into the fire and told the female Grizzly Bear to swallow
the hot stones. He said that the wives of those who do not catch
anything must do so, and she was to do so, because her husband had not
caught any halibut. The chieftainess trusted him. Txä'msEm took up the
stones with tongs. He told her to open her

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

mouth and he put the hot stones into it. Then she tumbled about, and
Txä'msEm hit her all over while she was doing so until she was dead. He
walked down at once and took the Bear that he had killed first out of
the canoe. He cut him first, and then his wife. Both the Bears were
dead. He stayed there for many days eating. When he had eaten all the
provisions of the Bear, he left again, not knowing where he went.

14\. Then he went out of the woods and came to a house, the house of
Little Pitch, who was rich, and lived there with his wife. Then Little
Pitch invited him in and he ate. When he was satiated, he slept. Then he
said that they would go to catch halibut. Little Pitch was willing, and
said to him, "It is not good for me to be out after sunrise.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I must return while it is still chilly. I shall
have enough by that time." Txä'msEm replied, "I shall do whatever you
say, Chief." Little Pitch said, "Well!" Then they started for the fish
bank. They fished all night. When the sun rose Little Pitch wanted to go
ashore, but Txä'msEm said, "I enjoy the fishing. Lie down in the bow of
the canoe and cover yourself with a mat." Little Pitch did so. Then
Txä'msEm said, "Little Pitch!" "Heh!" he replied. After a while Txä'msEm
called again, "Little Pitch!" He answered again in a loud voice. After
some time Txä'msEm called again. Then Little Pitch's voice was weary.
Now Txä'msEm hauled up his line and paddled home. He pretended to paddle
strongly, but he put his paddles into the water

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

edgewise. Again he called, "Little Pitch!" "Heh!" Little Pitch replied,
but his voice was very weak. Then Txä'msEm knew that Little Pitch was
dying. Behold, pitch came out and ran over the halibut where Little
Pitch died. Therefore the halibut is black on one side.

That is the end of another adventure of Txä'msEm. He always ate all the
food of the chiefs. He killed two chiefs, Grizzly Bear and Little Pitch.

15\. He did another thing. He found the town of the air. He saw houses,
and heard people saying, "The chief is coming," but he did not see
anyone. A man said to him, "Enter the house of the chief." Then he
entered. He walked proudly and erect. Behold, a mat was being spread for
him on one side of the house. Txä'msEm sat down on it. Behold, a box
opened of itself and salmon came out

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

of it. A dish walked to the fire all by itself. Txä'msEm was much
astonished. It lay down in front of him. He thought about it while he
was eating. When he had finished, he drank. Then cranberries mixed with
grease and water came from the corner of the house and placed themselves
in front of him. Then a spoon came to him. He took the handle of the
spoon, but nobody was holding it. Then he ate. The dish was very small,
and he thought (?) (?) (?). Thus thought Txä'msEm. Then he heard many
women laughing near the wall of the house. They said, "The Giant thinks
(?) (?) (?)." He heard his own name, Giant, mentioned. He rose from the
place where he was eating and went to where the women were speaking,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

but he did not find anyone, although they were speaking right in front
of him. He did not see them. He went back to the fire and sat down. He
was quite out of breath. Then he thought, "I will take these things and
eat them outside." He rose and took a bundle of salmon. He ran out of
the house, but when he came to the door they dragged him back, and he
almost fell down. Then be heard someone saying, "Sit down, Chief Giant."
Txä'msEm sat down again. He was quite out of breath. He rose again and
dragged the box from which the berries had come toward the fire. Then he
was attacked and beaten with sticks, although he did not see a person.
The sticks moved of themselves, hitting his body, his head, his hands,
and his feet. Then he felt very badly. He went on, not knowing which way
to turn.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

16\. Txä'msEm did still another thing. He came to the house where the
Deer was living with his wife. There were two persons in the house. Then
Txä'msEm sat down and said, "Let us go and cut wood." He called the Deer
his brother-in-law. The Deer trusted him, and they went to cut wood.
While they were splitting the wood the wedges jumped out all the time.
Txä'msEm said to the Deer, "Hold the wedges." He did so. Txä'msEm struck
the wedges with his hammer, and said to the Deer, "Come a little nearer
to the wedges, friend!" The Deer was afraid; but Txä'msEm again asked
him to come nearer, because the wedges were always jumping out. Txä'msEm
sang while splitting wood, because he was very glad. "Hôho, hôho,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

hîhî!" When he had said so, he hit the Deer's head. "O, my poor
brother-in-law!" he said when the Deer died. Then he took the Deer into
his canoe. He broke some mussel shells and stuck them into his body,
saying that they were arrowheads. Then he paddled back to the village
singing (?) (?) (?). Then the Deer's wife went down, and Txä'msEm showed
her where the arrow points were sticking in the Deer's blanket. The
woman believed him. They carried up the Deer which Txä'msEm had
murdered. Then he killed the Deer's wife also. He stayed at the house
and ate them. He had killed them for this purpose.

17\. Then he came to the house of Smoke-hole. The house was at the foot
of a mountain. He entered. The chief said to his grandchildren,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Attack him, because he steals all the good
things he sees." Txä'msEm took off the bark of an alder and chewed it.
Then he entered the house of Smoke-hole, intending to steal his bow,
which was ornamented with abalone shells. He transformed himself into a
raven and took the bow. Smoke-hole said to his door, "Shut, Door!" Then
Txä'msEm was unable to leave the house. They tried to catch him,
intending to kill him. He cried, "Qa, qa, qa, qa!" Smoke-hole said to
his smoke hole, "Shut!" and the smoke bole caught Txä'msEm's neck. He
was dead, and his body was hanging in the smoke hole. Txä'msEm pretended
to be dead. Then Smoke-hole made afire. Then Txä'msEm took his own voice
and put it in the woods, in a bluff behind Smoke-hole's house. There it
made an echo, crying, "Miserable chief, what are you doing? You are a
chief and you eat the excrements of a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

raven!" Then Smoke-hole was ashamed. Therefore he said to his smoke
hole, "Open!" It opened, and Txä'msEm flew away, crying, "Qa, qa, qa,
qa!" He was almost dead. He let the chewed alder juice run out of his
mouth, pretending that blood was coming out of it. When Smoke-hole saw
the alder juice he really believed that it was blood, and then he told
his smoke hole to open entirely. He said, "Be ashamed of yourself,
Txä'msEm, great slave! You were trying to steal again." Txä'msEm could
not steal this time.

18\. He went on, and came to a house where a man lived near the beach.
Then the Giant said: "I am your friend." The person replied, "That is
good." The beach in front of the house was full of seals. The Giant ate
them all during two nights. Then he killed his friend. He finished all
the seals in front of the house, and he ate them all.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Now he was hungry again, and he used the canoe
of the person whom he had killed. Only the man's canoe and harpoon
remained. The Giant used them. Then he speared seals, and caught four.
He returned and went ashore. He took the seals out of the canoe, and
began cutting wood. Then he built a fire, and placed stones in it in
order to heat them. Then he put the seals on a pile of hot stones. He
cooked the four seals, and covered them with skunk-cabbage leaves. The
Giant then raised the cover and took out a seal, which he ate when it
was cooked. Then he stretched out his hand and took out another seal.
There was a stump of a tree near by. The Giant held the seal in his
hands and said to the stump, "Don't you envy me, Stump?" Then he went
into the woods. Meanwhile the Stump rose and sat down on the hole in
which the seals were steaming. The seals

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

were right under him. Now the Giant returned, carrying leaves of the
skunk-cabbage. When he saw the Stump sitting on his seals. he cried; He
was very much troubled, because he was hungry. Then he took a stick and
dug the ground. He cried while he was digging. He found a little bit of
meat and ate it. He was crying all the time because he was hungry. He
could not do anything.

19\. He went on and came to the shore of the sea. There he built a
house. Then he made up his mind what to do. After he had finished his
house, he dressed himself, put up his hair, and fastened his blanket. He
took coal and rubbed it all over his face. He made a dagger and tied it
to his hand. Then he rose, and ran out, saying, "I am sad," Thus he
spoke while he was walking down to the beach. There he saw

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

a stump. He took it and said, "I caught you." Then he returned. He
entered and put the little stump down in his house.

20\. The Giant was sad all the time, because he was hungry and there was
no food in the house. Therefore he resolved what to do. Early next
morning be ran out of the house. Behold, there were ripples on the
water. Salmon and halibut and bullheads and porpoises were swimming
about in the water. There were all kinds of salmon. When the Giant saw
this, he said, "Alâ! alâ! alâ! guts?ē'ek<sup>u</sup>." Then the salmon
said, "Hm!" There was one chief among the salmon who commanded all the
others. He said, "I can not hear what the chief on shore there is
saving;" thus he said to the Giant. Then

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

he called Little Porpoise, saying, "You will be able to hear what the
chief on shore is saving." Little Porpoise swam ashore. He was not very
large. Then the Giant ran out again and cried, "Alâ! alâ! alâ!
guts?ē'ek<sup>u</sup>." Then the chief of the salmon understood it,
because Little Porpoise had told him. He said, "The chief ashore tells
us what to do. He says that we salmon shall all swim together." Then the
chief of the salmon repeated it, and all the salmon went ashore
together. Then all the halibut were left dry on the beach. The Giant ran
out of his house carrying a stick. He clubbed them and carried them up
to the house. Then he dried some of them and ate others. He was eating
all the time. He was a great eater. He ate them all and then he went on.

3a. Now he was very poor. He had no blanket. He was quite

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

naked. Then he was ashamed. He took a root and killed many ravens. After
he had caught them he fastened their skins together and put them on. He
went for a long time, and then he saw a dancing blanket hanging in front
of him. He was very glad; he took off his raven blanket and tore it to
shreds. He threw it down and went to take the dancing blanket, but
behold, there was nothing but old, withered leaves. Then the Giant was
troubled. It was no dancing blanket at all, and he cried with a loud
voice. He returned and found the shreds of his raven blanket. He cried
while he was gathering them up. Then he repaired the raven blanket,
making a small blanket out of it, which he put on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Stone and the Elderberry Bush](nass06)
