[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass23)  [Next](nass25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TSEGU'KSK

U

In the town Lax-anLôE, below G\*iLwunksî'Lk, was a shaman who owned a
rattle and a carved squirrel, which became alive as soon as it was dark.
There was a village on the opposite side of the river, whose inhabitants
were enemies of the shaman. One night he sent his squirrel across the
river to kill his enemies. It obeyed and killed all the people, with the
exception of a few men, among them a shaman, whose name was
TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>. After the squirrel had killed all the people,
TsEgu'ksku and three other men got into a canoe and descended the river.
He had a long board in his canoe which was painted red. They landed near
Cape Fox. There TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> lay down on the plank and covered
himself with a mat made of cedar bark. Then his friends made a small
fire on the end of the plank and burnt meat, tallow, and berries in the
fire. They turned their faces away from the plank, and when they looked
again the plank with the fire and TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> had disappeared.
They heard a noise, from the depths of the sea. TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>
had been taken into the house of the chief G\*itk\*staqL, who lives at
the bottom of the sea. The chief sent for a box drum. The three men
heard the following song coming from the deep:

Wudē', wudē', wudē', hē'yi, wudē, wudō'.  
Hwîl nE-<u>g</u>Eb<u>g</u>ā'bEL pLô'ôn qanL näqL, iē',  
Hwîl g?ōL-qa1<u>gā</u>'l qabā'q iē'.  
Hwîl g?ōL-diē'qat wī-Ts?egä'uks ts?äuL, wī-hwî'lpsqat G\*îtk\*tsEm
wâ'ōpElē'.

That is, "Fastened together are sea otter and killer-whale; scattered
are the cockles where TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> walks about in his great
house at Wâ'ôpEL" <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

Then G\*itk\*staqL gave TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> a club in shape of a land
otter and a small box, the lid of which was carved in the shape of a fin
of a whale. Furthermore, he gave him a chamber-pot made of wood. He said
to him," The river is frozen now. Take this, it will break the ice for
you." Then TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> was sent back. All of a sudden he was
seen again in the canoe, and by him were the presents of the chief from

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

below. He threw the club into the water. It swam up the river and cut
the ice. After some time the club became tired. He took it into the
canoe and put the box on the ice. The box assumed the shape of a
killer-whale and moved over the ice, thus cutting it. Then he told it to
go to the house of the shaman who had killed his friends. The latter had
a daughter, whose name was Lgo-yī'yuk (Little-worker). TsEgu'ksku
commanded the whale to break the ice when he saw the girl on the river
and to bring her to him. Soon the girl came down to the river to fetch
water. Then the whale rose and carried her away to where his master was
staying, and the latter sang:

 

<span id="img_23200"></span> ![](img/23200.jpg)

 

\[paragraph continues\] Next he ordered the whale to watch and whenever
a woman went to fetch water to take her away. The inhabitants were
therefore in great want of water. Finally TsEgu'ksku sent his otter club
to kill all the people. The club swam across the river and killed every
one. Only one man, who happened to be out hunting, was saved.

At this time the Haida used to make war upon the villages of Observatory
inlet. TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> happened to be there with his friends when
the Haida made an attack on the village, and he and all his companions
were killed. The Haida cut off the heads of the slain to take them along
as trophies. TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>'s head was placed in the bow of the
canoe. When the Haida had gone some little distance, his head rolled
overboard and swam back to where the body lay. Head and trunk were
joined again, and TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> rose hale and well. He returned
to Nass river.

The man who had been absent hunting while TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>'s
otter-club had killed all his friends resolved to take revenge. He
invited TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> to a feast. He was going to give him dried
human flesh mixed with poison to eat. One of TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>'s
supernatural helpers had warned him, however, and had told him to take
out his intestines after the feast, and to replace them with dogs'
intestines, then the poison would do him no harm. TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>
put on a bearskin for his blanket, placed a ring of red cedar bark
around his neck, and strewed eagle-down on his head. Then he went
across. He entered the house of his enemy and sat down. When the food
was ready for him, he remarked, "This is human carrion," but he ate it
nevertheless. At night he became sick. Then he said to the people, "I am
going to die. When I am dead, open my stomach, and take out the
intestines. Then kill a dog, take its intestines, and put them in place
of mine. Then

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

you must sew up my stomach." They obeyed, and after four days
TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> was alive and well. They placed his intestines in
a canoe, which was pushed into the river. It sank at once, and his
intestines are still at the bottom of the river. They cause the noise of
the rapids.

Once upon a time TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> traveled down the river in his
canoe. The canoe capsized, and when he was about to be drowned a great
number of gulls came to his rescue. They took him on their backs and
carried him up the river to his village, singing:

Hâ de-k\*â'etnē hagun-dE-hwî'lēL qē'wundeL an-dā'x\*L lax-ha'.

That is, "I am taken along on the water, I am taken around the world by
gulls."

After a short time an epidemic of smallpox visited the villages.
TsEgu'ksku placed a pole, which he had painted red, in front of his
house to ward off the disease. But, nevertheless, he became sick. He
called all the great shamans of his village, and asked them if he would
recover. Finally one of them replied that he would not recover. Then he
made a bow and four arrows, which he painted red. He ordered one of his
friends to shoot the arrows up to the sun. His friend did so, and the
arrows did not return; but every time he shot, blood began to flow from
TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup>'s forehead and from his cheeks. When
TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> felt the blood, he said, "I shall not remain
dead." He took his rattle and went around the fire twice, following the
course of the sun. Then he asked for a coffin box. He crawled into it
and died. Then the people took the skin of a mountain goat, cut ropes
out of it, and tied the box tightly. Then they placed it on a large
bowlder behind the village. On the fourth night after the burial a noise
was heard proceeding from the box. When the people went Out to see what
it was, they saw that TsEgu'ksku had broken the thongs, and that he was
sitting on the box. He had assumed the shape of a white owl. One man
tried to catch him; but as the owl flew away, he became afraid and
returned. Then a second man, whose name was Lō-gwisgwā's, tried. He did
not succeed. After four men had tried, the owl suddenly fell back into
the box, and the thongs were replaced by magic. The staff which
TsEgu'ksk<sup>u</sup> had raised in front of his house fell to pieces
and was seen to be rotten all through. Before the owl fell back into the
box, it said, "WuL dEmā'ndē;" that is, "Nobody will be left." The
epidemic continued for some time, and all the people died. This was the
first visitation of smallpox.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[231:1](nass24.htm#fr_12) A place near China
Hat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rotten-Feathers (continued)](nass25)
