[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp09)  [Next](potp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### THE WATER-SKY: WHAT IT IS.

IN presenting the different reports on the water-sky, or the ice-blink,
it will be well to point out that a reflection of the earth's surface in
the sky is of more importance than seems at first to be the case. How
hard it is for most people to believe anything new or different from
what they were taught when young! The reflection in the sky, as seen in
the Arctic Circle, is very peculiar. Something, not easily explained,
causes the skies in that vicinity to act as a mirror when the atmosphere
is in a certain condition: the surface of the earth is reflected
accurately. The entrance to the interior of the earth is undoubtedly the
cause; but how or why, I cannot tell; it is sufficient for our purposes,
however, to know that it positively does act as a mirror.

To show that the sky reflects the conditions of the ice, water, and land
would not

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

 

<span id="img_05500"></span>

[![VIEW OF THE WATER-SKY.&lt;br&gt; The skies in the Arctic and
Antarctic circles reflect the surface of the earth, water and ice,
accurately. No great enterprise is undertaken without first consulting
the water-sky.](tn/05500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05500.jpg)  
VIEW OF THE WATER-SKY.  
The skies in the Arctic and Antarctic circles reflect the surface of the
earth, water and ice, accurately. No great enterprise is undertaken
without first consulting the water-sky.  

 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

be of so much importance: that fact could not be used to prove that the
earth is hollow. But to prove that the Aurora Borealis is nothing but
the reflection of a burning volcano, prairie- or forest-fire in the
interior of the earth, would be important. Quotations from the various
authorities on Arctic exploration are cited here for the purpose of
proving the correctness of my views.

Throughout Nansen's work he gives accounts of water-skies. In Volume Il,
page 472, his diary states:

"Wednesday, March 25th--There is the same dark water-sky behind the
promontory in the southwest, stretching thence westward almost to the
extreme west. It has been there all through this mild weather, with
southwesterly wind, from the very beginning of the month. There seems to
be always open water there, for no sooner is the sky overcast than the
reflection of water appears in that quarter."

The object of quoting so many authorities on this subject is to show
that what is termed "water-sky" is not the whim or

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

fancy of one explorer, but a fixed fact, and one of the things that
northern explorers always depend upon as being absolutely reliable: the
condition of the surface in that country is reflected in the sky so
accurately that anyone can understand it. The water-sky is seen whenever
the skies are overcast. This fact supports the claim that the aurora is
a great fire underneath, reflected in the sky, and must come from a
burning volcano, prairie- or forest-fire in the interior of the earth.

Nansen also adds: To judge by the sky, there must be a number of lanes
in the south and southwest,"--a supposition that afterward proved to be
correct,--and on page 233, Volume II, he continues:

"In front of us on the horizon we have a water-sky, or at any rate a
reflection which is so sharply defined and remains so immovable that it
must either be over water or dark land; our course just bears on it. It
is a good way off, and the water it is over can hardly be of small
extent; I cannot help thinking that it must be over land. May it be so!
But between us, to

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

judge by the sky, there seems to be plenty of lanes."

Nansen and his companion, Johansen, were endeavoring by the appearance
of the sky to determine whether water, ice, or land was ahead. It
happened to be water, as many lanes, representing openings in the ice,
were reflected in the sky. They invariably depended upon the appearance
of the sky to determine the condition of the water or ice on the earth
ahead. And he mentions that soon after this the lanes were so numerous
that they retarded their progress very much. Many times they were
obliged to go miles around them, and in those directions found land and
water, just as the sky indicated that they would, When flames flash
through the heavens, wise men tell us that, instead of considering that
there is fire on the earth, or in the interior of the earth, it is an
Aurora Borealis, and supposed to be electricity.

It is strange that there is no difference of opinion about the
reflection of land, water, or ice, while there is so much about

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

fire. Perhaps the only reason why there is any difference of opinion as
to what causes the reflections of the aurora is that no one happens to
think of its being fire. This error arose from the fact that no one
entertained the idea that the reflection could arise from fire, as they
knew nothing about the earth being hollow.

Nansen proceeds to enlighten us concerning the water-sky, and imparts
some of his restless ambitions to us. In Volume II, page 261, he says:

"Johansen, who has gone out, says the same water-sky is to be seen in
the south. Why is it we cannot reach it? But there it is, all the same,
an alluring goal for us to make for, even if we do not reach it very
soon. We see it again and again, looking so blue and beautiful; for us
it is the color of hope."

The sky, extending over the entrance to the interior of the earth, seems
to act in some way as a mirror, and reflects objects of size on the
surface of the earth plainly and clearly. It is such a true mirror that
for hundreds of years people living there

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

 

<span id="img_06100"></span>

[![WATER-SKY.&lt;br&gt; Here is another view showing how the surface of
the earth, water, and ice is reflected as in a mirror.](tn/06100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06100.jpg)  
WATER-SKY.  
Here is another view showing how the surface of the earth, water, and
ice is reflected as in a mirror.  

 

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

or those going there, learn to tell from what is reflected just what to
expect.

Another explorer of the north, Kane, on page 152, writes that "as the
surface of the glacier receded to the south, its face seemed broken with
piles of earth and rock-stained rubbish, till far back in the interior
it was hidden from me by the slope of a hill. Still beyond this,
however, the white blink or glare of the sky above showed its continued
extension."

Heretofore, I have quoted almost entirely from Arctic explorers in
reference to the condition of the skies, and how the appearance of the
latter determines the condition of the water and the ice. Bernacchi, who
spent nearly two years in the Antarctic regions, declares that, in
speaking of the Antarctic:

"Before noon the storm had passed, and we made strenuous efforts to
reach some water to the east, which was indicated by a strongly marked
'water-sky' in that direction. Toward evening of the next day, we
reached the open sea, being then in latitude 65 deg. 33 min. S. and
longitude 165

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

deg. 48 min. E. There was a swell from the north, and the temperature of
the sea rose from 29 deg. 1 F. at the edge of the pack to 30 deg. 8 F.
We were now in very nearly the same position as we had been six weeks
before, and during those six weeks we had burnt nearly one hundred tons
of coal, with little result." (Page 60.)

This assures us that the same sort of sky is seen in the Antarctic
regions as in the Arctic. Something causes it to act as a mirror in both
circles, and reflects the condition of the earth in the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Aurora: Its Wonderful Variations](potp11)
