[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](potp16)  [Next](potp18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

# CHAPTER XIII.

### DRIFTWOOD--WHENCE IT CAME.

The driftwood and other material found on the northern sides of the
shores bordering the Arctic Ocean, present further proof that the earth
is hollow, and that the material came from the interior of the earth;
some say from Siberia. If so, and it floated from there, it must have
come past the supposed pole. Why, then, cannot the explorers sail over
the very same course?

Because the driftwood never came from there; if it had, they could have
pursued the same route. One might ask why they have not explored, or
sailed, to the place from which this driftwood came. Heretofore, all
explorers have had but one object in view,--to get as far north as
possible, not knowing that the earth was hollow. If the compass told
anything after they got half-way round, or more, it

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

would locate the north from the place they had just come from (having
passed the magnetic pole); and, not aware, therefore, that it was the
compass, and not the ship, that had turned round, they would steer out
again, thinking they were going north. It would be next to impossible to
reach the interior of the earth under such conditions, passing through
stormy, cloudy, and foggy weather, and not knowing how the compass
should work.

Greely tells us, on page 100, that Private Connell and Frederick found a
large coniferous tree on the beach just above the extreme high-water
mark. It was about thirty inches in circumference, some thirty feet
long, and had apparently been carried within a couple of years to that
point by a current. A portion of it was cut up for firewood, and for the
first time in that valley a bright, cheery camp-fire gave comfort to
man. Now, there is no timber of the dimensions mentioned growing
anywhere near where it was found. Whence did it come? There is but one
place that I can think of, and that is the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

interior of the earth. A wood fire made from native wood is a thing
practically unknown, barring a few dry willows.

Farther on (page 106), Greely states that a large number of pieces of
driftwood were found near or slightly above the high-water mark. Some of
the pieces were six or seven feet long, and from four to eight inches in
diameter. Nearly all were coniferous woods. If this wood drifted from
the earth's surface, it would be obliged to go hundreds of miles, and
almost constantly through frozen water; while, upon the other hand, if
it came from the interior of the earth, it would have open water to
drift in, and tidal waves to lift it above the high-water mark.

On page 308 Greely informs us that about half a mile from the coast he
found an old piece of driftwood nearly six feet long, four inches wide,
and four inches thick--apparently pine or fir, and evidently split from
the body or branch of a tree. It was partly buried, and indications were
that the tree must have been large.

Note that he speaks of it as *partly* buried,

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

which would be the case if it had been thrown there by some volcanic
eruption.

One of the most interesting articles he discovered was a piece of birch
bark, admirably preserved. This timber, it should be noted, never grows
in that vicinity.

On page 368 Greely says: "On the shores of this lake Biederbick found a
pair of reindeer antlers, and I picked up a piece of close-grained
wood--apparently pine--two and a half feet long, and nearly an inch in
diameter. In a ravine near the camp were two trees, probably coniferous,
partly covered by earth. One was ten feet long and sixteen inches in
diameter, and originally had two branches. The second tree was six feet
long and twelve inches in diameter. They were about one hundred and
fifty yards distant from Lake Heintzelmann."

If Greely was in a country where such timber grew, why did he say
anything about it? Because it did *not* grow in that country, the
incident was worth recording.

Greely writes on page 370 of the many musk-oxen--fifteen in one herd and
three

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

in another--which he saw. In the vicinity enough willow remained to
enable them to make a fire and brew tea.

From the writings of different explorers, I learn that willow is about
the only shrub or timber growing in that country. It sprouts in the
spring, and is generally frozen down in the winter, and it is unusual to
have it large enough to cook a cup of tea; so much so that he speaks of
it in this connection.

Nansen says, on page 303: "A secret doubt lurked behind all the
reasoning. It seemed as though the longer I defended my theory, the
nearer I came to doubting it. But no, there is no getting over the
evidence of that Siberian driftwood."

Although Nansen felt the driftwood came from Siberia, I hold an entirely
different view: it came from the interior of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Have Other Than the Eskimos Inhabited the Arctic
Regions?](potp18)
