[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flhl25)  [Next](flhl27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4OOY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk-lore of the Holy Land, Moslem, Christian and Jewish*, by J. E.
Hanauer \[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

# SECTION III

### CONTAINING STORIES AND ANECDOTES ILLUSTRATING SOCIAL IDEAS, SUPERSTITIONS, ANIMAL AND PLANT-LORE, ETC.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### SECTION III

### I

#### FOLKS GENTLE AND SIMPLE

AHMAD Al-muttafakhir, ibn Al-muttashakhim, sheykh of the Fasharìn
Arabs, <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75) was unduly proud of his noble
ancestry and constantly boasting of it. One day, when with a caravan on
its way from Tadmor to Akka, he was speaking on his favourite theme when
he saw a derwìsh sitting by the roadside staring intently at a white
object which he had in his hands. Being of an inquisitive turn of mind,
Ahmad galloped up to him in order to see what it might be. It turned out
to be a human skull. The sheykh asked the derwìsh why he was examining
it so closely. "Ah!" said the holy man, who evidently knew his man, "I
found this skull lying at the door of a cave which I passed this
morning, and am trying to discover whether it belonged, when alive, to
some great man, or whether it was only the brainpan of some ordinary
mortal like yourself or me." Ahmad galloped off, offended, and for that
day said no more about his noble forefathers.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Subsequently,
however, as the caravan was passing a village cemetery, he noticed that
the roof of a burial-vault <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76) had
fallen in, and that the bones of the dead were exposed. Of the skulls
some were black and brown, others white. "See!" he cried, "even after
death there is a difference between persons of good stock and those of
meaner birth, the skulls of the former are all white, and those of the
latter of a darker colour." Some days after he had made this remark, the
travellers approached their destination. Fixed over the city gate were
the heads of men who had been put to death for hideous crimes. Birds of
prey, insects, and the action of sun and rain combined, had completely
bleached the skulls. "Look up, O Emìr," shouted one of the company,
"those skulls up there must each of them have belonged to a person, like
yourself, of noble family."

 

"A certain sultan had two wazìrs, a Jew and a Christian, who were
jealous of one another. The sultan one day questioned whether it were
better to be humbly born, but well-educated, or to belong to some good
family, however poor. The Jew stood up for race while the Christian took
the side of education, saying that he himself had trained a cat to do
the work of a good servant. "If your Majesty will let him show his cat,"
said the Jew, "I shall demonstrate, in my turn, that good birth is above
training."

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

The trial took place next day, when, at a signal from the Christian
wazìr, a beautiful cat came on its hind legs into the Imperial presence,
bearing a small, gold tray of refreshments. But the Jew had got a mouse
in a little box up his sleeve and, just as the cat was offering the tray
to the sultan, he released that mouse. The cat, at once becoming
conscious of the presence of its natural prey, hesitated for a moment,
then let go the tray, and dashed off in pursuit.

The Jew then asked that a well-educated gipsy from the Sultan's harìm
might be called into the presence. The girl was brought, and he put a
question to her: "Suppose that, after midnight but before daybreak, you
awoke from sleep, how would you be able to tell when the dawn drew
near?" She said, "I should listen for a donkey's braying, because at the
approach of dawn they bray like this"; and she gave an imitation of the
sound.

"Your Majesty will please observe," said the Jew, when she was gone,
"that she answered from her ancestry and not her education. Now let us
ask some girl of good descent, but poor and uneducated, the same
question." A girl answering these requirements was brought into the
presence. She had but newly joined the harìm, and her manner was of
graceful shyness. When the Sultan asked how she would perceive the
approach of dawn, she faltered: "May it please your Majesty, my mother
has told me that the light of a diamond grows dull when dawn
approaches." The sultan and all present

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

applauded her answer and gave to good birth the palm over education.

 

A certain Emperor of China, a land of idolaters and infidels, was once
visited by a famous traveller who related the marvels which he had
witnessed in different countries, and, among other things, informed his
Majesty that the Shah of Persia had a lion so tame that it would follow
its master about everywhere like a well-trained hound; that the Emìr of
Cabûl had a tiger; the ruler of Cashmere a leopard; and, in short, every
potentate he had ever visited or heard of, possessed some wild beast
which had learnt to be companionable. It made the ruler of the Chinese
feel small to think that he alone, among the sovereigns of the earth,
had no strange pet. As wisest of men and chief of monarchs, he scorned
to ape such inferior mortals as either the Shah of Persia or the Czar of
Muscovy, and determined to adopt some creature that no human being had
ever dreamt of taming.

Having, after much deliberation, made his choice, he summoned his
councillors and laid upon them his commands to devise some means to tame
that foul and fierce animal, the pig, so completely that it should
become as clean, gentle, and well-disposed as a lamb.

The assembled sages and courtiers told their master that what he asked
of them was feasible, and in fact, so easy that they would set about it
at once. "All that has to be done," said they, "is to give orders

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

that a sow in pig be closely watched, and, as soon as she litters, one
of her young ones be snatched away before it has had time either to
smell her or to taste her milk. It must then be suckled by a ewe,
carefully washed every day, and trained in cleanly habits. If this
course be adopted the vilest of beasts is sure to grow up as mild and
unobjectionable as a lamb."

The monarch ordered all this to be done. An official of high rank was
appointed guardian of the Emperor's sucking-pig. He had under him a
special staff of washers and feeders, and the ruler of China awaited,
with Imperial patience, the result of his servants’ labours. The
sucking-pig was duly obtained; washed in frequent baths of rose-water
and other perfumes; and brought up in the manner directed by the
learned. In time the officials in charge had the honour to present to
their lord a pigling elegant and lamb-like.

The monarch liberally rewarded all concerned, and made the tame pig his
constant companion. It followed him about everywhere to his great
delight.

One day, however, the Emperor took it into his head to extend his walk
beyond the palace grounds. His pig, wearing a gold collar set with
jewels, followed at his heels. All of a sudden, the animal forgot its
manners. It began to sniff the air and grunt in most unlamblike fashion,
and, before anything could be done to prevent it, left its master and,
scampering across fields and scrambling through hedges, rushed headlong
into a morass in which a number of swine

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

were wallowing. The courtiers in attendance were horrified and ran as
fast as they could, forgetting all dignity, zealous to save their lives.
But in vain every effort. When they reached the edge of the slough, no
one could tell which of the unclean beasts rolling about in it had been
the royal pet. They suspected indeed that one particularly filthy
creature might be he, but could not be sure seeing that there was no
trace of any collar; so they returned in fear and trembling to their
sovereign, who threatened to do terrible things. Orders were given that
all the absent members of the Council and all the wise men in the
capital should immediately appear before him. When everyone of the
frightened grey, black, and brown beards had come into the presence they
were told that their master felt sorely tempted to have their heads
chopped off that very instant, but since it pleased him to remember that
he was the fount of mercy as well as of retribution, he would give them
grace of three days, in which to find some infallible means of turning a
pig into a permanent lamb.

Grateful for the respite, the wazìrs, the old men, and the learned
discussed the momentous question in all its aspects. At the close of the
last hour of the third day, they returned to the hall of audience and
prostrated themselves before the throne. "O mighty monarch of this
golden age," said their spokesman, "your humble and obedient servants
and slaves have very carefully considered and discussed the matter
graciously entrusted to them, and have found a solution of the
difficulty. The achievement is, indeed, a hard one, but just for that
cause

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

worthy of so great a ruler. Therefore, if it please your Majesty, let
orders be sent to all your ambassadors and representatives in foreign
parts to promise great rewards to that skilful surgeon who shall
undertake the operation of cutting both a live pig and a live lamb open
at the same time, and, extracting the heart of the former, of inserting
the lamb's heart in its place. When the wound is sewn up and the swine
has recovered, it will be found a perfect lamb, and the achievement will
be one to add lustre to the wonderful annals of your Majesty's most
glorious reign." So pleased was the Emperor of China with this
suggestion that he at once issued an Iradé commanding that orders should
be immediately forwarded to his envoys abroad. However, though
advertisements may have appeared in all the leading gazettes of Belâd el
Afranj, I have not heard that any surgeon applied in response to the
invitation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[141:1](flhl26.htm#fr_76) *i.e.* Ahmad the
Conceited, son of the Vainglorious, sheykh of the Boaster Arabs.--ED.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[142:1](flhl26.htm#fr_77) fûstikìyeh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Secret of Success](flhl27)
