[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont06)  [Next](ont08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### A ROCKY MOUNTAIN BLIZZARD

<span class="small">Preparations for a storm.—Tying down our lodge.—A
fierce wind and a wild night.—Siksikakoan's stories beside the lodge
fire.—Legends of the Home of the Wind Maker and the Origin and
Destruction of the Grizzly Bear Clan—Winter scenes in Cutbank
Canyon.—Stories told in the snow by the tracks of wild animals.</span>

I WAS wakened on the following morning by mournful howls from a band of
coyotes at the edge of the forest near the lodge. Lifting the door-skin
and looking out the sky was heavily overcast and a huge bank of clouds
hung over the entrance to the canyon. After an early breakfast, we lost
no time in beginning preparations for the approaching storm. We
constructed an outdoor kitchen, without a roof, under the shelter of a
thick grove of pines. It was made of forked poles supporting
cross-pieces with green branches laid against it to form a wind-break.
We placed inside of this enclosure our cooking utensils and the tripod
with its heavy camp kettle.

Almost before we were in readiness, a heavy east wind, with a drenching
rain, set in, but we made safe against it by anchoring the tipi on its
eastern side in true Indian fashion. This was done by driving two strong
stakes firmly into the ground, throwing the noose of a lariat over the
tops of the tipi poles, taking a hitch around the stakes and then
drawing it taut, until the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

ropes sang in the gale. We reset the ears for the change of wind,
crossing the earpoles in front to protect the smoke-hole and to prevent
the ears from being torn, and laying stones and logs around the bottom
of the canvas, so that the pegs could not be loosened by the
wind-strain.

The storm which Siksikakoan predicted from nature's

<span id="img_05900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LODGE WITH EAR
POLES CROSSED IN FRONT FOR STORM.](tn/05900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05900.jpg.md)  
LODGE WITH EAR POLES CROSSED IN FRONT FOR STORM.  
</span>

signs, began with snow and a high wind from the west, continuing three
days and three nights. Dense masses of clouds hung low upon the
mountains, but moved uncertainly about the high peaks, sometimes
lifting, as if to disappear, only to lower again more dense and
threatening than before. The temperature fell rapidly, and by evening,
the rain had changed to snow. The horses, which we had left unpicketed,
feeding in the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

meadow, were driven by the storm into the thick underbrush for
protection. We could hear them whinnying to each other for
encouragement, while trying to keep together. When the sky cleared at
sunset of the third day, it seemed as if the storm was over, but
Siksikakoan shook his head dubiously, saying, "When a storm breaks at
sunset, the weather is still unsettled, but, if the sky clears during
the night, or in the early morning, we will have settled weather."

After nightfall the wind increased. The snow and sleet beat violently
against the canvas. The furious blasts rushed through the tops of the
pines and firs, with a sound like that of escaping steam, and swept the
exposed slopes above timber-line, with a confused and distant roar. It
was a wild nigh t and sleep was impossible. But it was just the night
for story-telling while lying secure and comfortable by our small
inside-fire. Siksikakoan whiled the hours away with Blackfeet legends
and tales of his adventures as an army scout, during the Indian wars of
the north-west. I will only take space to repeat two of his legends.

#### THE HOME OF THE WIND MAKER.

"Many years ago, when a heavy wind swept across the plains, a chief of
the Blackfeet faced the storm and made a vow to find its origin. He
crossed the plains and entered the mountains. His way led through dark
canyons and dense forests, where the wind rushed and roared. The
terrible wind and the dark and gloomy surroundings filled him with
dread, but, because of his vow, he pressed forward until, at last, he
saw in the distance, close to one of the highest peaks, the shining
water of a lake. During a lull in the storm, he crept

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

close to the shore and watched. Suddenly from the middle of the lake,
arose the huge antlers of an enormous bull elk. His eyes were red and
flames

<span id="img_06100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE SNOW-COVERED
FOREST.](tn/06100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06100.jpg.md)  
THE SNOW-COVERED FOREST.  
</span>

darted from his nostrils. When he waved his huge ears, a wind arose, so
fierce and terrible, that the waters of the lake were whisked up into
the air. When the elk sank again beneath the waves, the wind event down.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

The chief hurried back to his tribe to tell them of his wonderful
discovery of the home of Medicine Elk, the Wind Maker."

#### ORIGIN AND DESTRUCTION OF THE GRIZZLY BEAR CLAN.

"Weasel Tail was a man noted for his skill in catching eagles. He lived
close to the mountains with his wife and six children, far from the main
camp, in a place where eagles were plentiful. He dug a pit for trapping
them, covering it ingeniously with green branches, grass and stones. He
sat in it every day from sunrise to sunset, watching his bait of buffalo
meat, lying overhead on the covering of branches. Whenever an eagle came
to the bait, he seized it firmly by the legs and; drawing it between the
branches into the pit, wrung its neck.

"Weasel Tail had been having bad luck for many days. The eagles would
not come to his bait, although he prayed all night in his lodge,
chanting Eagle songs and rubbing himself with the smoke of sweet grass,
that his body might be free from scent. He then fasted for many days and
took a human skull with him into the pit, that it might make him
invisible like a ghost. But it was all in vain, for the eagles continued
flying high above him and avoided his bait.

"One day exhausted by his efforts and weary waiting, he fell asleep in
the pit, when an eagle appeared to him in a dream and said, 'If you will
kill one of your children as an offering, you will have the power to
catch many eagles.' When Weasel Tail awoke, he decided to offer his dog
as a substitute, which he loved next to his children. He dressed the
dead body of the dog to resemble a child and, placing it on the roof of

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the pit, returned to his lodge. At night the Eagle again appeared to him
in a dream saying, 'I did not like the dog you offered me for food and
could not eat it. I told you I wanted one of your children.' Weasel Tail
then went on a hunt and killed an antelope. Returning he directed his
wife to bring in the meat. While she was gone he killed his youngest
child. He then felt so badly that he killed all of his children. He did
not offer any of their bodies to the eagle, but buried them together,
and sat in his lodge, waiting for his wife to come back. When she
returned, he said, 'I have killed all of our children, but we shall all
be together soon in the Spirit World, for I will now kill you and then
myself.' She replied, 'Be it as you say, only wait until I go to the
stream for water to wash the antelope meat.' She did not return, but ran
away into the mountains. Worn out and famished, she wandered into a
bear's den. A large grizzly was seated inside with her family of four
children. When the bears saw that the woman was starving, they took pity
on her. They were so kind and hospitable, that she lived with them for
many years, and became the wife of a big grizzly.

"One day, her grizzly husband asked her if she wanted to return to her
own people. She replied, 'Yes! if you can change yourself and our
children into people, and can also get another family of bears to go
with us, so that we can protect ourselves.' He said: 'I have a relative
with four children. He lives farther up on this mountain. I will get him
to come down here and live with us. I can then change all of us into
people.' When the big grizzly had brought the other family of bears
down, he said to his relative: 'We two will go together to the Indian
camp on the prairie and

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

kill a man. We must get his heart, for with it I can doctor and change
all of us into people.' The two grizzlies went to the camp and returned
with the heart.

<span id="img_06400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FROZEN
STREAM.](tn/06400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06400.jpg.md)  
THE FROZEN STREAM.  
</span>

When the big grizzly had driven the others from his den, he began his
incantations. He divided the heart, cutting a portion for each bear.
Calling them together, after sundown, he distributed the pieces, and
said, if

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

they would go at once to bed they would arise as people. In the morning
the woman arose first. After cooking the meal, she told all the bears to
get up, and when they stood upon their feet they became people.

"The two families intermarried, the big grizzly becoming the chief of
the band and taking the name Red Bear. The men hunted buffalo upon the
prairies, making six lodges from their hides. They joined the Blackfeet
camp, where the woman was recognised. She told the story of her murdered
children, and said that the people with her had come from a long
distance. They dressed in bear skins and wore grizzly claws around their
necks, arms, wrists, and ankles. Their arrows were wrapped with bear
skin, and they also carried daggers and spears for weapons. They painted
themselves with red clay mixed with bear fur and flint, which they
rubbed in so hard that their faces and bodies were covered with blood.
They also painted black streaks across their eyes and mouths. For robes
they used the smoked tops of lodges. This band of strangers soon became
so insolent and dangerous, that if any of the Blackfeet objected to
their actions they were killed. Whenever one of their own number was
killed, the old mother was said to be able to doctor him and bring him
back to life. The people were compelled to do whatever the bears wanted.
They increased in number rapidly, for their children, according to the
nature of bears, grew up and became mature in one year. The strangers
acted like bears in so many ways, that the Blackfeet called them the
clan of Grizzly Bears.

"A young man named Owl went on the war path against the Snake Indians.
He came back unsuccessful.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Disheartened and
worn out from travel, he wandered aimlessly over the prairies, for he
was ashamed to return to camp. One night a small underground animal came
to him in his sleep, saying, 'Near the high rocky cliff the Chief Bear
wishes to see you.' He awoke, and from the top of a butte examined the
surrounding country. Seeing near the mountains a rocky and precipitous
ridge, he went towards it. At the foot of the cliff, he found a bear's
den, and lay down to sleep in front of the door. During the night, he
was awakened by a large bear dragging him into the cave. When it became
light, he saw at the back of the den a huge grizzly with his family on
either side of him. Finally the big bear spoke to Owl, saying: 'I am the
head chief over all the bears. My medicine is strong, and I cannot be
killed. I have brought you here for I have taken pity on you and your
people. I will give you power so that, like me, you cannot be killed.'
The Chief Bear then sang a medicine song, and burned sweet grass as
incense, rubbing the smoke over Owl's body. He arose and danced around
the den, grunting, blowing, and snorting. He shot an arrow at Owl; it
struck him between the shoulders, but fell harmlessly to the ground. He
thrust a spear at his side, but the point broke off. He struck him with
a tomahawk which did him no injury. For the fourth trial the Chief Bear
stabbed him in the side, but when he pulled out the dagger, there was no
wound. The Chief Bear then directed Owl to return to his people, saying:
'You cannot be hurt as long as you stand your ground and fight. You can
only be killed when you flee from an enemy.'

"As soon as Owl returned to the Blackfeet camp, he

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

dressed and painted himself like the tribe of Grizzly Bears who had been
ruling the people.

"The old mother of the bears had an instinctive fear of Owl. She warned
all of her children to make a friend of him, and said: 'I fear him, for
I know his supernatural power is greater than ours.' But Red Bear, the
chief, was scornful towards Owl, saying: 'There is no reason why we
should fear that fellow.' He commanded that no one of the tribe should
sit on top of the butte north of the camp. When Owl heard of the
command, he immediately went up and sat there in sight of the people.
The Grizzly Bears then went out together and shot at Owl, but could do
him no harm. They next said they would kill anyone leaving camp for a
hunt. To show his contempt for this order, Owl announced to his people
that he was going away for a buffalo hunt. When the Grizzly Bears tried
in vain to kill him, the old mother again warned her children, saying,
'I advised you to make friends with Owl; now behold, he is stronger than
you. If he prevails over us, we will all be killed.'

"Owl selected for his comrade a poor boy, named Little Robe, saying to
him: 'To-morrow night when the moon rises, I will doctor you so that you
cannot be killed.' On the following evening, taking the boy into his
lodge, he painted and dressed him after the manner of the Grizzly Bears.
He said: 'When I have finished doctoring you, we will have a game of
"hide the bones" with the Bear tribe.' Owl rubbed sweet grass smoke over
Little Robe's body, as the Chief Bear had done. He took the tooth and
claw of a grizzly bear and directed him to hide the claw, either in his
mouth, or in one of his hands. He then started a

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

song, <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) while Little Robe, swaying his
body in time with the singing, hid the claw. Taking his bow and arrow,
Owl shot Little Robe between the shoulders. The arrow did him no harm,
for the shaft was splintered, and Little Robe said, 'You guessed wrong,
for I have the tooth and not the claw in my mouth.' <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) 'I will try again,' said Owl. Grasping his
spear, he thrust it at the boy's side. But the point was broken off, and
the spear did not penetrate the flesh. Little Robe said: 'I have the
claw in my left hand, it is not in the right.' He next plunged his
dagger into the boy's side, but it left no wound. Then Owl said: 'Go now
to the Grizzly Bears and tell them that Owl wants to gamble with them.'
Word was sent back by Little Robe that they were willing to have the
game if it could be played in their own camp. When the Blackfeet heard
the news, they crowded into Owl's lodge, saying, 'Why do you want to
gamble with this terrible people? They will only kill you, and probably
the rest of us also.' Owl said, to Little Robe before they started for
the camp: 'When we enter their lodge, pull down the buffalo robe
fastened over the door, and take it in with you. We will both sit on it'
(to secure power from the buffalo).

"They found the Grizzly Bears gathered together in one big lodge. The
men were painted and armed with spears and bows and arrows. Before the
game started, the mother of the Bears made a talk, warning them not to
gamble with Owl and his friend, but they did not heed her. Red Bear, the
chief, asked: 'Who will hide the bones first?' Owl replied: 'My little
brother here.'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The youngest of
the Bears said he would do the guessing. Owl started a gambling song,
beating time with arrows on his bow. Little Robe took two bones, one
marked and the other plain. He swayed his body and arms in time with the
song, while quickly moving his hands and hiding the marked bone from the
youngest of the bear warriors. The song grew louder, and the movements
of Little Robe quickened. The Bear tribe

<span id="img_06900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CLOUDS LIFTING
FROM MOUNTAINS AFTER BLIZZARD.](tn/06900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06900.jpg.md)  
CLOUDS LIFTING FROM MOUNTAINS AFTER BLIZZARD.  
</span>

grasped their weapons with excitement, and fiercely watched the two
players. While they gazed at Little Robe, he seemed to them to resemble
a bear. Suddenly the youngest Bear shot an arrow at Little Robe. The
shaft struck him between the shoulders, but fell harmlessly to the
ground. Little Robe said: 'you guessed wrong.' The second Bear then
tried, spearing Little Robe in the side, but the spear broke in two.

"Red Bear, the chief, said: 'I will take the last two

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

guesses.' The song was again started, and as Little Robe waved his
hands, the chief struck at him with a tomahawk, which did him no harm
and then stabbed him under the arm, but the dagger left no wound. Owl
said: 'None of you have guessed right. It is now our turn. My little
brother will do the guessing, while you hide the bones.' He arose, and
stood beside the door. Red Bear the chief, threw the bones, singing 'Try
your best to guess right.' Little Robe shot an arrow into the chief's
head and he fell to the ground dead. Owl, standing by the door, allowed
no one to go out. He felt glad when he saw the chief of the Grizzly
Bears fall dead. He and Little Robe then killed everyone in the lodge.
When the Blackfeet knew that their terrible enemies were overpowered,
they destroyed all the Grizzly Bears in the other lodges. They feared to
let one of them live. Owl became head chief of the Blackfeet and Little
Robe a great medicine man. They lived for many years, until they fled
from an enemy when both were killed."

Siksikakoan continued his story telling far into the night. After
midnight the wind began to subside, and, by morning, had entirely
ceased. The light of sunrise in the eastern sky indicated that the
clouds were breaking. The horses had left the sheltering willows and
were contentedly feeding in the meadow, uncovering the snow from the
grass, by pawing with their forefeet. This trait, which is called
"rustling," has been so long inbred in the cattle and horses of the
great plains of the north-west, that it has become a universal instinct.
In mid-winter, while the snows are deep, and the grass is beyond their
reach, they are compelled to resort to other shifts for food, and, if
none are available, they perish. One food substitute in winter is the
bark of

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the cottonwood tree, which is very nourishing and palatable. If an
Indian camp is near a growth of these trees, and they have no
summer-cured hay, the squaws will fell large trees for their Indian
ponies, from which they will strip the bark completely. Although their
horses are very hardy, their winter lot is at the best a hard one, and
they are apt to come out of it in the

<span id="img_07100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“HORSE UNCOVERING
SNOW FROM GRASS BY PAWING.”](tn/07100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07100.jpg.md)  
“HORSE UNCOVERING SNOW FROM GRASS BY PAWING.”  
</span>

spring in a reduced and weak condition. But, they fatten very rapidly,
when the prairies grow green with the early-spring grasses. A broncho
becomes accustomed to hardship and a precarious living, while a
city-bred horse would starve to death under similar conditions.

The clouds lifted slowly from the mountains, unveiling in the clear air
the canyons and forests and finally the high peaks. In spite of
Siksikakoan's friendly remonstrances, I started off on foot with my
camera, over the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

old Indian war-trail and towards the head of the canyon. He said "it is
unwise to go alone and unarmed in the Rockies, especially after a heavy
snowfall, when the

<span id="img_07200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE OLD TRAIL
AFTER SNOWSTORM.](tn/07200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07200.jpg.md)  
THE OLD TRAIL AFTER SNOWSTORM.  
</span>

wild animals come forth to hunt and are apt to follow any fresh tracks
in the snow, seeking for prey." Cut-bank Canyon was filled with winter
scenes of wonderful beauty. The outlines of every stone and log were

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span id="img_07300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CUTBANK CANYON
AFTER SNOWSTORM.](tn/07300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07300.jpg.md)  
CUTBANK CANYON AFTER SNOWSTORM.  
</span>

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

beautifully rounded with a white mantle of snow and the branches of firs
and pines bent under the heavy burdens they had received during the
night.

In the early morning, after a snowstorm, one can read by their tracks in
the snow, as if recorded in an open book, all the night movements of
wild animals. I saw many coyote and wolf tracks crossing and recrossing
the trail, and the peculiar footprints of the Lepus americanus, or
snow-shoe rabbit, so called because the fur grows long on their feet,
making the footprint to resemble a snow-shoe. A pair of mountain lions
with large round tracks, resembling those of a large mastiff, were
travelling close together towards the head of the canyon, their long
tails occasionally leaving their marks behind. The snow told a sad story
(whose sequel was probably a tragedy) of two large gray wolves running
down a buck-deer. I came to a much trampled place, red with his blood,
where he had stood at bay to fight them off, and then they all left the
trail together in the direction of Mount Rising Wolf. Because of the
ravages by numerous gray wolves, moose, wapiti and deer now show a
marked decrease in this part of the Rocky Mountains. The large
footprints of a grizzly bear emerged from a rocky ravine and crossed the
trail, overturning stones and logs, while on his way down the mountain
to drink at the river. While absorbed in taking a picture, with my head
under a focussing cloth, I heard behind me several dull thuds, quickly
following each other. They sounded so like the heavy footsteps of a
large animal, that I quickly withdrew my head, fully expecting to find
myself face to face with a grizzly. But, to my great relief, it was only
the falling of heavy masses of snow from the fir trees.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

When I emerged from the forest on my return to camp, the western sky was
aglow with colour. The sun was sinking below the horizon line of the
Continental Divide. For a brief moment, the last rays suffused the
winter landscape of forest and mountain with a soft and rosy light. The
silvery crescent of the new moon and the evening star crowned all with
their celestial beauty.

Siksikakoan was waiting, with the lodge fire brightly burning and the
horses picketed near for safety, in accordance with an old Blackfoot
custom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[68:1](ont07.htm#fr_14.md) Songs were sung in
gambling to distract the attention of the opponents.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[68:2](ont07.htm#fr_15.md) Shooting an arrow at his
opponent represented a guess, both in this test game and in the real
game to follow. 1f a failure it was counted a wrong guess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Mad Wolf Gives the Beaver Medicine Ceremonial](ont08.md)
