[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont02)  [Next](ont04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_00100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HERD OF BUFFALO ON
THE PLAINS](tn/00100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00100.jpg)  
HERD OF BUFFALO ON THE PLAINS  
</span>

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

### INTRODUCTION

THE once powerful confederation of the Blackfeet or Siksikaua Indians
comprising the North Blackfeet, Bloods and Piegans, is of Algonquin
origin. Although they speak the same language, have similar customs, and
are closely intermarried, these three divisions are independent of each
other, each having its own Sun-dance, council and head chief. When the
dominant white race, both in Canada and the United States, restricted
the Blackfeet from their nomadic life, which had covered the vast region
stretching, from the North Saskatchewan River in Alberta, to the
Yellowstone River in Montana, and from longitude 105 degrees west from
Greenwich to the Rocky Mountains, their fixed settlements were made in
the localities where their permanent camps were formerly located. Thus
the present reservations of the Bloods (Kainau), and North Blackfeet, in
the Province of Alberta, Canada, are along the same rivers, where their
ancestors camped. The Piegans became subdivided into North and South
Piegans, the former in Alberta, and the latter in Northwestern Montana.

The most reliable authorities that I could consult among the Blackfeet,
as to the origin of their tribal

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

name, stated that, ages ago, their people lived far to the north of
their present country, where the dark fertile soil so constantly
discoloured their moccasins that they were called Siksikaua, or Black
Moccasins.

They were the most aggressive and warlike of all the Plains tribes. They
were constantly at war with the Crows, Sioux, Cheyennes, Assinniboines,
Snakes, Kutenai and Flatheads. Their war-parties frequently met in
conflict along the Old North Trail. The Blackfeet say that the Crows
once roamed along the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains, but were
driven by them to the south-east, where the Crow reservation is now
situated. The Lewis and Clark Journals mention the Blackfeet as the only
tribe against which their expedition was compelled to use firearms.

In 1832 Catlin wrote about the Plains Indians: "The several tribes of
Indians, inhabiting the Upper Missouri, are undoubtedly the finest
looking, best equipped and most beautifully costumed. . . . They live in
a country well stocked with buffaloes and wild horses, which furnish
them an excellent and easy living; their atmosphere is pure, which
produces good health and long life, and they are the most independent
and happiest race of Indians I have met with: they are all entirely in a
state of primitive rudeness and wildness, and consequently are
picturesque and handsome, almost beyond description. Nothing in the
world, of its kind, can possibly surpass in beauty and grace some of
their games, amusements and parades. In my travels I have more than
realised my former predictions that those Indians, who could be found
almost entirely in a state of nature, with the least knowledge of
civilised society, would be found the most cleanly in their persons,
elegant in their dress and manners, and enjoying

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

life to the greatest perfection. Of such tribes perhaps the Crows and
Blackfeet stand first; and no one would be able to appreciate the
richness and elegance, (and even taste too), with which some of these
people dress, without seeing them in their own country."

The Blackfeet traversed wide tracts of country in quest of plunder and
adventure. They were the most daring and enterprising of the Plains
tribes, their expeditions following the Old North Trail into the far
distant North Land, and southward as far as Mexico. That they used
horses, on these far-seeking expeditions, we have the testimony of
Mackenzie, who says of the Blackfeet in 1800, "They are the people who
deal in horses and take them upon war parties towards Mexico, from which
they enter into the country to the south-east, which consists of
plains." Sometimes their expeditions did not return for several years,
and then would appear unexpectedly in full view of the tribal camp,
bearing their spoils and singing their songs of victory, amid general
rejoicing. The bravery of their chiefs and their wonderful adventures
were then heralded throughout the tribe, and the young men were thus
stimulated to emulate their deeds of valour.

In the former domain of the Blackfeet, lying between the Rocky Mountains
and the Yellowstone and Upper Missouri Rivers, the mountain slopes
abounded in beaver, wapiti, moose, mountain sheep and grizzly bears,
while immense herds of antelope and buffalo roamed over the plains,
furnishing them with an abundance of meat for food, and skins for
clothing and shelter. But the irresistible advance of the white race was
like the invasion of a hostile army in its effects upon this Indian
paradise. It brought small-pox, measles and

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

other contagious diseases and the seductive poison, alcohol, each in
turn contributing to the undermining of the vigour of the Indian race.
The last of several plagues of small-pox was introduced by a Missouri
River steamboat in 1869, spreading rapidly among the Plains tribes. It
decimated the Blackfeet and is still referred to by them as "the great
sickness." The climax of their misfortunes finally came with the sudden
annihilation in 1883 of the last of the great herds of buffalo, which
had afforded them occupation and their chief means of subsistence. At
the beginning of the following winter, the Blackfeet found themselves
deprived of their usual winter stores of dried buffalo meat, with the
result that, during that winter and the spring of 1884, a large number
of them perished from starvation.

Greatly reduced in numbers and crippled in resources, the Blackfeet
slowly retreated before the advancing tide of white settlers. Yielding
to the pressure from the whites and their own dire necessities, they
sold by treaty vast tracts of land to the United States, so that they
now occupy only a narrow strip of country bordering upon the eastern
slopes of the northern Rockies. The climate, being subject to severe
storms in summer and blizzards in winter, has so far seemed unfavourable
for agriculture. Their chief occupation of raising cattle and horses is
handicapped by the hazards of extreme heat and cold.

They have held themselves, as much as possible, aloof from civilisation,
cherishing the remembrance of their former days of comfort, freedom and
power. Oft repeated wrongs by the whites have provoked individual
retaliation and bloodshed, but not organised rebellion against the
Government, and developed in

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the Indian heart a deep-seated mistrust and hatred of the white race.
Early explorers estimated that the Blackfeet once numbered from 30,000
to 40,000. They have gradually dwindled, until at the present time there
are about 3,500 full bloods in Canada and the United States. This
constant decline of the full-blooded Blackfeet still continues, and we
have the pathetic spectacle of a dying race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. My Introduction to the Blackfeet](ont04)
