[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont08)  [Next](ont10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### LEGEND OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE

<span class="small">Evening in Mad Wolf's lodge.—His fatherly talk.—He
tells the origin of the Beaver Medicine.—In the legend, Nopatsis,
jealous of Akaiyan his younger brother, leaves him to die on a lonely
island.—The chief of the Beavers rescues him and keeps him all winter in
the lodge of the Beavers.—Teaches him the ceremonial of the Beaver
Medicine and the make-up of the Beaver Bundle, and bestows upon him
supernatural power.—His youngest child, Little Beaver, returns with
Akaiyan to the Blackfoot camp to help in teaching the people.—He creates
the Beaver Medicine, to which many birds and animals contribute their
power.</span>

RETURNING to Mad Wolf's lodge I found him reclining upon his blankets,
resting after the strain of the services. There was a long silence,
which I did not venture to break, nor to disturb him, while smoking with
half-closed eyes. Meanwhile the deepening twilight, which in a northern
latitude comes quickly after sunset, but lingers, had settled over
prairie and camp. As I looked upon the sacred Beaver Bundle, lying by
his side in the flickering light of the small fire, I thought of their
mysterious power over the Indian mind and life, and of the strange
superstitions centred about them, which had been handed down through
many generations. I was aroused from my reverie by Mad Wolf knocking the
ashes from his pipe. He looked at me intently for a few moments. His
manner was earnest and dignified, and as he sat erect, his long black
hair fell loosely over his shoulders. He

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

answered my inquiring look towards the Medicine Bundle by signing to me
that I should grasp one end of the rope. We together removed the cover
that hid it from view. He allowed me to gaze upon the sacred Bundle for
a moment, when the robe was solemnly replaced. He then began to speak in
a low voice, with eyes half closed, as if gazing into the far distance,
saying:

<span class="small">"When I was a young man, I too became interested in
the mysteries of the medicines, which have been taught to me by old
Indians, and what they have told me I know to be true. I have never
before explained those mysteries to white men, because I have always
been afraid to trust them. I am now willing to have you repeat these to
the white race, because I know that you will speak the truth and because
I feel toward you as a father to his son. When I bought the Beaver
Medicine from O-mis-tai-po-kah, there came with it a very old pipe,
which now lies by its side. I will not smoke this pipe for it brings bad
luck. When O-mis-tai-po-kah smoked it his children began to die, so I
preserve it only as a relic. There was a time when I had many relics. If
I had them now I would give them to you, but they are gone."</span>

He handed me the two rattles I had used in the ceremonial and a small
buckskin sack, saying,

<span class="small">"In it are some of the original seeds of the tobacco
given to us by the beavers. They were secured many years ago by Akaiyan,
the man who lived all winter in the lodge with the chief Beaver and
brought back with him the Beaver Medicine. I will relate to you the
story as it has been handed down from our ancestors. What I will tell
you happened long ago, when our people made all of their tools and
weapons from stone, and when they used dogs instead of horses for beasts
of burden."</span>

#### THE ORIGIN OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE

"In those days there were two orphan brothers. The younger, named
Akaiyan (Old Robe), lived with his brother Nopatsis, who was married to
a woman with an evil heart. This woman disliked Akaiyan and continually
urged her husband to cast him off. One day

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

when Nopatsis came home, he found his wife with her clothes torn and her
body lacerated. She explained that, during his absence, Akaiyan had
treated her brutally. Nopatsis said nothing to his younger brother, but
planned how he might be rid of him for ever. It was midsummer, the time
when the ducks and geese dropped their feathers. He proposed to Akaiyan
that they should go together to an island in a large lake and said, 'At
this time there will be many ducks and geese there, and we can gather
the feathers they have dropped to be used for arrows.' When the brothers
came to the lake they built a 'skatstan' (raft), binding together logs
with buffalo raw-hide and then floated on it to an island, far out in
the lake. As they walked along the shores of this island looking for
feathers, Akaiyan wandered off alone. He was returning with his arms
full, when he beheld his brother out on the lake, going towards the
shore of the mainland. He implored Nopatsis not to abandon him to perish
on the lonely island. But his brother only called back, that he deserved
no pity because of his brutal treatment of his sister-in-law. Akaiyan
besought him to return, solemnly declaring before the Sun that he had
not injured her. But Nopatsis replied heartlessly, 'You can live alone
on the island all winter. In the spring, when the ice melts in the lake,
I will return to gather your bones.' Akaiyan sat down and wept. He
thought his time had come to die. Then he called upon the animals and
the under-water spirits for assistance. He also prayed to the Sun, Moon
and Stars, saying,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Haiyu! Mistapixit Mekape Natotsichpi!'  
Behold, O Sun! I cast away whatever of bad I have done.'  
'Kokumekis! Kokatosix Kummokit Spummokit!'  
'O Moon! O Stars! pity me! Give me strength!</span>

</div>

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

"After this prayer Akaiyan felt relieved and strengthened. He walked
around the island and found a few branches, with which he made a
shelter. He also

<span id="img_10600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BEAVER
DAM.&lt;br&gt; (Home of a Beaver Family.)](tn/10600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10600.jpg)  
BEAVER DAM.  
(Home of a Beaver Family.)  
</span>

gathered many loose feathers, piling them up and making a bed that
fitted his body so well that he slept warmly on the coldest nights. He
killed many ducks

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and geese before their time for leaving the island to fly south,
shooting the wild ones with his arrows and striking the tame ones upon
the head with long sticks. He kept some for his winter food, but he
skinned others and made a warm robe for himself by binding the skins
together with alder bark.

"One day, when he discovered a beaver lodge, he lay

<span id="img_10700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BEAVER BUNDLE OF
MAD WOLF.&lt;br&gt; (It lies at the foot of tripod.)](tn/10700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10700.jpg)  
BEAVER BUNDLE OF MAD WOLF.  
(It lies at the foot of tripod.)  
</span>

for a long time watching it and weeping to himself, because he had been
abandoned. Finally, a little beaver came from the lodge, and said to
him, 'My father wants you to come into his lodge.' Akaiyan followed the
little beaver into the lodge, where he saw a big beaver with his wife
and family seated around him. This beaver was white from the snows of
many

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

winters, and so large that Akaiyan knew he must be the chief of all the
beavers. The Beaver Chief bade him be seated, and asked him why he was
living alone on the island. Akaiyan told him how cruelly and unjustly he
had been treated and left alone to die. The Beaver Chief pitied Akaiyan
and counselled with him, saying, 'My son, the time will soon come when
we will close up our lodge for the winter. The lake will freeze over and
we cannot come out again for seven moons, until the warm winds of spring
will break up the ice. Remain in our lodge while the snows are deep. We
will teach you many wonderful things and, when you return again, you can
take knowledge with you, that will be of great value to your people.'
The beavers were so hospitable, Akaiyan decided to remain with them. He
took with him into the beaver lodge many ducks and geese for food and
his bird-skin robe to keep him warm. They closed their lodge before it
became cold, leaving a hole for air at the top. During the coldest days
the beavers kept Akaiyan warm by lying close to him and placing their
tails across his body. He made friends with all of them, but he liked
the youngest and smallest beaver best of all. He was the cleverest as
well as the favourite child of the Beaver Chief. Akaiyan learned their
habits and manner of living. They taught him the names of the herbs and
roots, which we still use for the curing of the people. They showed him
also the different paints, and explained their use, saying, 'If you
should use these, they will bring to your people good luck and will ward
off sickness and death.' They gave him the seeds of the tobacco (origin
of tobacco), and taught him how they should be planted with songs and
prayers. They made scratches with their

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

claws on the smooth walls of the lodge to mark the days, and when the
days completed a moon they marked the moons with sticks. He witnessed
many dances belonging to their medicines, and listened carefully to the
songs and prayers. The Beaver Chief and his wife (Wise Old Woman) taught
him the prayers and songs of their medicine and the dances that belonged
to them, and said, 'Whenever any of your people are sick, or dying, if
you will give this ceremonial, they will be restored to health.' He
noticed that the beavers never ate during the ceremonial, and that they
beat time for the dances with their tails, always stopping when they
heard any suspicious noise, just as they do when they are at work. They
told him that they counted seven moons from the time when the leaves
fall before they prepared to open their lodge in the spring. When they
heard the booming of the ice breaking in the lake, they knew it would
soon be time to leave their winter home.

"Little Beaver told Akaiyan that, before he parted with them, his
father, the Beaver Chief, would offer him a present and would allow him
to choose anything within the lodge. Little Beaver also advised him,
saying, 'When my father asks you for your choice, say that you will take
your little brother. He will not be willing to part with me, for he
prizes me above everything he owns. He will ask you four times to choose
something else, but take me with you, for I will have more power to help
you than any of the others.'

"The ducks and geese were flying north, when the beavers finally opened
their lodge for the summer, and the Beaver Chief said to Akaiyan, 'You
will soon leave us now, because it is time for your older brother to
return. But, before you start, I will allow you to

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

choose anything in my lodge to take away with you.' Then Akaiyan,
remembering the advice of Little Beaver, asked for his youngest child.
The Beaver Chief made many excuses and endeavoured to persuade him to
take something else, but Akaiyan would have no other gift. After the
fourth trial, the Beaver Chief said, 'My son, you show your wisdom in
selecting your little brother to go with you. I am sorry to part with
him, because he is the best worker and the wisest of my children, but,
because of my promise, I now give him to you.'

"The Beaver Chief also told Akaiyan that, when he returned to his
people, he should make a sacred Bundle similar to the one he saw them
using in their ceremonial. He also taught him the songs and prayers and
dances that belonged to the Bundle and informed him that, if any of the
people were sick, or dying and a relative would make a vow to the Beaver
Medicine, the sick would be restored to health.

"One evening, when the Beaver Chief returned from his cutting, he said
to Akaiyan, 'My son, remain in hiding and do not show yourself. To-day,
when I was among the trees on the main shore, I saw your brother's
camp.' The next day Akaiyan, watching from the beaver lodge, saw
Nopatsis coming to the island on the raft. He saw him land and walk
along the shore hunting for his bones. Then Akaiyan ran, with Little
Beaver under his arm and took possession of the raft. He was far out in
the big lake before Nopatsis saw him, He at once realised that his
younger brother had secured power superior to his own and had become a
great medicine man.

"Akaiyan now returned with Little Beaver to the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

tribal camp. He went at once to the head chief's lodge and told his
story. All the people received him with the greatest honour, when they
heard of the wisdom and power that had been given him by the Beavers.
Akaiyan gathered together a Beaver Bundle as the Beaver Chief had
directed. He and Little Beaver had remained all winter in the camp,
teaching the people the songs, prayers and dances given him by the
beavers. When Spring came, Akaiyan invited all of the animals to add
their power to the Beaver Medicine. Many birds and animals of the
prairies and mountains came, offering their skins and taught him their
songs, prayers and dances to accompany their skins, just as the beavers
had done. The Elk and his wife each contributed a song and dance, also
the Moose and his wife. The Woodpecker gave three songs with his dance.
The Frog alone of all the animals could neither dance nor sing, and it
is for this reason he is not represented in the Beaver Bundle. The
Turtle could not dance and had no song, but is represented in the
Bundle, because he was wise and borrowed one from the Lizard, who owned
two songs.

"In the following spring Akaiyan returned to the island with Little
Beaver to visit the beaver lodge. He saw his brother's bones on the
shore and knew the beavers had not helped him. The Beaver Chief welcomed
Akaiyan warmly and when he gave back Little Beaver to his father, the
old chief was so grateful that he presented him with a sacred pipe,
teaching him also the songs, prayers and dances that belonged to it.
When Akaiyan returned again to the Indian camp he added this pipe to the
Beaver Bundle. Every spring Akaiyan went to visit his friends, the
beavers, and each time the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Beaver Chief gave
him something to add to the Beaver Bundle, until it reached the size it
has to-day. Akaiyan continued to lead the Beaver ceremonial as long as
he lived and was known as a great medicine man. When he died, the
ceremonial was continued by his son, and has been handed down ever
since."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. My Rocky Mountain Goat Hunt](ont10)
