[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont10)  [Next](ont12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### CHAPTER. VIII

#### WINTER ON THE PLAINS

<span class="small">A trip to the mountains for winter wood.—Nature's
signs of an early winter.—Narrow escape from death in the forest.—My
struggle with a blizzard.—Snow bound.—Legend of the Snow
Tipi.—Na-toia-mon's vision.—Power over a blizzard granted him by the
Cold Maker.—Supernatural power of the Snow Tipi.</span>

WHEN Mad Wolf said the time had come to secure our winter firewood,
Ah-see-tuck (his son-in-law) and I went together to the mountains. We
left the camp at sunrise with four powerful bronchos, harnessed to a
timber wagon without a bed. Ah-see-tuck was a skilled but reckless
driver. He drove standing on the axle between the front wheels, while I
sat back upon the reach. It required both strength and agility to hold
my uncertain seat, while the bronchos were running at a mad gallop over
the plains, the wagon swinging and tilting at times upon two wheels. The
bronchos, frightened by the rattling wheels, ran away, but there was no
need to hold them, for our course lay across the broad plains, without
fences, or obstacles of any kind, and with a constant upgrade towards
the mountains. When we reached the foothills and Ah-see-tuck wished to
slacken the speed, he put the brakes on hard and skillfully headed them
up the steep slope of a butte and brought them to a standstill. He then
guided them into a canyon and finally to the edge of a thick forest

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

of pine, spruce and fir. We felled only dead trees, thoroughly seasoned
and, having trimmed them free from branches, we had the horses snake
them out from the standing timber to be loaded upon the wagon. At midday
we rested from our exhausting work, on the bank of a small mountain
brook, and were refreshed by the fragrance of the firs and balsams.
While reclining upon a thick carpet of moss and pine-needles, we watched

<span id="img_12600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DRAWING OUT TIMBER
WITH HORSES.](tn/12600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12600.jpg.md)  
DRAWING OUT TIMBER WITH HORSES.  
</span>

a golden eagle flying high over the mountains and a flock of white swans
passing near the summit of Mount Rising Wolf. Many flocks of ducks
skimmed the treetops overhead, in their swift and level flight, while
far away was heard the faint honking of migrating geese.

Ah-see-tuck then imparted some of his weather wisdom by remarking,
"Geese are endowed with great wisdom and foreknowledge of the weather.
When they

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

fly high, it is the sign of an early winter. The movements of other
birds and the thickened skins of fur bearing animals, have already given
us warning. The curlew stopped it's singing in the early summer. The
song birds have gathered into flocks and the yellow breasts (prairie
larks) have disappeared before the sarvis berries were ripe. The skins
of the otter, mink and beaver are heavier than usual, and the jack
rabbits have turned white earlier than is their custom."

Our work in the forest was brought to an abrupt close by my narrow
escape from death. We were working together on a large spruce tree,
Ah-see-tuck chopping on one side, while I was standing on the other.
When the tree began to topple, and I saw it coming in my direction, I
jumped for a position of safety. The top unexpectedly struck a leaning
tree, which caused the butt to be thrown into the air and then to come
rolling towards us. It narrowly missed Ah-see-tuck, but, notwithstanding
his mighty yell, there was no escape for me. At the same instant I was
struck and hurled to one side. When I came back to consciousness, I
thought my end had come, for I was unable to breathe, or move. My breath
slowly returned and I sat up. A glancing blow from the jagged butt of
the tree had torn a ragged wound in my side six inches long, whose scar
I shall always carry. If I had been one foot nearer, I would have been
crushed to death. I carefully bound up the wound, using antiseptics and
other remedies from my small medicine case. It healed with remarkable
rapidity, because of the bracing atmosphere and my excellent physical
condition.

In early November, after returning from the mountains, I rode alone from
the camp many miles to the north, in search of missing horses. The sky
was clear and the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

air as mild as a day in early summer. At midday, while stopping for rest
in a thicket of willows and quaking asps, I was alarmed to see, in the
north, a heavy bank of clouds, which spread rapidly, until the high
ridge of the Hudson's Bay Divide was completely obscured. Quickly
saddling my horse, I started for the camp at a gallop. The thermometer
dropped seventy degrees in a few moments and a driving snow storm, with
a cold wind from the north, set in. The surrounding plains were shrouded
in a white mist and the ground was soon covered with a fine drifting
snow. I took a southerly course with the storm at my back. My horse
having been purchased from the Kutenai Indians, on the western side of
the Rockies, and therefore a stranger to the range, was constantly
inclined to turn westward towards the mountains. Finding that he lacked
endurance, I changed from a gallop to a slow trot, in order to save his
strength in the deepening snow. I followed a small stream, until I
recognised the land marks of my former crossing, and then pushed on
towards the Milk River Ridge, the most dangerous part of my ride. Having
climbed to its summit, I was upon a broad table-land many miles in
width. To hunt for a distant camp on the plains, in such a storm, was
taking desperate chances, but there was no alternative. The air was
bitterly cold, while a fierce gale was driving the snow in blinding
clouds. My horse presented a droll appearance with a heavy coat of frost
covering him from head to foot, leaving only holes for his eyes. The
dripping water from fording the streams formed icicles along his sides
and matted his long tail, which rattled like a bunch of bones at every
step. Darkness fell, while I was crossing the plateau. The snow grew
deeper and deeper, and my horse moved more and more

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

slowly, losing both spirit and strength. When my spurs failed of effect,
I dismounted and tried leading. Then he wanted to lie down, so I
remounted and by freely using both whip and spurs, again moved slowly
forward. The storm increased in violence. Everything was enveloped in a
dense white pall and I lost all sense of direction. I felt as if I were
becoming blind and losing my senses, so I gripped myself and shouted,
that I might hear the sound of my own voice. I knew when we descended
into a coulee by the feeling that we were going down, down, down, I
could not tell how far. But, when we reached the bottom, my horse was
stuck fast in a deep drift, helplessly groaning without even trying to
move. It was now a desperate question of life or death, with the latter
staring me hard in the face. Nerved with the energy of despair, I seized
him by the bridle, struck him with my whip, and by pulling with all my
strength upon his tail, slowly worked him loose. Just then the moon
broke through the low driving clouds for a moment, enabling me to
correct my course. I struggled on, until I came at last to the edge of
the plateau and then descended to the lower level of the plain. I was
still far from the camp, having struck the river valley, too high up
through the tendency of my horse to veer westward towards the mountains.
But, it was not difficult to follow the trail down the valley, sheltered
from the full force of the storm by the big cottonwoods and dense
thickets of willows. At last, the cheerful lights of the lodge fires
appeared, and my hard struggle with the blizzard was ended. Mad Wolf was
rejoiced at my safe return, having believed that I had been claimed by
the "Cold Maker." Completely exhausted and chilled to the bone, the
warmth and shelter of my own lodge, on that stormy night, was to me the
most

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

delightful haven of rest and comfort I had ever enjoyed. After finishing
my supper, I lay on my blanket-bed listening to the wind whistling
through the ropes and poles overhead. Above the roar of the storm, I
heard faintly the bawling of frightened cattle, as they drifted
[helplessly](errata.htm#1.md) before the driving wind and snow and bitter
cold.

When I first wakened on the following morning the

<span id="img_13000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY LODGE DURING
THE BLIZZARD.](tn/13000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13000.jpg.md)  
MY LODGE DURING THE BLIZZARD.  
</span>

terrible blizzard was still raging. Drawing the warm blankets more
closely around me I slept soundly until I was aroused at midday by
Strikes-on-both-sides calling me to Mad Wolf's lodge to eat. When I
looked outside it seemed as if a white sheet had been let down before
me. Huge drifts were piled up on the north and south sides of the lodge.
Bull Plume, a visiting chief from the North Piegans, appeared on

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

horseback, struggling through the drifts. He held Nokoa (a young child)
in his arms, completely wrapped in blankets. Mesamax
(Takes-a-long-time-to-fly—a name derived from the habit of the swans
which are slow in starting to fly)—a boy of eight years, rode behind
holding tightly to his father, while his little daughter, six years old,
Natoya-niskim (Sacred Buffalo Stone), sat in front. Three women were
following on

<span id="img_13100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BULL PLUME AND
FAMILY COMING THROUGH THE BLIZZARD.](tn/13100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13100.jpg.md)  
BULL PLUME AND FAMILY COMING THROUGH THE BLIZZARD.  
</span>

foot, Ika-sta-pina (Bull Plume's wife), a very pretty young woman,
carrying a baby on her back, Mistina, her mother, and Itomina, her old
and deaf aunt. Bull Plume explained that his fire-wood was gone and his
travelling lodge was a poor shelter for women and children during the
blizzard.

The storm of wind and snow from the north continued for ten days. In the
meantime the close companionship round the lodge fire dissolved all
reserve and facilitated,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

what I most desired, the unbosoming of their experiences, legends and
religious beliefs. I heard many thrilling stories of war and adventure,
also of strange and unearthly experiences with disembodied spirits. The
story-telling generally began in the evening, continuing far into the
night, for the Blackfeet, when they feel in the mood, are great talkers,
going into minute details

<span id="img_13200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SETTING THE EAR
POLES FOR A CHANGE OF WIND.](tn/13200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13200.jpg.md)  
SETTING THE EAR POLES FOR A CHANGE OF WIND.  
</span>

and giving vivid descriptions of their experiences for which their
language is well adapted. They are superstitiously opposed to relating
legends in daylight and insist that they should be told after dark and
in the winter time.

We were all gathered one night around the lodge fire. There had been a
long silence, which Mad Wolf broke by telling

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

#### THE LEGEND OF THE SNOW TIPI.

"The Blackfeet have a Winter or Snow Tipi. It was given to us by
Es-to-nea-pesta, Maker of Storms and Blizzards. Whenever it is pitched,
cold weather and winds are sure to come because of its great power. For
this reason the Bad Weather Tipi is rarely seen in our midsummer camps,
when the people are most anxious for warm and pleasant weather. That,
which

<span id="img_13300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SUNSET AFTER THE
CHINOOK (WARM WIND).](tn/13300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13300.jpg.md)  
SUNSET AFTER THE CHINOOK (WARM WIND).  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will now tell,
happened many years ago during this same autumn moon.

"The ducks and geese had flown south, the last of their flocks having
disappeared many days before. It was past the time for the beginning of
winter, but the air was warm and the sky cloudless. One morning a band
of hunters were running buffalo on a broad plain. Na-toia-mon (Sacred
Otter—father of Morning Plume) and his young son had been very
successful.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the hunt was
over they began at once to skin their buffalo. While busy on the carcass
of a large bull, they did not notice the coming storm. When they had
finished, Na-toia-mon saw a heavy black cloud hanging low in the
northern horizon and extending high up in the sky. As he watched the
cloud it began spreading out and rolling over and over. Soon he saw

<span id="img_13400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SNOW
TIPI.](tn/13400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13400.jpg.md)  
SNOW TIPI.  
</span>

a low, seething, flying mass of clouds advancing rapidly over the plain.
He then realised that a terrible Ma-kai-peye (charge- storm or
blizzard)) was coming, and there would be no chance for escape. They lay
behind the dead buffalo bull for shelter, but the cold became so intense
he knew they would soon be frozen. With the fresh buffalo hide he made a
low shelter behind the bull's carcass and both crawled inside. The

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

snow soon covered the frozen hide with a deep drift making them warm and
comfortable.

"Na-toia-mon then fell asleep and dreamed that he was travelling alone
on the plains. He discovered a large tipi in the distance and, as he
drew nearer, saw that it was decorated. Its top was yellow like the
sunlight, with clusters of the seven stars painted on both sides,
representing the North, from whence the blizzards come. At the back was
a red disc for the sun, to the centre of which was attached the tail of
the sacred buffalo. At the bottom were the rolling ridges of the
prairies, with their rounded tops, and a broad yellow band, with green
discs to represent the colour of holes in ice, or frozen drifts. Beneath
the yellow top and on four sides, where stood the four main lodge poles,
were painted four green claws with yellow legs representing the Thunder
Bird. Above the door, which was made of spotted buffalo calf-skin, was a
buffalo head in red, with black horns and eyes in green,—the ice colour.
Horse tails were tied at either side over the door, and bunches of crow
feathers, with small bells attached, that tinkled whenever the wind
blew, were fastened to the ends of both ear poles.

"While Na-toia-mon was contemplating these picture paintings, he heard a
voice saying, 'Who is it that walks around my tipi? Why do you not
enter?' So, lifting the door flap and entering, he beheld at the back a
large and handsome man smoking alone in the lodge. His hair was white
and he was clothed in a long white robe. Taking a seat near the door,
Na-toia-mon gazed anxiously around, the stranger continuing to smoke in
silence. He was seated behind an altar of fresh earth with juniper laid
on the top, similar to the one used in the Sun ceremonial. Smoke was
rising like incense

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

from a hot coal close to the altar. His face was painted yellow with a
red line across his mouth and another across the eyes to his ears. His
medicine stick was also yellow. In his back hair he wore a black feather
and around his waist strips of otter skin with small bells attached.
Across his breast was a beaded mink skin, with small bells fastened to
its paws and one also to its mouth. Beside him lay a tobacco sack made
also of mink skin. He smoked a black stone pipe, the stem of which had
been blackened in the fire. The stranger still smoked in silence for a
long time and then finally spoke:

<span class="small">"'I am Es-tonea-pesta, the maker of cold weather and
this is the Snow Tipi or Yellow Paint Lodge. It is I who bring the cold
storms, the whirling snow, and the biting winds from the north, and I
control them at my will. I have called you to my lodge because I have
taken pity on you. I am going to help you for the sake of your son who
was caught in the blizzard with you. I now give you the Snow Tipi with
its decorations and medicines. With it I also give you the mink-skin
tobacco pouch, the black stone pipe, and my supernatural power. You and
your son will not perish in this storm. Your lives will be spared. When
you return to camp make a tipi just as you see this one is made.'</span>

"The Cold Maker explained to Na-toia-mon the decorations to be used in
painting, advising him to remember them very carefully, also the songs
and the ceremonial to be used in transferring the tipi to anyone who
might make the vow. He told him that the mink skin should be worn as a
charm, whenever he went to war and that the horse tails, hanging over
the door, would bring him good luck, both in keeping his own horses and
in securing others from the enemy.

"Na-toia-mon then awoke from his sleep. He saw that the storm was
abating and knew that the North Man would keep his promise. As soon as
he returned to camp, he made a model of the Snow Tipi, painting it just
as the Cold Maker directed. He gathered together

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

the medicines necessary for the ceremonial and in the spring, the time
when the Blackfeet make their new lodges, Na-toia-mon made and painted
the Bad Weather, or Snow Tipi.

"During the following winter, the Blackfeet found out that the power,
given to Na-toia-mon by the Cold Maker, was very great. When the snows
lay deep (February), they were camped near the mouth of the Cutbank
Canyon. Meat was very scarce, so a party crossed the high plateau to
hunt on the North Fork of Milk River. They killed some buffalo but,
while skinning them, were caught in a blizzard. They were upon an
exposed plain, where there was no shelter. Finding a few small willows
they built a fire to thaw out the frozen hides. Part of the expedition
started for camp, but lost their way. After wandering around in a circle
they came back to the place they started from. When the wood gave out
they held a council. It seemed useless to attempt to cross the high
plateau in such a storm, but, if they remained, all would be frozen to
death. Then, Morning Plume turning to Na-toia-mon said: 'Brother! will
you not try the power given you by the Cold Maker? If his medicine is
strong, now is the time to use it. For the sake of your wife and
children, drive back this storm.' Na-toia-mon replied, 'I came not from
the Sun! How can I drive back the Ma-kai-peye?' 'Try it!' said Morning
Plume. 'For the sake of our wives and children I now call upon you for
help.' Na-toia-mon had with him the mink-skin tobacco pouch and the
black pipe given him by the North Man. When he was ready to open the
pipe, he gave directions to wrap up the women and children as warmly as
possible, and to place them upon the travois, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) and told the men to go in advance, and
break a trail through the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

deep snow for the horses. When they were ready to start he called out,
'As soon as I begin to pray for power to break this storm, start at
once. Travel as fast as you can for camp, for I can only hold back the
storm for a short time. When it sets in again, it will come more
fiercely than before.' Na-toia-mon filled the black pipe and when he
began smoking he gave the signal to start. He blew the smoke first
towards the north-east,—the direction the storm came from. Then he held
up the sacred pipe and prayed:

<span class="small">"'Maker of Storms! listen and have pity! Maker of
Storms! hear us and take pity on our women and children as you once took
pity upon my youngest son! Pity us now and hold back this storm! May we
survive! Listen, Oh Maker of Storms!'</span>

"When he blew the smoke towards the south-east, the sun shone through a
rift in the clouds. Na-toia-mon called after the people, 'Hurry now as
fast as you can across the high ridge, for the storm will soon come upon
you again.' He smoked towards the south-west and the clouds began to
break up. When he made his final smoke and prayed towards the
north-west, the clouds drew back and the blue sky was seen in all
directions. Then Na-toia-mon himself hurried towards camp. He knew the
Cold Maker was only holding the blizzard back. They crossed the plateau
in safety and were descending towards the river, when the blizzard again
enveloped them, and they could not see their way. But, the camp was not
far distant, and they finally reached their lodges in safety.

"From that time the Blackfeet have always believed in Na-toia-mon's
dream. But he could never again be prevailed upon to try his
supernatural power. He always replied, that he knew the power to control
the storms would not be given to him a second time."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[137:1](ont11.htm#fr_17.md) See
[Appendix](ont44.htm#an_137.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Ghost Stories](ont12.md)
