[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont13)  [Next](ont15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### CHAPTER XI

#### SUN WORSHIP

<span class="small">Religious beliefs.—Origin and meaning of "medicine"
and "medicine-man."—The reasonableness of Sun Worship in the light of
nature.—Religious significance of the Sun-dance.—Mad Wolf's letter
inviting his white son to the Sun-dance.—Reason for the vow to give the
Sun-dance by Mad Wolf's wife.—My return to attend Sun-dance.—First-night
impressions in Mad Wolf's camp.</span>

THE Blackfeet are firm believers in the Supernatural and in the control
of human affairs by both Good and Evil Powers in the invisible world.
The Great Spirit, or Great Mystery, or Good Power, is everywhere and in
everything—mountains, plains, winds, waters, trees, birds, and animals.
Whether animals have mind and the reasoning faculty admits of no doubt
with the Blackfeet, for they believe that all animals receive their
endowment of power from the Sun, differing in degree, but the same in
kind as that received by man and all things animate and inanimate. Some
birds and animals, such as the grizzly bear, buffalo, beaver, wolf,
eagle, and raven, are worshipped, because they possess a larger amount
of the Good Power than the others and so, when a Blackfoot is in trouble
or peril, he naturally prays to them for assistance.

His ideas of the Evil Power are vague and undefined. That problem of all
time, the origin of evil, its continuance, and the suffering in the
world because of it,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

are mysteries to the Indian, as well as to the greatest minds of the
Christian races. Without knowing why, he believes that bad luck or
misfortune, such as accident and loss of property, sickness or death, is
inflicted upon him as a punishment by the Evil Power because of his
violations of the laws of the "medicines." A Blackfoot has no fear of
the Good Power, because it is his friend; but he is an abject slave to
his constant dread of the Evil Power, or Evil Spirits, who are ever
ready to pursue and punish him. Death, like the fabled "sword of
Damocles," is always suspended over his head, ready to drop in
punishment for any one of the multitude of offences against the sacred
medicines, which he is liable to commit.

It is impossible for the Christian races to understand, or estimate the
powerful influence, which the "medicine" beliefs have for ages exerted
upon the Indian character and tribal life. It being their universal
belief that illness of the body signified possession by an evil spirit,
their methods of healing, in common with those of all savage tribes,
naturally took the form of incantation and occult ceremonies for
exorcising it. No doubt the title of "medicine," by which their doctors
were known in our early chronicles of the Indians, had its origin in
this manner with the early French colonists. By a natural transition it
passed into that of "medicine men," with English speaking people. A
"medicine man" is believed to control the weather, to heal the sick and
exorcise evil spirits by means of incantations and magic arts. He is
really more of a magician than a medical doctor, although he constantly
assumes the functions of the latter. His vocation is to instruct and
guide in the avoidance of acts that are "bad medicine" and therefore
unlucky, and in the use of the best means for propitiating the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Evil Power,
because of unlucky acts already committed. When an Indian is "making
medicine," he is performing mysterious ceremonies, or using other
approved means for controlling the supernatural powers and averting the
malevolence of the evil spirits. Some authorities have understood the
word as meaning "mystery," and the medicine man as "mystery man." But
this is not an adequate expression. While there is no corresponding word
in the English language to express the equivalent of the Indian idea,
the phrase "supernatural power" is probably the nearest equivalent to
the word "medicine," in its common Indian use.

Without the medium of a divine revelation, through which the Christian
races received knowledge of the true God, and with only their senses and
reason, and the light of nature to guide them, the Blackfeet evolved a
very reasonable form of pagan religion in their Sun-worship. Unaided, so
far as we know, and circumscribed by the horizon of their own
experiences, they determined the phenomena of nature, and connected
causes and effects into a system of natural religion, which did credit
to their reasoning powers, their piety and their imagination. Whether
they derived any of it from the South, through the Aztecs, or from Asia
via the Behring Straits, or otherwise, is, as yet, one of the unsolved
problems of ethnology.

The Sun, as the great centre of power and the upholder of all things,
was the Blackfeet's supreme object of worship. He saw that every bud and
leaf and blossom turned its face towards the Sun as the source of its
life and growth; that the berries he ate reddened and ripened under its
warmth; that men and animals thrived under its sustaining light, but all
perished

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

when it was withdrawn. He saw that in the darkness and cold of winter,
nature retired into silence and sleep; that when the sunlight and warmth
of spring returned, all nature awakened and put on its robe of green;
the bears left their hibernating dens and the beavers their winter
lodges. The Sun made the grass to grow and the trees to be covered with
foliage for the subsistence of birds and animals, upon which he himself
in turn depended for food. The devout Blackfoot therefore called upon
men, women and children and everything that had breath to worship the
all-glorious, all-powerful, Sun-God who fills the heavens with
brightness and the earth with life and beauty. To them, he is the
supreme source of light, of life, and of power.

The Sun-dance was not, as has been commonly believed, "merely an
occasion for the self torture of youths, who are candidates for
admission to the full standing of warriors." It was, on the contrary,
their great annual religious festival, their holy sacrament, the supreme
expression of their religion. It must always have its beginning in a
woman's vow, made to the Sun-God for the recovery of the sick. The
entire tribe were accustomed to come together every summer for the Sun
lodge, some to fulfil vows made for the recovery of the sick, some to
fast and pray, others seeking diversion, while warriors came to inflict
self torture in fulfilment of vows made to the Sun for deliverance from
peril.

It was my good fortune to witness several Sun-dances and to have had
exceptional facilities for their study and observation, especially in
the one given by Mad Wolf and his wife, my Indian parents by adoption. I
have been surprised that so little has been known as to the remarkable
symbolism of the ritual and the elevated religious ideas and teachings
contained in the ceremonial

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

of the Sun-dance. Much stress has been mistakenly laid upon its
demoralising tendencies, chiefly because of the self torture, which was
formerly practised under an intense religious fanaticism, but now
entirely suppressed and overlooking entirely the high morality it
inculcated. The silence of literature as to its true religious
significance and its highly developed symbolism, is doubtless owing to
the barriers with which all explorers have found it surrounded. These
have been a difficult and unwritten language; the Indian's natural
reserve, especially concerning religion, and the impenetrable
secretiveness of the medicine men, who were the custodians of the
religious rites and mysteries. Their very livelihood depended upon a
strict and jealous maintenance of that secrecy.

Early in the spring, I received the following letter from Mad Wolf,
written through an interpreter:—

"MY DEAR SON:—

"I am now feeling good in my heart because I received a letter from my
white son and read in it so much that I wanted to know. We are glad to
hear that Ka-ach-sino (great grandfather, President) is a good man, that
he cares for his red children and will protect them. We all feel good in
our hearts, when you write telling us so many things from the outside
that we do not know. After you left us, at the time of the first
snowfall, some white men tried to take away our lands, but my people
refused to allow it. We want to move away from civilisation, but there
is no longer a place to which we can go. We have been continually driven
westward, until the Rocky Mountains now face us like a wall and we can
go no farther. We have made many mistakes, but I consider the greatest
was when we allowed white men to live with us upon our lands. We were
not satisfied with one trading store. There are now two stores, but the
prices are even higher.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

Why is it that the Great Father does not send us a good man for agent?
He is wise and should know what his red children need. We have never had
one whole-agent, they have all been half-agents. I have come to feel
now, as if there was no one to trust except you, my son. I ask that you
continue writing to me, even if you should not hear in reply. I am
experiencing great difficulty in getting my letters written because
there are so few white men, upon whom I can depend. Last winter, my
youngest son was taken sick with a fever. When the Indian doctors said
Little Crane must die, my heart was heavy. I went alone to the mountains
and entering the forest, I fell asleep and had a dream. I saw you coming
through the trees and walking towards me carrying two large birds. You
came to my side, and said 'My father, you are in distress, but I have
come to help you. These two birds I have killed are your troubles and
they will no longer grieve you.' I awoke feeling relieved. You are far
away towards the rising sun, but I know you have influence among the
white men and can help us. When I returned from the mountain, my wife
met me, saying, 'Little Crane will now recover because I have made a vow
to give the festival sacred to the Sun God. I know it will cost us many
horses and I must fast and suffer, but it was necessary to make the vow
to save the life of our son.' Little Crane is well again, and in the
coming summer, when the grass is green, we will give the Sun ceremonial.
I ask that you come again soon to visit your brothers and sisters and
Indian parents. Tell your white father that no harm will come to you in
the Blackfeet camp, because you will be safe and at home with your
Indian parents. I now feel good in my heart towards you, my son, and
shake hands with you and with all your friends.

YOUR INDIAN FATHER,     
SIYEH (MAD WOLF)."

Early in the moon of flowers (June), I rode across the plains towards
Mad Wolf's home on Cutbank River.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The prairies were
brilliant with wild roses in various shades of colour, and on all sides
larks and Savanna sparrows were singing. I crossed a long and irregular
procession of hills, sweeping northward to join their mighty leader the
Hudson Bay Divide. Far to the north, as if rising from the plains, and
separated from the main range of the Rockies, stood the sharp peak of
Chief Mountain, a perpetual landmark of the Indians. I recognised the
familiar scenes, the streams, the lakes, and the cut-banks, the piles of
stones used for guidance and safety during storm and blizzard, and the
lonely graves upon the ridges. I found Mad Wolf camped on the South Fork
of Cutbank River. When I entered the lodge, he was seated at the back
with Gives-to-the-Sun, his wife, their heads bowed in prayer. It was
Gives-to-the-Sun who had made the vow, and around her, as the sacred
woman, all the ceremonies would centre. Mad Wolf exclaimed, "It is my
white son!" He gave me a warm hand-shake, and bidding me be seated
looked me over searchingly. I was deeply touched by the evidence of his
warm friendship for me, when he took a package from an old medicine bag,
and unrolling the outside cover, which was decorated with sacred red
paint, produced a number of my letters, the envelopes soiled and worn.
He first passed them around the circle for examination, and then, after
gazing at them for a moment in silence, returned them to the bundle,
saying he would always preserve them carefully and they would be buried
with him when he died. Sweet grass was burning on a hot coal, and as Mad
Wolf saw me watching the smoke, he explained that it was incense rising
to the sky, and said: "Ever since you went away, I have been praying to
the Sun that you might return in safety, and now you are here. We are

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

glad to have you present, and I will reveal many things in order that
you may know there is nothing harmful in our worship. You can then
explain our religion to the white people, for we know you are straight
and will speak the truth.

"Last winter when Little Crane was sick and about to

<span id="img_17400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A WOMAN'S VOW TO
THE SUN.](tn/17400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17400.jpg)  
A WOMAN'S VOW TO THE SUN.  
</span>

die, it was very cold. For many days the sun did not shine and the snow
lay deep over the plains. The medicine men, White Grass, and Bull Child
danced and beat upon their drums, but the evil spirits could not be
driven out. In vain Ear Rings sang his strongest songs and administered
root medicine by means of hot stones. Our son only became weaker. One
evening at sunset

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

the clouds broke, and my wife seeing the bright rays coming into the
lodge went outside, and prayed to the Sun:

<span class="small">"'Pity me, Great Sun God! for you know that I am a
pure woman. Give back health and strength to my boy, and I promise to
build a sacred Sun lodge for you before all the people.'</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "She then stood
beside Little Crane and said, 'Rise up, my son, for I am a pure woman
and have vowed to give the Sun-dance that your health may be restored.'
She then went to Bull Child, the medicine man and was painted by him.
Next morning at daybreak they stood together facing the east. As the sun
rose from the plains, Bull Child prayed,

<span class="small">"'Great Spirit in the Sun! I know that this is a
pure woman. If her sick boy recovers, I promise you that she will give a
Sun-dance and will eat of the sacred food with you and with the
Underground Spirits.'</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Before the snow
melted Little Crane was restored to health, and when the warm winds of
spring began to blow and the grass was green, we began preparations for
the Sun-dance in fulfilment of our vow. We are now waiting for Flat Tail
to bring tongues from the south. When he arrives, we will hold a
ceremonial, and will consecrate them as the sacred food."

There is always so much uncertainty in the movements of Indians, that,
in order to be present without fail and miss nothing, I determined to
stay night and day beside Mad Wolf's lodge. He gave me every facility
for accomplishing my purpose. He even stopped the ceremonies that I
might photograph the dances, write down the words of the chants and
prayers and secure graphophone records of their sacred songs. He also
made a speech into the graphophone, asking that it be sent as his
message to the Great Father at

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Washington. My
lodge was pitched by Strikes-on-both sides, my Indian sister. She was
the Chief's favourite child, and with good reason, for she was skilled
in the Indian arts and always thoughtful and considerate of others. It
was she who gathered my firewood, called me whenever my horses strayed
from camp, and showed where a cool spring lay just over the ridge.

When night fell, and a cold breeze blew from the

<span id="img_17700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WHEN NIGHT
FELL.](tn/17700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17700.jpg)  
WHEN NIGHT FELL.  
</span>

snow-covered Rockies, it was delightful to lie once more upon my
comfortable bed of robes and blankets, watching the flickering light of
my small inside fire, and to hear again all the well known sounds of
lodge life. The gentle flapping of the lodge ears, when the wind
changed, causing the smoke to swirl and even the mournful singing of wet
wood on the hot embers were familiar sounds. It was interesting to
distinguish the different odours of burning firewood, the sweet
fragrance of birch and cottonwood, the resinous scent of pine, and

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the disagreeable odour of alder, called mic-cisa-misoi (stink-wood) by
the Blackfeet, because of the offensive smell of its smoke. I went to
sleep listening to the musical flow of the river upon its rocky bed, and
it was the first sound to greet my ears when I wakened in the morning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Beginning of the Sun-Dance](ont15)
