[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont17)  [Next](ont19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### CHAPTER XV

#### PAINTED TIPIS

<span class="small">The tipi as a dwelling.—Impressive spectacle of the
"White City" of the Blackfeet.—Protective designs of tipis.—Their sacred
character and origin.—Strict secrecy of the owners.—I secure an Otter
Tipi that was believed to have lost its protective power.—The ceremonial
of transfer and its rules.—Special ceremonials and feast.—Transfer of
the Cross Stripe Tipi to Wolf Tail.—Methods of painting tipis.—Kinds of
paint used.—Manner of securing paints.—Medicine Weasel's superstitious
fear of copying an Otter design.—Five different Otter Tipis in one
camp.—While guest in an Otter Tipi, I learned the symbols of its
decorations.—The War Tipi.—Description of its picture writings.—I secure
a War and Hunting Tipi.—Relation of Painted Tipis to Sun-Worship.</span>

OF all types of primitive dwellings, the tipi of the plains-tribes, with
its conical shape, tapering poles and ingeniously devised "ears" for
facilitating the upward draught for the inside fire, is one of the most
picturesque and beautiful. It has been evolved in the distant past to
meet the requirements of a nomadic people for shelter. Like the snow
igloo of the far distant Esquimaux, it displays much skill in the
adaptation of available materials to the necessities of their
environment. It is a perfect habitation for comfort, convenience and
good ventilation in both summer and winter. Its design and interior
arrangements are so complete, they never change. In recent years canvas
has been substituted as a covering in place of buffalo skins, because of
the practical extinction of the buffalo.

No one who has seen the "White City" of the

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blackfeet, during
their annual Festival of the Sun, can ever forget the strange and
fascinating beauty of the scene. With the snow-capped Rocky Mountains
for a background, hundreds of white tipis, uniform in shape,

<span id="img_20800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CROW TIPI IN 1896
(MADE OF SKINS). REAR VIEW.](tn/20800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20800.jpg.md)  
CROW TIPI IN 1896 (MADE OF SKINS). REAR VIEW.  
</span>

and pitched in perfect order by clans, are spread upon the plain in a
great circular encampment.

The rapidity with which such a great camp can be either "pitched" or
"struck" is almost incredible. Catlin, in describing the sudden striking
of a similar camp by the Sioux, says: "At the time announced, the lodge
of the chief is seen flapping in the wind, a

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

part of the poles having been taken out from under it. This is the
signal, and in one minute 600 lodges (on a level and beautiful prairie),
which before had been strained tight and fixed, were seen waving and
flapping in the wind, and in one minute more all were flat upon the
ground. Their horses and dogs, of which they had a vast number, had all
been secured upon the spot in

<span id="img_20900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CROW TIPI IN 1906
(MADE OF COTTON DUCK). FRONT VIEW.](tn/20900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20900.jpg.md)  
CROW TIPI IN 1906 (MADE OF COTTON DUCK). FRONT VIEW.  
</span>

readiness, and each one was speedily loaded with the burden allotted to
it, and made ready to fall into the grand procession."

The tipi has received an added element of individuality and
picturesqueness, originating, no one knows when, by the use of painted
decorations in colours, representing prominent events in the history of
the tribe, or of the owner, or symbolical designs of religious
significance. The symbolical designs, medicine bundles

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and ceremonials attached to them, which are believed to secure for their
owners and their families protective power from sickness and misfortune,
suggest a large and interesting field for investigation and study. These
designs and the make-up of the medicine bundles were always

<span id="img_21000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BIG ROCK
TIPI.](tn/21000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21000.jpg.md)  
BIG ROCK TIPI.  
</span>

secured through dreams, after long fasting and solitary communion with
nature. They thus became, by right of discovery, the exclusive property
of their owners, who might transfer them to others, but there could be
no duplicates. When a painted tipi became worn out, a new one, with the
same decorations, could take its

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

place, but the owner must destroy the original, sacrificing it to the
Sun by spreading it upon a lake, and sinking it beneath the water. The
Yellow Buffalo Tipi, also the Crow, Otter, Serpent, Cross Stripe, Black
Buffalo, Big Rock and others, with their bundles and the legends of
their origin have been handed down

<span id="img_21100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SERPENT
TIPI.](tn/21100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21100.jpg.md)  
SERPENT TIPI.  
</span>

through many generations, and are considered preeminent in their strong
protective power. Their ownership is still jealously guarded by the head
men of the Blackfeet, who, because of their sacred character and power,
and consequent value to the tribe, will not sanction their disposal to
white men. Through several years of repeated failures, in trying to
purchase a painted tipi, I was made to realise the force of the rigid

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

customs governing their ownership, the religious barriers of ceremonial
requirements and the strict secrecy of the owners. I finally secured an
Otter Tipi from an Indian, out only because of the unusual circumstance,
that he

<span id="img_21200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CROSS STRIPE OR
BEAVER TIPI.](tn/21200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21200.jpg.md)  
CROSS STRIPE OR BEAVER TIPI.  
</span>

believed it had lost its protective power, his wife and all his children
having died.

Painted Tipis may change ownership, in the fulfilment of vows, made by
either men, or women in time of peril, or in behalf of the sick. Anyone,
who is willing

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

to observe the rules of the medicine and to keep the secrets of the
ceremonial, can make the vow. There are, however, certain penalties, in
the form of sickness, or loss of property, which are believed will fall
upon their owner, if the ceremonial is not carefully followed. Each
painted tipi has its medicine bundle composed of the skins of birds and
animals, or other articles, that

<span id="img_21300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THUNDER TIPI (ON
LEFT), RED STRIPE TIPI (IN CENTRE).&lt;br&gt; (Thunder Tipi was painted
blue, with Thunder-bird at the back.)](tn/21300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21300.jpg.md)  
THUNDER TIPI (ON LEFT), RED STRIPE TIPI (IN CENTRE).  
(Thunder Tipi was painted blue, with Thunder-bird at the back.)  
</span>

are used in the ceremonial of transfer, and at other times. The man,
receiving the tipi, makes payment to the owner with horses and other
gifts. His relatives generally contribute, to show that they take a deep
interest in the transaction, and to demonstrate to the tribe that they
are willing to sacrifice their property to help their clansman.

The ceremonial and feast are also given at a certain time of the year.
The time for the Thunder Tipi is

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

when the first thunder is heard in the Spring, and for the Beaver Tipi
when the first grass is seen,—the time when the beavers are opening
their winter lodges.

During a Sun-dance camp, Wolf Tail, in fulfilment of a vow to buy the
Cross Stripe or Beaver Tipi, called upon Wipes his-eyes, the owner, and
gave him a horse and a pipe as a retainer. According to the rules of the
medicine, Wipes-his-eyes could not refuse to part with the sacred tipi.
The ceremonial, with full payment, took place at a later time. On the
day following, when I was told of the occurrence, I visited the Cross
Stripe Tipi and saw Wolf Tail's horse tied outside, while the wife and
children of Wipes-his-eyes were mourning because they must give up their
home, to which they had become deeply attached, having lived in it for
many years. Later in the day I saw the tipi taken down, to be pitched by
Wolf Tail among the clan of the Skunks.

Although the use of paints as a preservative was unknown among the
Blackfeet, the decorative painting of tipis and the symbolic marking of
sacred objects, were in such general use, as to make the procuring and
preparing of paints a business in itself. Onesta and his wife Nitana, my
companions while visiting the Bloods and North Piegans in Alberta, were
known as "paint gatherers." They traded in them with their own people
and also with other Indian tribes. Onesta told me of the best places for
securing the different coloured paints and their methods of preparing
them.

There were formerly men who made a speciality of painting tipis. Their
names were Marrow Bones, Calf Looking and Eagle Flag. Whenever anyone
had a tipi to be painted, he gave a feast and invited his

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

friends. After songs and prayers, all present would assist the leader
chosen to do the painting. The pencils used for painting were made from
buffalo bones, which were porous and readily absorbed and held the
paint. A different pencil was used for each colour. Willow sticks were
used for ruling the lines, which were first traced out with a white
liquid scraped from a hide.

<span id="img_21500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BLACK BUFFALO
TIPI.](tn/21500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21500.jpg.md)  
BLACK BUFFALO TIPI.  
</span>

The paints were dug from the ground. The yellow and black colours were
found at certain places along the Marias River. The yellow clay was
first worked into a dough-like mass, and then roasted on a hot fire of
coals, when it became a red powder. This is called the sacred red paint
and is used in the ceremonials. Black was made from charred wood. The
green paint was formerly secured from a large lake north-east of the
Katoysix, (Sweet Pine Hills). It was made from the scum taken from

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

the surface of the water and dried. Most of the yellow came from a place
on the Yellowstone River near some warm springs, but was also made out
of the buffalo's gall.

"There was once a large camp of Blackfeet at these springs. Some of them
had made a tunnel into a high cut-bank and were hard at work getting out
yellow paint. One old woman, who made a speciality of paints, was
digging, while about eighty women, with their paint bags, were waiting
outside. Suddenly, the old woman called from the cave that her arms were
caught. She was frightened and said that she wanted to come out. An
Indian, seated on a butte not far away, shouted to them that the bank
was caving in. At first it came slowly, and then with such a rush, that
the women could not escape. They were buried beneath great masses of
earth. Almost all of the women were caught. The Indians worked night and
day to uncover them, but many were taken out dead."

Nitana then said, "just before we started on our northern expedition, I
was digging paint on Birch Creek. When I had finished, I prayed for the
old chief, Many-white-horses, and then examined my paint, only to find
it had turned to worthless dirt. I was so frightened that I hurried back
to the lodge. Soon after this, we heard that Many-white-horses had
died." Onesta replied to his wife, "If you had prayed for Heavy Breast,
as you should have done, because he was then giving the Sun-dance, your
paint would not have been changed to dirt." It was the custom, when a
woman was digging paint, to offer prayers in behalf of some prominent
medicine man."

No Blackfoot would venture to copy the design of a painted tipi, unless
it had been regularly transferred to

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

him, or been received in a dream, believing that such an infringement
would incur the penalty of sickness, or death. I first realised the
strength of this superstition when I attempted to have a tipi of my own
painted. I went to Medicine Weasel—an old friend of Mad Wolf's—asking
his assistance and promising to reward him for his trouble. He willingly
agreed, not realising fully the character of my proposition. Next day,
when I handed him the paints and suggested his making it into an Otter
Tipi, he begged to be released, explaining that he had no right to copy
the Otter design, and to do so might bring on a severe illness, or even
cause his death. After several futile efforts I abandoned my purpose,
because of the alarm it caused among my Blackfeet friends.

In the Sun-dance camp, consisting of three hundred and fifty lodges, I
counted thirty-five painted tipis—one-tenth of the entire number. They
included a great variety of designs, but lack of space forbids my taking
more than a few descriptions from my notes. There were five Otter Tipis,
each differing from the others, but all having a separate and distinct
origin.

In nearly all of these painted tipis, there is an appropriate and
logical arrangement of the decorations. There is generally, at the
bottom, an encircling band of dark colour representing the earth. Within
this band is a row of discs called "dusty stars." The Blackfeet have
given the name "dusty stars" to the puff-balls which grow in circular
clusters upon the prairies, because they are supposed to be meteors,
which have fallen from the night-sky and spring up into puff-balls in a
single night. They call them "dusty stars" because they emit a puff of
dust when pressed. Resting on this lowest band, we often find a row of

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

rounded, or of pointed projections, representing rounded ridges or
pointed mountain peaks. Upon the broad central space above these is
portrayed the protective design of animal, bird, sacred rock,
thunder-trails, or other emblems, which imparts to the lodge its
protective

<span id="img_21800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![OTTER
TIPI.](tn/21800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21800.jpg.md)  
OTTER TIPI.  
</span>

power and from which it receives its distinctive title.

Surmounting all, and including the "ears," a broad encircling band of
black represents the night sky, on which are portrayed the sun and
crescent moon, the constellations of the Seven Brothers and Lost
Children (Great Bear and Pleiades), and a Maltese cross, the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

emblem of the Morning Star. This cross is also said to represent the
Butterfly (or Sleep Bringer), which is believed to have great power in
bringing dreams to the owner.

I was once a guest for a week in an Otter Tipi, and had the opportunity
of learning the symbolic meaning of its decorations, the ceremonial
belonging to it and

<span id="img_21900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WAR TIPI OF
RUNNING RABBIT.](tn/21900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21900.jpg.md)  
WAR TIPI OF RUNNING RABBIT.  
</span>

the pictures and signs which had been painted on the owner's body for
the ceremonial of its transfer. A section of the top was painted black
to represent the night-sky. On it the Morning Star was represented by a
yellow cross, to the centre of which was attached a sacred buffalo tail.
On opposite sides of the black band the two constellations were painted
in yellow clusters. A procession of otters, painted on the middle space

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

beneath, made it an Otter Tipi and gave it the protective power promised
in the dream, which originally revealed the design. At the bottom of the
canvas a broad band in dark colour represented the earth, and on it two
parallel rows of discs were painted in yellow, to represent the "dusty
stars" of the prairie.

For the ceremonial of transferring the Otter Tipi, all the painting on
the face and body of the purchaser was made symbolical of the Otter.
Parallel lines on both sides of his face represented otter trails. Upon
his arms were painted otter paws. Over his body were otter tracks and
upon his breast a circle representing an otter lodge on the river bank.

The painted War Tipi of Running Rabbit was of an entirely different
character, being covered with picture records of tribal victories. It is
an interesting fact that Indians never make records of their defeats.
The War Tipi had a broad red band encircling the bottom. The top was
painted black, with a red star at the back. The picture records in the
central space, which were all in red, represented battles with the
Crows, Sioux, Snakes, Cheyennes and Flatheads. There was depicted a
daring horse-stealing expedition of a Blackfoot chief, who was in the
act of cutting loose a horse, tied close to a lodge, in full view of the
owner. A warrior was engaged in a fierce hand-to-hand conflict, while
seizing his enemy's rifle. A number of successful scouting expeditions
of a brave chief were marked, each expedition being portrayed by three
sides of a square. A circle around a number of arrows pointing in all
directions represented a small entrenchment where a Blackfoot warrior
repelled the enemy after a desperate fight. On a long crooked line,
representing the course

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of a river, was marked the bend, where a famous fight with the Crows
took place. The brave act of a warrior was recorded, who saved the lives
of two wounded comrades, by carrying one with him on his own horse

<span id="img_22100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WAR TIPI (REAR
VIEW).&lt;br&gt; (The crooked lines represent rivers where famous fights
took place.)](tn/22100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22100.jpg.md)  
WAR TIPI (REAR VIEW).  
(The crooked lines represent rivers where famous fights took place.)  
</span>

and leading a second horse carrying the other. The making of the first
treaty with the whites, by a Blackfoot chief, was recorded as an event
of great importance. A warrior stealing the first mule from the white
soldiers was also regarded as an act of

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

special renown, because mules had never been seen before by the
Blackfeet.

My own tipi, which was made by Ips-e-nikki (Kills-close-to-the-lake),
wife of Big Eyes, was decorated with symbols of the Blackfeet religion,
and pictographs of

<span id="img_22200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY OWN DECORATED
TIPI.](tn/22200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22200.jpg.md)  
MY OWN DECORATED TIPI.  
</span>

interesting events, both of war and hunting, in her husband's life. The
top was painted yellow and had the usual stellar constellations on both
"ears." The Sun and Morning Star were at the back with sun dogs at the
sides and a rainbow beneath. In two perpendicular rows, one on each side
of the door, were representations of Rocky Mountain peaks. At the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

bottom was a yellow hand, with a single row of discs for "dusty stars."
Figures of men, animals and Indian camps were painted in yellow, black
and red on the central space of the canvas. There was an attack by a
band of Sioux upon Big Eyes, while travelling with his family, and also
his hand-to-hand fight with the Sioux Chief. He was represented as
stealing by night a horse picketed close to a Crow lodge, also a mule
from a white man; also as suddenly descending at daybreak upon a white
man milking a cow; and also in a desperate fight on horse-back with a
band of Cree Indians.

On the north-side was depicted Big Eyes’ thrilling fight in the Rocky
Mountains with five grizzly bears (a mother bear with two large cubs and
two other bears) in a berry patch,—his wounding the she-bear,—her charge
and the desperate struggle, when he plunged his knife into her breast
and she tore him with her teeth and claws, then, leaving him for dead,
to attack and lacerate his horse.

A white man looking upon the inside circle of Painted Tipis, in the
great encampment of the Sun-dance festival, would be impressed with
their imposing array and with the spectacular effect of their novel
colourings and fantastic decorations. But, it probably would never occur
to him that he was looking upon pictorial representations of the
tipi-owner's religion. As the wearing of the crucifix is the outward
sign to the world of the inward faith of many Christians, so these tipi
representations of the Buffalo, Beaver, Elk, Otter, Eagle and Antelope
proclaim the belief of the Blackfeet, that these sacred animals and
birds have been endowed with power from the Sun, and, therefore, that
the owner and his family may secure from them aid in danger and
protection from sickness and misfortune. Just as patron

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

saints are worshipped to-day, and the Lares and Penates of pagan Rome
were worshipped two thousand years ago for household protection, in like
manner the spirit of the otter, or buffalo, or beaver, is worshipped and
its visible representation on the tipi is held sacred by the Blackfoot
family as their powerful protector.

These symbolic decorations, having a religious significance are an ever
present reminder to the family of their obligations to their tutelary
medicine, and of the protection they may expect as a reward for their
strict observance of its rules. Wherever the ascending smoke of their
fires denotes their abode, there they piously display the symbols of
their religious faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Sun-Dance Camp](ont19.md)
