[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont20)  [Next](ont22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### AN INITIATION INTO THE MEDICINE PIPE SOCIETY

<span class="small">Mysterious methods used in securing a new
member.—Medicine Pipe given to the Blackfeet ages ago by the Thunder
Chief.—Disturbing sounds in the big camp at night.—Excitement at
daybreak caused by herald announcing an election to the Medicine Pipe
Society.—Initiation of the new member.—Initiation ceremonial in Tearing
Lodge's tipi because of a superstition.—Large fee for membership.</span>

As I walked through the camp of the Grease Melters, bright inside fires
lighted up the Otter, Elk and Antelope Tipis, revealing the
characteristic animal paintings in soft Indian colours on the canvas. A
fresh breeze blew from the mountains, gently moving the lodge ears, and
tinkling the small bells attached to their decorations of buffalo tails.
Hearing strange noises from a tipi, I went near to listen. The fire had
burned so low that I could see nothing, but from the grunting and
blowing sounds I knew that a medicine man was doctoring within, by
invoking the power of the grizzly bear.

While standing in the dark shadow I noticed two men, with blankets drawn
closely over their heads, moving stealthily towards Big Spring's lodge.
A bright fire was burning inside. When they drew near, they stopped, as
if listening. One of them approached cautiously to peer inside, and then
both hurried away. When I told Mad Wolf, he explained that they were

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

two members of the Medicine Pipe society, choosing a new member in place
of Lone Chief, who had kept his Pipe for four years and was ready to
give it up. He

<span id="img_25200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MEDICINE PIPE
BUNDLE OVER LODGE DOOR.&lt;br&gt; (Position when in a permanent
camp.)](tn/25200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25200.jpg.md)  
MEDICINE PIPE BUNDLE OVER LODGE DOOR.  
(Position when in a permanent camp.)  
</span>

said, "It is a difficult matter to secure an acceptable member, because
the society can only take in prominent men, who can afford to pay well
for the Pipe, and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

to give the customary feasts and ceremonials. It is always known when a
member is to be taken in, so that those who are unwilling to be chosen
can sleep away from their lodges. Big Spring is sleeping to-night on a
ridge to the west of camp, because he is unwilling to stand the expense
and trouble of keeping a Medicine Pipe. The society is now assembled in
Lone Chief's lodge, singing Owl songs and drumming. They will keep
representatives out all night, with Lone Chief as leader, carrying the
Pipe hidden beneath his blanket and endeavouring to find a prominent
chief inside his lodge. If they catch a man unawares and offer the Pipe
to him, he dare not refuse, lest sickness or even death come to him, or
to some member of his family. The Medicine Pipe was given to the
Blackfeet long ago, when the Thunder struck down a man. While he lay on
the ground, the Thunder Chief appeared in a vision, showing him a pipe,
and saying, 'I have chosen you that I might give you this Pipe. Make
another just like it. Gather together also a medicine bundle, containing
the skins of the many animals and birds, which go with it. Whenever any
of your people are sick, or dying, a vow must be made and a ceremonial
given with a feast. The sick will then be restored to health.' The
Grizzly Bear afterwards appeared to this same man, and said to him, 'I
give you my skin to wrap around the sacred bundle, because it is larger
than the skins of other animals. Whenever you transfer the Pipe to
anyone, steal quietly upon him just before daybreak, the time I am on
the move, and take him by surprise, just as I do, chanting my song, and
making the sound of a bear charging. When you catch a man and offer him
the Pipe, he will not dare to refuse, but must accept it and smoke. It
is sure death to refuse,

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

because no one may dare to turn away from a grizzly bear.'

"The Owl is also a prominent figure in the Pipe ceremonial, because he
is a bird of the night. When the society are after a new member, they
chant Owl songs and pray to the Owl for power to enable them to catch
him in a deep sleep. In this way a spell is cast over him and he cannot
escape. In order to propitiate the Owl they also, in the ceremonial,
make use of the Siksocasim-root, which is his favourite food. The Indian
made the Medicine Pipe, just as the Thunder and the Bear had instructed
him. It is wrapped with raw hide and decorated with feathers and the
winter skins of weasels. He also gathered together many animal and bird
skins for the sacred bundle, wrapping them in a large grizzly bear skin.
In the spring, when the first Thunder was heard, the Pipe was brought
forth and held up. The Blackfeet had never before seen a Medicine Pipe,
but they have ever since continued the ceremony."

When I finally lay down upon my blanket-bed, it was not to sleep. All in
our lodge were disturbed by the many different sounds and even little
Tears-in-her-eyes was restless in her hammock cradle. There were
numberless dogs throughout the camp, fighting and barking. Some were on
foraging expeditions, sneaking silently into the lodges in search of
food. Menake saw a thieving dog in the act of making away with a side of
bacon from our lodge. She made such an outcry, that he fled through the
doorway with frightened yelps.

Although it was late at night, two small boys, the sons of Running
Fisher and Long-time-sleeping, came to our lodge and sang a Night song
as a serenade.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> According to the
Blackfeet custom, it was expected from me to go outside and give them
food.

In Morning Plume's lodge near by, a small boy was very restless. The
night air was cold and, when the fire burned low, he kept begging his
old grandmother to cover him more warmly. She finally went to him, but
had no sooner returned to her own bed than he began to whimper that the
robes were not tucked underneath.

<span id="img_25500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DAY
HERDER.](tn/25500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25500.jpg.md)  
THE DAY HERDER.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As he was the old
woman's pet, she went to him again, but said very sharply, that the
night was not cold and she would do nothing more for him. Then his baby
brother cried violently and I heard his mother softly crooning as she
rocked him to sleep.

Beyond Morning Plume's was the small tipi of a poor young Indian named
Okio. His only child, a young baby, was very sick. During the night a
medicine man was sent for. The monotonous drumming, so different in
sound from the dance drum, began after

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

midnight. It was not loud but rapid and regular, like the beating of a
human heart. With the first grey signs of dawn the drum suddenly ceased,
and I knew the little life was gone. For a brief moment there was a deep
stillness. The mother sobbed violently, as she took the lifeless body to
her breast; then, suddenly realising that it was dead, she broke into a
mournful

<span id="img_25600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE NIGHT
HERDER.](tn/25600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25600.jpg.md)  
THE NIGHT HERDER.  
</span>

wail, the universal utterance, the world over, for a mother's grief over
a dead child.

Such incidents in the daily life of an Indian camp are like the human
experiences we constantly find in the compact cities of civilisation.
Though the striking extremes of wealth and poverty are absent, the
lights and shadows of domestic joy and sorrow, of health and sickness,
of pathos and humour, of the grave and the gay, of love and hate, of the
old man's wisdom

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

and thoughtfulness and the young man's folly and recklessness—all of
these are present in an Indian camp, with even sharper and more
impressive contrasts, because of the close association of the people.

With the dawn, a light breeze came from the Rockies, making a low
humming sound in the tightly stretched canvas and causing the lodge ears
to flap gently like a loose sail. The quick movement of horses’ hoofs,
passing in the direction of the meadow, where the herd of horses was
feeding, meant that the day-man was going to the relief of the
night-herder. A sudden beating of many drums, accompanied by shouting
and singing, came from the clan of Grease Melters. When I opened my
door, the morning star had risen above the plains. In the uncertain
light, I could distinguish a crowd marching through the camp. People in
the surrounding lodges were talking excitedly and I knew something
unusual had happened. Then the powerful voice of Elk Horn, the herald
and a leader of the Grease Melters was heard, as he rode around the camp
circle beating upon a drum. He called upon all members of the clan to
build their fires and prepare the morning meal, announcing:

<span class="small">"The Medicine Pipe men have caught Mu-koi-sa-po, one
of the leaders of our band. He has smoked the Pipe and will now become a
member of their society. I call upon all of you to do your share towards
the expense, for it is a great honour and will cost many horses and
blankets. Do not delay for day is breaking, and the sun will soon rise.
Let each one of you carry what you can give to Mu-koi-sa-po's lodge,
whether it is a horse, robe, blanket, or provisions. Let everyone
come."</span>

The drums began again and Mad Wolf called to me that the society had
clothed Mu-koi-sa-po in his ceremonial dress. It was the signal for them
to appear and, if I did not hasten, I would be too late

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

to see them march through the camp bearing the Medicine Pipe. I hurried
forth with my camera and was just in time to see them emerging from Lone
Chief's lodge. I was fortunate in securing several photographs of this
unusual and interesting ceremony. The light, however, was very weak. It
was between three and four in the morning and the sun had not

<span id="img_25800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ELK HORN, THE
HERALD, AROUSING THE CAMP.](tn/25800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25800.jpg.md)  
ELK HORN, THE HERALD, AROUSING THE CAMP.  
</span>

yet risen. Lone Chief and Mu-koi-sa-po were in the lead, the latter
bearing the sacred Pipe covered with weasel tails and feathers.
Etomo-waki, his wife, accompanied the wife of Lone Chief, bearing
together the medicine bundles and the tripod. Then came the drummers
with the rest of the society and their wives.

Before entering the lodge, prepared for their reception, they paused to
perform certain rites. I noticed

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mu-koi-sa-po's old
mother standing near the door, waiting to receive them. She was bent
with age and leaned heavily upon her staff. As they marched up with
Mu-koi-sa-po bearing the sacred Pipe, singing in unison and with the
beating of drums, the old woman was so overwhelmed with delight that she
waved her staff in the air, calling loudly to her son, and joining in
the chant. Then the society slowly entered and took

<span id="img_25900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WOMEN CARRYING
MEDICINE PIPE BUNDLES.](tn/25900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25900.jpg.md)  
WOMEN CARRYING MEDICINE PIPE BUNDLES.  
</span>

their accustomed seats. The ceremony was performed in the tipi of
Tearing Lodge, Mu-koi-sa-po's father-in-law, because Mu-koi-sa-po owned
a Beaver Bundle, which did not permit of drums. The beating of rattles
on a buffalo hide was required in the Beaver ceremonial, because it was
supposed to resemble the striking of the water by the beaver's tail. The
Medicine Pipe, on the other hand, required drums, because they imitated
the drumming of the grouse, which had given its power to the Pipe. The
drums were decorated with symbols

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

representing the sun, moon, and stars. The figures also of birds and
animals were used as decorations, in accordance with the requirements of
the dream, which originated the ceremonial.

The women deposited the sacred bundles against the back of the lodge.
Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife, with the wife of Lone Chief and other women,
sat on the right, while Lone Chief, who was giving up the Pipe, and the
members of the society, were on the left of the medicines. Mu-koi-sa-po
was dressed in the ceremonial clothes by Lone Chief, and Etomo-waki (his
wife) by the women. Mu-koi-sa-po wore around his head a decorated band
of buffalo hide and a feather in his hair, a beaded buckskin shirt,
fringed with scalps and ermine; also beaded leggings with ermine tails
and moccasins to correspond. His blanket was decorated with red marks to
represent the stars. In addition to the clothes, Lone Chief gave him the
horse, saddle, bridle, whip and lariat which belong to the sacred Pipe.
Etomo-waki, his wife, received from Lone Chief's wife the buckskin
dress, beaded moccasins and leggings, and the soft tanned elk-skin robe
decorated with red paint, which were to be worn by her, only during the
Pipe ceremonials. Spectators from all sections of the camp thronged
about the lodge. The clan of the Grease Melters came, leaving their
presents with Tearing Lodge, who announced them and the names of the
givers in a loud voice. Menake brought my gift of a blanket in bright
colours, which was announced with the rest. Because of the high honour
conferred on one of their clansmen, the Grease Melters gave to
Mu-koi-sa-po forty horses and an enormous pile of clothing, blankets,
and provisions. These, with many additional presents were all turned
over by Mu-koi-sa-po to

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lone Chief as his
fee for transferring the Medicine Pipe.

The Blackfoot *esprit de corps* and large-hearted generosity were
strikingly displayed on this occasion. But, it was not unusual, for they
were characteristic of the tribe. The support of their Sun-worship by
offerings, always of their best; their generous gifts to their chiefs,
medicine men, and leaders of their societies, and their open-handed
hospitality to visiting tribes, were always conspicuous when the
opportunity offered. The aged, the fatherless and widow, the sick and
helpless, and those who had no one to hunt for them, were not allowed to
suffer for want of clothing, or meat, or a place by a lodge-fire. The
strong and successful hunters were always ready to give of their
abundance to those who lacked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Ceremonial Transferring the Medicine Pipe](ont22.md)
