[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont19)  [Next](ont21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

#### EVENING SCENES IN THE CAMP

<span class="small">A wonderful prairie sunset.—Distant view of the big
camp at night.—Young men and women singing Riding songs.—A Love song and
the rendezvous of the lovers at the river.—Ceremonial chants and Dance
songs.—Wolf song and an ancient war custom.—The Kissing dance.—Visit to
the lodge of a sick friend.—Scenes by the lodge fire.—A pet
coyote.—Gossip of the women.—I assist a medicine man and his wife in
doctoring their patient and have permission to photograph the
performance.—Indian methods of doctoring.</span>

WHEN the sun was setting, I walked through the camps of the Lone Eaters
and Don't Laugh bands along the shore of the lake. The picturesque
lodges, with their painted decorations and blue smoke rising from their
tops, were perfectly reflected on the surface of the quiet lake. I
crossed a rich meadow, very beautiful in the soft evening light, with
its long waving grass and brilliant wild flowers, and climbed to the
summit of a neighbouring butte, where I had an excellent view of the
entire encampment. On all sides larks, thrushes, and Savannah sparrows
were singing. In the surrounding meadows, large herds of horses were
quietly feeding, while upon the summit of a ridge was a solitary
horseman, who had left the noisy camp for quiet and meditation. He stood
gazing out over the vast expanse of country towards the mountains. The
sun, sinking behind the Rockies, lighted up the sombre cloud masses with
a splendid colouring, while its pencilled rays, streaming to

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span id="img_24100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![IN THE SURROUNDING
MEADOWS LARGE HERDS OF HORSES WERE QUIETLY FEEDING.](tn/24100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24100.jpg)  
IN THE SURROUNDING MEADOWS LARGE HERDS OF HORSES WERE QUIETLY FEEDING.  
</span>

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

either side and extending to the zenith, formed a magnificent
"sun-burst," with Mount Rising Wolf for its centre. Later in the
deepening twilight the great cluster of Indian lodges showed a ghostly
white against the darkening blue of the eastern sky. When the tipis were
lighted by bright inside fires, the circular encampment looked like an
enormous group of coloured

<span id="img_24200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![UPON THE SUMMIT OF
A RIDGE WAS A SOLITARY HORSEMAN.](tn/24200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24200.jpg)  
UPON THE SUMMIT OF A RIDGE WAS A SOLITARY HORSEMAN.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Japanese lanterns,
and the flickering lights of the man: outside fires resembled fireflies
in the summer's dusk.

Young men, with their wives, or sweethearts, were making the rounds of
camp on horseback singing Riding songs in unison. I heard the plaintive
voice of young brave singing a Love <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_18)
song near the lodge of hi sweetheart, begging her to come forth and meet
him

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span id="img_24300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WAR PARTY SINGING
“WOLFSONG”](tn/24300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24300.jpg)  
WAR PARTY SINGING “WOLFSONG”  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was probable
the girl alone knew for whom the song was intended. He stood waiting in
the meadow and she soon joined him, both going together to the river for
water, the common rendezvous of Indian lovers. The sound of beating
drums came simultaneously from six different lodges, where dances and
ceremonials were taking place. In Mad Wolf's sacred tipi a solemn chant,
accompanied by heavy and regular beating of rattles on the ground, was
being given as a preparatory ceremonial of the Sun-dance. In the clan of
the Grease Melters a group of young men and women were singing and
dancing round an outside fire. The Brave Dogs were assembled in their
big lodge drumming and singing a society song. A group of Crazy Dogs
were dancing in front of the lodge of a chief, who was under obligations
to their society and from whom they expected a feast.

Beside O-mis-tai-po-kah's tipi, a band of young men were singing a
Wolf <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_19) song together, reviving the
custom of former days, when an expedition was starting upon the war
path. They stood in a circle, holding a raw hide between them, upon
which they beat time with sticks. They sang no words, but gave the wolf
howl at regular intervals, the young women, who stood near, joining in
the wolf howl. They said this song was very ancient, having been handed
down through many generations. It was sung in time of danger when
hunting, or upon the war path, in the belief that the wolf would inspire
the singer with his cunning.

In another part of the camp a large throng was gathered about Sepenama's
tipi to see the Sina-paskan (Sioux dance). <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_20) The men and women dancers stood in
opposite lines, the women advancing towards the men.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Each woman singled
out the man of her choice and, dancing towards him, kissed him on the
face. For this favour he was expected to give her a handsome present.
The people always attended the Sioux dance in great numbers, because of
their curiosity to see who would be chosen. The story was told of a
woman who became so infatuated with the Sina-paskan that she danced
every afternoon and evening. Her husband becoming tired of her neglect
of their tipi, and jealous of her favours to an old rival, appeared
unexpectedly one night at the door of the dance-lodge and killed her
before the assembled people. After this tragedy, the Sina-paskan was
discontinued for several years.

When I descended from the butte, and again entered the camp circle,
twilight had faded into darkness. The bright inside fires revealed upon
the canvas of the tipis their weird decorations and the moving shadows
of those within. But I soon became confused in my wanderings and lost my
way. In the darkness, the tipis all looked alike. There were no streets
nor paths, nor any landmarks on the plains, by which I could identify my
lodge. Fortunately I met Awunna, the medicine man, with Ekitowaki, his
wife. He was carrying his drum, while she bore her medicine sacks of
herbs and paints. I joined them, for they were on their way to doctor
Stuyimi, whose tipi was close to mine. He was the father of Menake, who,
with her family and Kionama, her husband, shared my lodge. Stuyimi had
been sick for many months. He had grown steadily worse, and his robes
and horses were rapidly dwindling to pay the Indian doctors. We found
him looking very weak and sick, with sunken eyes and emaciated body. He
was an old friend and, when I entered, looked up with a smile of
welcome. Awunna

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the medicine man seated himself at the back. He was a large man with a
pleasing personality, and yet with an air of self-confidence and
importance. He held his head erect, and his long thick hair fell loosely
upon his shoulders, like the mane of a lion. Fresh wood was thrown upon
the fire, the brightening flame showing many women present—Stuyimi's
mother, his wife,

<span id="img_24500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![AT TWILIGHT THE
TIPIS WERE LIGHTED UP BY BRIGHT INSIDE FIRES.](tn/24500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24500.jpg)  
AT TWILIGHT THE TIPIS WERE LIGHTED UP BY BRIGHT INSIDE FIRES.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Akoan, and their
two daughters; also Menake and her daughter Sinopa.

A beautiful little coyote puppy, with long sharp nose and bright
sparkling eyes, suddenly emerged from the blankets, where I had taken my
seat. I put out my hand to feel its soft, fluffy coat, but drew back
quickly, when it turned and snapped at me, opening and closing its jaws
like a steel trap. It resented my intrusion, snarling and threatening me
with its shining fangs,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

until one of the little girls called to it by name (Apis), when it
hopped across to her on three legs, dragging its tail, after the manner
of coyotes, and went to sleep in her arms. They also had a dog named
Sa-sak-si (Freckle Face), which seemed to understand the Blackfeet
tongue, for, when Stuyimi, his master, called "ha-im-mit" (laugh), he
lifted his upper lip, as if smiling, and, at the same time, wagged his
tail. When he said "iks-skat-sit" (watch the door), the dog took his
seat by the entrance, to defend it against any corner. The Blackfeet
make pets of all kinds of birds and wild animals. In former days they
tamed and kept in their tipis cranes, hawks, eagles, beavers, wolves,
antelopes, and even grizzly bears.

The women were earnestly discussing the runaway match of young Mountain
Chief and the sixteen-year-old daughter of a visiting chief from the
north. She had been last seen with a party of children gathering
berries. Her mother and father opposed the match, because they did not
consider the young man able to provide for their daughter. But, as is
often the case in civilised society the world over, the young people
decided the question for themselves by a runaway match, and went to live
in a remote spot in the mountains. Awunna sat in silence, taking no
interest in the gossip about the elopement. The pose of his head and the
expression of his countenance indicated unmistakably his impatience for
the women to finish, yet he was too dignified to interrupt their
conversation. Meanwhile Ekitowaki had placed four round stones in the
fire to be used in the doctoring. While waiting for them to become
heated, Akoan passed around a small parfleche containing sarvis berries
for refreshment. When Ekitowaki pronounced the stones sufficiently hot,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Awunna removed the
cover from his medicine drum and warmed it over the fire. Its head was
painted yellow to represent a clear sky, with a red ball in the centre
for the sun. Beating the drum was believed to bring him power in
doctoring the sick.

The Blackfeet have a superstition that a doctor should not relate his
dreams (sources of inspiration),

<span id="img_24700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DOCTORING THE
SICK.&lt;br&gt; Ekitowaki taking herbs from medicine
sack.](tn/24700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24700.jpg)  
DOCTORING THE SICK.  
Ekitowaki taking herbs from medicine sack.  
</span>

nor reveal his methods, nor hand them down to others. On the other hand,
leaders of religious ceremonials were expected to teach their rituals to
anyone who made a vow to purchase them. Sometimes a doctor was a
specialist, his power being confined, by the command received in his
dream, to a certain form of sickness.

Because the presence of spectators is believed to weaken the doctor's
power, even the patient's family

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

are ordinarily excluded from the ceremony. As I had never been permitted
to witness a medicine man's methods of doctoring, I fully expected to be
asked to withdraw. To my surprise, Awunna called upon me to assist in
the incantations, saying that if I would join in the chants it would
give him greater power in his doctoring. I consented, but asked for
permission to photograph the ceremonial during his visit on the
following morning. Awunna hesitated and Ekitowaki, his wife, at once
raised objections, but it was decided in my favour by the patient
himself, who requested that the pictures be taken, so that I could
explain to the white people the Blackfeet methods of doctoring.

Stuyimi's shirt and blanket being removed, he lay upon the bed stripped
to the waist. Awunna then signed to his wife to begin. She took some
herbs from her medicine sack and threw them into a pot, which she placed
on the fire to brew into a hot drink. Removing a coal from the fire, she
placed dried sweet pine upon it, and holding her hands in the smoke,
prayed to the Spirit of the buffalo that she might be endowed with power
to discover the place where the disease lay. Kneeling by his side, she
placed her hands upon his body, feeling gently with the tips of her
fingers until she announced that the trouble lay in the breast and was
worse on the left side. She took a hot stone from the fire and placed it
in a kettle of water. As the steam arose, she dropped roots into it, one
by one, and prayed:

"Hear us, Great Spirit in the Sun! Pity us and help us! Listen and grant
us life! Look down in pity on this sick man! Grant us power to drive out
the Evil Spirit and give him health!"

At this point, Awunna raised his drum and signed to me that we should
begin the chant. With eyes closed

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

and head thrown back, he started the chant (in which I joined),
accompanying it with his drum. Ekitowaki brought from her sack a small
disc of buffalo raw hide. She held it towards Stuyimi, with many
mysterious motions in imitation of the buffalo, breathing upon it,
swaying her body, keeping time with the drum and also joining in the
chant. She laid the disc upon the hot

<span id="img_24900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DOCTORING THE
SICK.&lt;br&gt; Awunna drumming.](tn/24900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24900.jpg)  
DOCTORING THE SICK.  
Awunna drumming.  
</span>

stone and placed it quickly upon his breast on the left side. She wet
both hands in the root medicine and laying the tips of her fingers upon
a stone, so hot that I heard them sizzle, she then placed them, with a
quick movement, upon the body of the patient. In this way, she used
three hot stones, one after the other, and then, turning Stuyimi over,
proceeded to make hot applications to his back in the same manner. When
Ekitowaki

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

retired, Awunna knelt beside the patient, beating rhythmically upon his
medicine drum, while I united with him in his chant, praying for power
from the eagle. Taking yellow paint from a small sack, he sprayed it
through his medicine whistle over Stuyimi's breast, arms and back.
Grasping a large eagle wing, he imitated the motions of an eagle flying,
and beat the

<span id="img_25000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DOCTORING THE
SICK.&lt;br&gt; Awunna spraying patient with yellow
paint.](tn/25000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25000.jpg)  
DOCTORING THE SICK.  
Awunna spraying patient with yellow paint.  
</span>

wing against the patient's body. When the doctoring was finished, and I
was taking leave of Stuyimi, he suggested that I should accompany his
clan on the third day of the Sun-dance, when they went to the river
valley to secure their share of the branches and poles for the building
of the Sun lodge, explaining that, as he was sick, he desired me to go
as his substitute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[242:1](ont20.htm#fr_22) Song 1. See page
[283](ont23.htm#page_283).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[243:1](ont20.htm#fr_23) Song 2. See page
[513](ont43.htm#page_513).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[243:2](ont20.htm#fr_24) Song 3. See page
[514](ont43.htm#page_514).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. An Initiation Into the Medicine Pipe
Society](ont21)
