[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont32)  [Next](ont34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

### CHAPTER XXX

#### ONESTA GIVES THE CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL

<span class="small">North Piegans gather around our camp fire.—Dances by
the children Emonissi and Yellow Mink.—Embarrassing relations between a
mother-in-law and son-in-law.—Running Wolf and myself entertain a
gathering with Blackfeet songs.—At Onesta's request I sleep in the
sacred Thunder Tipi.—Story of my vision has an advantageous
result.</span>

ONESTA was drumming and chanting religious songs, inside his tipi, when
he requested me to join with him and help in the singing. The women,
having finished their evening cooking, opened the front of the lodge and
seated themselves to listen. The North Piegans, attracted by the
chanting and sound of the drum, also came to our camp and joined the
audience. Onesta and I continued our singing, while his little daughter,
Yellow Mink, danced for the amusement of the company. When she had
finished, Kionama directed his son, Emonissi, a young boy about eight
years of age, to go through some of the Medicine Pipe dances he was
teaching him. When his father picked up the drum, and began beating
time, the little fellow started off with the Grizzly Bear dance,
stepping slowly backwards and forwards, imitating the clumsy movements
of a bear, holding out his arms, with his hands hanging, and then moving
them about, just as a bear does, all the while breathing hard like a
grizzly, when running. In the Antelope dance, Emonissi imitated, with
his hands,

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

the graceful movements of an antelope, and turned his head alertly, like
an antelope. For the Swan dance, he held his arms in front with the
palms spread out, in imitation of the swan sailing through the air.
Kionama explained that the boy was representing the chief swan, who
leads the flock. In the Thunder, or Pipe dance,

<span id="img_40700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THUNDER
TIPI.&lt;br&gt; (“Lookout Butte” in distance.)](tn/40700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/40700.jpg.md)  
THUNDER TIPI.  
(“Lookout Butte” in distance.)  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Emonissi held a
pipe in his right hand, while his left was extended, to represent the
Thunder Bird flying. After the performance, Onesta announced that he and
Nitana would give the Sup-we-yok-kinni (Crow Beaver ceremonial), and
invited all the North Piegans to attend. He had been so pleased with my
singing during our evening dance, that he asked my help for his
ceremonial, and suggested that I should be the

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

owner of a medicine drum. Nitana had spent the entire day gathering
sarvis berries for the feast, also sage and the different herbs required
for the ceremonial.

Early in the morning of the day of the dance, the women pitched the
sacred Thunder Tipi. The top was painted black to represent a cloudy
sky, with a cross at the back, symbolising the Butterfly, the Bringer of
Dreams. A band of Dusty Stars circled the bottom, symbolising the earth
and, resting upon it, were representations of mountains. Between the top
and bottom decorations were four serpentine bands of red representing
the trails of the Thunder Bird (Lightning).

A huge kettle hung from the tripod over our outside fire, in which the
sarvis berry stew was cooked. Onesta and Nitana chanted and offered
prayers, while placing the berries in the kettle, and when all
preparations had been completed, they reverently carried the food and
their medicine bundles to the sacred tipi. Onesta beat loudly upon his
drum, the signal to the people to assemble. The North Piegans, having
never before witnessed the Crow Beaver ceremonial, attended in great
numbers. One exception was a fine-looking man, who was holding himself
aloof from the rest of the company. Noticing that he remained apart in
the South Piegan camp, and wondering what could be the cause of his
absence, I made inquiries. Menake explained that Bird was his
mother-in-law and, according to the tribal custom, two persons of such
relationship could not be present at the same time. If she chanced to
meet him face to face, she would be greatly annoyed. If a man came
unexpectedly into the presence of his mother-in-law, he would be
expected to make her a handsome present for such a breach of etiquette.

Brings-down-the-Sun did not enter the sacred tipi,

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

neither did his wife, nor any of the family, but sat outside, for only
those who took part in the ceremonial were expected to enter. Menake
said, that, "It was their custom to refrain from participation in any
ceremonial, excepting that of the Sun-dance. He was the high priest of
the Sun-dance and his wife one of its sacred women. It was necessary for
them to be careful,

<span id="img_40900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ONESTA GIVES THE
CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL.&lt;br&gt; (Onesta is second from right
end.)](tn/40900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/40900.jpg.md)  
ONESTA GIVES THE CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL.  
(Onesta is second from right end.)  
</span>

not only in respect to their own, but also their children's actions.
They were expected by the tribe to lead straight lives and to be above
reproach." In this instance, they all attended as onlookers, because
Onesta was a relative, but maintained their dignity by not
participating.

The Crow Beaver Society ceremonial was introduced in recent years by a
Blackfoot Chief, after a visit to the Crow Indians. It is participated
in by both men and

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

women. Their ceremonial is generally given for healing the sick. The
society is invited to the home of the sick person, where the ceremonial
is held. They bring their medicine bundles, and opening them, dance,
with feathers and skins of the different birds and animals, and offer
prayers for the recovery of the sick.

The priests, assisting Onesta in the ceremonial, were seated by his
side. The North Piegans, who were to be instructed sat opposite, or were
"against him," as the Indians expressed it.

When the Crow Beaver dance was over, and the people had dispersed,
Onesta inquired if I would be willing to sleep in the sacred Thunder
Tipi, explaining that it was contrary to the rules of the medicine to
leave it unoccupied during the night. He said that, if I slept inside, I
might possibly secure a dream, or a vision. He was much gratified, when
I agreed to the proposal. Onesta, Nitana, Kionama and Menake came to sit
with me during the evening. We were also joined by Running Wolf,
Star-that-sets-over-the-hill, and their wives.

When we were all gathered around the lodge fire, Running Wolf asked me
to sing some Indian songs. I agreed, if he would sing in turn. In reply
to my wolf song, he sang a dance song, used by young warriors during a
test for bravery. He gave me the following explanation of the occasion,
when it is used.

<span class="small">"The bark of a pitch pine tree was set on fire. A
group of men stripped naked, and holding hands, gathered in a circle
about the tree. Two of them with long poles stood close to the tree,
scraping the burning bark. This caused showers of sparks, which fell
upon the hare bodies of the candidates, dancing around the tree, and
singing 'Sats-to-o-komo' (Rub under the jaw). When the live sparks
struck the faint hearted and cowardly, they could not withstand the pain
and ran from the circle, but the men with brave, strong hearts continued
dancing and singing, unmindful of their burns."</span>

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

After my dance song, Running Wolf sang a song used in a man's game. The
oldest man present takes two burning brands from the fire. All the
others fall in line, each holding tightly to the one in front, and all
singing in unison. The leader strikes the burning brands together,
throwing off showers of sparks, while he leads them, winding in and out.
The sparks falling on their bare bodies make the faint hearted shrink
from the ordeal.

Nitana sang the song of a maiden disappointed in love. The words were,

<span class="small">"My lover looked like an eagle from a distance, but
alas! when he came nearer I saw that he was nothing but a
buzzard."</span>

My guests, especially the women, were much interested, when I sang the
love song I had heard in Mad Wolf's Sun-dance camp, and they insisted
upon hearing it over and over again. When Mysterious Woman entered the
lodge, a request was made that I would again sing the love song for her.

It was after midnight, when my visitors departed. Before they left,
Onesta was careful to inform me of certain things I must avoid, while
occupying the sacred Thunder Tipi, to guard against bad luck. Running
Wolf also warned me, that a skunk visited the locality every morning,
just before daybreak, but assured me that if he were to enter the lodge,
he would go out without causing any trouble, if I would lie perfectly
still.

The night was very cold, after the Indians had departed. I built a warm
fire and, comfortably wrapped in my blankets, lay for a long time,
thinking of the varied events of the past day. It was a strange
experience to be occupying a sacred tipi, to fulfil the laws of the
medicine and to await a vision, like a

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

medicine man. The rustling of the cottonwoods overhead, the faint murmur
of the river rapids near by, and the weird shapes of the lodge
decorations, in the fitful glow of the dying fire, made favourable
conditions for a vision. As I went to sleep I remembered having seen a
large eagle, sailing high above the plains, on the day we entered the
North Piegan country. He stood beside me in the night, advising what
message I should bring to the North Piegans.

I was wakened by the bright rays of the morning sun, shining into the
lodge. Smoke was slowly rising in the still air from our South Piegan
camp fire. Menake and Nitana were already cooking breakfast. Kionama
called me, while I was at the river endeavouring to wash the red paint
from my face and hair. Before long, as I had expected, Onesta inquired
if anything had disturbed me during the night. I replied, "No," and
relapsed into silence. Menake then asked if I had seen a vision. When I
replied that I had had a very strong vision, Onesta urged me to tell it.
I said, with the greatest seriousness,

<span class="small">"Before sunrise, just as day was breaking, an eagle
stood beside me, saying, 'My son, it is the chief of all the eagles that
is speaking to you. I am going to help you because you are alone among a
strange people. It is a good thing for you to visit the North Piegans,
to learn about them, and to take their pictures. It will bring good luck
to you and to those, who take part in the ceremonials. Good fortune and
long life will come to all who may help you.</span>

My companions looked to see if I were joking, but, when I maintained a
solemn countenance, nothing further was said, and I knew that my vision
was taken seriously, and would soon be heralded and discussed, in its
smallest detail, throughout the North Piegan camp.

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

During the day a violent storm passed over the camp. Onesta questioned
me closely as to my having disobeyed any rules of the Thunder Tipi. When
I told him I had washed off the red paint in the early morning, he said
that that was undoubtedly the cause of the storm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. The Rival Leaders](ont34.md)
