[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ont37)  [Next](ont39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV

#### THE MUTSAIX (SOCIETY OF BRAVE DOGS)

<span class="small">Brings-down-the-Sun tells of its origin.—Weapons and
characteristic dress of members.—Their society dance and customs.—A
courageous mother saves the life of a Brave Dog.—Usefulness of Blackfeet
Societies.</span>

"I MYSELF am a member of the Mutsaix, which has the reputation of being
the most exacting of the Blackfeet societies. We have even been known to
kill men, who refused to obey our orders. It was started by Red Blanket
and his wife, Generous Woman, who died of old age many years ago. She
became so old, that she lost all. of her teeth, and, before she died, it
became necessary to move her everywhere on a travois. Their graves are
close together on the summit of a high ridge, near the entrance to
Cutbank Canyon, overlooking the river and the plains.

"When the Blackfeet were once travelling across the plains, Generous
Woman told her husband, Red Blanket, that one of her dogs was missing
with a loaded travois. Red Blanket turned back, but could find no trace
of the dog. When he came to their former camping ground, it was dark and
he lay down to sleep. During the night he heard a strange voice calling,
'Lone Chief invites you to prepare for the dance.' Then a drum began to
beat and Red Blanket, supposing he was in a camp, looked around, but saw
no lodges, nor people;

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

<span id="img_45600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THREE LODGES OF
BRAVE DOG SOCIETY NEAR THE CENTRE OF ENCAMPMENT.](tn/45600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45600.jpg)  
THREE LODGES OF BRAVE DOG SOCIETY NEAR THE CENTRE OF ENCAMPMENT.  
</span>

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

there was no sign of life,—nothing but the barren plains. When he lay
down, he again heard a drum and the same voice calling, saying: 'Lone
Chief invites you to come and eat, for he is ready to give a dance.'
This time Red Blanket jumped to his feet, thinking he must be dreaming.
While walking around the old camp, he found some dried meat that had
been left behind. A

<span id="img_45700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![INTERIOR OF
SOCIETY LODGE SHOWING MANNER OF HANGING CLOTHES AND
HEADDRESSES.](tn/45700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45700.jpg)  
INTERIOR OF SOCIETY LODGE SHOWING MANNER OF HANGING CLOTHES AND
HEADDRESSES.  
</span>

female dog ran out from a thicket of willows and stood gazing at him. He
supposed that this dog must have been doing the mysterious talking, so
he threw her the meat, which she ate and immediately returned to the
bushes. When Red Blanket lay down again, he went to sleep and the spirit
of his lost dog came to him, saying: 'I am giving this dance here
to-night, in behalf of a poor mother and her six little boy dogs.

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were left
behind, when the camp moved, and I am. trying to help them. If you feel
sorry for this unfortunate mother and her children, carry them with you
and save their lives. We will show you our dance and, when you return
again to camp, you can make use of it to found a dog society.' In his
dream, Red Blanket followed the dog spirit into the bushes, where he saw

<span id="img_45800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BUCKSKIN SHIRT OF
MAD DOG SOCIETY.&lt;br&gt; (Decorated with beads and trimmed with
ermine.)](tn/45800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45800.jpg)  
BUCKSKIN SHIRT OF MAD DOG SOCIETY.  
(Decorated with beads and trimmed with ermine.)  
</span>

many dogs dancing. One of their chiefs wore a long black robe, dragging
behind like a tail, while others wore decorations and streamers,
trailing behind for tails. In the morning, when Red Blanket awoke, he
found the dog family among the willows. He took up the pups and, placing
them in his shirt, carried them back to camp, followed by their mother.
He then started the

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

society of Brave Dogs, taking members as the dog spirit had instructed,
and teaching them to dance, just as he had seen the dogs dancing. Red
Blanket, as the founder, wore a small rattle tied through the flesh of
his wrist, the medicine of the Brave Dogs. He first took in three
prominent chiefs, Many Eagles, Lost Feather,

<span id="img_45900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BUCKSKIN
LEGGING.](tn/45900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45900.jpg)  
BUCKSKIN LEGGING.  
</span>

and Lone Chief. They together selected other members. We formerly gave
our dance, when the camp was to be moved. We first marched around,
beating drums, and singing our society songs, and then we went to the
centre of the camp, where we lay on the ground, curled up like dogs
sleeping. We wore no clothes, but painted our bodies all over. Our
moccasins were decorated with

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

porcupine quills, but had no ankle-tops. Each man carried a knife, bow
and a big quiver filled with arrows. Next morning, when camp was broken,
we went around the deserted circle, and ate food that was left behind,
just like dogs. Then we followed the tribe slowly, always coming in
after the people had their lodges pitched and were settled. We first
went to the head chief's tipi, where we danced four times, and then we

<span id="img_46000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BUCKSKIN SHIRT
FRINGED AND DECORATED WITH COLOURED PORCUPINE QUILLS.](tn/46000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46000.jpg)  
BUCKSKIN SHIRT FRINGED AND DECORATED WITH COLOURED PORCUPINE QUILLS.  
</span>

went to the centre of camp, and curled upon the ground to sleep. We did
this for four successive nights. On the fourth morning, all of the Brave
Dogs returned to their own lodges, where we painted, dressed in our best
clothes, ate good food, and acted like dogs no more, until our next
dance. While we were giving our dance, we stole anything we wanted, even
food, while it was cooking, just as dogs do. Sometimes we danced at the
lodges of prosperous chiefs. If they gave us clothes as presents, we
could not wear them until after our dance,

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

so we gave them meanwhile into the care of our wives.

"We placed stones in a circle, near the centre or a new camp ground,
where we intended pitching our big dancing tipi. We always entered it
early in the morning of the day of our dance. We carried long sticks as
spears, with the bark peeled off and wrapped with red and black cloth.
Feathers, with small bells attached, were fastened at intervals along
the staff and a spear point tied to the end. The leader was called
Wolf-Skin-Man. He wore a coyote skin, with the head in front, and tail
hanging behind. To the left of the chief sat two men, with white spears
driven into the ground before them. Their bodies were painted white and
they had yellow stripes across the nose and eyes. This was their
distinguishing mark, because the others had red and black stripes over
the nose and eyes. Another man, holding a long willow stick, wore a
blanket made from an old lodge top, well browned with smoke. To his
blanket were tied many buffalo hoofs, so that they would rattle when he
moved. Two other men, called "Water Braves," painted black over their
bodies, carried on their backs pieces of old lodges made into small
bags, which were filled with back-fat and pemmican. They also carried
water-bottles.

"There were two dancers representing Grizzly Bears. They were stripped,
wearing only a waist band of bear skin. They always painted as hideously
as possible to inspire the spectators with awe. They covered their faces
with thick red paint, and made black streaks downward across their eyes.
They made their front hair stand erect with thickened paint. They
carried bows and arrows with large points, and wore headdresses made
from grizzly bears’ heads, with the ears on,

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

and two buffalo horns added, to make them look like double ears. The
bears were separated from the other dancers, lying in a hole for a den,
and covering themselves over with robes. Wolf-Skin-Man, the leader,
arose first to dance, the entire circle following him. All wore blankets
and carried spears. They also held whistles in their mouths, which were
blown while dancing. The two white-painted dancers pushed into the
circle, driving the others away with their spears. When the
black-painted water carriers passed the white dancers in the circle,
they stopped. Then the man with the willow stick entered, but he could
not sit down, until after the bears had stopped dancing. Every time
these five leaders arose, the entire society must dance, with the
exception of the bears. They always did as they pleased, lying lazily in
their den, covered with robes. When the spectators, eager to see them
dance, threw things at them, they pretended four times that they were
going to begin. After the fourth feint, they stood up, holding their
hands hanging down, just as bears hold their paws. While dancing, they
carried their bows and arrows, pretending to aim at the dancers. The
Brave Dogs kept going around in a circle, just like a dog looking for a
place to lie down. When we had danced four times, the bears held the
sharp pointed arrows ready to shoot, but, changing them quickly to two
painted arrows without points, they took aim at the crowd, as if to
shoot them, but the arrows were sent high over their heads. The rest of
us ran off over the prairie, following in the direction the arrows flew,
and throwing our moccasins into the air as we ran. Many boys followed us
to pick them up, for we wore finely decorated dance-moccasins, but no
one was allowed to pick up the two painted arrows, which the Grizzly
Bears

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

followed to recover. When the bears again returned to our ranks, we
formed into line and marched through camp, singing our society song. If
any of our members held back, the bears shot at them, or at any people,
who might interfere with us. When we had completed the camp circle, we
announced the events that would take place on the following day, and
then entered our society tipi and feasted. After the feast, we went off
on a hunt and killed two buffalo bulls. Each member took two pieces of
the meat. One he left in the society tipi, the other he took back to his
family. The Brave Dogs always said the opposite of what they really
meant. The people understood this custom. If we announced that camp was
not to be moved in the morning, we really meant that camp was to be
moved. If we returned from a scouting expedition for game, and reported
that there were no buffalo in sight, and that there was no need of their
sharpening their knives and arrows, they felt glad and started at once
to prepare for a hunt, for they knew well that buffalo were near at
hand. If one of our members stepped into a hole and fell, when we were
running and throwing away our moccasins, he could not get up by himself.
He had to lie there and wait, until the society came back, when we
lifted him up with our spears.

"A Brave Dog must always face the enemy, no matter how much he feared
them. We were once camped near Chief Mountain, when the Pend d’Oreilles
attacked us. It happened that one of our number, named 'Nose,' walked
out alone and faced the enemy. According to the rules of our society, he
could not turn back, unless one of his relatives drove him back like a
dog, so he stood there in plain sight, chanting and shaking his rattle.
His mother, Red Flower, realising her son's

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

danger, ran through camp, imploring someone to drive her son back, but
no one was willing. When the Pend d’Oreilles caught sight of him and
began shooting, she ran out herself. She had to run in front of him, and
strike him four times in the face with a switch, before he could turn.
After her fourth blow, he ran for the brush like a dog, and they both
escaped in safety. Because of this brave deed, the Piegans changed his
name from 'Nose' to 'Brave Dog.'

"Whenever it became necessary to move camp, the Mad Dogs always prepared
a feast, and sent a messenger to the head chief, inviting him to eat in
our society lodge. After we had finished eating, and were seated,
talking and smoking together, he would enquire:

"'My children! Why have you asked me to come here? What is it that you
desire?' Our leader would then say, 'It is now the time for the tribe to
move. The camp ground has become foul, the water supply is no longer
good, and it has become necessary to drive our horses a long distance to
secure good grass.' The chief would reply, 'It is too late for us to
move to-day. Have your herald announce that we will break camp early
to-morrow morning. Instruct everyone to bring in their horses before
dark, and to picket them close to their lodges, that we may not be
delayed in the morning. We shall start before sunrise.'

"Men did not join the Blackfeet societies for pleasure, but to fulfil
vows, generally made because of sickness, or for some remarkable escape
from danger. The leading societies ruled the camp, and helped the chiefs
to administer public discipline. They protected the tribes’ sources of
food and secured equal opportunities

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

for all. They strictly enforced the rule that private advantages must be
surrendered to the public good. Under the exercise of such police
regulations <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_38) and the enjoyment by all
of equal rights and a joint ownership of game and lands, no individual
could claim or enjoy special privileges. The roaming herds of buffalo, a
gift from the Great Spirit in the Sun, and their chief source of food
and materials for shelter, were owned in common. The society-men alone
had authority to decide when and how they should be hunted. If an Indian
disregarded their authority, and hunted for himself alone, they followed
him, forced him to return, and took away his horse and weapons. If his
selfish hunting scared away the buffaloes, they punished him severely,
destroying his saddle and tipi, stripping him of his clothes, and even
whipping him. Sometimes, when several Indians started for a hunt,
without their knowledge, the society-men took a position on a hill and
waited, watching the direction the hunters had taken. If, in returning,
the hunters sought to avoid them, the society-men followed them, and
seized their meat and horses.

"If they had given an order against picking berries, and a woman
disobeyed, they spilled all she gathered. If a husband and wife fought,
and their quarrels disturbed other people, one of the societies would
punish them, by cutting their lodge to pieces, or by destroying their
saddles and parfleches. The societies compelled everyone to submit to
their rule, but they never annoyed or interfered with people who obeyed
their commands."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[465:1](ont38.htm#fr_42) See
[Appendix](ont44.htm#an_465).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI. Legends of the Friendly Medicine Grizzly and the
Friendly Medicine Wolf](ont39)
