[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont41)  [Next](ont43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX

#### THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF THE BLACKFEET

<span class="small">Appalling inroads of death upon the Blackfeet
chiefs.—Decline in the tribal spirit and religion.—Pathetic appeal of an
old chief to the young men to "keep up their old religion."—A government
agent's prohibition of the annual Sun-dance causes despondency and
indignation.—I attend a council of the Chiefs.—Stock-stchi's speech in
behalf of the Sun-dance.—Challenges me to name anything harmful in its
observance.—My reply.—Changed conditions bring to an end the development
of the noble line of unselfish and patriotic Blackfeet Chiefs.—The
passing of the buffalo gave the death-blow to their tribal organisation
and brought poverty, government relief, pauperisation and moral
decline.—The government passes remedial legislation.—President Roosevelt
and Indian Commissioner Leupp give new impetus to the progressive
policy.—The medical and practical missionary both needed.—The Blackfeet
a promising field for Christian Missions.</span>

FOURTEEN years have passed since I first went among the Blackfeet. In
the meantime death has made appalling inroads upon the ranks of their
leading chiefs and medicine men, and but few of my friends are left.
There have passed over the "Wolf Trail" O-mis-tai-pokah, the head chief;
Mad Wolf, their greatest orator and leader of the Sun-dance; Running
Crane, leader of the southern division; Sik-si-ka-koan, the scout;
Double Runner; Elk Horn; Little Plume; Flat Tail; Drags-his-robe;
Morning Plume and Running Rabbit; the doctors Ear Rings and Awunna; and
the medicine men Spotted Eagle and Bull Child, and many others.

At the last Sun-dance of the Blackfeet, I could not suppress a feeling
of sadness, because of the absence of

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

the familiar and inspiring figures of so many of their leaders and
because of the visible indifference of the people towards the old
chiefs, who were still living.

I found the once noted chief and medicine man, Brings-down-the-Sun, in a
small poor lodge on the outskirts of the camp, unnoticed and seemingly
unknown by the younger generation of the Blackfeet. He had come from his
home in Alberta to attend their tribal festival, and to lead in the
ceremonials of the Sun-lodge. I saw him standing in his customary
position before the sacred booth, praying and waiting. But, instead of
having the people come before him for his blessing, as in former days,
they were thronging the horse races and social dances, and the young men
were engaged in a base ball game by the side of the Sun-lodge.

I heard the sorrowful entreaty of an elderly chief, made to the younger
men, exhorting them to keep up the religion of their fathers. He said:

<span class="small">"Young men, come forth and help us! You now have
homes of your own and should do your share in keeping up the worship of
the Sun. You no longer are helpers, but sit idly by and seem willing to
abandon all of our old religious customs. While we live, we should keep
up our religion. You now seem to care only for whisky, gambling, and
horse racing."</span>

I was present when the Blackfoot agent permitted the tribe to assemble
in their annual summer encampment, but his arbitrary interference
prevented the religious ceremonies of the Sun-dance. Much preparation
had already been made to fulfil the vow made by a woman to give the
Sun-dance to secure the recovery of her sick son. The subsequent death
of the boy and the prevalence of sickness and mourning for deceased
relatives, during the encampment, filled the people with gloom and
despondency. They very naturally attributed

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

their misfortunes to their inability to fulfil the vow. At that time a
council of chiefs, to which I was invited, was

held beside the unfinished Sun-lodge. While I was seated in their midst,
Stock-stchi, an old friend of Mad Wolf's, arose and addressing me said:

<span class="small">"You have been among us for many years, and have
attended many of our ceremonials. Have you ever seen a disturbance, or
anything harmful, that has been caused by our Sun-dance?"</span>

Then turning towards the council he continued very earnestly,

<span class="small">"We know that there is nothing injurious to our
people in the Sun-dance. On the other hand, we have seen much that is
bad at the dances of the white people. It has been our custom, during
many years, to assemble once every summer for this festival, in honour
of the Sun God. We fast and pray, that we may be able to lead good lives
and to act more kindly towards each other. I do not understand why the
white men desire to put an end to our religious ceremonials. What harm
can they do to our people? If they deprive us of our religion, we will
have nothing left, for we know of no other that can take its place. We
do not understand the white man's religion. The Black Robes (Catholic
Priests) teach us one thing and the Men-with-white-neckties (Protestant
Missionaries) teach us another; so we are confused. We believe that the
Sun God is all powerful, for every spring he makes the trees to bud and
the grass to grow. We see these things with our own eyes, and,
therefore, know that all life comes from him."</span>

Then, turning again towards me, Stock-stchi said,

<span class="small">"If the Indians should go to a church, where the
white men were holding their religious ceremonials, and would order them
to stop, what would they do?"</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The attention of
the council was fixed upon me, and they waited in dignified silence for
my reply. After considering for a moment, I said,

<span class="small">"The white men, where I live, know nothing about
your religion. Many things have been told to them about you that are not
true. I have come to live among you, that I might learn the truth from
you, and then tell the truth to the white people. The hearts of many of
the white men feel warm towards their red brothers, and when they know
the truth about you, they may act more wisely."</span>

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

With these words, I arose to depart and the council broke up.

These incidents in my recent experience indicate the drift of events and
the changed conditions of the Blackfeet, which have brought to an end
the development of such illustrious chiefs as O-mis-tai-po-kah, Mad
Wolf, Brings-down-the-Sun and Running Crane. The growth of such strong
and noble characters, out of the seemingly unfavourable moral soil of
Sun Worship seems unaccountable. Their unselfish and patriotic lives,
devoted to the welfare of their tribe, rise before me in strange and
painful contrast with the selfish and sordid lives of many of the rich
and powerful of my race. The latter's wealth and power, notwithstanding
the advantages of education and Christianity, are not devoted to the
amelioration, but tend rather to increase the suffering and degradation
of their fellow men.

The constantly increasing migration of white settlers, like the rising
tide of the sea, meant the inevitable extinction of the herds of
buffalo, which had formerly sustained the Blackfeet, and the other
plains-tribes, with food and shelter. The extermination, in 1883, of the
last of these great herds, gave the final death-blow to their tribal
organisation and suddenly cut off their food supply, necessitating
governmental relief to prevent their perishing of starvation. Then
followed the governmental policy of herding the Indian tribes on
reservations, and supporting them on a ration-system, which included
blankets, clothing and food supplies, conditioned upon their remaining
upon their reservations and refraining from acts of violence. The
gratuitous support of the government and an enforced life of idleness
inevitably tended to pauperise and degrade them.

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, as if to
doubly seal their fate, their contact with the white race was chiefly
with its worst representatives, who had gathered along the frontier to
seek their fortunes. These looked upon the Indian as only an obstacle to
their personal advantage, a hindrance to the progress of civilisation
and of necessity to be exterminated. No race, civilised, or uncivilised,
could long withstand such adverse conditions. Moral decline was the
swift and sure result. Then came the economic necessity of cutting down
the Blackfeet Reservation limits, through selling their lands to the
government by treaty, and the investment of the proceeds in cattle and
supplies, with a view to making them self supporting. But, because of
the inability of the Indians, from lack of experience, to adapt
themselves to the new conditions, and because of the incompetency of
government agents to properly handle their interests, their resources
were wasted. Their cattle perished in large numbers, and their rich
grazing lands, which had long been a coveted prize to the cattle-men,
were depleted through over-grazing and the machinations of the cattle
kings. Their condition and the similar condition of other Indian tribes
simultaneously reached an acute stage. Dispossessed of their ancestral
domains, their armed resistance overcome, their source of subsistence
destroyed, they had become the helpless dependents of the American
nation, requiring immediate action and the highest statesmanship and
constructive philanthropy for their redemption.

The accession of Theodore Roosevelt to the presidency in 1905 and of
Francis E. Leupp, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, gave great impetus
to the humane and progressive Indian policy of the government. This new
policy, in general, seeks to dissolve the tribal organisation, to
individualise the Indian, to make him a

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

self-supporting citizen, and to ultimately assimilate him with the white
race. Under it the Indian receives full recognition of his rights and,
at the same time, protection for his interests. Under it, the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs cuts up the reservations, giving to all
Indians a generous farm-allotment, and selling the remaining, or surplus
Indian lands to the public for settlement. The proceeds of such sales
are set aside as tribal funds, to be used for their general benefit by
the government under a wise and provident trusteeship, which safeguards
their interests.

In pursuance of this policy, the House of Representatives, in 1906,
passed a bill to survey and open for settlement lands formerly included
in the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana, comprising about one and a half
million acres. The disposal of these lands is now well under way.
Irrigation systems are also being constructed at the expense of the
tribal funds, which will give increased value to land heretofore
unavailable for agriculture.

Under the passing of the old conditions and the coming in of the new
policy, the younger generation of Blackfeet is already responding, and
manifesting a capacity for improvement. They are becoming the owners of
real estate, and are developing thrift and an ability to provide for the
future. A visitor to-day, in the Blackfeet country, unless he should
happen to come at a time when they have quit work and have assembled for
a few days’ recreation in their tribal camp, would not know that he was
among Indians. He would now see a marked advance towards civilised
conditions, and a striking contrast between the older generation of
Indians, who, because of their fixed habits of hereditary savagery, are
incapable of work, or a

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

settled occupation, and their children, who are being educated and
trained to work and to industrial pursuits. The industrious are rapidly
becoming self-supporting. Some of them live in well-made and comfortable
houses, and own ranches, with large herds of cattle and horses. They
wear white men's clothes, purchased from the trading stores, own high
priced wagons and buggies and make use of modern farming implements.

The mental and spiritual slavery of the Blackfeet, under their
"Medicine" superstitions, and the unchecked ravages of tuberculosis and
other diseases, which have come with the white men, offer a promising
field of usefulness for the medical missionary. There is also a great
opportunity for the practical missionary, who will not only teach the
Blackfeet Christianity, but also by personal contact and personal
example teach them how to live, in respect to hygiene, industry and
thrift, how to become self-supporting and make the most out of their
environment.

The whole question of lifting up the Indian is one of economical,
educational, and moral difficulty to both state and church. They are
together responsible for its solution, the work of each supplementing
the other.

Christian missions among the Blackfeet have not yet made equal progress
with the government. Nevertheless, the virility of the Blackfeet
character, and the robustness of their physical manhood, under the old
conditions of barbarism, give assurance of what should be forthcoming
under Christianity, rightly applied. The Blackfeet stock is endowed with
as favourable qualities for grafting upon it the fruits of our Christian
Civilisation, as was the Anglo-Saxon before its conversion to
Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix I. Black Feet Indian Songs](ont43.md)
