[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ont43)  [Next](ont45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9HLW0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Old North Trail*, by Walter McClintock, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

### APPENDIX II

*Page* [15](ont04.htm#page_15.md)<span id="an_15"></span>.—"This region
should be reserved as a National Park and Game Preserve."

There is a Bill before Congress which proposes to create this tract of
mountain country into a National Park. The Public Lands Committee of the
Senate in reporting the Bill to the Sixtieth Congress said:

"This Bill proposes to create a National Park which will be fittingly
called 'Glacier National Park.' The territory embraced contains about
1,400 square miles with approximately equal areas on the east and west
of the summit of the main range of the Rocky Mountains and immediately
south of the International Boundary line.

"The park will embrace more than 60 glaciers, 250 lakes and many
streams. From this area waters flow to the Hudson Bay, Gulf of Mexico,
and the Pacific Ocean. The mountain scenery is of unparalleled grandeur
and beauty. Mt. Cleveland, the highest peak, has an elevation of 10,434
feet and there are numerous other rugged peaks and mountains varying in
heights from 6,000 to 10,000 feet above the sea level. Mountain goats,
mountain sheep (Bighorn), grizzly and black bears, deer, wapiti, and
moose are still to be found, as well as a great variety of birds, and it
is believed these game animals and birds will increase in numbers, if
protected by law, to such an extent as to furnish in the overflow from
the park a tempting supply to sportsmen for all time to come."

The following Editorial concerning the proposed National Park is from
the *Outlook*, New York, April 16, 1910.

"In North-western Montana, fronting on the Canadian boundary line, lies
a tract of mountainous country which it is proposed in a Bill now before
Congress to turn into a National Park. It is not a large tract—from
south to north it covers approximately sixty miles. Yet within its
limits is comprised the most beautiful portion of the range of the Rocky
Mountains lying within the limits of the United States. The range there
is narrow. The great grass-covered

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

northern prairies sweep up to within twenty miles of the Continental
Divide. There is no intervening mass of foothills to break in upon and
tone down the abruptness of the approach. From out on the prairies can
be seen, within easy distance, the precipitous crags and the hanging
glaciers of a typical Alpine region; and, on the other hand, from the
summit of Chief Mountain on a clear morning one may look out on an ocean
of prairie in which the Sweet Grass Hills, over a hundred miles away,
appear to twinkle in the very foreground. The tract contains also an
apex of the continent. In its centre rises the Blackfoot Mountain, with
the great Blackfoot Glacier, containing almost as much ice as the Gorner
Glacier at Zermatt, descending from its eastern slope. The water from
this glacier forms the St. Mary's River, which, running north-westward,
joins the Saskatchewan and ultimately finds its way into Hudson Bay.
Near another slope of the mountain rises Cutbank Creek, flowing
southwesterly into the Marias, the Missouri, the Mississippi, and
ultimately the Gulf of Mexico; while on the western slope of the
mountain is found one of the sources of the Flathead, a tributary of the
Columbia, flowing westward into the Pacific.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

"The proposed park would make a wonderful recreation ground for the
American people. The summer and autumn climate is cold and bracing. The
mountains and glaciers offer the only chance for mountaineering of real
Alpine character (except that afforded by the Coast Range and Alaska) to
be found within the limits of the United States. The trout of the cold
St. Mary waters fight with a vigour that is seldom seen even in the
famous streams of eastern Canada. And the mountains still shelter a
sufficient number of our game animals (including our three most splendid
species, the mountain sheep and goat and the grizzly bear) to enable the
tract to become in time an important animal refuge. If by the action of
Congress the pending Bill becomes a law and the Glacier National Park is
established we shall have added to our system of National parks one
which in many features is unlike, and which in its beauty and
opportunities for wholesome pleasure will fitly supplement those which
we already have."

*Page* [29](ont05.htm#page_29.md)<span id="an_29"></span>,
[30](ont05.htm#page_30.md)<span id="an_30"></span>,
[35](ont05.htm#page_35.md)<span id="an_35"></span>.—"Sacred bundle of the
Beaver Medicine"—"Medicine Pipe" and "Medicine Bonnet."

The word "medicine," when used as a noun by itself, means something
endowed with supernatural power; but, when used as an adjective-prefix,
it also means sacred, or set apart for use in religious ceremonials.
"The sacred bundle of the Beaver Medicine" is a bundle containing many
skins of birds and animals thus set apart. It was believed to have been
given originally to the Blackfeet by the Beavers, and to have been
handed down from generation

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

to generation. (See legend of its origin in Chapter 6.) It was only
opened upon an important religious occasion, [accompanied](errata.htm#5.md)
by a ceremonial. For more extended comments on the significance and use
of the word "Medicine" see Chapter XI.

*Page* [50](ont06.htm#page_50.md)<span id="an_50"></span>.—"Parfleches." A
raw-hide case used for packing in horse transportation and also as a
trunk or receptacle for use inside the tipi. The "parfleches" and
"pemmican bags" were a necessity for a nomadic people. Both were
favourite objects for decoration to gratify their sense of the
beautiful. They ordinarily used conventional designs of triangles
combined in quadrangular forms and painted in red, blue and yellow.

*Page* [53](ont06.htm#page_53.md)<span id="an_53"></span>.—"Their lodge
poles were worn too short." When changing camp, the small ends of the
lodge poles were fastened to the horses’ sides, the large ends dragging
behind upon the ground. The Blackfeet changed camp so frequently that
their poles were soon worn too short for the lodges, requiring a new set
of lodge poles every year.

*Page* [152](ont12.htm#page_152.md)<span id="an_152"></span>,
[504](ont41.htm#page_504.md)<span id="an_504"></span>.—"When Wakes-up-last
murdered all of his children." The murder of Brings-down-the-Sun's
daughter (Pretty Blanket) and her three children, and Wakes-up-last's
suicide, was the result of the sale of bad whiskey, consisting largely
of wood alcohol, to Blackfeet Indians by white saloon-keepers in the
town of Cutbank, Montana. Their bodies lay for some time uncared for,
because of the superstitious dread of touching the dead, until Menake
prepared them for burial. Although the sale of whiskey to Indians is
prohibited by United States Law the saloon-keepers escaped punishment.

*Page* [157](ont13.htm#page_157.md)<span id="an_157"></span>.—Father De
Smet was a Jesuit priest noted in his day for his influence with the
Indian tribes in the North-West. His diary records that in 1841 he
secured 30 brave Pend d’Oreilles to accompany him through the country of
the Blackfeet, because the latter were so hostile to the whites that
they never gave them any quarter. Later, in 1846, while living among the
Blackfeet, he reported them equal in hospitality with other Indian
tribes.

*Page* [137](ont11.htm#page_137.md)<span id="an_137"></span>,
[193](ont17.htm#page_193.md)<span id="an_193"></span>.—"Travois." A horse
litter made of poles. Two poles were fastened like shafts to the sides
of a horse, the small ends crossing above and in front of the horse's
head, while the large ends dragged behind on the ground. A cross-framing
supported a network of raw-hide strips. Upon this simple but ingenious
device young children, the aged and sick were transported, also
provisions and camp equipage. Sometimes a canopy, constructed of bent
branches and a skin covering, was used for protection from sun and rain.

*Page* [283](ont23.htm#page_283.md)<span id="an_283"></span>.—"Indian music
should be preserved."

Deeply impressed with the great possibilities of Indian music, I
persuaded Arthur Nevin, an American composer, to go with me to

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

the camps of the Blackfeet. During his stay in my Indian tipi, I
proposed his composing an opera founded on the story of Poïa. (page
[491](ont41.htm#page_491).md), the most ancient tradition of the Blackfeet,
using an Indian environment and Indian musical themes. The opera, which
was named "Poïa," was completed by Mr. Nevin in the spring of 1906. Mr.
Randolph Hartley of New York wrote the libretto. The music was played
for the first time in concert form by the Pittsburg Orchestra, January
16th, 1907. Poïa was accepted for production by the Berlin Royal Opera
House in June, 1909. The premier performance took place April 23, 1910,
and was followed by three other performances. The opera was superbly
staged, both as to scenery and costumes, and was sung by a strong cast
of the Berlin Royal Opera. The second performance was attended by the
Crown Prince and Crown Princess and other members of the Royal Family.

*Page* [307](ont25.htm#page_307.md)<span id="an_307"></span>.—"Counting
Coups."

To "count coups" is to narrate deeds of valour. The bravest coup was to
strike, or even touch an enemy before killing him. It was also counted
as a coup to capture a weapon or article of clothing such as a shield,
war shirt, or war bonnet.

*Page* [312](ont26.htm#page_312.md)<span id="an_312"></span>.—"Bull Child
wore a robe famous among the Blackfeet." This robe was purchased by Dr.
Clark Wissler for the American Museum of Natural History, New York City,
and is exhibited in their collection from the Blackfeet. Its design and
the instructions as to how it should be made, were given to
Brings-Down-the Sun in a dream (page 430).

*Page* [425](ont34.htm#page_425.md)<span id="an_425"></span>.—"We call the
thunder Isis-a-kummi (Thunder-bird)." Nearly all of the widely spread
tribes of the Algonquian stock, as well as other ethnical divisions of
the Red Indians, had a myth concerning the awe-inspiring mystery of
nature we call thunder and lightning. They personified this mysterious
and supernatural power in the Thunder-bird, which they worshipped and to
which they made propitiatory sacrifices. We find it among the Micmacs of
Nova Scotia, the Passamaquoddies of Maine; the Hurons, Ottawas, and
Mississiquas of Lake Ontario; the Ojibways of Lake Superior, the Crees
of Hudson Bay; the Athabascan tribes of Northern Canada, the Illinois of
the middle west, the Comanches of the southwest, the Moquis of Arizona,
all the plains-tribes and those of the north-western Pacific Coast.

The Blackfeet have a tradition that the Thunder-bird was once overcome
by a snowstorm and descended into their camp. It was taken to the lodge
of the head chief, where many of the tribe assembled. Its feathers had
many colours like the rainbow and its claws were long and green. When it
suddenly flew from the lodge, the Indians rushed out and saw it
disappearing among the storm clouds.

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

The Indian belief made the storm cloud the Thunder-bird's vehicle,
behind which he moved through the air, making peals of thunder by
flapping his wings, and shooting forth lightning flashes by the blinking
of his all-penetrating eyes.

The legendary habitation of the Thunder-bird was usually in a high
mountain, or inaccessible crag in the tribe's vicinity. The Blackfeet
believed its home to be in a great cavern near the summit of Chief
Mountain, one of the most precipitous peaks of the Rocky Mountains. The
family of Thunderers of the Passamaquoddies of Maine were said to dwell
in the great cavern of Mount Katahdin. The Pottawotomies located the
Thunder-bird in one of the high mountain peaks of Thunder Bay on Lake
Superior. The Ojibways assigned their Thunder-bird to a high mountain
west of them. The Illinois, now almost extinct, had a legend about the
"Paieusen" or "Man-Devouring-Bird," which dwelt among the high cliffs on
the Mississippi River, near the present town of Alton. Its effigy was
carved and painted in large dimensions on the face of a perpendicular
cliff overlooking the Mississippi River. Father Marquette gives a vivid
description of it in the narrative of his voyage down that river in
1673. The Makah Indians of Cape Flattery named the mountain back of
Clyoquot on Vancouver Island as his dwelling place, where, "on the
shores of a small lake are quantities of whales’ bones, which the
Thunder-bird had killed." The Thlinkeets (Esquimaux) of Alaska have a
tradition of a mythical person named Chethl, "who, in the form of a
great bird, frequented the crater of Mount Edgecumbe, near Sitka,
feeding upon whales, which he carried there in his talons."

The Thunder-bird was frequently represented in Blackfeet religious
ceremonials. Its symbol was also painted on shields, weapons and war
clothes for inspiring courage, and on tipis for invoking protection in
behalf of the family.

*Page* [437](ont36.htm#page_437.md)<span id="an_437"></span>.—"Piskun:" A
natural trap, usually a perpendicular cliff or cut-bank, used for
capturing game on a large scale and requiring the co-operation of many
Indians. This method of killing buffalo by frightening and rushing them
over a cliff to their death, was used by the Blackfeet in ancient times,
when the buffalo were plentiful and their weapons primitive, but was
abandoned after the introduction of horses and fire-arms. The approaches
to the piskun were fenced to guide the frightened animals to the verge
of the cliff. This hunting device for securing by wholesale their winter
supplies of meat resembles the "deer-fences," which formerly the
Chippewa Indians constructed with much ingenuity and labour, extending
for miles through the unbroken forests of Michigan, and across the
general direction of the deer-migration, bringing them within the range
of the Indians’ weapons in ambush. The

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blackfeet also
built a corral about the foot of the cliff, to prevent the escape of any
buffalo, which were not killed outright by the fall. The locations of
piskuns are still easily recognised by the darker green of the grass,
showing the soil-enrichment from animal slaughter. Numerous flint
arrowheads and other relics of the chase are also found there.

*Page* [465](ont38.htm#page_465.md)<span id="an_465"></span>.—Tribal
regulations for hunting buffalo were not characteristic of the Blackfeet
alone, but were used by the other plains-tribes as a necessary
protection for their common interests. According to the journal of
Alexander Henry (a partner in the North-Western Company of Montreal,
1806), the tribal policy of the Mandans, in the matter of hunting
buffalo, was one of comity towards neighbouring tribes at peace with
them, of provident conservation in hunting them, and of humane
consideration of the poorest and helpless in the distribution of the
meat. The exercise of police power to prevent private exploitation of
the natural resources owned in common, fell into disuse with the advent
of the whites. The Blackfeet, together with the other plains-tribes,
finally joined with the white hunter in a blind and reckless slaughter
of the vast herds of buffalo, until they became practically extinct in
1883.

*Page* [478](ont39.htm#page_478.md)<span id="an_478"></span>.—"I see the
Last Brother is pointing downwards towards the prairie." The pointing of
the "Last Brother" furnished the Blackfeet with their night-sky clock.
This method of telling time in the night is well known to shepherds and
cattle herders, whose night occupation keeps them continually in the
open. Observation soon teaches them that the "Last Brother" or end star
of the handle of the Great Dipper, describes a great circle around the
North Star once in twenty-four hours and therefore, that its pointing or
relative position with the horizon would mark the time, as on a great
dial-face.

It should be noted, however, that "star time gains three minutes and
fifty nine seconds on solar time every twenty-four hours. If, therefore
the 'Last Brother' occupied a certain position in the sky at midnight of
June 1st, on September 1st it would have the same position at 6 p.m.
This variation would not affect the Indians’ use of this method, for
they never had need for other than an approximate record of time, that
being the one thing they had more of than they knew what to do with."
(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487a"></span>.—"When the
Akatsis (Lariat, or Rainbow) appears in the sky." The rainbow symbol is
sometimes used in Indian decoration to represent the Thunder-bird. Other
tribes call it "The Rain's Hat," "The Great Spirit's Fish Line," and
"Strong-medicine-to-drive-away-rain."

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487b"></span>.—"When the
fires of the Northmen (Aurora Borealis) flash in the winter sky."

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

The Aurora Borealis is also called by the plains Indians, "The Light of
the Northern Dancers," "Sacred Cloud," "The White Man's Fire," and "The
Mysterious Fire of the North." The Indians of Vancouver Island believe
that the light is caused by the fires of a tribe of Indian manikin, who
live near the North Pole and boil out their blubber on the ice.

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487c"></span>.—"When the
sun paints both his cheeks, that is, when the Sun-dogs (Ick ski)
appear." The concept, used in Indian sign-language to represent
Sun-dogs, is "Fires to warm the Sun." The Shoshones' name for the
phenomenon is "The Sun's Winter Ear-rings."

"When the parhelia, or Sun-dogs appear in very cold weather, the Sioux
say that 'the Sun has kindled a fire.' When the Sun is eclipsed, they
say it 'faints or dies.' The Sun 'travels' while the ground is
motionless." (Rev. J. O. Dorsey.)

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487d"></span>.—"When I see
a star feeding (Blackfeet name for comet)." "Comets have been regarded
among all nations from the earliest ages as portents of evil. It is
therefore not surprising that this superstition should be found among
the Blackfeet. The appearance of several very bright comets during the
16th and 17th centuries caused universal alarm. Andrew Pare writes of
the comet of 1528: 'This comet was so horrible and so dreadful and
inspired such terror in men's minds, that some died from fear alone,
others by illness caused by fear.' Famine was generally supposed to
follow the appearance of a comet. The recent return of Halley's Comet
stirred up dormant superstition in the minds of multitudes of people,
even those of intelligence, and from every part of Christendom, we have
learned of the fear and dread associated with the comet's near approach
to the sun and to the earth. It is true that the tail of the comet came
in contact with the earth, as has occurred with other comets in the
past, but it is known that it is built up of such tenuous matters, that
it could have no effect upon the earth that could be detected with the
most refined instruments. Sir Robert Ball has well said, The effect
could not be greater than the contact of a rhinoceros with a cobweb.'"
(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487e"></span>.—"When the
sun hides his face."

"A total eclipse of the sun is commonly regarded as the forerunner of
war, disease and death among the nations of the earth. The writer of
this note observed a total eclipse of the sun among a tribe of Winemucca
Indians in Nevada, January 1st, 1900. They looked upon the phenomena in
dread silence and yet with stolid bravery while, at the same time, a
Chinese settlement near by made a dreadful noise by beating upon tin and
other vessels to drive off the supposed dragon from the face of the
sun."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [487](ont40.htm#page_487.md)<span id="an_487f"></span>.—"Day Star."
In general the plains-tribes had more

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

special names for stars and constellations than the mountains tribes.
The Blackfeet called Mars the "Big-Fire-Star," and Venus "The Day Star"
because visible in the daytime.

"When at its greatest brilliancy, the planet Venus can easily be seen
overhead in a clear sky, even at midday. The period of visibility covers
several weeks, but varies slightly from year to year."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [488](ont40.htm#page_488.md)<span id="an_488"></span>.—"'The Seven
Brothers' (Great Bear), also known in England as the 'Plough' and
'Wain.'" According to a Sioux legend, "the four stars of the bowl of the
dipper are called the 'bier.' It is borne by four men, behind whom comes
the train of mourners. The second star in the handle has a very small
one (the Little Sister) beside it. The Sioux say, 'it is she, who goes
with her young one weeping'" (following the bier).

(Rev. J. O. Dorsey.)

*Page* [489](ont40.htm#page_489.md)<span id="an_489"></span>.—"The Little
Sister" star is the smaller one of the two stars, at the bend in the
handle of the dipper. In the older astronomy the brighter star is called
"Mizar," and its companion "Alcor." Mizar itself is a double star, one
of the most beautiful visible to the naked eye.

*Page* [490](ont40.htm#page_490.md)<span id="an_490"></span>.—"There is
also a family of six small stars we call the 'Lost Children'
(Pleiades)." "This beautiful and brilliant group of seven stars,
bringing its name Pleiades down from the ancients, has always been the
central object in the astronomy of the world. It has been mentioned by
many writers during the past ages. Job refers to them twice and the
prophet Amos once. Only six stars are visible to the ordinary vision,
but the seventh can readily be seen with a favouring atmosphere, and
when the observer knows just where to look for it. Professor Langley has
seen thirteen stars in the Pleiades in the clear sky of Mount Etna. The
telescope shows many stars in the environs of this beautiful
constellation. The photographic camera reveals to us the fact that the
brighter stars are surrounded with vast fields of nebulous matter."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [491](ont41.htm#page_491.md)<span id="an_491"></span>.—"Morning Star
and Young Morning Star or Legend of Star Boy (Later Scarface, or Poïa)."
"The conjunction of two planets, that is their near approach to each
other, has always been of deep significance to the untutored nations of
the earth; indeed to many of the learned it was considered a portent
fraught with great good or evil. Even Bacon in his 'Astrologia Sana'
tells us that these phenomena are not to be rejected lightly.

"There can be conjunctions of any of the planets, but their importance
seem to have been derived both from their near approach to each other,
and from the increased brilliancy of their light. The degree of
brilliance depends upon their distance from the earth at the time of
conjunction.

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

"In July, 1905, the date when the Star Boy legend was narrated by
Brings-down-the-Sun, Venus and Jupiter were in conjunction as Morning
Stars. The Indians were doubtless attracted by the brilliant spectacle
of the two planets 'travelling together,' but very probably recognised
them by their characteristic colours.

"Because of the remarkably close approach of these two planets to each
other, it was a rare and brilliant conjunction attracting the attention
of astronomers all over the world. Between the 3rd and 4th of July they
seemed to the naked eye to be almost in contact. They were both included
in the field of the telescope at the same time, being separated by only
a minute in right ascension, or about one-thirtieth of the diameter of
the moon, and, north and south, by a little more than one-half of the
diameter of the moon, *i.e.*, fifteen minutes. Jupiter (Star Boy) came
up first, followed by Morning Star (Venus).

"Venus and Jupiter were in conjunction just before sunrise, October
14th, 1908. They were in conjunction again August 11th, 1909. The
conjunction of Venus and Saturn on June 5th, 1910, will be very
beautiful on account of their near approach to each other, which will be
closest just before sunrise."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

*Page* [499](ont41.htm#page_499.md)<span id="an_499"></span>.—"The Star
that stands still." "The North Star has a motion around the true pole at
this epoch of one and one-third degrees, or in other words, it is nearly
three times the diameter of the Moon away from the true pole of the
heavens. This motion is so slow and so limited in extent that the
unaided eye would not likely detect it. In fact, the Pole Star has been
near enough to the true pole of the heavens for many generations to
satisfy all demands of the tutored as well as the untutored observers."
(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II (continued): Catalog of Botanical Collection](ont45.md)
