[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Letter from Sir Walter Scott to the author of the Irish Fairy Legends

SIR, -- I have been obliged by the courtesy which sent me your very
interesting work on "Irish Superstitions," and no less by the amusement
which it has afforded me, both from the interest of the stories and the
lively manner in which they are told. You are to consider this, sir, as
a high compliment from one who holds him on the subject of elves,
ghosts, visions, etc., nearly as strong as William Churns of
Staffordshire:

"Who every year can mend your cheer  
With tales both old and new."

The extreme similarity of your fictions to ours in Scotland is very
striking. The Cluricaune (which is an admirable subject for a pantomime)
is not known here. I suppose the Scottish cheer was not sufficient to
tempt to the hearth either him, or that singular demon called by Heywood
the Buttery Spirit, which diminished the profits of an unjust landlord
by eating up all that he cribbed for his guests.

The beautiful superstition of the Banshee seems in a great measure
peculiar to Ireland, though in some Highland families there is such a
spectre, particularly in that of MacLean of Lochbuy; but I think I could
match all your other tales with something similar.

I can assure you, however, that the progress of philosophy has not even
yet entirely "pulled the old woman out of our hearts," as Addison
expresses it. Witches are still held in reasonable detestation, although
we no longer burn or even *score above the breath.* As for the water
bull, they live who will take their oaths to having seen him emerge from
a small lake on the boundary of my property here, scarce large enough to
have held him, I should think. Some traits in his description seem to
answer the hippopotamus, and these are always mentioned in Highland and
Lowland story. Strange if we could conceive there existed, under a
tradition so universal, some shadowy reference to those fossil bones of
animals which are so often found in the lakes and bogs.

But to leave antediluvian stories for the freshest news from Fairyland,
I cannot resist the temptation to send you an account of King Oberon's
court, which was verified before me as a magistrate, with all the
solemnities of a court of justice, within this fortnight past. A young
shepherd, a lad of about eighteen years of age, well brought up and of
good capacity, and, that I may be perfectly accurate, in the service of
a friend, a most respectable farmer at Oakwood, on the estate of Hugh
Scott, Esq. of Harden, made oath and said, that going to look after some
sheep which his master had directed to be put upon turnips, and passing
in the grey of the morning a small copse-wood adjacent to the River
Etterick, he was surprised at the sight of four or five little
personages, about two feet or thirty inches in height, who were seated
under the trees and apparently in deep conversation. At this singular
appearance he paused till he bad refreshed his noble courage with a
prayer and a few recollections of last Sunday's sermon, and then
advanced to the little party. But observing that, instead of
disappearing, they seemed to become yet more magnificently distinct than
before, and now doubting nothing, from their foreign dresses and
splendid decorations, that they were the choice ornaments of the fairy
court, he fairly turned tail and went "to raise the water," as if the
South'ron had made a raid. Others came to the rescue, and yet the fairy
*cortege* awaited their arrival in still and silent dignity. I wish I
could stop here, for the devil take all explanations, they stop duels
and destroy the credit of apparitions, neither allow ghosts to be made
in an honourable way or to be 'believed in (poor souls !) when they
revisit the glimpses of the moon.

I must however explain, like other honourable gentlemen, elsewhere. You
must know, that like our neighbours, we have a school of arts for our
mechanics at O--,a small manufacturing town in this country, and. that
the tree of knowledge there, as elsewhere, produces its usual crop of
good and evil. The day before this avatar of Oberon was a fair-day at
Selkirk, and amongst other popular divertisements was one which, in
former days, I would have called a puppet show, and its master a puppet
showman. He has put me right, however, by informing me, that he writes
'himself *artist from Vauxhall,* and that he exhibits *fantoccini;* call
them what you will, it seems they gave great delight to the unwashed
artificers of G----. Formerly they would have been contented to wonder
and applaud, but not so were they satisfied in our modern days of
investigation, for they broke into Punch's sanctuary forcibly, after he
had been laid aside for the evening, made violent seizure of his person,
and carried off him, his spouse, and heaven knows what captives besides,
in their plaid nooks, to be examined at leisure. All this they literally
did (forcing a door to accomplish their purpose) in the spirit of
science alone, or but slightly stimulated by that of malt whisky, with
which last we have been of late deluged. Cool reflection came as they
retreated by the banks of the Etterick; they made the discovery that
they could no more make Punch move than Lord -- could make him speak;
and recollecting, I believe, that there was such a person as the Sheriff
in the world, they abandoned their prisoners, in hopes, as they
pretended, that they would be found and restored in safety to their
proper owner.

It is only necessary to add that the artist had his losses made good by
a subscription, and the scientific inquirers escaped with a small fine,
as a warning not to indulge such an irregular spirit of research in
future.

As this somewhat tedious story contains the very last news from
Fairyland, I hope you will give it acceptance, and beg you to believe me
very much, your obliged and thankful servant,

 

WALTER SCOTT  
ABBOTSFORD, MELROSE,

27th April, 1825

 

THE END
