[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat01)  [Next](flat03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Legend of Knockfierna

\[Kockfierna**:** Called by the people of the country *'Knock Dhoinn
Firinne,'* the mountain of Donn of Truth. This mountain is very high,
and may be seen for several miles round; and when people are desirous to
know whether or not any. day will rain, they look at the top of Knock
Firinn, and if they see a vapour or mist there, they immediately
conclude that rain will soon follow, believing that Donn (the lord or
chief) of that mountain and his aerial assistants are collecting the
clouds, and that he holds them there for some short time, to warn the
people of the approaching rain. As the appearance of mist on that
mountain in the morning is considered an infallible sign that, that day
will be rainy, Donn is called *'Dona Firinne,'* Donn of Truth. "- Mr.
Edward O'Reilly\]

 

II

 

**IT** is a very good thing not to be any way in dread of the fairies,
for without doubt they have then less power over a person ; but to make
too free with them, or to disbelieve in them altogether, is as foolish a
thing as man, woman, or child can do.

It has been truly said, that "good manners are no burthen," and that "
civility costs nothing;" but there are some people foolhardy enough to
disregard doing a civil thing, which, whatever they may think, can never
harm themselves or any one else, and who at the same time will go out of
their way for a bit of mischief, which never can serve them; but sooner
or later they will come to know better, as you shall hear of Carroll
O'Daly, a strapping young fellow up out of Connaught, whom they used to
call, in his own country, " Devil Daly."

Carroll O'Daly used to go roving about from one place to another, and
the fear of nothing stopped him; he would as soon pass an churchyard or
a regular fairy ground, at any hour of the night, as go from one room
into another without ever making the sign of the cross, or saying, "
Good luck attend you, gentlemen."

It so happened that he was once journeying, in the county of Limerick,
towards " the Balbec of Ireland," the venerable town of Kilmallock; and
just at the foot of Knockfierna he overtook a respectable4ooking man
jogging along upon a white pony. The night wag coming on, and they rode
side by side for some time, without much conversation passing between
them, further than saluting each other very kindly; at last, Carroll
O'Daly asked his companion how far he was going?

Not far your way," said the farmer, for such his appearance bespoke him;
" I'm only going to the top of this hill here."

"And what might take you there," said O'Daly, "at this time of the
night?"

"Why then," replied the farmer," if you want to know; 'tis the *good
people*."

The fairies, you mean," said O'Daly.

" Whist I whist!" said his fellow-traveller, " or you may be sorry for
it;" and he turned his pony off the road they were going towards a
little path which led up the side of the mountain, wishing Carrol O'Daly
good night and a safe journey.

That fellow," thought Carroll, " is about no good this blessed night,
and I would have no fear of swearing wrong if I took my Bible oath, that
it is something else beside the fairies, or the good people, as he calls
them, that is taking him up the mountain at this hour. The fairies!" he
repeated, " is it for a well shaped man like him to be going after
little chaps like the fairies! to be sure some say there are such
things, and more say not; but I know this, that never afraid would I be
of a dozen of them, ay, of two dozen, for that matter, if they are no
bigger than what I hear tell of."

Carroll O'Daly, whilst these thoughts were passing in his mind, had
fixed his eyes steadfastly on the mountain, behind which the full moon
was rising majestically. Upon an elevated point that appeared darkly
against the moon's disk, he beheld the figure of a man leading a pony,
and he had no doubt it was that of the farmer with whom he had just
parted company.

A sudden resolve to follow flashed across the mind of O'Daly with the
speed of lightning: both his courage and curiosity had been worked up by
his cogitations to a pitch of chivalry; and, muttering "Here's after
you, old boy!" he dismounted from his horse, bound him to an old thorn
tree, and then commenced vigorously ascending the mountain.

Following as well as he could the direction taken by the figures of the
man and pony, he pursued his way, occasionally guided by their partial
appearance: and, after toiling nearly three hours over a rugged and
sometimes swampy path, came to a green spot on the top of the mountain,
where he saw the white pony at full liberty grazing as quietly as may
be. O'Daly looked around for the rider, but he was nowhere to be seen;
he, however, soon discovered close to where the pony stood an opening in
the mountain like the mouth of a pit, and he remembered having heard,
when a child, many a tale about the "Poul-duve," or Black Hole of
Knockfierna; how it was the entrance to tbe fairy castle which was
within the mountain; and how a man whose name was Ahern, a land-surveyor
in that part of the country, had once attempted to fathom it with a
line, and had been drawn down into it and was never again heard *of;*
with many other tales of the like nature.

"But," thought O'Daly, "these are old woman's stories; and since I've
come up so far*,* I'll just knock at the castle door and see if the
fairies are at home."

No sooner said than done; for, seizing a large stone, as big, ay, bigger
than his two hands, he flung it with all his strength down into the
Poul-duve of Knockfierna. He heard it bounding and tumbling about from
one rock to another with a terrible noise, and he leant his head over to
try and hear when it would reach the bottom, - and what should the very
stone he had thrown in do but come up again with as much force as it had
gone down, and gave him such a blow full in the face, that it sent him
rolling down the side of Knockfierna, head over heels, tumbling from one
crag to another, much faster than he came up. And in the morning Carroll
O'Daly was found lying beside his horse; the bridge of his nose broken,
which disfigured him for life ; his head all cut and bruised, and both
his eyes closed up, and as black as if Sir Daniel Donnelly had painted
them for him.

Carroll O'Daly was never bold again in riding alone near the haunts of
the fairies after dusk; but small blame to him for that; and if ever he
happened to be benighted in a lonesome place, he would make the best of
his way to his journey's end, without asking questions, or turning to
the right or to the left, to seek after the good people, or any who kept
company with them.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of Knockgrafton](flat03)
