[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat18)  [Next](flat20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Spirit Horse

THE history of Morty Sullivan ought to be a warning to all young men to
stay at home, and to live decently and soberly if they can, and not to
go roving about the world. Morty, when he had just turned of fourteen,
ran away from his father and mother, who were a mighty respectable old
couple, and many and many a tear they shed on his account. It is said
they both died heartbroken for his loss: all they ever learned about him
was that he went on board of a ship bound to America.

Thirty years after the old couple had been laid peacefully in their
graves, there came a stranger to Beerhaven enquiring after them - it was
their son Morty; and, to speak the truth of him, his heart did seem full
of sorrow when he heard that his parents were dead and gone ; - but what
else could he expect to hear? Repentance generally comes when it is too
late.

Morty Sullivan, however, as an atonement for his sins, was recommended
to perform a pilgrimage to the blessed chapel of Saint Gobnate, which is
in a wild place called Ballyvourney.

This he readily undertook; and willing to lose no time, commenced his
journey the same afternoon. He had not proceeded many miles before the
evening came on: there was no moon, and the starlight was obscured by a
thick fog, which ascended from the valleys. His way was through a
mountainous country, with many cross-paths and by-ways, so that it was
difficult for a stranger like Morty to travel without a guide. He was
anxious to reach his destination, and exerted himself to do so; but the
fog grew thicker and thicker, and at last he became doubtful if the
track he was in led to the blessed chapel of Saint Gobnate. But seeing a
light which he imagined not to be far off, he went towards it, and when
he thought himself close to it the light suddenly seemed at a great
distance, twinkling dimly through the fog. Though Morty felt some
surprise at this he was not disheartened, for he thought that it was a
light sent by the holy Saint Gobnate to guide his feet through the
mountains to her chapel.

And thus did he travel for many a mile, continually, as he believed,
approaching the light, which would suddenly start off to a great
distance. At length he came so close as to perceive that the light came
from a fire; seated beside which be plainly saw an old woman ;- then,
indeed, his faith was a little shaken, and much did he wonder that both
the fire and the old woman should travel before him, so many weary
miles, and over such uneven roads.

"In the holy names of the pious Gobnate, and of her preceptor Saint
Abban," said Morty, "how that burning fire move on so fast before me,
who can that old woman be sitting beside the moving fire?"

These words had no sooner passed Morty's lips than he found himself,
without taking another step, close to this wonderful fire, beside which
the old woman was sitting munching her supper. With every wag of the old
woman's jaw her eyes would roll fiercely upon Morty, as if she was angry
at being disturbed; and he saw with more astonishment than ever that her
eyes were neither black, nor blue, nor gray, nor hazel, like the human
eye, but of a wild red colour, like the eye of a ferret. If before he
wondered at the fire, much greater was his wonder at the old woman's'
appearance; and stout-hearted as he was, he could not but look upon her
with fear - judging, and judging rightly, that it was for no good
purpose her supping in so unfrequented a place, and at so late an hour,
for it was near midnight. She said not one word, but munched and munched
away, while Morty looked at her in silence. - " What's your name?" at
last demanded the old hag, a sulphurous puff coming out of her mouth,
her nostrils distending, and her eyes growing redder than ever, when she
had finished her question.

Plucking up all hjs courage, "Morty Sullivan," replied he, "at your
service;" meaning the latter words only in civility

"*Ubbubbo!"* said the old woman, "we'll soon see that;" and the red fire
of her eyes turned into a pale green colour. Bold and fearless as Morty
was, yet much did he tremble at hearing this dreadful exclamation: he
would have fallen down on his knees and prayed to Saint Gobnate, or any
other saint, for he was not particular; but he was so petrified with
horror, that he could not move in the slightest way, much less go down
on his knees.

"Take hold of my hand, Morty," said the old woman: "I'll give you a
horse to ride that will soon carry you to your journey's end." So
saying, she led the way, the fire going before them ; - it is beyond
mortal knowledge' to say how, but on it went, shooting out bright
tongues of flame, and flickering fiercely.

Presently they came to a natural cavern in the side of the mountain, and
the old hag called aloud in a most discordant voice for her horse! In a
moment a jet-black steed started from its gloomy stable, the rocky floor
whereof rung with a sepulchral echo to the clanging hoofs.

"Mount, Morty, mount !" cried she, seizing him with supernatural
strength, and forcing him upon the back of the horse. Morty finding
human power of no avail, muttered, " O that I had spurs!" and tried to
grasp the horse's mane; but he caught at a shadow; it nevertheless bore
him up and bounded forward with him; now springing down a fearful
precipice, now clearing the rugged bed of a torrent, and rushing like
the dark midnight storm' through the mountains.

The following morning Morty Sullivan was discovered by some pilgrims
(who came that way after taking their rounds at Gougane Barra) lying on
the flat of his back, under a steep cliff, down which he had been flung
by the Phooka. Morty was severely bruised by the fall, and he is said to
have sworn on the spot, by the hand of O'Sullivan (and that is no small
oath \[*"Nulla manus, Tam liberalis, Atque generalis, Atque universalis,
Quam Suilivanis."*\] ), never again to take a full quart bottle of
whisky with him on a pilgrimage.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel O Rourke](flat20)
