[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat17)  [Next](flat19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Legends of the Banshee

THE family of Mac Carthy have for some generations possessed a small
estate in the county of Tipperary. They are the descendants of a race,
once numerous and powerful in the south of Ireland; and though it is
probable that the property they at present hold is no part of the large
possessions of their ancestors, yet the district in which they live is
so connected with the name of Mac Carthy by those associations which are
never forgotten in Ireland, that they have preserved with all ranks a
sort of influence much greater than that which their fortune or
connections could otherwise give them. They are, like most of this
class, of the Roman Catholic persuasion, to which they adhere with
somewhat of the pride of ancestry, blended with a something, call it
what you will, whether bigotry, or a sense of wrong, arising out of
repeated diminutions of their family possessions, during the more
rigorous periods of the penal laws. Being an old family, and especially
being an old Catholic family, they have of course their Banshee; and the
circumstances under which the appearance,. which I shall relate, of this
mysterious harbinger of death took place, were told me by an old lady, a
near connection of theirs, who knew many of the parties concerned, and
who, though not deficient in understanding or education, cannot to this
day be brought to give a decisive opinion as to the truth or
authenticity of the story. The plain inference to be drawn from this is,
that she believes it, though she does not own it; and as she was a
contemporary of the persons concerned - as she heard the account from
many persons about the same period, all concurring in the important
particulars - as some of her authorities were themselves actors in the
scene - and as none of the parties were interested in speaking what was
false; *I* think we have about as good evidence that the whole is
undeniably true as we have of many narratives of modern history, which I
could name, and which many grave and sober-minded people would deem it
very great pyrrhonism to question. This*,* however, is a point which it
is not my province to determine. People who deal out stories of this
sort must be content to act like certain young politicians, who tell
very freely to their friends what they hear at a great man's table; not
guilty of the impertinence of weighing the doctrines, and leaving it to
their hearers to understand them in any sense, or in no sense, just as
they may please.

Charles Mac Carthy was, in the year 1749, the only surviving son of a
very numerous family. His father died when he was little more than
twenty, leaving him the Mac Carthy estate, not much encumbered,
considering that it was an Irish one. Charles was gay, handsome,
unfettered either by poverty, a father, or guardians, and therefore was
not, at the age of one-and-twenty, a pattern of regularity and virtue.
In plain terms, he was an exceedingly dissipated - I fear I may say
debauched young man. His companions were, as may be supposed, of the
higher classes of the youth in his neighbourhood, and, in general, of
those whose fortunes were larger than his own, whose dispositions to
pleasure were therefore under still less restrictions, and in whose
example he found at once an incentive and an apology for his
irregularities. Besides, Ireland, a place to this day not very
remarkable for the coolness and steadiness of its youth, was then one of
the cheapest countries in the world in most of those articles which
money supplies for the indulgence of the passions. The odious
excise-man, with his portentous book in one hand, his unrelenting pen
held in the other, or stuck beneath his hat-band, and the ink-bottle
('black emblem of the informer') dangling from his waist-coat-button -
went not then from ale-house to ale-house, denouncing all those
patriotic dealers in spirit, who preferred selling whiskey, which had
nothing to do with English laws (but to elude them), to retailing that
poisonous liquor, which derived its name from the British " Parliament,"
that compelled its circulation among a reluctant people. Or if the
gauger - recording angel of the law - wrote down the peccadillo of a
publican, he dropped a tear upon the word, and blotted it out for ever!
For, welcome to the tables of their hospitable neighbours, the guardians
of the excise, where they existed at all, scrupled to abridge those
luxuries which they freely shared; and thus the competition in the
market between the smuggler, who incurred little hazard, and the
personage ycleped fair trader, who enjoyed little protection, made
Ireland a land flowing, not merely with milk and honey, but with whiskey
and wine. In the enjoyments supplied. by these, and in the many kindred
pleasures to which frail youth is but too prone, Charles Mac Carthy
indulged to such a degree, that just about the time when he bad
completed his four-and-twentieth year, after a week of great excesses,
he was seized with a violent fever, which, from its malignity, and the
weakness of his frame, left scarcely a hope of his recovery. His mother,
who had at first made many efforts to check his vices, and at last had
been obliged to look on at his rapid progress to ruin in silent despair,
watched day and night at his pillow. The anguish of parental feeling was
blended with that still deeper misery which those only know who have
striven hard to rear in virtue and piety a beloved and favourite child;
have found him grow up all that their hearts could desire, until he
reached manhood; and then, when their pride was highest, and their hopes
almost ended in the fulfilment of their fondest expectations, have seen
this idol of their affections plunge headlong into a course of reckless
profligacy, and, after a rapid career of vice, hang upon the verge of
eternity, without the leisure for, or the power of, repentance.
Fervently she prayed that, if his life could not be spared, at least the
delirium, which continued with increasing violence from the first few
hours of his disorder, might vanish before death, and leave enough of
light and of calm for making his peace with offended Heaven. After
several days, however, nature seemed quite exhausted, and he sunk into a
state too like death to be mistaken for the repose of sleep. His face
had that pale, glassy, marble look, which is in general so sure a
symptom that life has left its tenement of clay. His eyes were closed
and sunk; the lids having that compressed and stiffened appearance which
seemed to indicate that some friendly hand had done its last office. The
lips, half-closed and perfectly ashy, discovered just so much of the
teeth as to give to the features of death their most ghastly, but most
impressive look. He lay upon his back, with his hands stretched beside
him, quite motionless; and his distracted mother, after repeated trials,
could discover not the least symptom of animation. The medical man who
attended, having tried the usual modes for ascertaining the presence of
life, declared at last his opinion that it was flown, and prepared to
depart .from the house of mourning. His horse was seen to come to the
door. A crowd of people who were collected before the windows, or
scattered in group' on the lawn in front, gathered round when the door
opened. These were tenants, fosterers, and poor relations of the family,
with others attracted by affection, or by that interest which partakes
of curiosity, but is something more, and which collects the lower ranks
round a house where a human being is in his passage to another world.
They saw the professional man come out from the hall door and approach
his horse; and while slowly, and with a melancholy air, he prepared to
mount, they clustered round him with enquiring and wishful looks. Not a
word was spoken; but their meaning could not be misunderstood; and the
physician, when he had got into his saddle, and while the servant was
still holding the bridle, as if to delay him, and was looking anxiously
at his face, as if expecting that he would relieve the general suspense,
shook his head, and said in a low voice, "It's all over, James;" and
moved slowly away. The moment he had spoken, the women present, who were
very numerous, uttered a shrill cry, which, having been sustained for
about half a minute, fell suddenly into a full, loud, continued and
discordant but plaintive wailing, above which occasionally were heard
the deep sounds of a man's voice, sometimes in broken sobs, sometimes in
more distinct exclamations of sorrow. This was Charles's foster-brother,
who moved about in the crowd, now clapping his hands, now rubbing them
together in an agony of grief. The poor fellow had been Charles's
playmate and companion when a boy, and afterwards his servant; had
always been distinguished by his, peculiar regard, and loved his young
master, as much, at least, as he did his own life.

When Mrs. Mac Car thy became convinced that the blow was indeed struck,
and that her beloved son was sent to his last account, even in the
blossoms of his sin, she remained for some time gazing with fixedness
upon his cold features; then, as. if something had suddenly touched the
string of her tenderest affections, tear after tear trickled down her
cheeks, pale with anxiety and watching. Still she continued looking at
her son, apparently unconscious that she was weeping, without once
lifting her handkerchief to her eyes, until reminded of the sad duties
which the custom of the country imposed upon her, by the crowd of
females belonging to the better class of the peasantry, who now, crying
audibly, nearly filled the apartment. She then withdrew, to give
directions for the ceremony of waking, and for supplying the numerous
visitors of all ranks with the refreshments usual on these melancholy
occasions. Though her voice was scarcely heard, and though no one saw
her but the servants and one or two old followers of the family, who
assisted her in the. necessary arrangements, every thing was conducted
with the greatest regularity ; and though she made no effort to check
her sorrows, they never once suspended her attention, now more than ever
required to preserve order in her household, which, in this season of
calamity, but for her would have been ail confusion.

The night was pretty far advanced; the boisterous lamentations which had
prevailed during part of the day in and about the house had given place
to a solemn and mournful stillness; and Mrs. Mac Carthy, whose heart,
notwithstanding her long fatigue and watching, was yet too sore for
sleep, was kneeling in fervent prayer in a chamber adjoining that of her
son: - suddeniy her devotions were disturbed by an unusual noise,
proceeding from the persons who were watching round the body. First
there was a low murmur - then al\[ was silent, as if the movements of
those in the chamber were checked by a sudden panic - and then a loud
cry of terror burst from all within : - the door of the chamber was
thrown open, and all who were not overturned in the press rushed wildly
into the passage which led to the stairs, and into which Mrs. Mac
Carthy's room opened. Mrs. Mac Carthy made her way through the crowd
into her son's chamber, where she found him sitting up in the bed, and
looking vacantly around, like one risen from the grave. The glare thrown
upon his sunk features and thin lathy frame gave an unearthly horror to
his whole aspect. Mrs. Mac Carthy was a woman of some firmness; but she
was a woman, and not quite free fr6m the superstitions of her country.
She dropped on her knees, and, clasping her hands, began to pray aloud.
The form before her moved only its lips, and barely uttered " Mother;" -
but though the pale lips moved, as if there was a design to finish the
sentence, the tongue refused its office. Mrs. Mac Carthy sprung forward,
and catching the arm of her son, exclaimed, "Speak in the name of God
and his saints, speak! are you alive?"

He turned to her slowly, and said, speaking still with apparent
difficulty, " Yes, my mother, alive, and -- But sit down and collect
yourself; I have that to tell, which will astonish you still more than
what you have seen.? " He leaned back upon his pillow, and while his
mother remained kneeling by the bedside, holding one of his hands
clasped in hers, and gazing on him with the look of one who distrusted
all her senses, he proceeded :- " Do not interrupt me until I have done.
I wish to speak while the excitement of returning life is upon me, as I
know I shall soon need much repose. Of the commencement of my illness I
have only a confused recollection; but within the last twelve hours, I
have been before the judgment-seat of God. Do not stare incredulously on
me - 'tis as true as have been my crimes, and, as I trust, shall be my
repentance. I saw the awful Judge arrayed in all the terrors which
invest him when mercy gives place to justice. The dreadful pomp of
offended omnipotence, I saw,- remember. It is fixed here; printed on my
brain in characters indelible; but it passeth human language. What I
*can* describe I *will* - I may speak it briefly. It is enough to say, I
was weighed in the balance and found wanting. The irrevocable sentence
was upon the point of being pronounced; the eye of my Almighty Judge,
which had already glanced upon me, half spoke my doom; when I observed
the guardian saint, to whom you so often directed my prayers when I was
a child, looking at me with an expression of benevolence and compassion.
I stretched forth my hands to him, and besought his intercession; I
implored that one year, one month might be given to me on earth, to do
penance and atonement for my transgressions. He threw himself at the
feet of my Judge, and supplicated for mercy. Oh! never-not if I should
pass through ten thousand successive states of being - never, for
eternity, shall I forget the horrors of that moment, when my fate hung
suspended - when an instant was to decide whether torments unutterable
were to be my portion for endless ages! But Justice suspended its
decree, and Mercy spoke in accents of firmness, but mildness, ' Return
to that world in which thou hast lived but to outrage the laws of Him
who made that world and thee. Three years are given thee for repentance;
when these are ended, thou shalt again stand here, to be saved or lost
for ever.' - I heard no more; I saw no more, until I awoke to life, the
moment before you entered."

Charles's strength continued just long enough to finish these last
words, and on uttering them he closed his eyes, and lay quite exhausted.
His mother, though, as was before said, somewhat disposed to give credit
to supernatural visitations, yet hesitated whether or not she should
believe that, although awakened from a swoon, which might have been the
crisis of his disease, he was still under the influence of delirium.
Repose, however, was at all events necessary, and. she took immediate
measures that he should enjoy it undisturbed. After some hours' sleep,
he awoke refreshed, and thenceforward gradually but steadily recovered.

Still he persisted in his account of the vision, as he had at first
related it; and his persuasion of its reality had an obvious and decided
influence on his habits and conduct. He did not altogether abandon the
society of his former associates, for his temper was not soured by his
reformation; but he never joined in their excesses, and often
endeavoured to reclaim them. How his pious exertions succeeded, I have
never learnt; but of himself it is recorded, that he was religious
without ostentation, and temperate without austerity; giving a practical
proof that vice may be exchanged for virtue, without a loss of
respectability, popularity, or happiness.

Time rolled on, and long before the three years were ended, the story of
his vision was forgotten, or, when spoken of, was usually mentioned as
an instance proving the folly of believing in such things. Charles's
health, from the temperance and regularity of his habits, became more
robust than ever. His friends, indeed, had often occasion to rally him
upon a seriousness and abstractedness of demeanour, which grew upon him
as he approached the completion of his seven-and-twentieth year, but for
the most part his manner exhibited the same animation and cheerfulness
for which he had always been remarkable. In company, he evaded every
endeavour to draw from him a distinct opinion on the subject of the
supposed prediction; but among his own family it was well known that he
still firmly believed it. However, when the day had nearly arrived on
which the prophecy was, if at all, to be fulfilled, his whole appearance
gave such promise of a long and healthy life, that he was persuaded by
his friends to ask a large party to an entertainment at Spring House, to
celebrate his birthday. But the occasion of this party; and the
circumstances which attended it, will be best learned from a perusal of
the following letters, which have been carefully preserved by some
relations of his family. The first is from Mrs. Mac Carthy to a lady, a
very near connection and valued friend of hers, who lived in the county
of Cork, at about fifty miles' distance from Spring House.

  
" To Mrs. Barry, Castle Barry.

" Spring House, Tuesday morning, October 15th, 1752.

"MY DEAREST MARY,

"I am afraid I am going to put your affection for your old friend and
kinswoman to a severe trial. A two days' journey at this season,, over
bad roads and through a troubled country, it will indeed require
friendship such as yours to persuade a sober woman to encounter. But the
truth is, I have, or fancy I have, more than usual cause for wishing you
near me. You know my son's story. I can't tell how it is, but as next
Sunday approaches, when the prediction of his dream or his vision will
be proved false or true, I feel a sickening of the heart, which I cannot
suppress, but which your presence, my dear Mary, will soften, as it has
done so many of my sorrows. My nephew, James Ryan, is to be married to
Jane Osborne (who, you know, is my son's ward), and the bridal
entertainment will take place here on Sunday next, though Charles
pleaded hard to have it postponed a day or two longer. Would to God -
but no more of this till we meet. Do prevail upon yourself to leave your
good man for *one* week, if his farming concerns will not admit of his
accompanying you; and come to us, with the girls, as soon before Sunday
as you can.

"Ever my dear Mary's attached Cousin and friend,

"ANN MAC CARTHY."

  
Athough this letter reached Castle Barry early on Wednesday, the
messenger having travelled on foot, over bog and moor, by paths
impassable to horse or carriage, Mrs. Barry, who at once determined on
going, had so many arrangements to make for the regulation of her
domestic affairs (which, in Ireland, among the middle orders of the
gentry, fall soon into confusion when the mistress of the family is
away), that she and her two younger daughters were unable to leave home
until late on the morning of Friday. The eldest daughter remained, to
keep her father company, and superintend the concerns of the household.
As the travellers were to journey in an open one-horse vehicle, called a
jaunting-car (still used in Ireland), and as the roads, bad at all
times, were rendered still worse by the heavy rains, it was their design
to make two easy stages; to stop about mid-way the first night, and
reach Spring House early on Saturday evening. This arrangement was now
altered, as they found that, from the lateness of their departure, they
could proceed, at the utmost, no farther than twenty miles on the first
day; and they therefore purposed sleeping at the house of a Mr. Bourke,
friend of theirs, who lived at somewhat less than that distance from
Castle Barry. They reached Mr. Bourke's in safety; after rather a
disagreeable drive. What befel them on their journey the next day to
Spring House, and after their arrival there, is fully related in a
letter from the second Miss Barry to her eldest sister.

  
Spring House, Sunday evening, 20th October, 1752.

"DEAR ELLEN,

As my mother's letter, which encloses this will announce to you briefly
the sad intelligence which I shall here relate more fully, I think it
better to go regularly through the recital of the extraordinary events
of the last two days.

"The Bourkes kept us up so late on Friday night, that yesterday was
pretty far advanced before we could begin our journey, and the day
closed when we were nearly fifteen miles distant from this place. The
roads were excessively deep, from the heavy rains of the last week, and
we proceeded so slowly, that at last my mother resolved on passing the
night at the house of Mr. Bourke's brother (who lives about a quarter of
a mile off the road), and coming here to break-fast in the morning. The
day had been windy and showery, and the sky looked fitful, gloomy, and
uncertain. The moon was full, and at times shone clear and bright; at
others, it was wholly concealed behind the thick, black, and rugged
masses of clouds, that rolled rapidly along, and were every moment
becoming larger, and collecting together, as if gathering strength for a
coming storm. The wind, which blew in our faces, whistled bleakly along
the low hedges of the narrow road, on which we proceeded with difficulty
from the number of deep sloughs, and which afforded not the least
shelter, no plantation being within some miles of us. My mother,
therefore, asked Leary, who drove the jaunting-car, how far we were from
Mr. Bourke's. ' 'T is about ten spades from this to the cross, and we
have then only to turn to the left into the avenue, ma'am.' 'Very well,
Leary: turn up to Mr. Bourke's as soon as you reach the cross roads.' My
mother had scarcely spoken these words, when a shriek, that made us
thrill as if our very hearts were pierced by it, burst from the hedge to
the right of our way. If it resembled any thing earthly, it seemed the
cry of a female, struck by a sudden and mortal blow, and giving out her
life in one long deep pang of expiring agony. ' Heaven defend us!'
exclaimed my mother. 'Go you over the hedge, Leary, and save that woman,
if she is not yet dead, while we run back to the hut we just passed, and
alarm the village near it.' 'Woman ! said Leary, beating the horse
violently, while his voice trembled - ' that's no woman : the sooner we
get on, ma'am, the better;' and he continued his efforts to quicken the
horse's pace. We saw nothing. The moon was hid. It was quite dark, and
we had been for some time expecting a heavy fall of rain. But just as
Leary had spoken, and had succeeded in making the' horse trot briskly
forward, we distinctly heard a loud clapping of hands, followed by a
succession of screams, that seemed to denote the last excess of despair
and anguish, and to issue from a person running forward inside the
hedge, to keep pace with our progress. Still we saw nothing; until, when
we were within about ten yards of the place where an avenue branched off
to Mr. Bourke's to the left, and the road turned to Spring House on e
right, the moon started suddenly from behind a cloud, and enabled us to
see, as plainly as I now see this paper, the figure of a tall thin
woman, with uncovered head, and long hair that floated round her
shoulders, attired in something which seemed either a loose white cloak,
or a sheet thrown hastily about her. She stood on the corner hedge,
where the road on which we were met that which leads to Spring House,
with her face towards us, her left hand pointing to this place, and her
right arm waving rapidly and violently, as if to draw us on in that
direction. The horse had stopped, apparently frightened at the sudden
presence of the figure, which stood in the manner I have described,
still uttering the same piercing cries, for about half a minute. It then
leaped upon the road, disappeared from our view for one instant, and the
next was seen standing upon a high wall a little way up the avenue, on
which we purposed going, still pointing towards the road to Spring
House, but in an attitude of defiance and command, as if prepared to
oppose our passage up the avenue. The figure was now quite silent, and
its garments, which had before flown loosely in the wind, were closely
wrapped around it. ' Go on, Leary, to Spring House, in God's name,' said
my mother; ' whatever world it belongs to, we will provoke it no
longer.' ' 'T is the Banshee, ma'am,' said Leary; 'and I would not, for
what my life is worth, go any where this blessed night but to Spring
House. But I 'm afraid there 's something bad going forward, or *she*
would not send us there.' So saying, he drove forward; and as we turned
on the road to the right, the moon suddenly withdrew its light, and we
saw the apparition no more; but we heard plainly a prolonged clapping of
hands, gradually dying away, as if it issued from a person rapidly
retreating. We proceeded as quickly as the badness of the roads and the
fatigue of the poor animal that drew us would allow, and arrived here
about eleven o'clock last night. The scene which awaited us you have
learned from my mother's letter. To explain it fully, I must recount to
you some of the transactions which took place here during the last week.

"You are aware that Jane Osborne was to have been married this day to
James Ryan, and that they and their friends have been here for the last
week. On Tuesday last, the very day on the morning of which cousin Mac
Carthy despatched the letter inviting us here, the whole of the company
were walking about the grounds a little before dinner. It seems that an
unfortunate creature, who had been seduced by James Ryan, was seen
prowling in the neighbourhood m a moody melancholy state for some days
previous. He had separated from her for several months, and, they say,
had provided for her rather handsomely; but she had been seduced by the
promise of his marrying her; and the shame of her unhappy condition,
uniting with disappointment and jealousy, had disordered her intellects.
During the whole forenoon of this Tuesday, she had been walking in the
plantations near Spring House, with her cloak folded tight round her,
the hood nearly covering her face; and she had avoided conversing with
or even meeting any of the family.

" Charles Mac Carthy, at the time I mentioned, was walking between James
Ryan and another, at a little distance from the rest*,* on a gravel
path, skirting a shrubbery. The whole party were thrown into the utmost
consternation by the report of a pistol, fired from a thickly planted
part of the shrubbery which Charles and his companions had just passed.
He fell instantly, and it was found that he had been wounded in the leg.
One of the party was a medical man; his assistance was immediately
given, and, on examining, he declared that the injury was very slight,
that no bone was broken, that it was merely a flesh wound, and that it
would certainly be well in a few days. ' We shall know more by Sunday,'
said Charles, as he was carried to his chamber. His wound was
immediately dressed, and so slight was the inconvenience which it gave,
that several of his friends spent a portion of the evening in his
apartment.

"On enquiry, it was found that the unlucky shot was fired by the poor
girl I just mentioned. It was also manifest that she had aimed, not at
Charles, but at the destroyer of her innocence and happiness, who was
walking beside him. After a fruitless search for her through the
grounds, she walked into the house of her own accord, laughing, and
dancing and singing wildly, and every moment exclaiming that she had at
last killed Mr. Ryan. When she heard that it was Charles, and not Mr.
Ryan, who was shot, she fell into a violent fit, out of which, after
working convulsively for some time, she sprung to the door, escaped from
the crowd that pursued her, and could never be taken until last night,
when she was brought here, perfectly frantic, a little before our
arrival.

"Charles's wound was thought of such little consequence, that the
preparations went forward, as usual, for the wedding entertainment on
Sunday. But on Friday night he grew restless and feverish, and on
Saturday (yesterday) morning felt so ill, that it was deemed necessary
to obtain additional medical advice. Two physicians and a surgeon met in
consultation about twelve o'clock in the day, and the dreadful
intelligence was announced; that unless a change, hardly hoped for, took
place before night, death must happen within twenty-four hours after.
The wound, it seems, had been too tightly bandaged, and otherwise
injudiciously treated. The physicians were right in their anticipations.
No favourable symptom appeared, and long before we reached Spring House
every ray of hope had vanished. The scene we witnessed on our arrival
would have wrung the heart of a demon. We heard briefly at the gate that
Mr. Charles was upon his death-bed. When we reached the house, the
information was confirmed by the servant who opened the door. But just
as we entered, we were horrified by the most appalling screams issuing
from the staircase. My mother thought she heard the voice of poor Mrs.
Mac Carthy, and sprung forward. We followed, and on ascending a few
steps of the stairs, we found a young woman, in a state of frantic
passion, struggling furiously with two men-servants, whose united
strength was hardly sufficient to prevent her rushing up stairs over the
body of Mrs. Mac Carthy, who was lying in strong hysterics upon the
steps. This, I afterwards discovered, wag the unhappy girl I before
described, who was attempting to gain access to Charles's room, to 'get
his forgiveness,' as she said, 'before he went. away to accuse her for
having killed him.' This wild idea was mingled with another, which
seemed to dispute with the former possession of her mind. In-one
sentence she called on Charles to forgive her, in the next she would
denounce James Ryan as the murderer both of Charles and her. At length
she was torn away; and the last words I heard her scream were, 'James
Ryan, 't was you killed him, and not I - 't was you killed him, and not
I.'

"Mrs. Mac Carthy, on recovering, fell into the arms of my mother, whose
presence seemed a great relief to her. She wept - the first tears, I was
told, that she had shed since the fatal accident. She conducted us to
Charles's room, who,. she said, had desired to see us the moment of our
arrival, as he found his end approaching,. and wished to devote the last
hours of his existence to uninterrupted prayer and meditation. We found
him perfectly calm, resigned, and even cheerful. He spoke of the awful
event which was at hand with courage and confidence; and treated it as a
doom for which he had been preparing ever since his former remarkable
illness, and which he never once doubted was truly foretold to him. He
bade us farewell with the air of one who was about to travel a short and
easy journey; and we left him with impressions which, notwithstanding
all their anguish, will, I trust, never entirely for-sake us.

"Poor Mrs. Mac Carthy -but I am just called away. There seems a slight
stir in the family; perhaps ------"

The above letter was never finished. The enclosure to which it more than
once alludes told the sequel briefly, and it is all that I have farther
learned of this branch of the Mac Carthy family. Before the sun had gone
down upon Charles's seven-and-twentieth birthday, his soul had gone to
render its last account to its Creator.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spirit Horse](flat19)
