[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat16)  [Next](flat18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Legends of the Banshee

THE Reverend Charles Bunworth was rector of Buttevant, in the county of
Cork, about the middle of the last century. He was a man of unaffected
piety, and of sound learning; pure in heart, and benevolent in
intention. By the rich he was respected, and by the poor beloved; nor
did a difference of creed prevent their looking up to ." *the minister*
"(so was Mr. Bunworth called by them) in matters of difficulty and in
seasons of distress, confident of receiving from him the advice and
assistance that a father would afford to his children. He was the friend
and' the benefactor of the surrounding country - to him, from the
neighbouring town of Newmarket, came both Curran and Yelverton for
advice and instruction, previous to their entrance at Dublin College.
Young, indigent and inexperienced, these afterwards eminent men received
from him, in addition to the advice they sought, pecuniary aid; and the
brilliant career which was theirs, justified the discrimination of the
giver.

But what extended the fame of Mr. Bunworth far beyond the limits of the
parishes adjacent to his own, was his performance on the Irish harp, and
his hospitable reception and entertainment of the poor harpers who
travelled from house to house about the country. Grateful to their
patron, these itinerant minstrels sang his praises to the tingling
accompaniment of their harps, invoking in return for his bounty abundant
blessings on his white head, and celebrating in their rude verses the
blooming charms of his daughters, Elizabeth and Mary. It was all these
poor fellows could do; but who can doubt that their gratitude was
sincere, when, at the time of Mr. Bunworth's death, no less than fifteen
harps were deposited on the loft of his granary, bequeathed to him by
the last members of a race which has now ceased to exist, Trifling, no
doubt, in intrinsic value were these relics, yet there is something in
gifts of the heart that merits preservation; and it is to be regretted
that, when he died, these harps were broken up one after the other, and
used as fire-wood by an ignorant follower of the family, who, on their
remove to Cork for a temporary change of scene; was left in charge of
the house.

The circumstances attending the death of Mr. Bunworth may be doubted by
some; but there are still living credible witnesses who declare their
authenticity, and who can be produced to attest most, if not all of the
following particulars.

About a week previous to his dissolution, and early in the evening, a
noise was heard at the hall-door resembling the shearing of sheep; but
at the time no particular attention was paid to it. It was nearly eleven
o'clock the same night, when Kavanagh, the herdsman, returned from
Mallow, whither he had been sent in the afternoon for some medicine, and
was observed by Miss Bunworth, to whom he delivered the parcel, to be
much agitated. At this time, it must be observed, her father was by no
means considered in danger.

"What is the matter, Kavanagh?" asked Miss Bunworth: but the poor
fellow, with a bewildered look, only uttered, "The master, Miss - the
master - he is going from us;" and, overcome with real grief, he burst
into a flood of tears.

Miss Bunworth, who was a woman of strong nerve, enquired if any thing he
bad learned in Mallow induced him to suppose that her' father was worse.

" No, Miss," said Kavanagh; "it was not in Mallow -"

"Kavanagh," said Miss Bunworth, with that stateliness of manner for
which she is said to have been remarkable, "I fear you have been
drinking, which, I must say, I did not expect at such a time as the
present, when it was your duty to have kept yourself sober ; - I thought
you might have been trusted: - what should we have done if you had
broken the medicine. bottle, or lost it? for the doctor said it was of
the greatest consequence that your master should take the medicine
to-night. But I will speak to you in the morning, when you are in a
fitter state to under-stand what I say."

Kavanagh looked up with a stupidity of aspect which did not serve to
remove the impression of his being drunk, as his eyes appeared heavy and
dull after the flood of tears - but his voice was not that of an
intoxicated person.

Miss," said he," as I hope to receive mercy hereafter, neither bit nor
sup has passed my lips since I left this house: but the master ----"

"Speak softly," said Miss Bunworth; "he sleeps, and is going on as well
as we could expect."

Praise be to God for that, any way," replied Kavanagh; " but oh! Miss,
he is going from us surely - we will lose him-the master - we will lose
him, we will lose him!" and he wrung his hands together.

"What is it you mean, Kavanagh?" asked Miss Bunworth.

"Is it mean?" said Kavanagh: "the Banshee has come for him, Miss; and
'tis not I alone who have heard her."

" 'Tis an idle superstition," said Miss Bunworth.

"May be so," replied Kavanagh, as if the words idle superstition only
sounded upon his ear without reaching his mind - "May be so," he
continued; "but as I came through the glen of Ballybeg, she was along
with me keening, and screeching, and clapping her hands, by my side,
every step of the way, with her long white hair failing about her
shoulders, and I could hear her repeat the master's name every now and
then, as plain as ever I heard it. When I came to the old abbey, she
parted from me there, and turned into the pigeon-field next the *berrin*
ground, and folding her cloak about her, down she sat under the tree
that was struck by the lightning, and began keening so bitterly, that it
went through one's heart to hear it."

" Kavanagh," said Miss Bunworth, who had, however, listened attentively
to this remarkable relation, " my father is, I believe, better; and I
hope will himself soon be up and able to convince you that all this is
but your own fancy; nevertheless, I charge you not to mention what you
have told me, for there is no occasion to frighten your fellow servants
with the story."

Mr. Bunworth gradually declined; but nothing particular occurred until
the night previous to his death: that night both his daughters,
exhausted with continued attendance and watching, were prevailed upon to
seek some repose; and an elderly lady, a near relative and friend of the
family, remained by the bedside of their father. The old gentleman then
lay in the parlour, where he had been in the morning removed at his own
request, fancying the change would afford him relief; and the head of
his bed was placed close to the window. In a room adjoining sat some
male friends, and, as usual on like occasions of illness, in the kitchen
many of the followers of the family had assembled.

The night was serene and moonlight-the sick man slept - and nothing
broke the stillness of their melancholy watch, when the little party in
the room adjoining the parlour, the door of which stood open, was
suddenly roused by a sound. at the window near the bed: a rose-tree grew
out-side the window, so close as to touch the glass; this was forced
aside with some noise, and a low moaning was heard, accompanied by
clapping. of hands, as if of a female in deep affliction. It seemed as
if the sound proceeded from a person holding her mouth close to the
window. The lady who sat by the bedside of Mr. Bunworth went into the
adjoining room, and in the tone of alarm, enquired of the gentlemen
there, if they had heard the Banshee? Sceptical of super natural
appearances, two of them rose hastily and went out to discover the cause
of these sounds, which they also had distinctly heard. They walked all
round the house, examining every spot of ground, particularly near the
window from the voice had proceeded; the bed of earth beneath, in which
the rose tree was planted, had been recently dug, and the print of a
footstep - if the tree had been forced aside by mortal hand - would have
inevitably remained; but they could perceive no such impression; and an
unbroken stillness reigned without. Hoping to dispel the mystery, they
continued their search anxiously along the road, from the straightness
of which and the' lightness of the night, 'they were enabled to see some
distance around them; but all was silent and deserted, and they returned
surprised and disappointed. How much more then were 'they astonished at
learning that the whole time of their absence, those who remained within
the house had heard the moaning and clapping of hands even louder and
more distinct than before they had gone out; and no sooner was the door
of the room closed on them, than they again heard the same mournful
sounds! Every succeeding hour the sick man became worse, and as the
first glimpse of the morning appeared, Mr. Bunworth expired.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Legends of the Banshee](flat18)
