[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al08)  [Next](al10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Win-pe the Sorcerer, having stolen Glooskap's Family, was by him pursued, and how Glooskap for a Merry Jest cheated the Whale. Of the Song of the Clams, and how the Whale smoked a Pipe.

(Micmac.)

*N'kah-ne-oo*. In old times (P.), in the beginning of things, men were
as animals and animals as men; how this was, no one knows. But it is
told that all were at first men, and as they gave themselves up to this
and that desire, and to naught else, they became beasts. But before this
came to pass, they could change to one or the other form; yet even as
men there was always something which showed what they were.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Now Glooskap lived on an island named Aja-ligun-mechk, and with him were
many Indians with the names and natures of animals and birds.

These men, but most of all Pulowéch, the Partridge, having acquired
power themselves, became jealous of Glooskap, and made up their minds to
depart when he was away, taking with them Martin and the grandmother.
For they had great hope that Glooskap, being left alone on the island,
would perish, because they knew not his power. There is another story
which says that he was living at the mouth of the Oolostook, at a place
called Menogwes (St. John, N. B.), and went away into the forest as far
as Goolwahgik (Juan), and had been gone six weeks, when he returned home
and found the old woman, whose name was Mooinarkw, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) and Martin had been taken away. Following
their tracks to the shore he saw one of his greatest enemies, a terrible
sorcerer named Win-pe, just pushing off in his canoe. And with him were
his wife and child and Dame Bear and Martin. They were still within
call, and Glooskap cried from the shore to the grandmother to send back
his dogs, which were not larger than mice, and, as some stories tell us,
were squirrels. So she took a *woltes-takun*, which is a small wooden
platter, and on such Indian dice are tossed. This she put in the water,
and placed the dogs on it, and it floated to the shore, and Glooskap
took it up. Win-pe with his family and prisoners pushed on to
Passamoogwaddy (M.), and thence to

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Grand Manán; and
after remaining there a while he crossed over to Kes-poog-itk
(Yarmouth), and so went slowly along the southern coast through
Oona-mah-gik (Cape Breton), and over to Uktukkamkw (Newfoundland), where
he was slain.

Now whether it was to gain magical power, or to weaken that of Win-pe,
or to chasten the others by suffering, who knows? But Glooskap rested
seven years alone before he pursued the enemy, though some say it was
seven months. And when the time had come, he took his dogs and went to
the shore, and looked far out to sea over the waves, and sang the magic
song which the whales obey. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) Soon
there rose in the distance a small whale, who had heard the call, and
came to Glooskap; but he was then very great, and he put one foot on the
whale to test his weight, and the fish sank under him. So he sent it
away.

Then the lord of men and beasts sang the song again, and there came the
largest, a mighty female, and she bore him well and easily over to
Kes-poog-itk. But she was greatly afraid of getting into shoal water, or
of running ashore, and this was what Glooskap wished her to do that he
might not wet his feet. So as she approached she asked him if land were
in sight. But he lied, and said "No." So she went on rapidly.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

However, she saw shells below, and soon the water grew so shoal that she
said in fear, "*Moon-as-tabá-kán-kwi-jéan-nook*? (M.) Does not the land
show itself like a bow-string?" And he said, "We are still far from
land."

Then the water grew so shoal that she heard the song of the Clams as
they lay under the sand, singing to her that she should throw him off
and drown him. For these Clams were his deadly enemies. But Bootup the
Whale did not understand their language, so she asked her rider--for he
knew Clam--what they were chanting to her. And he replied in a song:—

"They tell you to hurry (*cussal*) (M.),  
To hurry, to hurry him along,  
Over the water,  
Away as fast as you can!"

Then the Whale went like lightning, and suddenly found herself high on
the shore. Then she lamented and sang:—

"Alas, my grandchild (*noojeech*),  
Ah, you have been my death;  
I can never leave the land,  
I shall swim in the sea no more."

But Glooskap sang:—

"Have no fear, *noogumee*,  
You shall not suffer,  
You shall swim in the sea once more."

Their with a push of his bow against her head he sent her off into deep
water. And the Whale rejoiced

 

<span id="img_03500"></span> ![GLOOSKAP LOOKING AT THE WHALE SMOKING HIS
PIPE](img/03500.jpg)  
GLOOSKAP LOOKING AT THE WHALE SMOKING HIS PIPE

 

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

greatly. But ere she went she said, "Oh, my grandson," "*K'teen
penabskwass n'aga tomawé*?" (P.). "Hast thou not such a thing as an old
pipe and some tobacco?" He replied,--

"Ah yes.  
You want tobacco,  
I behold you."

So he gave her a short pipe and some tobacco, and thereunto a light. And
the Whale, being of good cheer, sailed away, smoking as she went, while
Glooskap, standing silent on the shore, and ever leaning on his maple
bow, beheld the long low cloud which followed her until she vanished in
the far away. And to this day the Indians, when they see a whale blow,
say she is smoking the pipe of Glooskap.

 

In a Passamaquoddy tale of Pook-jin-skwess the Witch, the Clams sing a
song deriding the hero. The words are:—

"Mow chow nut-pess sell  
Peri marm-hole wett."

These words are not Indian, but they are said to mean,--

You look very funny with your long hair streaming in the wind, And
sailing on a snail's horn.

The large Clams sing this in a bass voice, the small ones in falsetto.
The gypsies say that a Snail, when put on a fire, utters four cries, or
squeaks; hence in Germany the Romany call it *Stargoli*: that is,
*shtor-godli*, four cries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[32:1](al09.htm#fr_15) Mr. Rand translates this
Micmac word as Mrs. Bear.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[33:1](al09.htm#fr_16) In the *Tales and
Traditions of the Eskimo*, by Dr. Henry Rink, we are told in the story
of Akigsiak that an old man taught the hero a magic lay for luring a
whale to him. In another, Katersparsuk sings such a song to the walrus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Dreadful Deeds of the Evil Pitcher, who was both Man and
Woman, and how she fell in love with Glooskap, and, being scorned,
became his Enemy. Of the Toads and Porcupines, and the Awful Battle of
the Giants](al10)
