[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al10)  [Next](al12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How the Story of Glooskap and Pook-jin-skwess, the Evil Pitcher, is told by the Passamaquoddy Indians. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

(Passamaquoddy.)

There was a village of Indians who were all Black Cats, or Po'gum'k. One
of them, the cleverest and bravest, went forth every day with bow and
arrow, tomahawk

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and knife, and killed moose and bear, and sent meat to the poor, and so
he fed them all. When he returned they came to him to know where his
game lay, and when he had told them they went forth with toboggins <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) and returned with them loaded with meat.
And the chief of the Black Cats was by his mother the son of a
bear. <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md)

Pook-jin-skwess, the Witch, was a Black Cat. She was a woman or a man as
she willed to be; but in these days she was a man. And she, being evil,
hated the chief, and thought long how she could kill or remove him, and
take his place. Now, one day when all the camp had packed what they had,
being about to travel, Pitcher asked the chief to go with him, or with
her, as you may will, down to the water-side to gather gulls' eggs. And
then they went far out in a canoe, and very far, and still farther, till
they came to an island, and there they landed, and while Pogumk (who was
Glooskap) sought for eggs, the false-hearted Pitcher stole away in the
*akwéden* (P., canoe), and as she paddled she sang a song--

"Nikhed-ha Pogumk min nekuk,  
Netswil sa\_ga\_mawin!" (P.)

"I have left the Black Cat on an island,  
I shall be the chief of the Fishers now!"

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

So she came to the village, and the next day they all departed through
the woods; there was not one of them left save the one who was worth
them all. And at night they camped, expecting every day that the chief
would come to them, and till then Pitcher was in his place.

Now on the thirtieth day the chief remembered his friend the Fox, who
had *m'téoulin* (P.), or magic power. And he sang a song, and the Fox
heard it, although he was miles away, beyond forests and mountains. And
thus knowing all, he went to the shore and swam to the island, where he
found the chief. At this time the Black Cat could not swim such a
distance, <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) but the Fox offered to
take him to the mainland. Then they waded into the water, and the Fox
said, "Close thine eyes and hold fast to my tail as tightly as thou
canst, and be of good faith, oh, my elder brother, and we shall soon
gain the shore." Saying this, he swam away and his friend followed. And
it went well with them, but the chief grew weary, and he opened one eye
a little, and saw that they were not ten feet from the shore. And being
of little faith he thought, for he spoke not aloud, "We shall never get
to land." But the Fox replied, "Do not believe it." But the journey
lasted long, for what seemed to Pogumk to be ten feet was ten miles, and
the wind

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

was high and the waters were wild, for Pitcher had called forth a storm.
So they swam all day and all the evening before they landed. "And now,
my elder brother," said the Fox, "you may go your way." And he went to
the camp of the Black Cats.

When he came to the camp it was cold, and there were only ashes, for the
people had gone on. So he followed them, and in one day came near them.
And the first whom he overtook was his mother, bearing his younger
brother Sable ('Nmmok-swess, P.) on her back, so that while she looked
forward he looked behind. And as Pogumk peeped out from among the
leaves, Sable saw him, and said, "Here comes my brother!" And she
turned, but saw nothing, for the chief suddenly hid himself behind a
tree. Then they went on, and Sable cried again, "Indeed, mother, I
behold my elder brother!" And this time the mother, glancing quickly,
caught him, and they all laughed for joy, and she threw Sable down in
the leaves, like a stick. Then the chief bade Sable run to the camp.
"And when you are there," he said, "build up a great fire of hemlock
bark, and take Pitcher's babe, even the babe which she loves, and which
you tend, and throw it into the fire, and run to me as fast as you can,
for verily thou wilt be in dire need to do so."

And as he commanded it was done; and when the fire was hot, Sable threw
the babe into it, and it was burned to death. And Pitcher, being, as one
may well believe, maddened at such a sight, pursued him as a starving
wolf pursues a rabbit. Then Sable, in great fear, cried aloud, "Oh, my
elder brother, my

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

brother!" And Pitcher screamed, "Call aloud to him, for you must run as
far as the island where Pogumk is, to save yourself!" And at that word
Pogumk stepped forward and confronted her, and said, "Truly, she need
not ran so far."

And seeing him and hearing this, fear came upon her; but she laughed
aloud to hide it, and said, "I did but chase him in sport, for I love
Sable." But Pogumk: replied grimly, "I know thee and thy tricks, thou
the evil one." Then, as his magic had come to him, he used his power,
and put Pitcher with her back against a tree; and there she stayed,
stuck to it, unable to get away. But the chief and Sable went to the
camp. Now Pitcher had a hatchet and wedge, and with much ado she cut
herself away, and the Black Cats heard her pounding and chopping all
night long. And in the morning she came to them, and there was a great
piece of wood sticking to her back, and they laughed her to scorn, and
sang at her,

"He who made the chief  
Stay on a distant island,  
He is stuck by the chief  
Fast with his back to a tree." <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md)

Now Pitcher the Witch, being mad with shame and spite, fled from the
face of man, and ran through the woods like a wild wolf. And so she came
to Bar Harbor (Pes'sonkqu', P.), and sat down on a log and said, with
her heart full of bitterness and malice,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "I would that I
could become something which should torment all men." And as she said
this she became a mosquito (T'sis-o, P.), and so it came to pass that
mosquitoes were made. And to this day men see that wherever the Black
Cat is, there too is the Sable not far away. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

Of this Pook-jin-skwess it was said that she had children of her own,
begotten by sorcerers and giants and monsters; but as they were all ugly
she stole from the Indian women their fairest babes, and brought them up
as if they were her own, that she might not be entirely put to shame
because of her children. And once she had thus stolen a boy, and when he
grew up some one said to him that he should not believe that she was his
mother, but should question her as to it. Now the youth, reflecting on
this, observed that his brothers and sisters were all as ugly as evil
beasts and no better behaved, while he himself was comely and good. Then
he asked her what this

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

might mean. And she replied, laughing, "Because they were all begotten
(or born) in the night-time, but you are a child of the day and of
light." <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[44:1](al11.htm#fr_27.md) In this story Glooskap is
called Pogumk, the Black Cat or Fisher, that is, a species of wild cat,
while Martin is a N'mockswess, sable. There seems to be no settled idea
as to what was the totem or innate animal nature of the lord of men and
beasts. I have a series of pictures scraped on birch-bark illustrating
these myths, executed by a Passamaquoddy, in which Glooskap and the
adopted grandmother in the stone canoe are represented as wood-chucks,
or ground-hogs. (Mon-in-kwess, P.)

<span id="fn_28"></span>[45:1](al11.htm#fr_28.md) Toboggin, a sled made
very simply by turning up the ends of one or more pieces of wood to
prevent them from catching in the snow.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[45:2](al11.htm#fr_29.md) A confused but important
point in all these myths.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[46:1](al11.htm#fr_30.md) The most powerful
*manitous*, or magicians, in the Chippeway tales, as well as in all
others of the Indians, may exhaust their power and be forced to depend
on that of inferiors in the great art. In this tale Glooskap is
decidedly under a cloud.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[48:1](al11.htm#fr_31.md) In another version
Pook-jin-skwess is turned to a toad, and the piece of wood or bark is
the hump which she bears to this day.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[49:1](al11.htm#fr_32.md) The Passamaquoddy version
relates that Pitcher in her flight pursued a moose to Bar Harbor, where,
having killed him and drawn out the entrails, she petrified him. A
Penobscot woman told me she had often seen the moose rock there, and the
"inments." But she attributed the deed to Glooskap, to whom it properly
belongs, his petrified moose and dogs and the print of his bow, etc.,
being still shown in Nova Scotia; and it is also said that it was at
Freshwater, after returning from Bar Harbor (Maine), that Pitcher was
changed into a mosquito.

Another story states that Pook-jin-skwess, having pursued young men all
her life, changed into a mosquito that she might continue to prey on
them.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[50:1](al11.htm#fr_33.md) There is probably an
allusion in this to the Wabanaki, or Children of Light; that is, the
Algonquin. This story was told me by Noel Josephs, a Passamaquoddy.

I have been told by an old Passamaquoddy woman that the descendants of
Pook-jin-skwess were the 'Nmmok-skwess. This stealing the white boy is
related in another tale more fully. It may refer to the early dark
Eskimo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Glooskap became friendly to the Loons, and made them his
Messengers](al12.md)
