[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al14)  [Next](al16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Of the Great Works which Glooskap made in the Land.

(Micmac, Passamaquoddy, Penobscot.)

Over all the Land of the Wabanaki there is no place which was; not
marked by the hand of the Master. And it is to be seen on hills and
rivers and great roads, as well as mighty rocks, which were in their day
living monsters.

For there is a very wonderful highway from Cwesowra legek <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) to Parrsborough, running parallel with

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the river now called Hebert, and this road is called by Indians
Ou-wokun, the Causeway, but by white men, or the Iglesmani, the Boar's
Back. For it is said that he meant to visit Partridge Island and Cape
Blomidon, but they who were with him had got tired of the sea, and
wished to cross over by land. And while they were resting and getting
ready for their trip across, the Master, raising his magic power to a
great deed to be spoken of forever, went away a little time, and cast up
a great and beautiful level ridge, throwing it over bogs and streams;
and on this they traveled, rejoicing, and, having reached the island,
awaited him.

And yet again the Master did a mighty deed. It came to pass in those
days that the Beavers had built a dam across from Utkoguncheek, or Cape
Blomidon, to the opposite shore, and thereby made a pond that filled all
the valley of Annapolis. Now in those times the Beavers were monstrous
beasts, and the Master, though kind of heart, seems to have had but
little love for them ever since the day when Qwahbeetsis, the son of the
Great Beaver, tempted Malsum to slay his brother. Now the bones of these
Beavers may be found to this day, and many there are on Oonamahgik, and
their teeth are six inches across, and there are no such *qwah-beet*
to-day. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) And these are the remains of
the Beavers who built the dam at Cape Blomidon and forded the Annapolis
Valley.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Now Glooskap would have a hunt and do a deed which should equal the
great whale-fishing of Kitpooseeog-unow. So he cut the great dam near
the shore, and bade Marten watch; for he said, "I mistrust that there is
a little Beaver hiding hereabouts." And when the dam was cut from where
it joined the shore there was a mighty rush of many waters, so that it
swung round to the westward, yet it did not break away from the other
shore. Therefore the end of it lodged with a great split therein when
the flood had found a free course, and the whole may be seen there
still, even to this day, and may be seen by all of those who pass up the
bay; and this point, or Cape Split, is called by the Micmacs Pleegun,
which, being interpreted, means the opening of a beaver dam.

Then, to frighten the Beaver, Glooskap threw at it a few handfuls of
earth, and these, falling somewhat to the eastward of Partridge Island,
became the Five Islands. And the pond which was left was the Basin of
Minas.

And yet another tradition tells that, after cutting the dam, Glooskap
sat and watched, but no beaver came out; <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) for *Qwah-beet* had gone out of a back
door. So he took a rock and threw it afar, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46)--one hundred and fifty miles,--to scare
the Beaver back again; but the Beaver had gone over the Grand Falls, and
the stone remaineth there even to this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[62:1](al15.htm#fr_43) Hardwood Point, Fort
Cumberland.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[63:1](al15.htm#fr_44) Both Mr. Rand and myself
have been solemnly assured by Indians who had seen these antediluvian
remains that they are the petrified relies of Glooskap's victims.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[64:1](al15.htm#fr_45) This is the Anglo-Indian
manuscript, already referred to.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[64:2](al15.htm#fr_46) "He tock Rock tructed 150
miles ip River to sker beaber bock down, but beaber has gone ober
granfalls."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Glooskap as told in a few Words by a Woman of the
Penobscots](al16)
