[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al15)  [Next](al17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### The Story of Glooskap as told in a few Words by a Woman of the Penobscots.

Glus-gahbé gave names to everything. He made men and gave them life, and
made the winds to make the waters move. The Turtle was his uncle; the
Mink, *Uk-see-meezel*, his adopted son; and *Monin-kwessos*, the
Woodchuck, his grandmother. The Beaver built a great dam, and Glus-gahbé
turned it away and killed the Beaver. At; Moose-tchick he killed a
moose; the bones may be seen at Bar Harbor turned to stone. He threw the
entrails of the Moose across the bay to his dogs, and they, too, may be
seen there to this day, as I myself have seen them; and there, too, in
the rock are the prints of his bow and arrow." <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[65:1](al16.htm#fr_47) Many a place is pointed
out as the locality of the same legend. In addition to those in New
Brunswick and Bar Harbor, Thoreau found another in Maine, which he thus
describes:—

"While we were crossing this bay" (that is, the mouth of Moose River),
"where Mount Kineo rose dark before us, within two or three miles, the
Indian repeated the tradition respecting this mountain's having been
anciently a cow moose,--how a mighty Indian hunter, whose name I forget,
succeeded in killing this queen of the moose tribe with great
difficulty, while her calf was killed somewhere among the islands in
Penobscot Bay; and to his eyes this mountain had still the form of the
moose in a reclining posture, its precipitous side presenting the
outline of her head. He told this at some length, though it did not
amount to much, and with apparent good faith, and asked its how we
supposed the hunter could have killed such a mighty moose as that; <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> how we could do it. Whereupon a man-of-war to
fire broadsides into her was suggested, etc. An Indian tells such a
story as if he thought it deserved to have a good deal said about it,
only he has not got it to say; and so he makes up for the deficiency by
a drawling tone, long-windedness, and a dumb wonder which he hopes will
be contagious."

This concluding criticism is indeed singularly characteristic of Mr.
Thoreau's own nasal stories about Nature, but it is as utterly untrue as
ridiculous when applied to any Indian storytelling to which I have ever
listened, and I have known the near relatives of the Indians of whom he
speaks, and heard many of them tell their tales. This writer passed
months in Maine, choosing Penobscot guides expressly to study them, to
read Indian feelings and get at Indian secrets, and this account of
Glooskap, whose name he forgets, is a fair specimen of what he learned.
Yet he could in the same book write as follows: "The Anglo-American can
indeed cut down and grub up all this waving forest, and make a stamp and
vote for Buchanan on its ruins; but he cannot converse with the spirit
of the tree he fells, he cannot read the poetry and mythology which
retires as he advances."

If Mr. Thoreau had known the Indian legend of the spirit of the fallen
tree--and his guide knew it, well--he might have been credited with
speaking wisely of the poetry and *mythology* which he ridicules the
poor rural Yankees for not possessing. <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>
Such a writer can, indeed, peep and botanize on the grave of Mother
Nature, but never evoke *her* spirit.

The moving the island is evidently of Eskimo origin, since Crantz
(*History of Greenland*) heard nearly the same story of some
magician-giant. It was probably suggested by the very common floating
away of ice-islands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Glooskap, leaving the World, all the Animals mourned for him,
and how, ere he departed, he gave Gifts to Men](al17)
