[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al18)  [Next](al20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Glooskap made a Magician of a Young Man, who aided another to win a Wife and do Wonderful Deeds.

(Micmac.)

It is well known unto all Indians who still keep the true faith of the
olden time that there are wondrous dwellers in the lonely woods, such as
elves and fairies, called by the Micmacs *Mikumwessos*, and by the
Passamaquoddies *Oonahgemessos*. And these can

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

work great wonders, and also sing so as to charm the wildest beasts.
From them alone come the magic pipes or flutes, which sometimes pass
into possession of noted sorcerers and great warriors; and when these
are played upon, the woman who hears the melody is bewitched with love,
and the moose and caribou follow the sound even to their death. And when
the *Megumawessos* are pleased with a mortal they make him a fairy, even
like themselves.

*N'Karnayoo*. In old times there was an Indian village, and in it were
two young men, <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) who had heard that
Glooskap, ere he left the world, would bestow on those who came to him
whatever they wanted. So they went their way, an exceeding long
pilgrimage, until they came to a great island, where he dwelt. And there
they first met with Dame Bear and Marten, and next with the Master
himself. Then they all, sitting down to supper, had placed before them
only one extremely small dish, and on this there was a tiny bit of meat,
and nothing more. But being a bold and jolly fellow, the first of the
pilgrims, thinking himself mocked for sport, cut off a great part of the
meat, and ate it, when that which was in the dish grew in a twinkling to
its former size; and so this went on all through the supper, every one
eating his fill, the dish at the end being as full as ever.

Of these two, one wished to become a Mikumwess,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and the other to win a very beautiful girl, the daughter of a great
chief, who imposed such cruel tasks on all who came for her, that they
died in attempting them.

And the first was taken by Glooskap; and after he had by a merry trick
covered him with filth and put him to great shame, he took him to the
river, and after washing him clean and combing his hair gave him a
change of raiment and a hair string of exceeding great magic virtue,
since when he had bound it on he became a Mikumwess, having all the
power of the elfin-world. And also because he desired to excel in
singing and music, the Master gave him a small pipe, and it was that
which charmed all living beings; <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md) and
then singing a song bade him join in with him. And doing this he found
that he could sing, and ever after had a wondrous voice.

Now to seek the beautiful girl it was necessary to sail afar over the
sea; and during this adventure the Mikumwess was charged to take care of
the younger pilgrim. So he begged the Master to lend him his canoe. And
Glooskap answered, "Yes, I will do this for thee, if thou wilt honestly
return it when thou needest it no more. Yet in very truth I did never

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

yet lend it to mortal man but that I had to go after it myself." <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md)

Thereupon the young man promised most faithfully that he would indeed
return the canoe, and with this they got them ready for the journey. But
when they came to the bay there was no canoe, and they knew not what was
to be done. But Glooskap pointed to a small island of granite which rose
amid the waves, and it was covered with tall pine-trees. "There is my
canoe!" said he; <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59.md) and when he had
taken them unto it, it became a real canoe, with masts, and they set
sail on it, rejoicing.

So they came in time to a very large island, where they drew up the
canoe and hid it in the bushes. Then they went forward to seek for
people, and found

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

a village in which dwelt the chief who had the beautiful daughter, in
seeking whom so many had lost their lives.

And having found him, they went into his wigwam, and were placed on the
seat of honor. Now when an Indian seeks a wife, he or his mutual friend
makes no great ado about it, but utters two words, which tell the whole
story. And these are *Sewin-coadoo-gwahloogwet'*, which mean in Micmac,
"I am tired of living alone." And the chief, hearing this, consented
that the young man should marry her whom he sought, but on one
condition: and this was that he should slay and bring unto him the head
of a certain horned dragon, called in Micmac *Chepichcalm*. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) So this was agreed upon, and the two
strangers went to the wigwam which was assigned them.

Now in the night he that was Mikumwess arose and went alone and afar
until he came to the den of the dragon, and this was a great hole in the
ground. And over this he laid a mighty log, and then began the magic
dance around the den. So the serpent, or the great Chepichcalm, hearing
the call, came forth, putting out his head after the manner of snakes,
waving it all about in every way and looking round him.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While doing this
he rested his neck upon the log, when the Indian with a blow of his
hatchet severed it. Then taking the head by one of the shining yellow
horns he bore it to his friend, who in the morning gave it to the chief.
And the old man said to himself, "This time I fear me I shall lose my
child."

Yet the young man had more to do; for the chief said, "I would fain see
my son coast down yonder hill on a hand-sled." Now this hill was an
exceeding high mountain; the sides thereof were ragged with rocks and
terrible with trees and ice. Then two toboggins <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md) were brought out, one of them for the two
strangers, and this he that was Mikumwess was to direct. And on the
other were two powerful men, and these were both *boo-oinak*, <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62.md) who hoped to see the former soon fall out,
and then to run over them. And at the word they went flying fearfully
down the mountain, and yet ever faster, as if to death. And soon he that
sought the girl went whirling headlong from the sled, and the two
*boo-oinak* gave a loud hurrah; for they knew not that this had been
done with intent by the Mikumwess, that he might get them before him. So
he put forth his hand, and, seizing the younger man, turned a little
aside, but in an instant went on after; and erelong the sled of the
*boo-oinak* stopped, but the other, bounding upwards from a mighty wall
of ice, flew far

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

over their heads onwards; nor did it stop in the valley, but, running
with tremendous speed up the opposite hill and into the village, struck
the side of the chief's wigwam, ripping it up from end to end ere it
stopped. And the old man, seeing this, said, "This time I have lost my
daughter!"

Yet the young man had more to do; for the chief said, "There is here a
man who has never been beaten in running, and thou must strive with him
in that and overcome him, to win thy wife." And the race was appointed;
but ere it came off he that was Mikumwess lent to his friend the magic
pipe to give him power. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md) And when he
that was the racer of the village met the young man, the youth said,
"Who art thou?" and he replied, "I am Wey-ad-esk" (the Northern Lights,
M.); "but who art thou?" And he answered, "I am Wosogwodesk" (the Chain
Lightning). And they ran. In an instant they were no longer in sight;
they were far away over the most distant hills. Then all sat and waited,
and ere it was noon he that was the Chain Lightning returned, and he was
not out of breath, nor weary, and he had gone round the world. And at
evening they saw the Northern Lights return, and he trembled and
quivered with fatigue; yet for all

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

that he had not been round the world, but had turned back. And the old
chief, seeing him beaten, exclaimed, "This time I shall lose my child!"

And yet there was another trial of the young man ere he could win her
whom he wanted. For the chief had a man whom no one could overcome in
swimming and diving, and it was chiefly in this last thing that he
excelled. And the young man must strive with him. And when they met he
asked the man of the village his name, and he replied, "I am an
*Ukchigumooech*" (a Sea Duck, M.); "but who are you?" And he answered,
"I am a *Kweemoo*" (a Loon, M.). So they dived, and after a time the Sea
Duck rose again for breath, but those who waited waited long indeed ere
they saw the Loon. And an hour passed, and he came not, and yet another
ere they beheld him; but when he at last rose the old chief said, "This
is the end of all our weary work, for this time truly I have lost my
child."

Yet it was not the end of the wonderful deeds which were done in that
village by the power of the great Glooskap. For the Mikumwess, at the
great dance which was held that evening at the wedding, astonished all
who beheld him. As he danced around the circle, upon the very hard
beaten floor, they saw his feet sink deeper at every step, and ever
deeper as the dance went on; ploughing the ground up into high, uneven
ridges, forming a trench as he went, until at length only his head was
to be seen. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md) And

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

this ended the dancing for that night, since the ground was no longer to
be danced upon by anybody except wizards and witches.

Then the young man and his wife and the Mikumwess entered their canoe
and sailed *boosijk* (homewards, M.). And yet their trials were not
over. <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) For they had not gone far ere
they saw an awful storm coming to meet them; and he that had the Elfin
spells knew that it was raised by *boo-oin*, or sorcery, since these
storms are the worst of all. Then, without fear, he rose, and, filling
his lungs and puffing his cheeks, he blew against the tempest, wind
against wind, until he blew the wind away, and the great water was
*aoobuneak'*, as calm and smooth as before.

So they sailed on over the sunlit sea, but it was not long before the
Elf-gifted saw rising among the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

waves far before them a dark mass, which soon proved to be a tremendous
beast coming to attack them. And as he drew near they saw it was
Quahbeet, the giant beaver, and his eyes were angry. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) But the Mikumwess, seeing this, steered
straight to meet the monster, and, coming to him, said, "I am the great
hunter of beavers; lo, I am their butcher; many a one has fallen by my
hand." <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) Now the Beaver had placed
himself under water, with his tail out of it and rising upwards, that he
might sink the canoe with a blow thereof; for the Beaver strikes
mightily in such wise, as is his wont. But he of the magic power, with
one blow of his tomahawk, cut the tail from the body, and sailed onward.

Yet they had not gone far ere, on rounding a point, they saw before them
another animal of giant size, who likewise had his tail in the air,
waiting to overcome them, and this was A-bekk-thee-lo (M.), the Skunk.
Yet ere he made his hideous attack the Mikumwess, ever on the watch,
caught up his spear, and, hurling it, pierced A-bekk-thee-lo, who did
but kick two or three times ere he died. And, stepping ashore, he who
had slain him took a pole, a long dead pine, which lay upon the sand,
and, transfixing the Skunk, lifted him high in air, and, planting the
tree

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

on the ground, left him, saying scornfully, as he left, "*Lik cho je
nain*!" which, being interpreted, meaneth, "And now show your tail
there!" <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)

So they returned safely. And Glooskap met them at the landing, and his
first words were, "Well, my friends, I see that you have brought back my
canoe." And they answered, "We have, indeed." Then he inquired, "Has all
gone well with ye?" And they replied that it had. Then Glooskap,
laughing, let them know that in all they had experienced he had been
busy, and that in all their triumphs he had had a hand. And to the
Mikumwess he said, "Go now thy ways, thou and these, and ever lead happy
lives: thou amid the Elfin, they among mankind. And be sure of this,
that if danger or trouble should come to you, you have but to think of
me, and verily aid will come. So they rose and went to their
wigwams. <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[82:1](al19.htm#fr_56.md) According to another
Micmac version of this legend, the elder of these pilgrims was
Keekwahjoo, the Badger, and the younger Caktoogwasees, or Little
Thunder.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[83:1](al19.htm#fr_57.md) The identity of these
incidents with those of "classic" times is worth noting. There is a
lustration and the clothing the neophyte in a new garment, and he
receives the magic fillet, as in the Mysteries of the old world. Nor is
the resemblance of the pipe to that of Orpheus less striking. In many
respects this is the most remarkable old Indian myth I have ever met
with.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[84:1](al19.htm#fr_58.md) One of the traits of
*bonhomie* and common humanity which continually occur in the Glooskap
tales, even in the most serious situations and solemn myths. In this
respect the resemblance of the Northwest Algonquin tales to the Norse is
truly striking. The canoe is among all Indians, even in Central America,
exactly what the umbrella is in civilized society. With all his immense
originality Glooskap had a number of "old Joes," of which he never seems
to have tired. One was the inexhaustible dish, and another the giant
skunk set upon end to salute his visitors, and this of the canoe was
probably the commonest of all. He is a true Indian divinity, shining
like the lightning and striking only when there is a storm, but
appearing like the Aurora Borealis, or even the Robin
Goodfellow-Will-o'-the-Wisp at others.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[84:2](al19.htm#fr_59.md) Another standard "piece
of witt" with the incorrigible joker. Glooskap's "floating island" was
served up as a dessert to all guests, and I doubt not that if the double
meaning of the word had been known to him, they would have had that too.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[85:1](al19.htm#fr_60.md) Vide "Supernatural
Beings." The *Chepichcalm* (M.) is an immense horned serpent or wingless
dragon. It is probably identical with the Wiwillmekq' (P. and Pen.),
which is a singular horned worm found on trees or by water. It is
believed to be capable of assuming a vast size and to be gifted with
supernatural powers.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[86:1](al19.htm#fr_61.md) Toboggin: a sled or
sledge.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[86:2](al19.htm#fr_62.md) Magicians, the original
of *pow-wow-in*. It is apparently the same in meaning as the *angakok*
of the neighboring Eskimo.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[87:1](al19.htm#fr_63.md) It may be observed that
Indian magic depends on fetich, or objects having innate power. Glooskap
himself relies on his belt, and when he lends it to Marten, the boy
becomes "manitoo," as the more Western Indians term it. There is in the
early red Indian mythology really no God; only more or less powerful
magicians.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[88:1](al19.htm#fr_64.md) This is very
characteristic of the true magician, both in the <span id="page_89">p.
89</span> Algonquin and Eskimo folk-lore. "The *angakok*," or sorcerer
of Greenland, "after meeting with *tomarsuk*, or guardian spirits,
sometimes manifested it by his feet sinking into the rocky ground *just
as if into snow*." (Rink.) This phrase indicates the Northern origin of
the idea, which occurs in many Indian stories. I have been assured in
all faith that there is a Passamaquoddy *m'téoulin*, or sorcerer, now
living, who can walk up to his knees in a floor or in the paved street,
and an honest and trustworthy Indian assured me that he had seen him do
it.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[89:1](al19.htm#fr_65.md) These subsequent trials
were not inflicted by the old chief, but were, as appears by comparison
with other legends, simply jokes played by the incorrigible Glooskap. It
is most probable that in its original form this remarkable myth was all
*maya*, or illusion, and the whole a series of illusions, caused by the
arch-conjurer, typifying natural phenomena.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[90:1](al19.htm#fr_66.md) From the beginning, when
*Quahbeetsis*, the son of the Beaver, inspired Malsumsis with hatred of
Glooskap, this quadruped appears as an enemy.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[90:2](al19.htm#fr_67.md) This is oddly like the
speech of the beaver-killer in *The Hunting of the Snark*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[91:1](al19.htm#fr_68.md) The Skunk is here a
parody on the Beaver.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[91:2](al19.htm#fr_69.md) In its earlier form this
must have been a very remarkable narrative, or poem. That the two
combatants in the race were originally the personified Northern Lights
and Lightning, and that these were not merely names assumed for
boasting, is shown by the incident that the Lightning actually *passed
round the world*, while the Aurora Borealis only covered a portion of
it. The diving is either a later addition, or it represents the same
stupendous spirits taking on the appearance of mastering the element of
water as well as that of fire. Without carrying the Solar myth theory to
extremes, it cannot be denied that Glooskap appears in several of these
stories as Spring, or as the melter of ice, the conqueror of the frozen
stream and of the iceberg. In this narrative he is active and creative
Nature itself, directing and sporting with the warring elements. His
vast practical joking <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> cannot fail to
remind the reader yet again of the Norse deities and their jovial
household godhood.

This tradition is Micmac, and taken almost entirely from Mr. Rand's
manuscript. It should be borne in mind that it is not from a single
story of this collection, but from a careful analysis and comparison of
them all, that their entire value is to be ascertained.

Certain incidents in this tale deserve special attention. The young men
go to a land of evil sorcerers, of *boo-oin*. When one is required to
run a race he conquers because he is really the Lightning. When Thor
visits Utgard Loki, there is also a race, in which Hugi wins, because he
is *Thought* disguised as a man. Glooskap has a canoe, which is
sometimes immensely large, but which at other times shrinks to a very
small size. In the Edda, Odin is said to have had made for him by the
dwarfs a boat, Skidbladnir, which, like Glooskap's bark, expanded or
diminished. Sigurd, in the New Edda, is obliged to kill a dragon, and it
is very remarkable that he does it by a special previous preparation.
That is to say, he digs a little ditch, and when the dragon crawls over
it the hero pierces him with his sword. In this story the Indian lays a
log over the dragon's hole, to enable him to chop his head off. The
dragon, or horned snake, is an old-time tradition in America, or
pre-Columbian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How a Certain Wicked Witch sought to cajole the Great and Good
Glooskap, and of her Punishment](al20.md)
