[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al21)  [Next](al23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Of Glooskap and the Three Other Seekers.

(Micmac.)

Of old time. Now when it was noised abroad that whoever besought
Glooskap could obtain the desire of his heart, there were three men who
said among themselves, "Let us seek the Master." So they left their home
in the early spring when the bluebird first sang, and walked till the
fall frosts, and then into winter, and ever on till the next midsummer.
And having come to a small path in a great forest, they followed it,
till they came out by a very beautiful river; so fair a sight they had
never seen, and so went onward till it grew to be a great lake. And so
they kept to the path which, when untrodden, was marked by blazed trees,
the bark having been removed, in Indian fashion,

 

<span id="img_09800"></span> ![GLOOSKAP TURNING A MAN INTO A
CEDAR-TREE](img/09800.jpg)  
GLOOSKAP TURNING A MAN INTO A CEDAR-TREE

 

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

on the side of the trunk which is *opposite* the place where the wigwam
or village lies towards which it turns. So the mark can be seen as the
traveler goes towards the goal, but not while leaving it.

Then after a time they came to a long point of land running out into the
lake, and, having ascended a high hill, they saw in the distance a
smoke, which guided them to a large, well-built wigwam. And, entering,
they found seated on the right side a handsome, healthy man of middle
age, and by the other a woman so decrepit that she seemed to be a
hundred years old. Opposite the door, and on the left side, was a mat,
which seemed to show that a third person had there a seat.

And the man made them welcome, and spoke as if he were *weleda'asit
kesegvou* (M.)--well pleased to see them, but did not ask them whence
they came or whither they were going, as is wont among Indians when
strangers come to their homes or are met in travel. Erelong they heard
the sound of a paddle, and then the noise of a canoe being drawn ashore.
And there came in a youth of fine form and features and well clad,
bearing weapons as if from hunting who addressed the old woman as
*Kejoo*, or mother, and told her that he had brought game. And with sore
ado--for she was feeble--the old dame tottered out and brought in four
beavers; but she was so much troubled to cut them up that the elder,
saying to the younger man *Uoh-keen*! (M.), "My brother," bade him do
the work. And they supped on beaver.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

So they remained for a week, resting themselves, for they were sadly
worn with their wearisome journey, and also utterly ragged. And then a
wondrous thing came to pass, which first taught them that they were in
an enchanted land. For one morning the elder man bade the younger wash
their mother's face. And as he did this all her wrinkles vanished, and
she became young and very beautiful; in all their lives the travelers
had never seen so lovely a woman. Her hair, which had been white and
scanty, now hung to her feet, dark and glossy as a blackbird's breast.
Then, having been clad in fine array, she showed a tall, lithe, and
graceful form at its best.

And the travelers said to themselves, "Truly this man is a great
magician!" They all walked forth to see the place. Never was sunshine so
pleasantly tempered by a soft breeze; for all in that land was fair, and
it grew fairer day by day to all who dwelt there. Tall trees with rich
foliage and fragrant flowers, but without lower limbs or underbrush,
grew as in a grove, wide as a forest, yet so far apart that the eye
could pierce the distance in every direction.

Now when they felt for the first time that they were in a new life and a
magic land, he that was host asked them whence they came and what they
sought. So they said that they sought Glooskap. And the host replied,
"Lo, I am he!" And they were awed by his presence, for a great glory and
majesty now sat upon him. As the woman had changed, so had he, for all
in that place was wonderful.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Then the first, telling what he wanted, said, "I am a wicked man, and I
have a bad temper. I am prone to wrath and reviling, yet I would fain be
pious, meek, and holy."

And the next said, "I am very poor, and my life is hard. I toil, but can
barely make my living. I would fain be rich."

Now the third replied, "I am of low estate, being despised and hated by
all my people, and I wish to be loved and respected." And to all these
the Master made answer, "So shall it be!"

And taking his medicine-bag (*Upsakumoode*, M.) he gave unto each a
small box, and bade them keep it closed until they should be once more
at home. <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) And on returning to the
wigwam. he also gave to each of them new garments; in all their lives
they had never seen or heard of such rich apparel or such ornaments as
they now had. Then when it was time to depart, as they knew not the way
to their home, he arose and went with them. Now they had been more than
a year in coming. But he, having put on his belt, went forth, and they
followed, till in the forenoon he led them to the top of a high
mountain, from which in the distance they beheld yet another, the blue
outline of which could just be seen above the horizon. And having been
told that their way was unto it, they

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

thought it would be a week's journey to reach it. But they went on, and
in the middle of the afternoon of the same day they were there, on the
summit of the second mountain. And looking from this afar, all was
familiar to them--hill and river, and wood and lakes; all. was in their
memory. "And there," said the Master, pointing unto it,--"there is your
own village!" So he left them alone, and they went on their way, and
before the sun had set were safe at home.

Yet when they came no one knew them, because of the great change in
their appearance and their fine attire, the like of which had never been
seen by man in those days. But having made themselves known to their
friends, all that were there of old and young gathered together to gaze
upon and hear what they had to say. And they were amazed.

Then each of them, having opened his box, found therein an unguent, rich
and fragrant, and with this they rubbed their bodies completely. And
they were ever after so fragrant from the divine anointing that all
sought to be near them. Happy were they who could but sniff at the
blessed smell which came from them.

Now he who had been despised for his deformity and weakness and meanness
became beautiful and strong and stately as a pine-tree. There was no man
in all the land so graceful or of such good behavior.

And he who had desired abundance had it, in all fullness, his wish. For
the moose and caribou came

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to him in the forest, the fish leaped into his nets, all men gave unto
him, and he gave unto all freely, to the end.

And he that had been wicked and of evil mind, hasty and cruel, became
meek and patient, good and gentle, and he made others like himself. And
he had his reward, for there was a blessing upon him as upon all those
who had wished wisely even unto the end of their days. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[101:1](al22.htm#fr_75) In this version (Rand
manuscript) there is a fourth Indian introduced,--he who would fain be
tall and long-lived, and is changed to a tree. As it is precisely the
same tale as that of the three who became cypresses or pines, I have not
repeated it.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[103:1](al22.htm#fr_76) This beautiful story, in
its original simplicity, reminds one of the tenderest biblical
narratives. There is in it nothing reflected or second-hand; it is a
very ancient or truly aboriginal tale. I can but sincerely regret my
utter inability to do justice to it. The pen of a great master would be
required to describe the fairyland freshness and light of Glooskap's
home as it is *felt* in the original by men far more familiar with the
forest in all its loveliness at all seasons than any white writer can
be. The *naïveté* or simplicity of the pilgrims is as striking as that
of the narrator or poet, to whom fine clothes--a Homeric trait--are as
wonderful as all the deeds of magic which he describes.

In this and other tales a man is represented as being punished by being
turned into a tree, so that he can never leave a certain spot. This is a
kind of imprisonment. In the Edda the Ash Yggdrasil is the prison of
Iduna.

"She ill brooked  
her descent  
under the hoar tree's  
trunk confined."  
(*Hrofnagaldr Odins*, 7.)

It is to keep a man or a woman in a certain place, as prisoner, that the
characters described in the Indian. and Norse myths arc put into trees.

This was related to Mr. Rand by Benjamin Brooks,--a Micmac.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Glooskap and the Sinful Serpent](al23)
