[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al26)  [Next](al28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### How Glooskap conquered the Great Bull-Frog, and in what Manner all the Pollywogs, Crabs, Leeches, and other Water Creatures were created.

(Passamaquoddy and Micmac.)

*N'karnayoo*, of old times, there was an Indian village far away among
the mountains, little known to other men. And the dwellers therein were
very comfortable: the men hunted every day, the women did the work at
home, and all went well in all things save in this. The town was by a
brook, and except in it there was not a drop of water in all the country
round, unless in a few rain-puddles. No one there had ever found even a
spring.

Now these Indians were very fond of good water. The brook was of a
superior quality, and they became dainty over it.

But after a time they began to observe that the brook was beginning to
run low, and that not in the summer time, but in autumn, even after the
rains. And day by day it diminished, until its bed was as dry as a dead
bone in the ashes of a warm fire.

Now it was said that far away up in the land where none had ever been
there was on this very stream another Indian village; but what manner of
men dwelt therein no one knew. And thinking that these people of the
upper country might be in some way concerned in the drought, they sent
one of their number to go and see into the matter.

And after he had traveled three days he came to

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the place; and there he found that a dam had been raised across the
rivulet, so that no water could pass, for it was all kept in a pond.
Then asking them why they had made this mischief, since the dam was of
no use to them, they bade him go and see their chief, by whose order
this had been built.

And when he came to him, lo, there lay lazily in the mud a creature who
was more of a monster than a man, though he had a human form. For he was
immense to measure, like a giant, fat, bloated, and brutal to behold.
His great yellow eyes stuck from his head like pine-knots, his mouth
went almost from ear to ear, and he had broad, skinny feet with long
toes, exceeding marvelous.

The messenger complained to this monster, who at first said nothing, and
then croaked, and finally replied in a loud bellow,--

"Do as you choose,  
Do as you choose,  
Do as you choose.

"What do I care?  
What do I care?  
What do I care?

"If you want water,  
If you want water,  
If you want water,  
Go somewhere else."

Then the messenger remonstrated, and described the suffering of the
people, who were dying of thirst.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And this seemed to
please the monster, who grinned. At last he got up, and, making a single
spring to the dam, took an arrow and bored a hole in it, so that a
little water trickled out, and then he bellowed,

"Up and begone!  
Up and begone!  
Up and begone!"

So the man departed, little comforted. He came to his home, and for a
few days there was a little water in the stream; but this soon stopped,
and there was great suffering again.

Now these Indians, who were the honestest fellows in all the world, and
never did harm to any one save their enemies, were in a sorry pickle.
For it is a bad thing to have nothing but water to drink, but to want
that is to be mightily dry. And the great Glooskap, who knew all that
was passing in the hearts of men and beasts, took note of this, and when
he willed it he was among them; for he ever came as the wind comes, and
no man wist how.

And just before he came all of these good fellows had resolved in
council that they would send the boldest man among them to certain
death, even to the village which built the dam that kept the water which
filled the brook that quenched their thirst, whenever it was not empty.
And when there he was either to obtain that they should cut the dam, or
do something desperate, and to this intent he should go armed, and sing
his death-song as he went. And they were all agog.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Then Glooskap, who was much pleased with all this, for he loved a brave
man, came among them looking terribly ferocious; in all the land there
was not one who seemed half so horrible. For he appeared ten feet high,
with a hundred red and black feathers in his scalp-lock, his face
painted like fresh blood with green rings round his eyes, a large
clam-shell hanging from each ear, a spread eagle, very awful to behold,
flapping its wings from the back of his neck, so that as he strode into
the village all hearts quaked. Being but simple Indians, they accounted
that this must be, if not Lox the Great Wolverine, at least Mitche-hant,
the devil himself in person, turned Wabanaki; and they admired him
greatly, and the squaws said they had never seen aught so lovely.

Then Glooskap, having heard the whole story, bade them be of good cheer,
declaring that he would soon set all to rights. And he without delay
departed up the bed of the brook; and coming to the town, sat down and
bade a boy bring him water to drink. To which the boy replied that no
water could be had in that town unless it were given out by the chief.
"Go then to your chief," said the Master, "and bid him hurry, or,
verily, I will know the reason why." And this being told, Glooskap
received no reply for more than an hour, during which time he sat on a
log and smoked his pipe. Then the boy returned with a small cup, and
this not half full, of very dirty water.

So he arose, and said to the boy, "I will go and see your chief, and I
think he will soon give me better

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

water than this." And having come to the monster, he said, "Give me to
drink, and that of the best, at once, thou Thing of Mud!" But the chief
reviled him, and said, "Get thee hence, to find water where thou canst."
Then Glooskap thrust a spear into his belly, and lo! there gushed forth
a mighty river; even all the water which should have run on while in the
rivulet, for he had made it into himself. And Glooskap, rising high as a
giant pine, caught the chief in his hand and crumpled in his back with a
mighty grip. And lo! it was the Bull-Frog. So he hurled him with
contempt into the stream, to follow the current.

And ever since that time the Bull-Frog's back has crumpled wrinkles in
the lower part, showing the prints of Glooskap's awful squeeze.

Then he returned to the village; but there he found no people,--no, not
one. For a marvelous thing had come to pass during his absence, which
shall be heard in every Indian's speech through all the ages. For the
men, being, as I said, simple, honest folk, did as boys do when they are
hungry, and say unto one another, "What would *you* like to have, and
what you?" "Truly, I would be pleased with a slice of hot venison dipped
in maple-sugar and bear's oil." "Nay, give me for my share succotash and
honey." Even so these villagers had said, "Suppose *you* had all the
nice cold, fresh, sparkling, delicious water there is in the world, what
would *you* do?"

And one said that he would live in the soft mud, and always be wet and
cool.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

And another, that he would plunge from the rocks, and take headers,
diving, into the deep, cold water, drinking as he dived.

And the third, that he would be washed up and down with the rippling
waves, living on the land, yet ever in the water.

Then the fourth said, "Verily, you know not how to wish, and I will
teach you. I would live in the water all the time, and swim about in it
forever."

Now it chanced that these things were said in the hour which, when it
passes over the world, all the wishes uttered by men are granted. And so
it was with these Indians. For the first became a Leech, the second a
Spotted Frog, the third a Crab, which is washed up and down with the
tide, and the fourth a Fish. Ere this there had been in all the world
none of the creatures which dwell in the water, and now they were there,
and of all kinds. And the river came rushing and roaring on, and they
all went head-long down to the sea, to be washed into many lands over
all the world. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[119:1](al27.htm#fr_79.md) This was told by Tomah
Josephs. It is given much more imperfectly in the tale of Kitpooseagunow
in the Rand manuscript, and in the Anglo-Indian "Storey of Glooscap." I
have taken very great pains in this, as in all the tales written down
from verbal narration, to be accurate in details, and to convey as well
as I could the quaint manner and dry humor which characterized the style
of the narrator. Even white men do not tell the same story in the same
way to everybody; and if Tomahquah and others fully expressed their
feelings to me, it was because they had never before met with a white
man who listened to them <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> with such
sympathy. It may be observed that the Indians commonly say that wherever
the bull-frog is to be found in summer there is always water. It is not
to be understood, in this tale, that the bull-frog is supposed to have
merely drunk up the river. It is the river which has become incarnate in
him. It is the ice of winter penetrated by the spear of the sun; that
is, Glooskap. Thus, in another tale, a frozen river tries, as a man, to
destroy the hero, but is melted by him. The conception of *the hour*
when all wishes are granted, and the abrupt termination of the whole in
a grand transformation scene, are both very striking. There is something
like the former in Rabelais, in his narrative of the golden hatchet; as
regards the latter, it is like the ending of a Christmas pantomime.
Indeed, the entire tale is perfectly adapted to such a "dramatization."

I have been told by an old Passamaquoddy woman that the name of the
monster who swallowed the stream was *Hahk-lee-be-mo*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Lord of Men and Beasts strove with the Mighty Wasis, and
was shamefully defeated](al28.md)
