[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al27)  [Next](al29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

### How the Lord of Men and Beasts strove with the Mighty Wasis, and was shamefully defeated.

(Penobscot.)

Now it came to pass when Glooskap had conquered all his enemies, even
the *Kewahqu'*, who were giants and sorcerers, and the *m'téoulin*, who
were magicians, and the *Pamola*, who is the evil spirit of the night
air, and all manner of ghosts, witches, devils, cannibals, and goblins,
that he thought upon what he had done, and wondered if his work was at
an end.

And he said this to a certain woman. But she replied, "Not so fast,
Master, for there yet remains One whom no one has ever conquered or got
the better of in any way, and who will remain unconquered to the end of
time."

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

"And who is he?" inquired the Master.

"It is the mighty *Wasis*," she replied, "and there he sits; and I warn
you that if you meddle with him you will be in sore trouble."

Now *Wasis* was the Baby. And he sat on the floor sucking a piece of
maple-sugar, greatly contented, troubling no one.

As the Lord of Men and Beasts had never married or had a child, he knew
naught of the way of managing children. Therefore he was quite certain,
as is the wont of such people, that he knew all about it. So he turned
to Baby with a bewitching smile and bade him come to him.

Then Baby smiled again, but did not budge. And the Master spake sweetly
and made his voice like that of the summer bird, but it was of no avail,
for Wasis sat still and sucked his maple-sugar.

Then the Master frowned and spoke terribly, and ordered Wasis to come
crawling to him immediately. And Baby burst out into crying and yelling,
but did not move for all that.

Then, since he could do but one thing more, the Master had recourse to
magic. He used his most awful spells, and sang the songs which raise the
dead and scare the devils. And Wasis sat and looked on admiringly, and
seemed to find it very interesting, but all the same he never moved an
inch.

So Glooskap gave it up in despair, and Wasis, sitting on the floor in
the sunshine, went *goo! goo!* and crowed.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

And to this day when you see a babe well contented, going *goo! goo!*
and crowing, and no one can tell why, know that it is because he
remembers the time when he overcame the Master who had conquered all the
world. For of all the beings that have ever been since the beginning,
Baby is alone the only invincible one. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[122:1](al28.htm#fr_80) I am indebted for this
"märchen" to Maria Saksis, a very intelligent Penobscot woman, a widow
of a former governor, whom I met at North Conway, in the White
Mountains, N. H. In her dialect Glooskap is invariably called
*Glus-gah-be*. She told it with that admirable dry drollery,
characteristic of a good story-teller in a race where there are no bad
ones. The exquisite humor and humanity of this little legend, placed as
a pendant to the stupendous successes of the giant hero, are such as to
entitle its Indian author to rank as a genius. I have frequently
asserted that these Wabanaki or Northeastern Algonquin tales bore to
those of the West the apparent relation of originals to poor copies. Let
the reader compare this, which is given as nearly word for word as was
possible from the Indian narrative, with that of Manobozho-Hiawatha's
effort to compete with a baby. The Cherokee account is that, seeing an
infant sucking its own toe, he tried to do the same, and failed. It is
in accounting for the unaccountable crowing of Baby that the point of
the Penobscot story lies. Of this there is no mention made in the
Western tale, which is utterly wanting in any feeling as to the power of
childhood or its charm over the strongest. A real Indian tale may always
be assumed to be ancient when it is told to set forth an origin. This
gives the origin of a baby's crowing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the great Glooskap fought the Giant Sorcerers at Saco, and
turned them into Fish](al29)
