[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al33)  [Next](al35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

# THE MERRY TALES OF LOX, THE MISCHIEF MAKER,

### COMMONLY KNOWN AS THE INDIAN DEVIL.

### Of the Surprising and Singular Adventures of two Water Fairies who were also Weasels, and how they each became the Bride of a Star. Including the Mysterious and Wonderful Works of Lox, the Great Indian Devil, who rose from the Dead.

(Micmac and Passamaquoddy)

*Wee-zig-yik-keseyook*. "Of old times." Far back in the forest, by a
brook, dwelt two young men, Abistanooch, the Marten, and Team, the
Moose. Of these each had a wigwam, and therewith a grandmother who kept
house. And Team hunted and worked industriously, but Master Marten was
greatly *moalet* (M.), which signifies one who liveth upon his
neighbors, depending on their good nature, even as he that planteth corn
and beans depends upon the pleasant smiles of the sun; whence it came to
pass that wherever victuals were in store there too his presence did
greatly abound.

Now it happened that one day Team, the Moose, had killed a bear, and
brought home a single load of the meat, leaving the rest to be looked
after anon. And being thrifty, and not caring to feed those who fed

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

him not, neither did they thank, he said unto himself, and also to his
grandmother, "Truly, the eyes of Marten shall not see this thing, his
nose shall not smell thereof, neither shall his tongue taste it; so let
not the tidings of our good luck go forth from the wigwam." "Yes,"
replied the old woman, "and well and wisely thou speakest, my son. But
we have this day broken our kettle, while Marten has brought in a new
one. Behold, I will go and borrow it, and having cooked in it I will
wash and wipe it, so that there shall be no sign of what we did
therewith, and so return it."

Now, this was done, but he who is *moalet* and a haunter of feasts is
like a hunter of beasts: he knows well from a small sign where there is
a large load, and the borrowing of kettles means the boiling of victuals
therein. So having in him somewhat of sorcery, he did but step to his
friend's wigwam, and, peeping through a crevice, saw a great store of
bear's meat. And when the grandmother of Moose came unto him to return
the kettle, just as she entered the lodge there arose from it a savory
steam, and looking in it was full of well-cooked food. And Marten
thanked her greatly, yet she, being put to shame, fled to her own home.
But Moose said it was no matter, so the next day they went to the woods
together, and all was well.

Now it befell Marten, as it might have befallen any other man, that one
day he came to a distant and lonely lake in the mountains. Yet there,
stepping softly as a cat behind the rocks bung with grapevines,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

he heard laughing and splashing, and a pleasant sound as of girls'
voices. So, peeping carefully, he saw many maids merrily bathing in the
lake: and these were of the fairy race, who dwell in deep waters and
dark caves, and keep away from mankind. And seeing their garments lying
on the shore, and beholding among the damsels one whom he desired to
obtain, <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) Marten quietly slipped along
unseen, as all of his species can do, till he had the clothes in his
hands. For being tinctured with magic and learned in the lore of all
kind of goblins, elves, and witches, Master Marten knew that when Naiads
are naked and a man has their garments he holds them at his mercy. For
in the apparel lies their fairy power; and if you doubt it, do but give
it a trial and see for yourself!

And having done this, the merry fellow ran inland with a brave whoop,
which the fairies hearing, they in a great rage ran after the ravisher
of their robes. But she whom he desired outstripped the rest, and when
she approached him he did but tap her lightly on the head with a small
stick, according to a certain ancient prescription followed in
Fairy-land, which makes of a woman a wife; whereupon she, according

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

to the antique rite, being astonished to find herself so suddenly
married, fainted dead away, and was carried off in peace. And as for the
clothes of the others, the Marten gave them back without taking fee or
rewards.

Then Team, the Moose, who was a good soul, but not wise above all the
world, coming home and finding Marten married, wished also for a wife.
And having heard all the tale, he said, "Well, if it is no harder than
that, 't is as easy as sucking a honeysuckle, and I am as good as
married." And going to the pond in the mountains, among the rocks and
behind the grapevines, he too beheld the virgins jumping, flapping,
splashing, and mischieving merrily, like mad minxes, in the water;
whereat he, being all of a rage, as it were, caught up the clothes of
these poor maids and ran; she whom he most admired catching up with him.
And being, resolved to do the thing thoroughly, he grappled up a great
club and gave her a bang on her small head, which stunned her indeed,
and that forever, inasmuch as she was slain outright. So the Moose
remained unmarried.

Now Team was one of the kind not uncommon in this world, who hold that
if any other man has or gets more than they have, then they are deeply
wronged. And it had come to pass that Master Marten, finding that his
wife yearned greatly for the society of her sisters, offered to take yet
another of them in marriage, merely to oblige his wife; for in such a
kind of benevolence he was one of the best souls that ever

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

lived, and rather than have trouble in the family he would have wedded
all the pretty girls in the country. So going as before to the pond in
the mountains, among the rocks and behind the grapevines, he, by the
same device, captured yet another fairy, whom, taking home, he wedded.

Yet Team took this sadly to heart, and willed that Marten should give
him this last spouse, to which Marten would in nowise agree. Truly, Team
argued earnestly that as he had no wife, and no wisdom wherewith to win
one, of course he must have one of Marten's, or that Marten should go
and get him one. To which Marten replied that Moose might skin his own
skunks, and fish for his own minnows, and also paddle his own canoe to
the devil, if it so pleased him,--all of these being approved Indian
sayings of high and racy antiquity. Whereupon Team sought to persuade
Marten with a club, who gave a soft answer by shooting a flint-headed
arrow through Team's scalp-lock; and this friendship they continued for
many days, passing their evenings in manufacturing missiles, and the
mornings in sending them one at the other.

Now the fairy water-wives, not being accustomed to this kind of
intimacy, sought to subtract themselves from it. So one morning, when
Marten and Team were most industriously endeavoring to effect mutual
murder, the two wives of the former fled afar to seek fortune, and
succeeded therein to perfection. And it came to pass when the sun had
set and the voice of

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bumole, the Spirit
of Night, was heard afar on high, and Nibauchset (P.), the Night-Walker,
shone over all, that the two brides lay in an oak opening of the forest,
and looked at P'ses'muk, the Stars, and talked about them even as
children might do. And one said to the other, "If those Stars be men,
which would you have for a husband?" "By my faith," replied the other,
"it should be that little red, twinkling fellow, for I like the little
stars best." "And I." said the other, "will wed the Wisawaioo P'ses'm
(P.), the Great Yellow Star, for I love the large stars." And, saying
this in jest, they fell asleep.

But many a word spoken in jest is recalled in earnest, as these brides
learned when they awoke, and found themselves married again in the
Indian manner, at only a word. For she who had wished for the Great
Yellow Shining Star, as she opened her eyes, heard a man's voice say,
"Take care, or you will upset my war-paint!" <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) And lo, there lay by her side a great and
handsome man, very noble, with large and lustrous eyes. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93) Then the other, as she awoke and stirred,
heard a little feeble, cracked voice crying,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Take care, or you
will spill my eye-water!" <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) And by her
was the smaller star, whom she had chosen; but he was a weak-looking old
fellow, with little red, twinkling eyes. And as they had chosen so it
came unto them.

But yellow or red, young or old, in a few days they both grew a-weary of
the star country to which they were taken, and wished to return to the
earth. And then that came to pass which made them yearn with tenfold
longing; for their husbands, who were absent all day hunting, had
pointed out to them a large flat stone, which they were on no account to
lift; which they obeyed in this wise, that they did not both lift the
stone, but only the younger, who, as soon as the Stars had gone to the
greenwood, rushed to the slab, and, lifting it up, gazed greedily down
into the hole beneath. And what she saw was wonderful, for it was the
sky itself, and directly under them was the world in which they had
lived, and specially in sight was the home of their childhood, with all
its woods and rivers. And then the elder having looked, both almost
broke their hearts with weeping.

Now the Stars were by no means such evil-minded men as you may have
deemed; for having perceived by magic that their wives had looked
through the hole in the sky, and knowing that they were lying when they
denied it, they gave them leave to go back to earth. Yet there were
conditions, and those not easy to such fidgety damsels as these; for
they said,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Ye shall lie
together all this night, and in the morning when ye awake ye shall be in
no haste to open your eyes or to uncover your faces. Wait until ye shall
have heard the song of the *Ktsee-gee-gil-lassis* (P.), or
chick-a-dee-dee. And even then ye shall not arise, but be quiet until
the song of the red squirrel shall be heard. And even then ye must wait
and keep your faces covered and your eyes closed until ye hear the
striped squirrel sing. And then ye may leave your bed and look around."

Now the younger wife was ever impatient, and when the chick-a-dee-dee
sang she would have leaped up at once, but the elder restrained her.
"Wait," she said, "my sister, until we hear the *Abalkakmooech*." <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) And she lay still till the
*Adoo-doo-deech* <span id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96) began his early
chatter and his morning's work. Then, without waiting, she jumped up, as
did the elder, when they found themselves indeed on earth, but in the
summit of a tall, spreading. hemlock-tree, and that in such a manner
that they could not descend without assistance. And it had come to pass
in this wise: for as each song was sung by the bird and the squirrels,
they had come nearer and nearer to the earth, even as the light of day
drew near, but as they could not delay they had been deserted. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[3](#fn_97)

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

And as they sat there and day dawned, men of the different Indian
families went by, and unto all of these they cried for help. It is true
that their star husbands had made for them in the tree a bed of moss,
but they cared not to rest in the hemlock, for all that. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) And of all the beasts of the forest or men
of the clearing, who should be the first to appear but Team, or Master
Moose, himself. And to him they cried, "*N'sesenen-apkwahlin,
n'sesenen*!" "Oh, our elder brother, let us free; take us down, and we
will be your two dear little wives, and go home with you." But he,
looking up scornfully, said, "I was married this autumn." And so he went
his way.

And he who next came was the shaggy Bear, or *mooin*, to whom they made
the same request, offering themselves for no higher price than to be
taken down safely out of their nest. But he growled out that he had been
married in the spring, and that one wife was enough for any man. So he
went his way. <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99)

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

And then who should come along but Marten himself, even the Abistanooch,
whom they had deserted! And they cried out for joy, begging him to take
them back. But he, behaving as if they were utter strangers, replied
that he had been married in the early spring to one of his own tribe,
and unto a damsel whose name was Marten, and that it was not seemly for
animals to wed out of their own kind. So he scampered off, leaving the
little Weasels all alone.

And last of all came Lox, whom hunters call the Indian Devil, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) and others the Wolverine, who is
exceeding subtle above the beasts of the forest, and who is gifted with
more evil mischief than all of them in one. And when the Weasels called
to him for help he tarried, for it came into his heart that he might in
some way torment and tease them. But verily he had to deal with those
who were not much more virtuous than himself, and quite as cunning, for
what with traveling

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

from the earth to the heavens and changing husbands, these fair minevers
were learning wisdom rapidly. So the elder sister, who had not the least
idea of keeping her promise unless it suited her fancy, played a trick,
and that quickly anon. For she at once took off her hair-string <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) and tied it into a few less than a
hundred knots among the twigs of the trees, tangling it so that you
would have deemed it a week's work before a man could loosen it again
without injury.

Now Master Lox, having taken down the younger sister with all the
politeness in the world, came for the other, and aided her also to
descend. And when on the ground she indeed said, "*Willee-oon*," "I
thank you" (P.), but begged him to go up the tree again and bring down a
great treasure which she had left there, her hair-string; beseeching him
for all their lives not to break or injure it in any way, but to most
carefully untie every knot, for thus doing it would bring untold
felicity on them all; and that they, the Weasels, would meantime build a
beautiful bridal bower, or a wigwam, and that so furnished as he had
never seen the like before,--in which verily they kept their word.

For they speedily built the wigwam, but the furniture thereof was of
this rare kind. The Weasels had, it seems, certain sworn friends,--for
birds of a feather

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

flock together,--and these were not far to seek, as they were the
Thorns, Burrs, and Briers of all kinds, Hornets and other winged
[and](errata.htm#0) stinged insects,--besides the Ants. And they wore,
moreover, intimate with all the sharp-edged Flints in the land, which
was a goodly company. So when the bower was built it had therein a
hornet's nest for a bridal bed, thorns for a carpet, flints for a floor,
and an ant's nest for a seat, which for a bare-footed and bare-breeched
Indian is indeed a sore essay. Now it had taken Master Lox the entire
day to untie the hair-string, so when he came down it was dark, and he
was glad when he saw the hut and thought of resting therein.

But, as he entered, he ran among the Thorns, which pierced his nose, and
Flints, which cut his feet, so that he roared aloud. Then he heard a
voice, which seemed to be that of the younger Miss Weasel, crying
"Namescole" (M.), "Go to my sister, yonder!" So he went, and trod in an
ant-hill, and this was worse than the Briers. And then he heard another
voice on that side which cried, laughing, "*N'kwech-kale*!" (M.), "Go to
my sister, who is younger than I." And plunging furiously through the
darkness, he fell on the hornet's nest; and verily the last state of
that Indian was worst of all. Thus, seeing himself mocked, he became
furious; so that he who has by nature the very worst temper of all
beasts or men was never so angry before, and, seeking the tracks of the
Weasels, he pursued them as they fled in the night and through the thick
forest.

Now it came to pass that by daybreak the two girls,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

even the Misses Weasel, had come to a broad river which they could not
cross. But in the edge of the water stood a large Crane, motionless, or
the *Tum-gwo-lig-unach*, who was the ferryman. Now truly this is
esteemed to be the least beautiful of all the birds, for which cause he
is greedy of good words and fondest of flattery. And of all beings there
were none who had more bear's oil ready to anoint every one's hair
with--that is to say, more compliments ready for everybody -than the
Weasels. So, seeing the Crane, they sang:—

"Wa wela quis kip pat kasqu',  
Wa wela quis kip pat kasqu'." (P.)

The Crane has a very beautiful long neck,  
The Crane has a very beautiful long neck.

This charmed the old ferryman very much, and when they said, "Please,
grandfather, hurry along," he came quickly. Seeing this, they began to
chant in chorus, sweetly as the Seven Stars themselves:—

"Wa wela quig nat kasqu',  
Wa wela quig nat kasqu'." (P.)

The Crane has very beautiful long legs,  
The Crane has very beautiful long legs.

Hearing this, the good Crane wanted more; so when they asked him to give
them a lift across, he answered slowly that to do so he must be well
paid, but that good praise would answer as well. Now they who had
abundance of this and to spare for

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

everybody were these very girls. "Have I not a beautiful form?" he
inquired; and they both cried aloud, "Oh, uncle, it is indeed
beautiful!" "And my feathers?" "Ah, *pegeakopchu*" (M.), "Beautiful and
straight feathers indeed!" "And have I not a charming long, straight
neck?" "Truly our uncle has it straight and long." "And will ye not
acknowledge, oh, maidens, that my legs are fine?" "Fine! oh, uncle, they
are perfection. Never in this life did we see such legs!" So being well
pleased, the Crane put them across, and then the two little Weasels
scampered like mice into the bush.

And scarcely were they concealed, or the Crane well again in his place,
ere Master Lox appeared. And being in no good temper he called to Uncle
Crane to set him across, and that speedily. Now the Crane had been made
mightily pleased and proud by the winsome words of the Weasels, and was
but little inclined to be rudely addressed. So he said to Lox, "I will
bear thee over the river if thou wilt bear witness to my beauty. Are not
my legs straight?" "Yea" replied the Lox, "and beautifully painted,
too." Now the color thereof was little pleasing to poor Uncle Crane.
"Are not my feathers very smooth and fine?" "Yea, smooth and fine; what
a pity, though, that they are mildewed and dusty!" "And my straight
neck?" "Yes, wonderfully straight,--straight as *this*," said Lox to
himself, taking up a crooked stick. And then he sang:—

"Mecha guiskipat kasqu',  
Meecha quig nat kasqu'." <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

"The Crane has a very ugly neck,  
The Crane has dirty, ugly legs."

"Come, *mooso me* (grandfather), hurry up!

Oh, the Crane has a very ugly neck,  
The Crane has dirty, ugly legs.

I wish you to be quick, *mooso me*. Hurry up, I say!" <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

And all of this ill-temper and insincerity was deeply and inwardly
detected by Uncle Crane, but he said not a word, and only meekly bent
him down to take the traveler on his back. But when in the stream, and
where it was deepest and most dangerous, he gave himself a shake, and in
another instant Lox was whirling round and round like a chip in the
rapids. And yet a little time he was dashed against the rocks, and then
anon was thrown high and dry on the shore, but dead as a seven-year-old
cedar cone.

Now the Lox is a great magician at certain times and seasons, albeit his
power fails him at others. <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103)

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And he is one of
those who rise from the dead. Now it came to pass that some days after
two boys of the Kwedech or Mohawk race found the Lox lying dead on a
rock in the sunshine, and the worms were crawling from him. But when
they touched him he arose as if from sleep, and stood before them as a
proud and fierce warrior. But he was scarce alive ere he sought to do
them who had roused him to life a mischief; for having noted that they
had fine bows, he got them into his hands, and broke them, yet all as if
he meant it not. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) And then by magic
making a sound as of many children at play, afar off across the next
point of land by the river, he bade them run and join the pleasant
games. And when he had got them a space onward, lo, the sound seemed
ever farther on, mingled with the murmur of the stream; and so they went
without him, seeking it, and yet it wandered ever far away.

Now he had learned from the boys that they were of a *Cullo* family; and
the Culloos are certain monstrous birds, exceeding fierce. But Master
Lox, having seen in the cabin plenty of fine meat, desired greatly to
become one of the family, and having been much about in life knew
something of the ways of every one. So putting on the Culloo style, he,
seeing a

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

babe, began to sing with the most natural air in the world a Culloo
nursery-song:—

"Agoo ge abeol,  
Wetkusanabeol." <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105)

A seal-skin strap,  
A shoulder-strap.

Now it costs very little to fall into the humor of a man; but this the
woman would not do, and told him plainly that he could not deceive her.
On hearing which Master Lox, in a great rage, seized his tomahawk and
slew her. Then seeing a kettle boiling on the fire, he cut off her head
and put it into the pot, hiding the body. And this was a merry jest
after his own heart, so that it greatly solaced him. But after a time,
the two boys, returning, missed their mother, and looking into the
kettle, found her head. Then they knew well who had done this. And,
being fearless, they pursued him, but having no bows they could do him
no harm; however, they took from him his gloves, and with these they
returned.

And anon there came also an uncle of the boys, or *Kah-kah-goos* (P.),
the Crow. So he gave chase to Lox, yet all that he could do was to
snatch away his cap as he ran. Yet without shame he cried aloud, "Well,
my head was getting warm, and now I am cooler. Thank you!"

Then came another relative, *Kitpoo*, the Eagle (M.). And he, pursuing
Lox, took from him his coat. Yet

 

<span id="img_15700"></span> ![LOX CARRIED OFF BY
CULLO.](img/15700.jpg)  
LOX CARRIED OFF BY CULLO.

 

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

all unabashed he replied, "Thanks unto you also; for I was just wishing
that my younger brother were here to carry my coat for me." But he who
now arrived, hearing of the deadly deed, was the great Culloo himself,
the most terrible of all created creatures, and he, pursuing Lox, caught
him up, and carrying him in his claws, even to the summit of the sky
itself, let him drop, and he was a whole day in falling; even from the
first dawn unto sunset he went down ere he touched the earth. But before
he was let drop, and when on high, he burst into a mocking song on what
he saw, and the words were as follows

"Kumut kenovek,  
Telap tumun ek,  
Stugach' kesenagasikel,  
Yog wa egen'  
Yog wa egeno  
Telap tumen ek  
Kumut ken ooik'  
Stuga 'mkudomoos koon."

Our country all lost  
Seems clearly to us  
As though it were all spread with boughs.  
Heigh he, hay hum!  
Heigh ho, hay hum!  
Our country now lost  
Seems now unto us  
To be blue like the clear blue sky.  
Hum, hum--tol de rol!

And when let fall, this graceless jackanapes in nowise ceased his
ribaldry; for while pretending to flap

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

with his arms as if they were wings, he imitated with his mouth,
mockingly, the *wish! wish!* of the wide wings of the Culloo. Yet just
ere he touched the earth he uttered one little magic spell, "Oh, spare
my poor backbone!" And with that all the trouble of all the birds went
for nothing. Truly he was mashed to a batter, and his blood and brains
flew in every direction, like raspberry pudding; but among the remains
his backbone lay whole, and this was his life.

And in a few days after his younger brother came by, who, seeing the
dire mess, exclaimed, "Hey, what is all this?" <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) Whereupon a Voice came from the bone,
crying, "*Nuloogoon, ba ho*!" "Ho, my leg, come hither!" and a leg came
unto the spine. Then the Voice cried, "*N'petunagum, ha ho*!" "Ho, my
arm, come hither!" And when the last fragment had come he arose, the
same indomitable Lox as ever, even the Indian Devil, or Wolverine, who
never says Die, and whom nothing can kill, and who is hard to put away.

Now the two brothers went on till they came to the top of a high
mountain, where there lay a very great round rock, or a mighty boulder.
And, being full of fun, they turned it over with great sticks, saying to
it,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Now let us run a
race!" Then it rolled downhill till it stopped at the foot, they rushing
along by it all the time. And when it rested they jeered it, and bade it
race with them again, when it so listed.

And truly they had not long to wait, for soon after, as they sat cooking
their food, they heard a mighty commotion as of something coming with
dreadful speed through the forest. And lo! it was the stone in dire
wrath, which, having rested a little while, came rushing through the
forest, crashing the mighty trees like grass, with a roar like thunder,
leaving a smooth road behind it in the roughest wilderness. Up and after
the sorcerers flew the stone, and the younger slipped aside like a
snake, but the elder had scarcely time to utter his magic charm,
"*Noo-goon ooskudeskuch*!" "Let my backbone remain uninjured!" ere the
awful rock rolled down upon him, crushing his bones and mashing his
flesh. Yet the spine was unhurt; it remained sound as ever.

And the stone went on and ever on, till the sound of its roar died away
in the breeze and afar in the wilderness.

Then the younger brother turned to the Backbone and said, "*Cagooee
wejismook' tumun*?" (M.) "Why are you lying there?" And bearing this
charm the Bone called aloud, "*Ntenin ba ho*!" "My body, ho!" and
"*Nuloogoon ba ho*!" "My leg, ho!" and so with the rest of the members
as before, until he that was decomposed was now recomposed; yes, and
composed perfectly. And then he that was dead, but was now

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

alive, arose, and said as one awaking, "What have I been doing?" So his
brother told him all.

Then he was greatly angered, and when the Wolverine is angry it is not a
little. And he said in his wrath, "Shall I that am the devil of the
woods himself be slain by birds and stones, and not be revenged?" So
they went onwards through the woods till they found the Great Rock: they
followed in the path of the broken trees; even by the trees did they
track it. Which having found, they built a fire around it; with great
stones for hammers they broke it, and ever more and still smaller, till
it was all mere dust, for their souls were sore for revenge.

When lo, a great wonder! For the Spirit of the Old Rock, even that which
was itself, turned all the dust to black flies, into the stinging and
evil things which drive men and beasts mad, so that its hatred and spite
might be carried out on all living creatures unto the end of time.

And having had their ill-will of the Rock and seen it become Flies, the
two went through the forest, and so on till they came to a village of
good, honest folk; and knowing what manner of men they were, Lox
resolved to forthwith play them an evil trick, for in all life there was
nothing half so dear to him as to make mischief, the worse the better.

And this time it came into his head that it would be a fine piece of wit
to go into the town as a gay girl and get married, and see what would
come of it, trusting to luck to fashion a sad fool out of somebody. So

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

having made himself into a delicate young beauty, richly attired, he
entered the place; and truly the town was soon agog over the new guests.
And the young chief of the tribe, wanting her, won her without waste of
time. Truly there lieth herein some mystery. I know not what, only this
I know: that there are in all towns certain folk who, by means of magic
or meddling, always find out everything about everybody, and then
tittle-tattle thereof. Now, albeit Lox had utterly abjured all the
sinfulness of manhood, and had made a new departure in an utterly mew
direction, saying not a word thereof to any one, yet in a brief measure
of time, one here, another there, Jack in a corner and Jane by the bush,
began to whisper of a strange thing, and hint that all was not as it
should be, and, whatever the chief might think, that in their minds
matters were going wrong in his wigwam.

Now Lox, knowing all this thread as soon as it was spun, began to think
it high time to show his hand in the game. And what was the amazement of
all the town to hear, one fine evening, that the chief's wife would soon
be a mother. And when the time came Dame Lox informed her husband that,
according to the custom of her people, she must be left utterly alone
till he was a father and the babe born. And when in due time the cry of
a small child was heard in the lodge the women waiting ran in, and
received from the mother the little one, abundantly rolled in many
wrappers, which they took to the chief. But what was his amazement, when
having unrolled

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the package, he found under one skin after another, tied up hard, yet
another sewed up, and yet again, as the inmost kernel of this nut, the
little withered, wizened, dead, and dried shrivelment of an unborn moose
calf. Which pleased the chief so much that, dashing Master Moose into
the fire, he seized his tomahawk and ran to his lodge to make his first
morning call on the mother.

But Master Lox was now a man again, and expecting this call, and not
wishing to see visitors, had with his brother fled to the woods, and
that rapidly. And in the rush he came to a river, and, seeing a very
high waterfall, thought of a rare device whereby he might elude pursuit.
For he with his brother soon built a dam across the top with trees and
earth, so that but little water went below. And lying in a eave,
concealed with care, he imitated the *boo-oo-oo* of a falling stream
with quaint and wondrous skill. And there he lay, and no man wist
thereof.

But verily the wicked one is caught in his own snare, and even so it
befell Master Lox. For as he bid, the water above, having gathered to a
great lake, burst the dam, so that it all came down upon him at once and
drowned him; nor was there any great weeping for him that ever I heard
of. So here he passes out of this story, and does not come into it
again. But whether he went for good and all out of this life is
doubtful, since I find him living again in so many rare, strange
histories that it has become a proverb that Lox never dies.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Now the tale returns to the two little Weasels, or Ermines, or
Water-Maids, poor souls, who had such a hard life! And it happened that,
fleeing from Master Lox, they came at evening to a deserted village, and
entered a wigwam to pass the night. But the elder, being the wiser, and
somewhat of a witch in the bud, mistrusted the place, deeming it not so
empty as it seemed. And beholding by the door, lying on the ground, the
Neckbone of a man or some other animal, she warned her sister that she
should in nowise offend it or treat it lightly, to which the younger
replied by giving it a kick which sent it flying, and by otherwise
treating it with scorn and disdain.

Then they laid them down to sleep; but before their slumber came they
heard a doleful, bitter voice chanting aloud and shouting, and it was
*Chamach keg wech*, or the Neckbone, bewailing the scorn that had been
put upon him, and reviling them with all manner of curses. Then the
elder said, "There, truly, I said it. I knew you would be our death if
you did not mind me:" it being in all cases an esteemed solace for every
woman and most men to say, "I told you so!" But the younger, being
well-nigh frightened to a corpse, in a soft whisper implored the elder
to let her hide herself in her roll of hair, <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) which the Voice, mocking her, repeated;
adding thereto all the reviling and railing that Mitche-hant, the devil,
himself ever yet invented, and abusing her so for her past life, and

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

exhorting her so for all the sins, slips, and slops therein (of which
there were many), that even the impenitent little Weasel repented and
wept bitterly. Howbeit no further harm came to them beyond this, so that
the next morning they went their way in peace; and I warrant you Master
Neckbone got no kicks that day from them, departing. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108)

Then, coming to a river, they saw on the other side a handsome young man
holding a bow, and to him they called, making their usual offer to
become his wives, and all for no greater thing than to carry them over
the ferry. And this man's name was See-witch, <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109) and to please them he did indeed pass
them over in his canoe; but as for taking them home, he said that he had
housekeepers in store, and as many as he needed just then, and that of a
kind who kept him very busy. So they went their way onwards.

And coming anon to the great sea, they beheld yet another canoe with two
men therein, and these were Kwe-moo, the Loon, and Mahgwis, the
Scapegrace. And embarking with them, Loon soon began to admire the girls
greatly. And saying many sweet things, he told them that he dwelt in the
Wigem territory, or in the land of the Owealkesk, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[3](#fn_110) of which he himself

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

was one. But the Mahgwis whispered to them aside that they should put
little trust in what he told them, for Loon was a great liar. Now when
they came to the land of the Owealkesk, they were amazed at the beauty
of the people, and saw that all in that land was lovely, nor did they
themselves seem less marvelously fair to the men therein. Indeed, the
poor little Weasels began to see the end of their sorrows, for, being
water-fairies, these sea-birds were nigh akin to them. And there was a
great feast, a great dance, and great games held in honor of their
arrival, and the two finest young Sea-Duck men, utterly unheeding the
old Loon, who believed indeed that they were his own wives, carried them
off, and nothing loath wedded them.

And it was in this wise. There was a canoe-race, and Kwe-moo, being
bitterly angry that he was held of so little account in the Sea-Duck
land, went forth with the rest, and, paddling far outside, upset his
canoe, and making as if he were drowning called to the Weasels to come
and save him. But the Sea, Ducks laughed, and said, "Let him alone.
Truly he will never drown. We know him." And the race ended they went
ashore in peace. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)

And that night they danced late, and the Weasels,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

being better pleased with the two handsome Sea-Ducks than with Loon,
forthwith divorced themselves out of hand, and at once married them,
going to where their canoe lay, to pass the bridal night. Now Loon had
not gone to the dance, but sat at home nursing his vengeance till he was
well-nigh mad. And as the Weasels did not return, he went forth and
sought them; and this he did so carefully that at last he found all four
by the sea, sound asleep. Whereupon he, with his knife, slew the young
men, and being in great fear of their friends took his canoe and went
down the river to kill a deer. But not daring to return, and being mad
for loss of the Weasels, and fearing to fall into the hands of the
enemy, he in despair took his knife and killed himself.

Yet the Weasels, who had seen the deed done, did not betray him, for
there was at least so much truth left in them. And they lived with the
Sea-Ducks, and I doubt me not went on marrying and mischief-making after
their wont even unto the end of their days. And their kind are not dead
as yet in any land.

 

This is a fair specimen of many Indian legends. So much of it as is
Micmac was told to Mr. Rand by a highly intelligent Indian, named
Benjamin Brooks, who was certain that the story was of great antiquity.
As I at first heard it, it was limited to the adventure with the Stars,
but I was told that this formed only a part of an extremely long
narrative. It consists, in

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

fact, of different parts of other tales connected, and I doubt not that
there is much more of it. It cannot escape the reader versed in
fairy-lore that the incident of the water-maiden captured by her clothes
is common to all European nations, but that it is especially Norse;
while the adventures of the Wolverine, and indeed his whole character,
are strangely suggestive of Loki, the Spirit of mere Mischief, who
becomes evil. The fact that both Loki and Lox end their earthly career
at a waterfall is very curious. The two also become, in wizard fashion,
women at will. But it is chiefly in the extreme and wanton devilishness
of their tricks that they are alike. Many other resemblances will
suggest themselves to those who know the Eddas.

In the Passamaquoddy version of this tale, it is See-witch, and not the
Loon, who plays the part of the jealous husband at the end. The career
of the Weasels *seems* to set forth the adventures of a couple of Indian
Becky Sharps, very much in the spirit of an Indian Thackeray. The
immorality of these damsels, the sponging of Marten, the deviltry of
Lox, the senile follies and ferocious vindictiveness of the Loon, all
seem to impress the composer of the tale as so many bubbles rising and
falling on the sea of life, only remarkable for the sun-gleam of humor
which they reflect. Outside these tales I know of nothing which so
resembles the inner spirit of Aristophanes, Rabelais, and Shakespeare. I
do not say that the genius of these great masters is in them, but their
manner of seeing humor and wickedness combined. The cause

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of this lies in the cultivated stoicism with which every Indian trains
himself to regard life. The inevitable result of such culture is always
in some way a kind of humor, either grim or gay.

A re-perusal of the Eddas has impressed me with the remarkable
resemblance of Lox, the Wolverine, to Loki. The story begins with the
incident of a bird maiden caught by a trick, and married. This is
distinctly Scandinavian. It is known in all lands, but the Norse made
the most of it. Then the two girls sit and choose the kind of stars they
will have. In the Eskimo (Rink, No. 8), two girls sitting on a beach,
talking in the same way, seeing eagles' and whales' bones by them,
declare that they would like to marry, the one an eagle, the other a
whale, and both get their wishes. In the Norse legends stars are like
human beings. Lox is pursued by a giant bird; Loki is chased by Thiassi,
the giant, in eagle plumage. Again, in the Edda a giant eagle drags and
trails Loki over woods and mountains, till he screams for pity. The
Wolverine's race with a stone giant also recalls this race, the eagle
being really one of the Jötuns, who were also all mountains and rocks.
The Wolverine wizard becomes a girl, merely to make mischief. Loki took
the form of a woman in Fensal, where he schemed to kill Balder. This is
certainly a strange coincidence; for as in the Edda, Loki's becoming a
woman led to all the subsequent tragedy and to his own doom, so in the
Indian tale the very same thing caused the Wolverine to be chased to the
high water-fall,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

where, owing to his own tricks, he perished, just as Loki came to grief
in Franangursfors, the bright and glistening cataract. But the most
remarkable point is that the general immoral character of the Lox, <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) or Wolverine, is so much like that of
Loki, consisting of evil or mischief of the worst kind, always tempered
by humor, which provokes a laugh. Now to find a similar and very
singular character supported by several coincidences of incident is, if
nothing more, at least very remarkable.

Loki is fire, and Lox, when killed in another tale, is revived by heat.
He is carried off by the Culloo, or cloud, and let fall, typifying fire
or lightning coming from a cloud. Again, in another story he dies for
want of fire. And he twice dies by drowning; that is, the fire is
quenched by water.

In one of the Passamaquoddy versions of this tale, which is, though less
detailed, far superior in humor to the Micmac, the Loon is cheated by
his two nephews, the *Assoops*, a species of loon, who steal the Weasels
from him. He revenges himself, not by murdering, but by merely
frightening them. He fills a bladder with blood, puts it under his
shirt, and then stabs himself. They, thinking he is killed, lament, when
he grandly comes to life, and is regarded as a great magician.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[142:1](al34.htm#fr_91) There are many of these
stories which indicate passionate and deeply seated attachment, but I
never once heard a real Indian say that man or woman loved, though they
have words which fully express it. "He wanted her" is the nearest
approach to tenderness which I have ever heard from them. This is not
the result of a want of feeling, but of the suppression of all
manifestation of it, to which every red man is trained from earliest
infancy.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[145:1](al34.htm#fr_92) *Sekroon* (red ochre).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[145:2](al34.htm#fr_93) In the Passamaquoddy
version of this tale, given me by Tomah Josephs, the brides awake in
Star-Land. The husbands are both elderly men, and he who is the Yellow
Star has bright yellow corners to his eyes, while the other has red. In
another the Yellow Star is called *Wabeyu*, the White. While they are
all distinctly forms of one tale, the three differ so much that I have
had great difficulty in reconstituting what appears to be the original
legend.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[146:1](al34.htm#fr_94) *Nebijegwode* (eye
medicine, M.).

<span id="fn_95"></span>[147:1](al34.htm#fr_95) Ground squirrel.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[147:2](al34.htm#fr_96) Red squirrel.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[147:3](al34.htm#fr_97) A want of patience or of
dignity, and restlessness, are more scorned by every Indian than any
other fault. This is not the only story in which people are represented
as being punished for being unable to bide their time. Glooskap was
specially severe on all such sinners.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[148:1](al34.htm#fr_98) In another very full
version of this legend (M.), the water-wives are called Weasels
(*Uskoolsk*), "from their great whiteness." This, however, indicates
supernatural fairness or beauty. In the same story the tree is a pine,
not a hemlock. Insignificant as these differences may appear, they are
of primary importance in the elucidation of a myth.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[148:2](al34.htm#fr_99) N. B.--There is a joke
here. The animals who pass by the tree each mate at the season of the
year when they declare that they were married. The White Ladies, weasels
or ermines, therefore, came at the wrong time. The fickle, variable
nature ascribed to woman, *varium et mutabile semper femina*, is
supposed to be most decidedly expressed by such slender, slippery,
active little animals.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[149:1](al34.htm#fr_100) In the Micmac it is
the Badger, *Keekwajoo*, who is the rogue and teaser of the tale. But in
the Passamaquoddy versions it is the dreaded and mysterious Lox, who
appears to be a species of Lynx or Wolverine. The Lox is said, by
trustworthy white travelers as well as Indians, to follow hunting
parties for weeks, inspired apparently only by an incredible mania for
mischief, much like that of a monkey or a revengeful savage, but guided
by remarkable intelligence. He will find his way into a camp and destroy
every object made by the hand of man with a thoroughness akin to genius,
and what he cannot destroy he will carry to a great distance and
carefully conceal. As his ferocity is equal to his craftiness, he is
very appropriately termed the Indian Devil.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[150:1](al34.htm#fr_101) The Hair-String,
*Saggalobee* (M.), occurs very often in Indian legends, generally as
gifted with magic. The Indian women allowed their hair to grow long,
then doubled it upon the back of the head, often making additions of
something to enlarge the roll. It was then bound in a bunch with the
string.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[154:1](al34.htm#fr_102) This dialogue,
including the songs, is from a very curious Passamaquoddy version of the
tale, sent to me by Louis Mitchell. As in all such cases, there is far
more humor in the Passamaquoddy narratives than in the Micmac or Eskimo.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[154:2](al34.htm#fr_103) From this point of the
legend onward there is an inextricable confusion as regards the four
different versions. While the hero is decidedly a Badger in the Micmac,
I regard the great ferocity, craft, and above all the vitality which he
displays as far more characteristic of the Lox or Wolverine of the
Passamaquoddy. What is almost decisively in favor of the latter theory
is that in all the stories, despite his craft and power, he is always
getting himself into trouble through them. This is eminently
characteristic of the Lox, much less so of the Badger.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[155:1](al34.htm#fr_104) In the Passamaquoddy
version of this tale, when Lox is thus dismembered, the ants, pitying
him, bring his scattered members together. As soon as he recovers, the
Wolverine, with characteristic ingratitude, amuses himself by trampling
his benefactors to death beneath his feet.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[156:1](al34.htm#fr_105) Micmac.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[158:1](al34.htm#fr_106) The dead body of a
sorcerer must lie until addressed by some human being. Then it revives.
This is suggestive of vampirism, which is well known to the Indians.
There is something strangely ghastly in the idea of the Voice calling
separately to each dead limb to come to it. The Culloo is an emblem of
the cloud, and Lox let fall from one probably signified fire, or the
lightning.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[163:1](al34.htm#fr_107) That is, the elder
should retain the human form, and the younger become a weasel.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[164:1](al34.htm#fr_108) This incident of the
Neckbone is very much like the common nursery tale of Teeny Tiny, in
which an old woman takes home a human bone and puts it in the cupboard.
It torments her all night by its cries.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[164:2](al34.htm#fr_109) A kind of small
sea-duck.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[164:3](al34.htm#fr_110) A very beautiful
species of sea-duck.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[165:1](al34.htm#fr_111) Here the Micmac
narrative ends. The rest is as it was given to me by Noel Josephs, or
*Chi gatch gok*, the Raven, a Passamaquoddy. It would not be a complete
Indian tale if a man having received a slight or injury did not take a
bloody revenge for it.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[169:1](al34.htm#fr_112) The coincidence of
name amounts to something, as Lox is not, I believe, an Indian word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Wolverine and the Wolves, or how Master Lox Froze to
Death](al35)
