[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al34)  [Next](al36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### Of the Wolverine and the Wolves, or how Master Lox Froze to Death.

(Passamaquoddy.)

Of old times it came to pass that Master Lox, the Wolverine, or Indian
Devil, he who was slain many times and as often rose from the dead,
found himself deeply down in luck; for he was crossing a wide and dismal
heath in winter-time, being but poorly provided in any way for travel.
The wind blew like knives; the snow fell; sleet, frost, hail, and rain
seemed to come all together in bad company, and still Lox was not happy,
although he had no blanket or fur coat beyond his own. Yet this
evil-minded jolly companion with every vice had one virtue, and that was
that of all the beasts of the forest or devils in *P'lamkik'* he was the
hardest hearted, toughest, and most unconquerable, being ever the first
to fight and the last to give in, which even then he did not, never
having done it and never intending to; whence it happened that he was
greatly admired and made much of by all the blackguardly beasts of the
backwoods,--wherein they differed but little from many among men.

Now as of all rowdies and rascals the wolves are the worst, we may well
believe that it was with great joy Lox heard, as the darkness was coming
on, a long, sad howl, far away, betokening the coming of a pack of these
pleasant people; to which he raised his own voice in the wolf
tongue,--for he was learned in

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

many languages,--and soon was surrounded by some fifteen or sixteen
lupine land-loafers, who danced, rolling over, barking and biting one
another, all for very joy at meeting with him. And the elder, he who was
captain, or the *sogmo*, <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md) said,
"Peradventure thou wilt encamp with us this night, for it is ill for a
gentleman to be alone, where he might encounter vulgar fellows." And Lox
thanked him as if he were doing him a favor, and accepted the best of
their dried meat, and took the highest place by their fire, and smoked
the chief's choicest tomawe out of his best pipe, and all that with such
vast condescension that the wolves grinned with delight.

And when they laid them down to sleep he that was the eldest, or the
sogmo, bade the younger cover their guest Lox over very carefully. Now
the tail of the wolf has broad-spreading, shaggy hair, and Lox, being
sleepy, really thought it was a fur blanket that they spread, and though
the night was cold enough to crack the rocks he threw the covering off;
twice he did this, and the chief who looked after him, with all the
rest, admired him greatly because he cared so little for the cold or for
their care.

And having eaten after they arose, when in the morning they would wend
away, the Wolf Chief said unto Lox, "Uncle, thou hast yet three days'
hard travel before thee in a land where there is neither home, house,
nor hearth, and it will be ill camping without a fire. Now I have a most
approved and excellent

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

charm, or spell, by which I can give thee three fires, but no more; yet
will they suffice, one for each night, until thou gettest to thy
journey's end. And this is the manner thereof: that thou shalt take unto
thee dry wood, even such as men commonly burn, and thou shalt put them
together, even as boys build little wigwams for sport, and then thou
shalt jump over it. And truly, uncle, this is an approved and excellent
charm of ripe antiquity, kept as a solemn secret among the wolves, and
thou art the first not of our holy nation to whom it hath been given."
So they parted.

Now Lox trudged on, and as he went westwards kept thinking of this great
secret of the pious and peculiar people, and wondering if it were even
as the Wolf said, or only a deceit; for however kindly he was treated by
people, he always suspected that they mocked him to scorn, or were
preparing to do so; for as he ever did this thing himself to every
condition of mankind or beasts, he constantly awaited to have it done to
him. And being curious withal, and anxious to see some new thing, he had
not walked half an hour ere he said, "Tush! let me try it. Yea, and I
will!" So building up the sticks, he jumped over them, and at once they
caught fire and blazed up, and it came to pass even as the Wolf had
prophesied.

Now having solaced himself by the heat, Lox went on. And anon it grew
cold again, and he began to think how pleasant it was to be warm; and
being, like most evil people, wanting in a corner of wisdom, he at once
put the sticks together again and jumped over

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

them, and as before there rose a blaze, and he was happy. And this was
the second fire, and he had still three cold nights before him before he
could reach his home.

And yet this Wolverine, who was so wise in all wickedness and witty in
evil-doing, had not walked into the afternoon before he began to think
of the third fire. "Truly," he said to himself, "who knows but the
weather may take a turn to a thaw, and give us a warm night? Hum! ha!
methinks by the look of the clouds the wind will soon be southwesterly.
Have I not heard my grandmother say that such a color, even the red,
meant something?--I forget what, but it might be a warm change. Luck be
on me, I will risk the odds." And, saying this, he set up the sticks
again; and this was the last fire, though it was not even the first
night.

And when he came after dark to the first camping place it grew cold in
earnest. Howbeit Lox, thinking that what was good for once must be good
forever, made him his little pile of sticks and jumped over them. It was
of no avail. Finally, when he had jumped twenty or thirty times more,
there arose a little smoke, and, having his heart cheered by this, he
kept on jumping. Now it is said that there can be no smoke without fire,
but this time it went not beyond smoke. Then Lox jumped again, and this
time the Indian Devil came up within him, and he swore by it that he
would jump till it blazed or burst. So he kept on, and yet there came no
comfort, not even a

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

spark; and being at last aweary he fell down in a swoon, and so froze to
death. And so the Devil was dead, and that was the last of him for that
turn; but I think he got over it, for he has been seen many a time
since.

 

In two stories Lox (once as the *loup cervier*) is intimate with the
wolves. Loki was the father of the wolves. Loki is fire; here Lox dies
for want of fire. Since I wrote the foregoing, Mrs. W. Wallace Brown has
learned that Lox is definitely the king or chief of the wolves, and that
many Indians deny that he is really an animal at all, though he assumes
the forms of certain animals. He is a spirit, and the Mischief Maker. It
will be admitted that this brings the Lox much nearer to Loki.

It is said that when Glooskap left the world, as he took away with him
the kings of all the animals, Lox went with him as king of the Wolves.
This is an identification of him with Malsum, the Wolf, himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[171:1](al35.htm#fr_113.md) *Sogmo*, sagamore, a
chief; the word corrupted into sachem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Master Lox played a Trick on Mrs. Bear, who lost her eyesight
and had her eyes opened](al36.md)
