[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al35)  [Next](al37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Master Lox played a Trick on Mrs. Bear, who lost her eyesight and had her eyes opened.

(Micmac.)

Don't live with mean people if you can help it. They will turn your
greatest sorrow to their own account if they can. Bad habit gets to be
devilish second nature. One dead herring is not much, but one by one you
may make such a heap of them as to stink out a whole village.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

As it happened to old Mrs. Bear, who was easy as regarded people, and
thought well of everybody, and trusted all. So she took in for a
house-mate another old woman. Their wigwam was all by itself, and the
next neighbor was so far off that he was not their neighbor at all, but
that of some other folks.

One night the old women made up a fire, and lay down and went to sleep
Indian-fashion,--*witkusoodijik*,--heads and points, so that both could
lie with their back to the fire.

Now while they were sound asleep, Lox, the Wolverine, or Indian Devil,
came prowling round. Some people say it was Hespuns, the Raccoon; and it
is a fact that Master Coon can play a very close game of deviltry on his
own account. However, this time it must have been Lox, as you can see by
the tracks.

While they were both sound asleep Lox looked in. He found the old women
asleep, heads and points, and at once saw his way to a neat little bit
of mischief. So, going into the woods, he cut a fine long sapling-pole
of *ozo-bo-goos*, and poked one end of it into the fire till it was a
burning coal. Then he touched the soles of Mrs. Bear; and she, waking,
cried out to the other, "Take care! you are burning me!" which the other
denied like a thunder-clap.

Then Master Lox carefully applied the end of the hot pole to the feet of
the other woman. First she dreamed that she was walking on hot sand and
roasting rocks in summer-time, and then that the Mohawks were cooking
her at the death-fire; and then she woke

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

up, and, seeing where she was, began to blame Mrs. Bear for it all, just
as if she were a Mohawk.

Ali, yes. Well, Master Lox, seeing them fighting in a great rage, burst
out laughing, so that he actually burst himself, and fell down dead with
delight. It was a regular side-splitter. When my grandfather said *that*
we *always* laughed.

In the morning, when the women came out, there lay a dead devil at the
door. He must indeed have looked like a Raccoon this time; but whatever
he was, they took him, skinned him, and dressed him for breakfast. Then
the kettle was hung and the water boiled, and they popped him in. But as
soon as it began to scald he began to come to life. In a minute he was
all together again, alive and well, and with one good leap went clear of
the kettle. Rushing out of the lodge, he grabbed his skin, which hung on
a bush outside, put it on, and in ten seconds was safe in the greenwood.
He just saved himself with a whole skin.

Now Master Lox had precious little time, you will say, to do any more
mischief between his coming to life and running away; yet, short as the
allowance was, he made a great deal of it. For even while jumping out
his wits for wickedness came to him, and he just kicked the edge of the
pot, so that it spilled all the scalding hot water into the fire, and
threw up the ashes with a great splutter. They flew into the eyes of
Dame Bear and blinded her.

Now this was hard on the old lady. She could not

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

go out hunting, or set traps, or fish any more; and her partner, being
mean, kept all the nice morsels for herself. Mrs. Bear only got the
leanest and poorest of the meat, though there was plenty of the best. As
my grandfather used to say, Mrs. Bear might have fared better if she had
used her eyes earlier.

One day, when she was sitting alone in the wigwam, Mrs. Bear began to
remember all she had ever heard about eyes, and it came into her head
that sometimes they were closed up in such a way that clever folk could
cut them open again. So she got her knife and sharpened it, and,
carefully cutting a little, saw the light of day. Then she was glad
indeed, and with a little more cutting found that she could see as well
as ever. And as good luck does not come single, the very first thing she
beheld was an abundance of beautiful fat venison, fish, and maple-sugar
hung up overhead.

Dame Bear said nothing about her having recovered her eyesight. She
watched all the cooking going on, and saw the daintiest dinner, which
all went into one platter, and a very poor lot of bones and scraps
placed in another. Then, when she was called to eat, she simply said to
the other woman, who kept the best, "Well, you have done well for
yourself!"

The other saw that Mrs. Bear had recovered her sight. She was
frightened, for Dame Bear was by far the better man of the two. So she
cried out, "Bless me! what a mistake I've made! Why, I gave you the
wrong dish. You know, my dear sister,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

that I always give you the best because you are blind."

My grandfather said that after this Mrs. Bear kept her eyes open on
people in two ways. And it always made us laugh, *that* did.

 

The Spirit of Mischief in these stories is sometimes Lox, the Wolverine;
at others the Raccoon, or the Badger. Their adventures are
interchangeable. But the character is always the same, and it is much
like that of Loki. Now Loki is Fire; and it may be observed in this
legend that the wolverine or raccoon comes to life when thrown into
scalding water, and that in another narrative Lox dies for want of fire;
in another he is pricked by thorns and stung by ants. "We must," says C.
F. Keary, in his Mythology of the Eddas, "admit that the constant
appearance of thorn-hedges, pricking with a sleep-thorn (Lox's thorns
are his bed), in German and Norse legends, is a mythical way of
expressing the idea of the funeral *fire*."

The first thing that the Lox-Raccoon does in this tale, on coming to
life, is to upset a pot into the ashes for mischief's sake. And the very
first exploit of the magic deer, made by the evil spirits and sorcerers
in the Kalevala (Runes XIII.), is thus set forth:

"Then the Hüsi stag went bounding,  
Bounding to the land of Pohja,  
Till he reached the fields of Lapland.  
Passing there before a cabin (*goatte*),  
With a single kick while running <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>  
He upset the boiling kettle,  
So that all the meat went rolling,  
Rolling rained in the ashes,  
And the soup upon the hearth-stone."

This is, in both cases, the very first act of an animal, created and
living only for mischief, on coming to a magic or artificial life.

The legends of Finland and Lapland are as important as the Norse to
explain the origin of our Indian mythology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Lox came to Grief by trying to catch a Salmon](al37.md)
