[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al36)  [Next](al38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### How Lox came to Grief by trying to catch a Salmon.

(Passamaquoddy.)

Kusk, the Crane, had two brothers. One of these was Lox, the Wolverine,
or Indian Devil. And his other brother was Koskomines, the Blue Jay.

Kusk was very lazy, and one day, being hungry, thought he would go and
get a dinner from Lox. Lox served him a kind of pudding-soup in a broad,
flat platter. Poor Kusk could hardly get a mouthful, while Lox lapped it
all up with ease.

Soon after, Kusk made a fine soup, and invited Lox to dinner. This he
served up in a jug, a long cylinder. None of it had Lox. Kusk ate it
all.

The next day the pair went to dine with Blue Jay. Blue Jay said, "Wait
till I get our food." Then he ran out on a bough of a tree which spread
over a river, and in a minute fished out a large salmon. "Truly,"
thought Lox, "that is easy to do, and I can do it."

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

So the next day he invited the Blue Jay and Crane to feed with him. Then
he, too, ran down to the river and out on a tree, and, seeing a fine
salmon, caught at it with his claws. but he had not learned the art, and
so fell into the river, and was swept away by the rushing current.

 

This is one of Æsop's fables Indianized and oddly eked out with a
fragment from a myth attributed to both Manobozho and the Wabanaki
Rabbit. As the Wolverine has a great resemblance to Loki, it may be here
observed that, while he dies in trying to catch a salmon, "Loki, in the
likeness of a salmon, cast himself into the waterfall of Frânângr,"
which was effectively his last act in life before being captured by the
gods, as told in the Edda. Otter, in the Edda, caught a salmon, and was
then caught by Loki. There is, of course, great confusion here, but the
Indian tale is a mere fragment, carelessly pieced and indifferently
told. Lox is, like Loki, *fire*, and perishes by water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Master Lox as a Raccoon killed the Pear and the Black Cats,
and performed other Notable Feats of Skill, all to his Great
Discredit](al38.md)
