[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al39)  [Next](al41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### The Mischief Maker. A Tradition of the Origin of the Mythology of the Senecas. A Lox Legend.

(Seneca.)

An Indian mischief maker was once roving about. He saw that he was
approaching a village, and said, "How can I attract attention?"

Seeing two girls coming from the wigwams, he pulled up a wild plum-bush
and placed it upon his head, the roots clasping about his chin.

"It will be strange to see a plum-tree on my head, bearing ripe fruit.
These girls will want trees also." So he thought.

The tree shook as he walked, and many plums fell to the ground.

The girls wondered greatly at the strange man with the tree. They
admired it, and said they, too, would like to be always supplied with
fruit in such a manner.

"I can manage that," he replied. So he pulled up a bush for each, and
planted them on their heads. The plums were delicious, and grew as fast
as they were plucked; and the girls stepped along proudly, for they had
something which certainly no girls ever had before.

The Mischief Maker went on to the village. On the way he reflected,
"There is no such thing in the world as a plum-tree growing on a man's
head. I will take this off." He did so, and, on entering the village,
gave a loud signal (a whoop). All the people

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

listened, and the chiefs sent messengers to inquire what news he
brought.

He said, "I have seen a very strange sight. As I was coming hither I saw
two girls walking. Trees grew on their heads; the boughs were covered
with plums, and the roots, which came through their hair, were fastened
about their necks. They were beautiful, and seemed to be very happy."

"We will go and see them!" cried the women.

They had not gone far before they saw one of the girls lying on the
ground, while the other pulled at the tree on her head. The roots gave
way and the tree came out, but all the hair came with it also. Then the
other lay down, and her friend in turn pulled the tree from her head.
They were very angry, and said, "If we meet with the man who played us
this trick we will punish him."

When the women who had gathered round them learned how the trees had
been fastened by magic upon the girls' heads, they returned to the
village, resolved to chastise the man who had played the trick. But when
they reached home he was gone.

Gone far and away to another town. Before reaching it he sat down, and
said, "Now I will show these people also what I can do." He went a
little distance into the woods, where he found a wigwam. A woman with a
bucket in her hand came from it. He saw that as she passed along she
reached high with one hand, and felt her way by a thong which ran from
tree to tree till it ended at a spring of cold water. She

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

went on, filled her bucket, and so returned. Then another woman after
her did the same.

"They must be blind," said the Mischief Maker. "I will have some fun
with them." And so it was. There lived in that wigwam five blind
sisters.

Then he untied the thong from the tree near the spring and fastened it
to another, where there was no water. Then a third blind woman came with
a bucket, and followed the line to the end, but found no water. She
returned to the wigwam, and said, "The spring is dried up."

"No, it isn't," replied one of the sisters, who was stirring pudding
over the fire. "You say that because you are too lazy to bring water;
you never work. Here, do you stir the pudding, and let me go for water."

The Mischief Maker heard all this, and made haste to tie the end of the
thong where it belonged. The blind woman filled her bucket, and when she
returned said to her sister, "There, you lazy creature, I found the
water!"

By this time the Mischief Maker was in the house, and slipping quietly
up to the fire he dipped out some of the pudding and threw it, scalding
hot, into the face of the scolding woman, who cried in a rage,--

"You throw hot pudding at me, do you?"

"No, I did not throw any at you," replied the sister.

Then the Mischief Maker threw some into her face. She screamed, being
very angry.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

"You mean thing! You threw hot pudding at me, when I did you no harm."

"I didn't throw any!" said the other, in a rage.

"Yes, you *did*, you mean thing!"

"Stop! stop!" cried the others. Just then hot pudding flew in all their
faces; they had a terrible quarrel, and the Mischief Maker left them to
settle it among themselves as they could.

He entered the village near by, and gave the usual signal for news. The
runners came out and met him; the chiefs and all the people assembled,
lining the path on both sides for a long way. They asked, "What news do
you bring?"

He replied, "I come from a village where there is great distress. A
pestilence visited the people. The medicine man could not cure the sick;
till I came there was no remedy; the tribe was becoming very small. But
I told them the remedy, and now they are getting well. I have come to
tell you to prepare for the pestilence: it will soon be here; it is
flying like the wind, and there is only one remedy."

"What is it? what is it? what is it?" interrupted the people.

He answered, "Every man must embrace the woman who is next to him at
this very instant; kiss her, quick, immediately!"

They all did so on the spot, he with the rest.

As he was leaving them an elderly man came to him and whispered, "Are
you going to do this thing again at the next village? If you are I
should like

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

to be on hand. I didn't get any girl myself here. The woman I went for
dodged me, and said she had rather have the pestilence, and death too,
than have me kiss her. Is the operation to be repeated?"

The Mischief Maker said that it certainly would be, about the middle of
the morrow forenoon.

"Then I will start now," said the middle-aged man, "for I am lame, and
it will take me all night to get there."

So he hurried on, and at daylight entered the village. He found a
wigwam, by which several beautiful Indian girls were pounding corn in a
great wooden mortar. He sat down by them. He could hardly take his eyes
from them, they were so charming, and they wondered at his strange
behavior.

He talked with them, and said, "My eyelids quiver, and by that I know
that some great and strange news will soon be brought to this tribe.
Hark!"--here he moved up towards the one whom he most admired,--"did you
not hear a signal?"

"No," they replied.

The middle-aged man became very uneasy. Suddenly the girls gave a cry,
and dropped their corn pestles. A voice was heard afar; the runners
leaped and flew, the chiefs and people went forth. With them went the
girls and the middle-aged man, who took great pains to keep very near
his chosen one, so as to lose no time in applying the remedy for the
pestilence when the Mischief Maker should give the signal. He was
determined that a life should not be lost if he could prevent it.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

The Stranger went through his story as at the other village. The people
became very much excited. They cried out to know the remedy, and the old
bachelor drew nearer to the pretty girl.

"The only remedy for the pestilence is for every woman t*o knock down
the man who is nearest her*."

The women began to knock down, and the first to fall was the too
familiar old bachelor. So the Mischief Maker waited no longer than to
see the whole town in one general and bitter fight, tooth and nail,
tomahawk and scalper, and then ran at the top of his speed far away and
fleet, to find another village. Then the people, finding they had been
tricked, said, as people generally do on such occasions, "If we had that
fellow here, wouldn't we pay him up for this?"

The Mischief Maker was greatly pleased at his success. It was nearly
dark when he stopped, and said, "I will not enter the next village
to-night; I will camp here in the woods." So he had piled up logs for a
fire, and was just about to strike a light, when he saw a stranger
approaching. "Camp with me here over night," said the Mischief Maker,
"and we will go to the village in the morning."

So they ate and smoked their pipes, and told stories till it was very
late. But the stranger did not seem to tire; nay, he even proposed to
tell stories all night long. The Mischief Maker looked at him aslant.

"My friend," he said, "can you tell me of what wood my back-log is?"

"Hickory?" inquired the stranger.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

"No, not hickory."

"Maple?"

"No, not maple."

"White oak?"

"No, not white oak."

"Black walnut?"

"No, not black walnut."

"Moosewood?"

"No, not moosewood."

"Ash?"

"No, not ash."

"Pine?"

"No, not Pine."

"Cedar?"

"No, not cedar."

"Birch?"

The stranger began to yawn, but he kept on guessing. Then his head
nodded. By the time he had found out that it was slippery elm he was
sound asleep.

"This fellow deserves punishment," remarked the Mischief Maker. "He is
an enemy to mankind." Here he adroitly put some sticky clay on the
sleeper's eyes, and departed. When the stranger awoke he thought himself
still fast asleep in darkness, and then that he was blind.

"If ever I meet with that fellow again," he said, "I'll punish him!"

The Mischief Maker played so many pranks that all the tribes sent out
runners to catch him. He heard

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

their whoops in every forest. He knew that he was being hunted down. He
hurried on, and once at night hid in a cave under a rock. The runners
did not quite overtake him, but they saw that his tracks were fresh, and
thought they might catch him in the morning. In the morning he was up
and far away long before they awoke. The next night he hid again in a
hollow log. In the middle of the afternoon of the next day he heard the
whoops of the pursuers very near, and knew that they were gaining fast
on him. He climbed a thickly limbed tree, and hid in the top. Here the
runners lost his track, because he had broken the weeds and bushes down
beyond the tree, as if he had gone further on. They ran for a long
distance. Then they returned, and camped and built a fire under the
tree.

The smoke crept up among the branches and curled above, and rose in a
straight column to the sky. The fugitive sailed away on the smoke, going
up and up,--past beautiful lakes and hunting-grounds stocked with deer,
large fields of corn and beans, tobacco and squashes; past great
companies of handsome Indians, whose wigwams were hung full of dried
venison and bear's meat. And so he went on and up to the wigwam. of the
Great Chief.

Here he rested. He remained for a hundred moons observing the customs of
the people and learning their language. One morning the Great Chief told
him that he must return to his own people. He disliked to do this, for
he was very happy in the new

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

place. The Chief said, "These are the happy hunting-grounds. We have
admitted you that you may know how and what to teach your people, that
they may get here. Go, and if you do what I tell you, you may return to
remain forever. You have not been allowed to come here to remain, but
only to observe. When you come again, you shall join us in all things.
You shall hunt and fish then, and have whatever you wish. But return
now, and teach what you have learned here."

A cloud of smoke in the form of a great eagle came to him, and, seated
on its back, he was borne down to the top of the tree from which he had
risen. He opened his eyes. The sun was shining. His pursuers had gone
away. He descended and traveled on. His mind was filled with what he had
seen. He said, "I will no longer play tricks, but tell the people about
what I learned in the happy hunting-grounds."

After a long journey he drew near a village. He gave the common signal.
Runners came to meet him. The head chief and all the people came to
hear. He was asked, "What news do you bring us?

He said, "I that was the Mischief Maker am the Peace Maker now. The
Great Spirit took me to the happy hunting-grounds, and I am sent back to
tell you how to get there." Then the Peace Maker described all he had
seen. The people built a great fire and danced around it, and shouted as
they had never done before. Then he said, "This is the message I bring
you."

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

So the people sat in a great circle round the fire and listened. He
spoke:—

"The Great Spirit is unseen, but he is about us. He will not forsake us.
He rules all things for us. He will take care of us. He told me that we
should return thanks to him, for he changes the seasons, and makes corn
and beans and squashes grow for us. He is displeased when we kill our
brothers. He hopes that we will not forget him. He will never die. His
name is *Ha-wen-ni-yu*,--the Ruler. He bids us keep away from his wicked
brother, whose name is *Ha-ne-go-ate-geh*, the Evil-Minded. He is very
bad. He brings pestilence and fevers, and lizards and poisonous weeds.
He destroys peace, and brings war. Ha-wen-ni-yu will care for us if we
trust in him. Obey his words, and Ha-ne-go-ate-geh will never harm us.

"The Great Spirit, has messengers, who aid him in his work. They watch
over the people. They take care of the mother and her new-born babe,
that they receive no harm; they watch over those whom the Evil-Minded
has troubled with disease. The Evil-Minded has messengers who do his
work. They scatter pestilence, and whisper in our ears, and tell us to
go against Ha-wen-ni-yu.

"The Great Spirit has messengers. Heno has a pouch filled with
thunderbolts. Heno gathers the clouds and sends the rain. He is a friend
to the corn and beans and squashes. He also punishes witches and evil
persons. Pray to Heno when you plant, and

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

thank him when you gather your crop. Pray also to Ha-wen-ni-yu, who will
send Heno to care for you. Let Heno be called Grandfather.

"Ga-oh is the Spirit of the Winds. He moves the winds, but he is chained
to a rock. The winds trouble him, and he tries very hard to get free.
When he struggles the winds are forced away from him, and they blow upon
the earth. Sometimes he suffers terrible pain, and then his struggles
are violent. This makes the winds wild, and they do damage on the earth.
Then he feels better and goes to sleep, and the winds become quiet also.

"There is a spirit for the corn, another for beans, another for
squashes. They are sisters, and are very kind to each other. They dwell
together, and live in the fields. They shall be known as
*De-o-ha-ka*,--the keepers of our life.

"There are spirits in the water, in fire, in all the trees and berries,
in herbs and in tobacco, in the grass. They assist the Great Spirit.

"Always return thanks to *Ho-noh-che-noh-keh*, the Guardian Spirits.

"*Ha-ne-go-ate-geh* has messengers. These are the spirits of disease, of
fever, of witches, weeds, and murder. But the Great Spirit will keep
them away from his children.

"This is the message I bring from the happy hunting-grounds. Obey these
words, and the Great Spirit will give you a place there."

So Peace Maker taught the people. They threw

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

tobacco on the fire, according to his instructions, and on the column of
its smoke he was borne away to the happy hunting-grounds. And the people
danced and sang around the dying embers of the council fire.

This is probably an ancient legend with a modern moral. The idea of an
Indian Tyl Eulenspiegel going about the country making mischief recalls
a great part of the adventures of Hiawatha or Manobozho; in fact, it
could not fail to suggest itself to a believer in Shamanism, or pow-wow,
according to which evil spirits and men like them are continually
teasing mankind, out of sheer malice. The reform of the wicked man,
under the influence of the "Great Spirit," is of later days. I do not
believe that the idea of a Great Spirit, in the sense in which it is
generally used by Indians, or is attributed to them, was ever known till
learned from the whites. Nothing is more natural than that during the
two hundred years past intelligent Indians, who felt that there were
many evils in the old barbaric state, yet who were still under the
influence of its myths and poetry, should have made up legends like this
purporting to be revelations. There is one of the kind given in the
Hiawatha Legend, as "Eroneniera, an Indian visit to the Great Spirit,"
which bears on its face every mark of modern manufacture for a purpose.
For these very reasons, however, the tale here given is of great
interest to the impartial historian. I am indebted for it to the
kindness of Colonel T. Wentworth Higginson, who informs me that it was
written by the Rev. J. Wentworth

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

Sanborn (alias O-yo-gah-weh) of Batavia, N. Y.

In the first part we have in the *Mischief Maker* the same character or
principle who appears as Lox, the Wolverine, the Raccoon, and Badger
among the Wabanaki. The setting the blind women together by the ears,
and the dashing of hot pudding, soup, or water in their faces, is
another form of a Lox story, which occurs again in the Kalevala. But the
entire spirit of the tricks is that of Lox, as those of Lox are like
those of Loki. The Rev. Moncure D. Conway once said to me, as Miss E.
Robins has also said in an article in the Atlantic Monthly, that it is
only in the Norse mythology that the Evil One, or devil, is represented
as growing up from or inspired solely by reckless wanton
*mischief*,--the mischief of a bad boy or a monkey. But the very same is
as true of so much of a devil as there is in the Wabanaki mythology. It
is as a grotesque shadow of Loki, but still it is his. The Germans say
the devil is God's ape; the Indian Lox is the Norse devil's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Lox told a Lie](al41.md)
