[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al47)  [Next](al49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

### VII. The Young Man who was Saved by a Rabbit and a Fox.

(Passamaquoddy.)

There dwelt a couple in the woods, far away from other people,--a man
and his wife. They had one boy, who grew up strong and clever. One day
he said, "Father and mother, let me go and see other men and women."
They grieved, but let him go.

He went afar. All night he lay on the ground. In the morning he heard
something coming. He rose and saw it was a Rabbit, who said, "Ha,
friend, where go you?" The boy answered, "To find people." "That is what
I want," replied the Rabbit. "Let us go together."

So they went on for a long time, till they heard voices far off, and
walking quietly came to a village. "Now," said the Rabbit, "steal up
unseen, and listen to them!" The boy did so, and heard the people saying
that a *kewahqu'*, a cannibal monster, was to come the next day to
devour the daughter of their sagamore. And having returned and reported
this to the Rabbit, the latter said to the boy, "Have no fear; go to the
people and tell them that you can save her." He did so, but it was long
before they would listen to him. Yet at last it came to the ears of the
old chief that a strange young man insisted that he could save the girl;
so the chief sent for him, and said, "They tell me that you think you
can deliver my daughter from death. Do so, and she shall be yours."

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

Then he returned to the Rabbit, who said, "They did not send the girl
far away because they know that the demon can follow any track. But I
hope to make a track which he cannot follow. Now do you, as soon as it
shall be dark, bring her to this place." The young man did so, and the
Rabbit was there with a sled, and in his hand he had two squirrels.
These he smoothed down, and as he did so they grew to be as large as the
largest sled-dogs. Then all three went headlong, like the wind, till
they came to another village.

The Rabbit looked about till he found a certain wigwam, and then peered
through a crevice into it. "This is the place," he said. "Enter." They
did so; then the Rabbit ran away. They found in the cabin an old woman,
who was very kind, but who, on seeing them, burst into tears. "Ah, my
dear grandchildren," <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) she cried,
"your death is following you rapidly, for the kewahqu' is on your track,
and will soon be here. But run down to the river, where you will find
your grandfather camping."

They went, and were joined by the Rabbit, who had spent the time in
making many divergent tracks in the ground. The kewahqu' came. The
tracks delayed him a long time, but at last he found the right one.
Meanwhile the young couple went on, and found an old man by the river.
He said, "Truly

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

you are in great danger, for the kewahqu' is coming. But I will help
you." Saying this, he threw himself into the water, where he floated
with outstretched limbs, and said, "Now, my children, get on me." The
girl feared lest she should fall off, but being reassured mounted, when
he turned into a canoe, which carried them safely across. But when they
turned to look at him, lo! he was no longer a canoe, but an old Duck.
"Now, my dear children," he said, "hasten to the top of yonder old
mountain, high among the gray rocks. There you will find your friend."
They fled to the old gray mountain. The kewahqu' came raging and roaring
in a fury, but however he pursued they were at the foot of the precipice
before him.

There stood the Rabbit. He was holding up a very long pole; no pine was
ever longer. "Climb this," he said. And, as they climbed, it lengthened,
till they left it for the hill, and then scrambled up the rocks. Then
the kewahqu' came yelling and howling horribly. Seeing the fugitives far
above, he swarmed up the pole. With him, too, it grew, and grew rapidly,
till it seemed to be half a mile high. Now the kewahqu' was no such
sorcerer that he could fly; neither had he wings; he must remain on the
pole; and when he came to the top the young man pushed it afar. It fell,
and the monster was killed by the fall thereof.

They went with the squirrel-sledge; they flew through the woods on the
snow by the moonlight; they were very glad. And at last they came to the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

girl's village, when the Rabbit said, "Now, friend, good-by. Yet there
is more trouble coming, and when it is with you I and mine will aid you.
So farewell." And when they were home again it all appeared like a
dream. Then the wedding feast was held, and all seemed well.

But the young men of the village hated the youth, and desired to kill
him, that they might take his wife. They persuaded him to go with them
fishing on the sea. Then they raised a cry, and said, "A whale is
chasing us! he is under the canoe!" and suddenly they knocked him
overboard, and paddled away like an arrow in flight.

The young man called for help. A Crow came, and said, "Swim or float as
long as you can. I will bring you aid." He floated a long time. The Crow
returned with a strong cord; the Crow made himself very large; he threw
one end of the cord to the youth; by the other he towed him to a small
island. "I can do no more," he said; "but there is another friend." So
as the youth sat there, starving and freezing, there came to him a Fox.
"Ha, friend," he said, "are you here?" "Yes," replied the youth, "and
dying of hunger." The Fox reflected an instant, and said, Truly I have
no meat; and yet there is a way." So he picked from the ground a blade
of dry grass, and bade the youth eat it. He did so, and found himself a
moose (or a *horse*). Then he fed richly on the young grass till he had
enough, when the Fox gave him a second straw, and he became a man

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

again. "Friend," said the Fox, "there is an Indian village on the
main-land, where there is to be a great feast, a grand dance. Would you
like to be there?" "Indeed I would," replied the youth. "Then wait till
dark, and I will take you there," said the Fox. And when night came he
bade the youth close his eyes and enter the river, and take hold of the
end of his tail, while he should draw. So in the tossing sea they, went
on for hours. *Thought* the youth, "We shall never get there." *Said*
the Fox, "Yes, we will, but keep your eyes shut." So it went on for
another hour, when the youth *thought* again, "We shall never reach
land." *Said* the Fox, "Yes, we shall." However, after a time he opened
his eyes, when they were only ten feet from the shore, and this cost
them more time and trouble than all the previous swim ere they had the
beach under foot.

It was his own village. The festival was for the marriage of his own
wife to one of the young men who had pushed him overboard. Great was his
magic power, great was his anger; he became strong as death. Then he
went to his own wigwam, and his wife, seeing him, cried aloud for joy,
and kissed him and wept all at once. He said, "Be glad, but the hour of
punishment for the men who made these tears is come." So he went to the
sagamore and told him all.

The old chief called for the young men. "Slay them all as you choose,"
he said to his son-in-law; "scalp them." But the youth refused. He
called

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

to the Fox, and got the straws which gave the power to transform men to
beasts. He changed his enemies into bad animals,--one into a porcupine,
one into a hog,--and they were driven into the woods. Thus it was that
the first hog and the first porcupine came into the world.

 

This story, narrated by Tomah Josephs, is partly old Indian and partly
European, but whether the latter element was derived from a French
Canadian or a Norse source I cannot tell, since it is common to both.
The mention of the horse and the bog, or of cattle, does not prove that
a story is not pre-Columbian. The Norsemen had brought cattle of various
descriptions even to New England. It is to be very much regretted that
the first settlers in New England took no pains to ascertain what the
Indians knew of the white men who had preceded them. But modern material
may have easily been added to an old legend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[228:1](al48.htm#fr_129.md) The terms
grandchildren, grandmother, etc., do not here signify actual
relationship, but only friendship between elderly and young people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Chenoo, or the, Story of a Cannibal with an Icy
Heart](al49.md)
