[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al48)  [Next](al50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

# THE CHENOO LEGENDS.

### I. The Chenoo, or the, Story of a Cannibal with an Icy Heart.

(Micmac and Passamaquoddy.)

OF the old time. An Indian, with his wife and their little boy, went one
autumn far away to hunt in the northwest. And having found a fit place
to pass the winter, they built a wigwam. The man brought home the game,
the woman dressed and dried the meat, the small boy played about
shooting birds with bow and arrow; in Indian-wise all went well.

One afternoon, when the man was away and the wife gathering wood, she
heard a rustling in the bushes, as though some beast were brushing
through them, and, looking up, she saw with horror something worse than
the worst she had feared. It was an awful face glaring at her,--a
something made of devil, man, and beast in their most dreadful forms. It
was like a haggard old man, with wolfish eyes; he was stark naked; his
shoulders and lips were gnawed away, as if, when mad with hunger, he had
eaten his own flesh. He carried a bundle on his back. The woman had
heard of the terrible Chenoo, the being who comes from the far, icy
north, a creature who is a man grown to be both devil and cannibal, and
saw at once that this was one of them.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

Truly she was in trouble; but dire need gives quick wit, as it was with
this woman, who, instead of showing fear, ran up and addressed him with
fair words, as "My dear father," pretending surprise and joy, and,
telling him how glad her heart was, asked where he had been so long. The
Chenoo was amazed beyond measure at such a greeting where he expected
yells and prayers, and in mute wonder let himself be led into the
wigwam.

She was a wise and good woman. She took him in; she said she was sorry
to see him so woe-begone; she pitied his sad state; she brought a suit
of her husband's clothes; she told him to dress himself and be cleaned.
He did as she bade. He sat by the side of the wigwam, and looked surly
and sad, but kept quiet. It was all a new thing to him.

She arose and went out. She kept gathering sticks.

The Chenoo rose and followed her. She was in great fear. "Now," she
thought, "my death is near; now he will kill and devour me."

The Chenoo came to her. He said, "Give me the axe!" She gave it, and he
began to cut down the trees. Man never saw such chopping! The great
pines fell right and left, like summer saplings; the boughs were hewed
and split as if by a tempest. She cried out, "*Noo, tabeagul
boohsoogul*!" "My father, there is enough!" <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130.md) He laid down the axe; he walked into the
wigwam and sat down, always in

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

grim silence. The woman gathered her wood, and remained as silent on the
opposite side.

She heard her husband coming. She ran out and told him all. She asked
him to do as she was doing. He thought it well. He went in and spoke
kindly. He said, "*N'chilch*," "My father-in-law," and asked where he
had been so long. The Chenoo stared in amazement, but when he heard the
man talk of all that had happened for years his fierce face grew
gentler.

They had their meal; they offered him food, but he hardly touched it. He
lay down to sleep. The man and his wife kept awake in terror. When the
fire burned up, and it became warm, the Chenoo asked that a screen
should be placed before him. He was from the ice; he could not endure
heat.

For three days he stayed in the wigwam; for three days he was sullen and
grim; he hardly ate. Then he seemed to change. He spoke to the woman; he
asked her if she had any tallow. She told him they had much. He filled a
large kettle; there was a gallon of it. He put it on the fire. When it
was scalding hot he drank it all off at a draught.

He became sick; he grew pale. He cast up all the horrors and
abominations of earth, things appalling to every sense. When all was
over he seemed changed. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131.md)

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He lay down and
slept. When he awoke he asked for food, and ate much. From that time he
was kind and good. They feared him no more.

They lived on meat such as Indians prepare. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132.md) The Chenoo was tired of it. One day he
said, "*N'toos*" (my daughter), "have you no *pela weoos*?" (fresh
meat). She said, "No." When her husband returned the Chenoo saw that
there was black mud on his snow-shoes. He asked him if there was a
spring of water near. The friend said there was one half a day's journey
distant. "We must go there to-morrow," said the Chenoo.

And they went together, very early. The Indian was fleet in such
running. But the old man, who seemed so wasted and worn, went on his
snow-shoes like the wind. They came to the spring. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_133.md) It was large and beautiful; the snow was
all melted away around it; the border was flat and green. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_134.md)

 

<span id="img_23700"></span> ![THE CHENOO AND THE
LIZARD](img/23700.jpg.md)  
THE CHENOO AND THE LIZARD

 

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

Then the Chenoo stripped himself, and danced around the spring his magic
dance; and soon the water began to foam, and anon to rise and fall, as
if some monster below were heaving in accord with the steps and the
song. The Chenoo danced faster and wilder; then the head of an immense
*Taktalok*, or lizard, rose above the surface. The old man killed it
with a blow of his hatchet. Dragging it out he began again to dance. He
brought out another, the female, not so large, but still heavy as an
elk. They were small spring lizards, but the Chenook had conjured them;
by his magic they were made into monsters.

He dressed the game; he cut it up. He took the heads and feet and tails
and all that he did not want, and cast them back into the spring. "They
will grow again into many lizards," he said. When the meat was trimmed
it looked like that of the bear. He bound it together with withes; he
took it on his shoulders; he ran like the wind; his load was nothing.

The Indian was a great runner; in all the land was not his like; but now
he lagged far behind. "Can you go no faster than that?" asked the
Chenoo. "The sun is setting; the red will be black anon. At this rate it
will be dark ere we get home. Get on my shoulders."

The Indian mounted on the load. The Chenoo bade him hold his head low,
so that he could not be knocked off by the branches. "Brace your feet,"
he said, "so as to be steady." Then the old man flew like the
wind,--*nebe sokano'v'jal samastukteskugul* 

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

*chel wegwasumug wegul*; the bushes whistled as they flew past them.
They got home before sunset.

The wife was afraid to touch such meat. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135.md) But her husband was persuaded to eat of
it. It was like bear's meat. The Chenoo fed on it. So they all lived as
friends.

Then the spring was at hand. One day the Chenoo told them that something
terrible would soon come to pass. An enemy, a Chenoo, a woman, was
coming like wind, yes--on the wind--from the north to kill him. There
could be no escape from the battle. She would be far more furious, mad,
and cruel than any male, even one of his own cruel race, could be. He
knew not how the battle would end; but the man and his wife must be put
in a place of safety. To keep from hearing the terrible war-whoops of
the Chenoo, which is death to mortals, their ears must be closed. They
must hide themselves in a cave.

Then he sent the woman for the bundle which he had brought with him, and
which had hung untouched on a branch of a tree since he had been with
them. And he said if she found aught in it offensive to her to throw it
away, but to certainly bring him a smaller bundle which was within the
other. So she went and opened it, and that which she found therein was a
pair of human legs and feet, the remains of some earlier horrid meal.
She threw them far away. The small bundle she brought to him.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

The Chenoo opened it and took from it a pair of horns,--horns of the
*chepitchcalm*, or dragon. One of them has two branches; the other is
straight and smooth. <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136.md) They were
golden-bright. He gave the straight horn to the Indian; he kept the
other. He said that these were magical weapons, and the only ones of any
use in the coming fight. So they waited for the foe.

And the third day came. The Chenoo was fierce and bold; he listened; he
had no fear. He heard the long and awful scream--like nothing of
earth--of the enemy, as she sped through the air far away in the icy
north, long ere the others could hear it. And the manner of it was this:
that if they without harm should live after bearing the first deadly
yell of the enemy they could take no harm, and if they did but hear the
answering shout of their friend all would be well with them. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137.md) But he said, "Should you hear me call
for help, then hasten with the horn, and you may save my life."

They did as he bade: they stopped their ears; they hid in a deep hole
dug in the ground. All at once the cry of the foe burst on them like
screaming thunder; their ears rang with pain: they were well-nigh

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

killed, for all the care they had taken. But then they heard the
answering cry of their friend, and were no longer in danger from mere
noise.

The battle begun, the fight was fearful. The monsters, by their magic
with their rage, rose to the size of mountains. The tall pines were torn
up, the ground trembled as in an earthquake, rocks crashed upon rocks,
the conflict deepened and darkened; no tempest was ever so terrible.
Then the male Chenoo was heard crying: "*N'loosook*! *choogooye*! *abog
unumooe*!" "My son-in-law, come and help me!"

He ran to the fight. What he saw was terrible! The Chenoos, who upright
would have risen far above the clouds as giants of hideous form, were
struggling on the ground. The female seemed to be the conqueror. She was
holding her foe down, she knelt on him, she was doing all she could to
thrust her dragon's horn into his ear. And he, to avoid death, was
moving his head rapidly from side to side, while she, mocking his cries,
said, "You have no son-in-law to help you." *Neen nabujjeole*, "I'll
take your cursed life, <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138.md) and eat
your liver."

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

The Indian was so small by these giants that the stranger did not notice
him. "Now," said his friend, "thrust the horn into her ear" He did this
with a well-directed blow; he struck hard; the point entered her head.
At the touch it sprouted quick as a flash of lightning, it darted
through the head, it came out of the other ear, it had become like a
long pole. It touched the ground, it struck downward, it took deep and
firm root.

The male Chenoo bade him raise the other end of the horn and place it
against a large tree. He did so. It coiled itself round the tree like a
snake, it grew rapidly; the enemy was held hard and fast. Then the two
began to dispatch her. It was long and weary work. Such a being, to be
killed at all, must be hewed into small pieces; flesh and bones must all
be utterly consumed by fire. Should the least fragment remain unburnt,
from it would spring a grown Chenoo, with all the force and fire of the
first. <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139.md)

The fury of battle past, the Chenoos had become of their usual size. The
victor hewed the enemy to small pieces, to be revenged for the insult
and threat

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

as to eating his liver. He, having roasted that part of his captive, ate
it before her; while she was yet alive he did this. He told her she was
served as she would have served him.

But the hardest task of all was to come. It was to burn or melt the
heart. It was of ice, and more than ice: as much colder as ice is colder
than fire, as much harder as ice is harder than water. When placed in
the fire it put out the flame, yet by long burning it melted slowly,
until they at last broke it to fragments with a hatchet, and then melted
these. So they returned to the camp.

Spring came. The snows of winter, as water, ran down the rivers to the
sea; the ice and snow which had encamped on the inland hills sought the
shore. So did the Indian and his wife; the Chenoo, with softened soul,
went with them. Now he was becoming a man like other men. Before going
they built a canoe for the old man: they did not cover it with birch
bark; they made it of moose-skin. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md)
In it they placed a part of their venison and skins. The Chenoo took his
place in it; they took the lead, he followed.

And after winding on with the river, down rapids and under
forest-boughs, they came out into the sunshine,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

on a broad, beautiful lake. But suddenly, when midway in the water, the
Chenoo laid flat in the canoe, as if to hide himself. And to explain
this he said that he had just then been discovered by another Chenoo,
who was standing on the top of a mountain, whose dim blue outline could
just be seen stretching far away to the north. "He has seen me," he
said, "but he cannot see you. Nor can he behold me now; but should he
discover me again, his wrath will be roused. Then he will attack me; I
know not who might conquer. I prefer peace."

So he lay bidden, and they took his canoe in tow. But when they had
crossed the lake and come to the river again, the Chenoo said that he
could not travel further by water. He would walk the woods, but sail on
streams no more. So they told him where they meant to camp that night.
He started over mountains and through woods and up rocks, a far,
round-about journey. And the man and his wife went down the river in a
spring freshet, headlong with the rapids. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141.md) But when they had paddled round the
point where they meant to pass the night, they saw smoke rising among
the trees, and on landing they found the Chenoo sleeping soundly by the
fire which had been built for them.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

This he repeated for several days. But as they went south a great change
came over him. He was a being of the north. Ice and snow had no effect
on him, but he could not endure the soft airs of summer. He grew weaker
and weaker; when they had reached their village he had to be carried
like a little child. He had grown gentle. His fierce and formidable face
was now like that of a man. His wounds had healed; his teeth no longer
grinned wildly all the time. The people gathered round him in wonder.

He was dying. This was after the white men had come. They sent for a
priest. He found the Chenoo as ignorant of all religion as a wild beast.
At first he would repel the father in anger. Then he listened and
learned the truth. So the old heathen's heart changed; he was deeply
moved. He asked to be baptized, and as the first tear which he had ever
shed in all his life came to his eyes he died. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142.md)

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

As there is actually a tribe of Indians in the Northwest called Chenoo,
there can be little doubt as to the derivation of the name. Such a
character could have originated, as I have said, only in the icy north;
it could never have grown in the milder regions of the west and south.
But the Chenoo, the monstrous, ferocious cannibal giant, with an icy
heart, is the central figure of the evil supernatural beings of the
north. The Schoolcraft traditions and Hiawatha have little to say of
Titans whose heads top the clouds, who tear up forests and rend rocks,
and change the whole face of Nature in their hideous battles or horrible
revels. But such scenes are continually described by the Passamaquoddy
and Micmac story-tellers, and they would be natural enough to
Greenlanders, familiar with whales, icebergs, frozen wastes, long winter
nights, and all the frozen desolation of the north.

There is a mystery connected with the *eating of the liver*, which is to
be explained, like many other Indian mysteries, by having recourse to
the Eskimo Shamanism. "In Greenland a man who has been murdered can
revenge himself by *rushing into* him," that is, entering his soul,
which can only be prevented by eating a piece of his liver." (Rink, T.
and T. of the Eskimo, page 45.) The Chenoo is in all essentials
identical with the *Kivigtok* of Greenland, "a man who has fled mankind,
and acquired extraordinary mental and physical powers. The story which I
have here

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

given is probably that of the Eskimo tale of the Blind Man who recovered
his sight (Rink, page 99), in which a *Kivigtok*, after becoming
incredibly old, returns to mankind to seek a Shaman priest and repent.
In both stories there is a "Chenoo," and in both there is atonement with
mankind and the higher powers.

It may be observed that while the Chenoo is a giant with a heart of ice
as hard as stone, the giant Hrungnir, of the Edda, has a heart of stone.
The Chenoo agrees with the Jötuns in many respects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[234:1](al49.htm#fr_130.md) The tremendous pine
chopper is a character in another Indian tale.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[235:1](al49.htm#fr_131.md) The Chenoo is not only
a cannibal, but a ghoul. He preys on nameless horrors. In this case,
"having yielded to the power of kindness, he has made up his mind to
partake of the food and hospitality of his hosts," "to change his life;
but to adapt his <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> system to the new
regimen, he must thoroughly clear it of the old."--Rand manuscript. This
is a very naive and curious Indian conception of moral reformation. It
appears to be a very ancient Eskimo tale, recast in modern time by some
zealous recent Christian convert.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[236:1](al49.htm#fr_132.md) That is, cured, dried,
smoked, and then packed and pressed in large blocks.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[236:2](al49.htm#fr_133.md) "The Micmacs have two
words for a spring of water: one for summer, *utkuboh*, which means that
the water is cool; the other for winter, *keesoobok*, indicating that it
is warm."--S. T. Rand.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[236:3](al49.htm#fr_134.md) Not uncommon round
warm springs even in midwinter, and among ice and snow.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[238:1](al49.htm#fr_135.md) "The Indians are much
less particular than white men as to food, but they avoid *choojeeck*,
or reptiles."--Rand manuscript.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[239:1](al49.htm#fr_136.md) In the winter of
1882-1883, Tomah Josephs killed a deer whose horns were precisely like
those of the chepitchcalm. as regarded shape.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[239:2](al49.htm#fr_137.md) In all this we clearly
perceive the horrible scream of the *angakok*, or Eskimo Shaman, trained
through years and generations to utter sounds which terrify even brave
men.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[240:1](al49.htm#fr_138.md) It is generally said
that there can be no swearing in Indian, but Mr. Rand corrects this
gross error. "It is a mistake," he writes, "to suppose that the red man
cannot swear in his own tongue." It cannot, of course, be expected that
simple savages can swear like cultivated Christians, but they do the
best they can. They introduce the venom into their speech by inserting
an extra syllable. Thus *nabole* or *nabol'* means, "I will kill you,"
but *nabujeol'* is the equivalent of "I'll take your cursed life,"
though it has not that literal meaning. Having only one <span
id="page_241">p. 241</span> small syllable to swear with, the Indians
are, however, not so profuse and wasteful of profanity as their more
gifted and pious white brethren.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[241:1](al49.htm#fr_139.md) The idea is common to
both Eskimo and Indian that so long as a fragment of a body remains
unburned, the being, man or beast, may, by magic, be revived from it. It
was probably suggested by observing the great vitality and power of
self-production inherent in many lower forms of life, and may have given
rise to the belief in vampires.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[242:1](al49.htm#fr_140.md) "The Indians have
several names for a canoe: *Kwedun* (M.); *A'kweden* (P.); *N'tooal*
(M.), my canoe or my water-craft of any kind; *Mooseoolk*, a canoe
covered with moose-skin (M.); *Skogumoolk* (M.), a new canoe;
*N'canoolk* (M.), an old canoe."--Rand manuscript. To these may be added
the different patterns of canoes peculiar to different tribes, as for
instance the Mohawk, which is broad, with peculiar ends, etc.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[243:1](al49.htm#fr_141.md) One should be familiar
with the almost impassable forests of Maine and Canada, even as they are
at the present day, to properly appreciate the Chenook's journey. As for
the speed of the canoe, I have myself gone down the Kenawha River (Va.),
in a dug-out, at the rate of one hundred miles in a day.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[244:1](al49.htm#fr_142.md) This strange and
touching tale was told to Mr. Rand by a Micmac Indian, Louis Brooks, who
heard it from his grandfather, Samuel Paul, a chief, who died in 1843,
at the age of eighty. He was a living chronicle of ancient traditions.
The Chenoo can be directly identified with the so-called Inlander of the
Greenland Eskimo. He is a cannibal, a giant, a mysterious being who
haunts the horrible and almost unexplored interior. He assumes different
forms; in one shape he is supposed to be a man who has become a recluse
and a misanthrope. But no such being as a Chenoo could ever have been
imagined out of in arctic country. The conception of the heart of
hardest ice and the gradual civilization of the savage by kindness the
tact with which this is done, as only a woman could do it the indication
of the old nature, as shown by eating the liver of his conquered <span
id="page_245">p. 245</span> foe, and his final conversion, display a
genius which is greatly heightened by the simplicity of the narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of the Great Chenoo, as told by the
Passamaquoddies](al50.md)
