[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al52)  [Next](al54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

### How a Hunter visited the Thunder Spirits who dwell in Mount Katahdin.

(Passamaquoddy.)

*N'karnayoo*. Of old times. Once an Indian went forth to hunt. And he
departed from the east branch of the Penobscot, and came to the head of
another branch that leads into the east branch, and this he followed
even to the foot of Mount Katahdin. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) And there he hunted many a day alone,
and met none, till one morning in midwinter he found the track of
snowshoes. So he returned to his camp; but the next day he met with it
again in a far-distant place. And thus it was that, wherever he went,
this track came to him every day. Then -noting this, as a sign to be
observed, he followed it, and it went up the mountain, Katahdin, which,
being interpreted, means "the great mountain," until at last it was lost
in a hard snowshoe road made by many travelers. And since it was hard
and even, he took off his *agahmook* (P.), or snow-shoes, and went ever
on and up with the road; and it was a strange path and strange was its
ending for it stopped just before a high ledge, like an immense wall, on
a platform at its foot. And there

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

were many signs there, as of many people, yet he saw no one. And as he
stayed it seemed to grow stranger and stranger. At last he heard a sound
as of footsteps coming, yet within the wall, when lo! a girl stepped
directly out of the precipice upon the platform. But though she was
beautiful beyond belief, he was afraid. And to his every thought she
answered in words, and that so sweetly and kindly and cleverly that he
was soon without fear, though he saw that she had powerful *m'téoulin*,
or great magic power. And they being soon pleased one with the other,
and wanting each other, she bade him accompany her, and that by walking
directly through the rock. "Have no fear," said she, "but advance
boldly!" So he obeyed, and lo! the rock was as the air, and it gave way
as he went on. And ever as they went the maiden talked to him, answering
his thoughts, so that he spoke not aloud.

And anon they came to a great cavern far within, and there was an old
man seated by a fire, and the old man welcomed him. And he was very
kindly treated by the strange pair all day: in all his life he had never
been so happy. Now as the night drew near, the old man said to his
daughter, "Can you hear aught of your brothers?" Then she went out to
the terrace, and, returning, said, "No." Then anon he asked her again,
and she, going and returning as before, replied, "Now I hear them
coming." Then they listened, when lo! there came, as at the door
without, a crash of thunder with a flash of lightning, and out

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

of the light stepped two young men of great beauty, but like giants,
stupendous and of awful mien. And, like their father, their eyebrows
were of stone, while their cheeks were as rocks.

And the hunter was told by their sister that when they went forth, which
was every few days, their father said to them, "Sons, arise! it is time
now for you to go forth over the world and save our friends. Go not too
near the trees, but if you see aught that is harmful to those whom we
love, strike, and spare not!" Then when they went forth they flew on
high, among the clouds: and thus it is that the Thunder and Lightning,
whose home is in the mighty Katahdin, are made. And when the thunder
strikes, the brothers are shooting at the enemies of their friends.

Now when the day was done the hunter returned to his home, and when
there, found he had been gone seven years. All this I have heard from
the old people who are dead and gone.

 

This tale was told me by Tomah Josephs (P.). It seems to have nothing in
common with the very widely spread myth that the thunder is the flapping
of the wings of a giant bird, and the lightning the flashes of its eyes.
The tradition is probably of Eskimo origin, supernatural beings
partially of stone being common to Greenland and Labrador. There is a
strange but entirely accidental resemblance between this story and Rip
Van Winkle, as in the distant sound of the ninepins like low-muttered
thunder, the hospitable entertainment,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

and finally the seven years as one day. Apparent resemblances are very
deceptive. In the Eskimo mythology the *mersugat* or *kutadlit*, who are
the higher or benevolent spirits, protecting mortals, are distinguished
from the evil ones by dwelling in cliffs, to which there are invisible
entrances.

There is a remarkable resemblance between Katahdin and Hrunguir of the
Edda. Hrungnir has a face of stone; he is unquestionably a mountain
personified, as Miss Larned declares: "His stony head pierces the blue
sky." <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149) Both giants are the typical
great mountain of their respective countries. Hrungnir has also very
great affinity with the Chenoo giant. He has a *stony heart*, an
insatiable appetite, and is cruel and brutal.

The Iroquois have the very stone giants--or, as Schoolcraft calls them,
the stonish giants--themselves, and a very curious picture of them has
been preserved. <span id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150) Of them he
remarks, "Who the giants are intended to symbolize is uncertain. They
are represented as impenetrable by darts." The connection between the
stone giants of the Indians, the Eskimo, and the Norsemen, if not
historical, is at least identical in this, that they all typify the
mountains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[259:1](al53.htm#fr_148) This minuteness of
needless detail is very characteristic of Indian tales. I do not think
that it is introduced for the sake of local color, or to give an air of
truthful seeming, because the Indian simply believes the whole, as it
is. I think the reason may be that, owing to their love of adventure,
they enjoy the mere recitation of topographical details.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[262:1](al53.htm#fr_149) *Tales of the Elder
Edda*, p. 235.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[262:2](al53.htm#fr_150) Vide Cusick's *Five
Nations*, 2d edition, and Schoolcraft's *Indian Tribes*, vol. i. p. 429.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thunder and Lightning Men](al54)
