[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al56)  [Next](al58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

### Ne Hwas, the Mermaid.

A long time ago there was an Indian, with his wife and two daughters.
They lived by a great lake, or the sea, and the mother told her girls
never to go into the water there, for that, if they did, something would
happen to them.

They, however, deceived her repeatedly. When swimming is prohibited it
becomes delightful. The shore of this lake sands away out or slopes to
an island. One day they went to it, leaving their clothes on the beach.
The parents missed them.

The father went to seek them. He saw them swimming far out, and called
to them. The girls swam up to the sand, but could get no further. Their
father asked them why they could not. They cried that they had grown to
be so heavy that it was impossible. They were all slimy; they grew to be
snakes from below the waist. After sinking a few times in this strange
slime they became very handsome, with long black hair and large, bright
black eyes, with silver bands on their neck and arms.

When their father went to get their clothes, they began to sing in the
most exquisite tones:—

"Leave them there  
Do not touch them  
Leave them there!"

Hearing this, their mother began to weep, but the girls kept on:—

"It is all our own fault,  
But do not blame us; <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>  
'T will be none the worse for you.  
When you go in your canoe,  
Then you need not paddle  
We shall carry it along!"

And so it was: when their parents went in the canoe, the girls carried
it safely on everywhere.

One day some Indians saw the girls' clothes on the beach, and so looked
out for the wearers. They found them in the water, and pursued them, and
tried to capture them, but they were so slimy that it was impossible to
take them, till one, catching hold of a mermaid by her long black hair,
cut it off.

Then the girl began to rock the canoe, and threatened to upset it unless
her hair was given to her again. The fellow who had played the trick at
first refused, but as the mermaids, or snake-maids, promised that they
should all be drowned unless this was done, the locks were restored. And
the next day they were heard singing and were seen, and on her who had
lost her hair it was all growing as long as ever.

 

We may very easily detect the hand of Lox, the Mischief Maker, in this
last incident. It was the same trick which Loki played on Sif, the wife
of Odin. That both Lox and Loki were compelled to replace the hair and
make it grow again--the one on the snake-maid, the other on the
goddess--is, if a coincidence, at least a very remarkable one. It is a
rule with little exception that where we have to deal with myths which
have passed into romances or tales, that a

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

which was originally one character becomes many, just as the king who
has but one name and one appearance at court assumes a score when he
descends to disguise of low degree and goes among the people. But when,
in addition to characteristic traits, we have even a single anecdote or
attribute in common, the identification is very far advanced. When not
one, but many, of these coincidences occur, we are in all probability at
the truth. Thus we find in the mythology of the Wabanaki, as in the
Edda, the chief evil being indulging in mere wanton, comic mischief, to
an extent not to be found in the devil of any other race whatever. Here,
in a mythical tale, the same mischief maker steals a snake-girl's hair,
and is compelled to replace it. In the Edda, the corresponding mischief
maker steals the hair of a goddess, and is also forced to make
restitution. Yet this is only one of many such resemblances in these
tales. It will be observed that in both cases the hair of the loser is
made to grow again. But while the incident has in the Edda a meaning, as
appears from its context, it has none in the Indian tale. All that we
can conclude from this is that the Wabanaki tale is subsequent to the
Norse, or taken from it. The incidents of tales are often remembered
when the plot is lost. It is certainly very remarkable that, wherever
the mischief maker occurs in these Indian tales, he in every narrative
does something in common with his Norse prototype.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Woman who loved a Serpent who lived in a Lake](al58)
