[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al59)  [Next](al61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

### Origin of the Black Snakes.

(Passamaquoddy.)

Far away, very far in the north, there dwelt by the border of a great
lake a man and his wife. They had no children, and the woman was very
beautiful and passionate.

The lake was frozen over during the greater part of the year. One day
when the woman cut away the ice, she saw in the water a bright pair of
large eyes looking steadily at her. They charmed her so that she could
not move. Then she distinguished a handsome face; it was that of a fine
slender young man. He came cut of the water. His eyes seemed brighter
and more fascinating than ever; he glittered from head to foot; on his
breast was a large shining silvery plate.

The woman learned that this was At-o-sis, the Serpent, but she returned
his embraces and held conversation with him, and was so charmed with her
lover that she not only met him more than once every day, but even went
forth to see him in the night.

Her husband, noticing these frequent absences, asked her why she went
forth so frequently. She replied, "To get the fresh air."

The weather grew warmer; the ice left the lake; grass and leaves were
growing. Then the woman waited till her husband slept, and stole out
from the man whom she kissed no more, to the lover whom she fondled and
kissed more than ever.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

At last the husband's suspicions being fairly aroused, he resolved to
watch her. To do this he said that he would be absent for three days.
But he returned at the end of the first day, and found that she was
absent. As she came in he observed something like silvery scales on the
logs. He asked what they were. She replied, *Brooches*. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160.md)

He was still dissatisfied, and said that he would be gone for one day.
He went to the top of a hill not far distant, whence he watched her. She
went to the shore, and sat there. By and by there rose up out of the
lake, at a distance, what seemed to be a brightly shining piece of ice.
It came to the strand and rose from the water. It was a very tall and
very handsome man, dressed in silver. His wife clasped the bright
stranger in her arms, kissing him again and again.

The husband was awed by this strange event. He went home, and tried to
persuade his wife to leave the place and to return to her people. This
she refused to do. He departed; he left her forever. But her father and
mother came to find her. They found her there; they dwelt with her.
Every day she brought to them furs and meat. They asked her whence she
got them. "I have another husband," she replied; "one who suits me. The
one I had was bad, and did not use me well. This one brings all the
animals to me." Then she sent them away with many presents,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

telling them not to return until the ice had formed; that was in the
autumn.

When they returned she had become white. She was with young, and soon
gave birth to her offspring. It consisted of many serpents. The parents
went home. As they departed she said to them, "When you come again you
may see me, but you will not know me."

Years after some hunters, roaming that way, remembered the tale, and
looked for the wigwam. It was there, but no one was in it. But all the
woods about the place were full of great black snakes, which would rise
up like a human being and look one in the face, then glide away without
doing any harm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[279:1](al60.htm#fr_160.md) *Nskmahn'l*: coins of
all sizes hammered out by the Indians and made into pin-brooches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventures of the Great Hero Pulowech, or the
Partridge](al61.md)
