[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al61)  [Next](al63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Story of a Partridge and his Wonderful Wigwam.

Once a man was traveling through the woods, and he heard afar off a
sound as of footsteps beating the ground. So he sought to find the
people that made it, and went on for a full week ere he came to them.
And it was a man and his wife dancing about a tree, in the top of which
was a Raccoon. They had, by their

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

constant treading, worn a trench in the ground; indeed, they were in it
up to their waists. <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168.md) Then, being
asked why they did this strange thing, they answered that, being hungry,
they were trying to dance down the tree to catch the Raccoon.

Then the man who had come said, "Truly there is a newer and better way
of felling trees, which has lately come into the land." As they wished
to know what this might be, he showed them how to cut it down, and did
so; making it a condition that if they got the game they might have the
meat and he should get the skill. So when the tree fell they caught the
animal, and the woman, having tanned the skin, gave it to the man, and
he went his way.

And being afar, in a path in the forest, he met another man, and was
greatly amazed at him because he was bearing on his head a house, or a
large birch wigwam of many rooms. He was frightened at first at such a
sight, but the man, putting down his house, shook hands with him, and
seemed to be a right honest good fellow. Then while they smoked and
talked, the Man of the House, seeing the skin of *Hespuns*, or that of
the Raccoon, in the other's belt, said, "Well, that is a fine pelt!
Where did you get it, brother?" And he, answering, told all the story of
the Dancing Man and Wife; whereupon he of the

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> House became
mightily anxious to buy it, offering one thing after another for it, and
at last the House, which was accepted. And, examining it, the buyer was
amazed to find how many rooms it contained, and how full it was of good
furniture. "Truly," said he, "I can never carry this as you do!" "Yes,
you can," replied the *Pil-wee-mon-soo-in* (P., one who belongs
somewhere else,--a stranger). "Do but try it!" So he essayed and lifted
it easily, for he found it as light as any *bassinode* or basket.

So they parted and he went on carrying his cabin till night-fall, when
coming to a hard-wood ridge, near a good spring of water, he resolved to
settle there. <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) And, searching, he
found a room in which there was a very fine bed, covered with a white
bear-skin. <span id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170.md) And as it was very
soft, and he was very weary, he slept well.

In the morning, when he awoke, what was his astonishment and delight to
see above him, hanging to the beams, all kinds of nice
provisions,--venison, hams, ducks, baskets of berries and of
maple-sugar, with many ears of Indian corn. And as he, in his joy,
stretched out his arms and made a jump towards all these dainties,
behold the white bear-skin melted and ran away, for it was the snow of
winter; and his arms

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

spread forth into wings, and he flew up to the food, which was the early
buds of the birch, on which they hung. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171.md) And he was a Partridge, who after the
manner of his kind had been wintering under a snowdrift, and now came
forth to greet the pleasant spring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[291:1](al62.htm#fr_168.md) To dance away the
ground, or walk knee-deep in it, was characteristic of wizards. So was
the hearing of any sound at an apparently incredible distance. To an
Indian mind this tale is weird and wonderful from the first words
thereof.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[292:1](al62.htm#fr_169.md) A hard-wood ridge;
that is, where there is plenty of birch, ash, and such trees as are
necessary for baskets, dishes, canoes, and other Indian wants. Hence it
is mentioned in many tales as a desirable place to live.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[292:2](al62.htm#fr_170.md) A sure indication of
sorcery.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[293:1](al62.htm#fr_171.md) Birch buds are the
food of the partridge. The unexpected ending of this tale signifies the
sudden return of spring. As told by an Indian, it is very effective.
This tale was told me by Tomah Josephs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Partridge built Good Canoes for all the Birds, and a Bad
One for Himself](al63.md)
