[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al63)  [Next](al65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Mournful Mystery of the Partridge-Witch; setting forth how a Young Man died from Love.

Of the olden time. Two brothers went hunting in the autumn, and that as
far as the head waters of the Penobscot, where they remained all winter.
But in March their snow-shoes (*agahmook*, P.) gave out, as did their
moccasins, and they wished that a woman were there to mend them.

When the younger brother returned first to the lodge, the next
day,--which he generally did, to get it ready for the elder,--he was
astonished to find that some one had been there before him, and that,
too, in the housekeeping. For garments had been mended, the place
cleaned and swept, a fire built, and the pot was boiling. He said
nothing of this to his brother;

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

but returning the next day at the same time, found that all had been
attended to, as at first. And again he said nothing; but in the morning,
when he went forth to hunt, he did but go a little way, and, returning,
watched, from a hidden place, the door. And there came a beautiful and
graceful girl, well attired, who entered the wigwam. And he, stepping
softly, looking through a hole in the hut, saw her very busy with his
housekeeping.

Then he entered, and she seemed to be greatly alarmed and confused; but
he calmed her, and they soon became good friends, sporting together very
happily all day long like children, for indeed they were both young.

When the sun's height was little and his shadows long, the girl said, "I
must go now. I hear your brother coming, and I fear him. But I will
return to-morrow. *Addio*!" So she went, and the elder brother knew
nothing of what had happened. The next day she came again, and once more
they played in sunshine and shadow until evening; but ere she went he
sought to persuade her to remain always. And she, as if in doubt,
answered, "Tell thy brother all, and it may be that I will stay and
serve ye both. For I can make the snow-shoes and moccasins which ye so
much need, and also canoes." Then she departed with the day, and the
elder, returning, heard from his brother all that had happened, and
said, "Truly I should be glad to have some one here to take care of the
wigwam and make snow-shoes."

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

So she came in the morning, and hearing from the younger that his
brother had consented to her coming was very glad, and went away, as in
baste. But she returned about noon, drawing a *toboggin* (sled) piled up
with garments and arms, for she was a huntress. Indeed, she could do all
things as few women could, whether it were cooking, needle-work, or
making all that men need. And the winter passed very pleasantly, until
the snow grew soft, and it was time for them to return. Till she came
they had little luck in hunting, but since her coming all had gone well
with them, and they now had a wonderful quantity of furs.

Then they returned in a canoe, going down the river to their village.
But as they came near it the girl grew sad, for she had thrown out her
soul to their home, though they knew it not, by *meelahbi-give*. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173) And suddenly she said, as they came to a
point of land, "Here I must leave. I can go no further. Say nothing of
me to your parents, for your father would have but little love for me."
And the young men sought to persuade her, but she only answered
sorrowfully, "It cannot be." So they came home with their furs, and the
elder was so proud of their luck and their strange adventure that he
could not hold his peace, but told all.

Then his father was very angry, and said, "All my life have I feared
this. Know that this woman was a devil of the woods, a witch of the
Mitche-hant, a sister

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

of the *Oonahgamess* <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174) and of the
*Ke'tahks*." And he spoke so earnestly and so long of this thing that
they were afraid, and the elder, being persuaded by the sire, went forth
to slay her, and the younger followed him afar. So they sought her by
the stream, and found her bathing, and, seeing them, she ran up a little
hill. And, as she ran, the elder shot an arrow at her. Then there was a
strange flurry about her, a fluttering of scattered feathers, and they
saw her fly away as a partridge. Returning, they told all this to their
father, who said, "You did well. I know all about these female devils
who seek to destroy men. Verily this was a she Mikumwess." <span
id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175)

But the younger could not forget her, and longed to see her again; so
one day he went into the woods, and there he indeed found her, and she
was as kind as before. Then he said, "Truly it was not by my goodwill
that my brother shot at you." And she answered, "Well do I know that,
and that it was all by your father; yet I blame him not, for this is an
affair of *N'karnayoo*, the days of old; and even yet it is not at an
end, and the greatest is to come. But let the day be only a day unto
itself; the things of to-morrow are for to-morrow, and those of
yesterday are departed." So they forgot their troubles, and played
together merrily all day long in the woods and in the open places, and
told stories of old times till sunset. And as the

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Kah-kah-goos*, or
Crow, went to his tree, the boy said, "I must return;" and she replied,
"Whenever you would see me, come to the woods. And remember what I say.
Do not marry any one else. For your father wishes you to do so, and he
will speak of it to you, and that soon. Yet it is for your sake only
that I say this." Then she told him word by word all that his father had
said; but he was not astonished, for now he knew that she was not as
other women; but he cared not. And he grew brave and bold, and then he
was above all things. And when she told him that if he should marry
another he would surely die, it was as nothing to him.

Then returning the first thing his father said was, "My son, I have
provided a wife for you, and the wedding must be at once." And he said,
"It is well. Let it be so." Then the bride came. For four days they held
the wedding dance; four days they feasted. But on the last day he said,
"This is the end of it all," and he laid him down on a white bear-skin,
and a great sickness came upon him, and when they brought the bride to
him he was dead.

Truly the father knew what ailed him, and more withal, of which he said
nothing. But he liked the place no longer, and he and his went away
therefrom, and scattered far and wide.

 

This strange story recalls the Undine of La Motte Fouqué. There is in it
an element of mystery and destiny, equal in every way to anything in
German

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

literature. The family secret, touched on but never explained, which
ends in such a death, is, speaking from an artistic point of view, very
skillfully managed. It must be borne in mind that in this, as in most of
these tales, there are associations and chords which make as gold to an
Indian that which is only copper, or at best silver, to the civilized
reader of my translations.

There is a characteristic feature of this story superior to anything in
Undine. It is the growth in the hero, when he knows the worst to come,
of that will, or stoicism, or complete indifference to fate, which the
Indians regard as equivalent to attaining *m'téoulin*, or magic power.
When a man has in him such courage that nothing earthly can do more than
increase it, he has attained to what is in one sense at least *Nirvana*.
From an Algonquin point of view the plot is perfect.

I have given this story accurately as it was told to me by Tomah
Josephs, a Passamaquoddy Indian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[297:1](al64.htm#fr_173) Passamaquoddy:
Clairvoyance, or state of vision.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[298:1](al64.htm#fr_174) P. Goblins and ghosts.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[298:2](al64.htm#fr_175) P. The Mikumwess is a
Robin Goodfellow, who plays pranks on people, or treats them kindly,
according to his caprice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How one of the Partridge's Wives became a Sheldrake-Duck, and why
her Feet and Feathers are Red](al65)
