[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al66)  [Next](al68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

# STORY OF THE THREE STRONG MEN.

(Micmac.)

THERE was a chieftain in the days of yore. He had a great desire for a
poor girl who was a servant, and who worked for him. To win this girl he
first must lose his wife. He took his wife afar into the woods to gather
spruce-gum, and then left her there.

She soon found out that she had lost her way, and, wandering, she lost
it more and more for many days, until she came at last to a bear's den,
where, going in, she found the Chief of all the bears, who welcomed her,
provided for her wants, and furnished her with pleasant food; but as the
meat was raw he went into a neighboring town for fire. And as she lived
with him she was to him in all things as he wished, and as a wife.

So that it came to pass, as time went on, that a new-comer was expected,
and she bade the Bear provide the baby's clothes. And when the
long-expected infant came it was a boy, large, beautiful, and strong; he
was in everything beyond all other boys.

And as the child was born in a strange way, he very soon displayed a
magic power. No baby ever grew so rapidly: when four months old he
wrestled with the Bear and threw him easily upon the floor. And so the
mother saw that he would be a warrior, and the chief of other men.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

She loathed the life she led, and wished to leave, and live as she had
done in days of old. To this the Bear would in nowise consent, and as
her son was human, like herself, he loved his mother best, and thought
with her.

One day he said, "Now I can wrestle well and throw the Bear as often as
I choose. When I next time cast him upon the ground, catch up a club;
the rest remains for you!"

They waited yet a while till he had grown so strong that the Bear was
nothing in his grasp. One day they wrestled as they ever did, and then
the woman, with a vigorous blow, strengthened by hate and famishing
desire of freedom and a better human life, laid him in death upon the
mossy floor.

They went their way back to the chieftain's town, and found him married
to the servant-girl. The mother only spoke, and the wild boy tore down
the wigwam of the Indian chief just with a blow, and then he called
aloud unto the Lightning in the sky above, "Come down to me and help me
in my need! Build a grand wigwam such as man ne'er saw! Build it, I say,
and for my mother here!"

The Lightning came, and with a single flash built such a home as man had
never seen.

And then he said, "Mother, I mean to go and travel everywhere, until I
find another man who is as strong as I. When he is found I will return
to thee."

So on he went afar until he saw a man who lifted up a vast canoe with
many people in it. This he did,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

raising it in the water; but the boy bore it ashore, and lifted it on
land.

And so the two agreed that they would go on together until they found a
third equal to them in strength, if such a man were living anywhere in
all the world.

So traveling by hill and lake, they went, until one day, far in a lonely
land, they saw a man rolling a mighty rock, large as the largest wigwam,
up a hill. But the Bear's son, lifting the stone with ease, threw it
afar over the mountain-top,--threw it afar beyond the rocky range; they
heard it thunder down the depths below.

Then the three strong men went to hunt the moose. He who had tossed the
ship remained in camp to do the cooking, while the others went with bow
and spear afar to find their game.

Now when the sun was at the edge of noon, just balancing to fall, there
came a boy, a little wretched, elfish-looking child, as sad and sickly
as a boy could be, who asked the man for food. He answered him, "Poor
little fellow! there, the pot is full of venison, so go and eat your
fill."

He ate, indeed, the dinner for the three. When he had done he did not
leave a scrap; then walked into the stony mountain-side, as any man
might walk into the fog, and in a second he was seen no more.

Now when the two returned and heard the tale they were right angry,
being hungry men. The man who rolled the stone stayed next in turn, but
when the

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

little fellow came to him he seemed so famished and he shed such tears
that this one also gave him leave to eat. Then, in a single swallow, as
it seemed, he bolted all the food, and yelled aloud with an insulting
laugh. The man, enraged, grappled him by the throat, but the strange boy
flung him away as one would throw a nut, and vanished in the mountain as
before.

Oin the third day the mighty man himself remained at home, and soon the
starveling child came and began to beg, with tears, for food. "Eat,"
said the chief, "as other people eat, and no more tricks, or I will deal
with you." But as it was with him the day before, so it went now; he
swallowed all the meat with the same jeering yell. Then the strong man
closed with the boy. It was an awful strife; they fought together from
the early morn until the sun went down, and then the Elf--for elf he
was--cried out, "I now give in!" So both his arms were tightly bound
behind, and with a long, tough cord of plaited hide the strong man kept
his prey, the lariat fast noosed about his neck. The child went on, the
strong man ever following behind, holding the cord well twisted round
his hand.

And so they went into the mountain-side, and ever on, a long and winding
way, down a deep cavern, on for many a mile,--the light of sorcery
shining from the elf made it all clear,--until at last the guide stopped
in his course, and said:—

"Now list to me. I am the servant of a frightful fiend, a seven-headed
devil, whom I deemed no man

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

could ever conquer, he and I being of equal strength; but I believe that
thou mayst conquer him, since I have found, by bitter proof, that thou
canst conquer me. Here is a staff, the only thing on earth that man way
smite him with and give him pain. Now, do your best; it is all one to me
which of you gains, so one of you be slain, for well I wot 't will be a
roaring fight."

In came the evil being with a scream, and clutched the Indian with teeth
and claws. There, in the magic cavern, many a mile from the sun's rays,
they fought for seven days, the stubborn devil and the stubborn man,
whose savage temper gave him fresher strength with every fresh wound;
the more his blood ran from his body all the more his heart grew harder
with the love of fight, until he beat away the monster's seven heads.
And so he slew him, and the watching elf burst into laughter at the
victory.

"Now," said the Elf, "I have a gift for thee. I have three sisters: all
are beautiful, and all shall be thine own if thou wilt but unbind my
hands." The strong man set him free. And so he led the man to another
cave, and there he saw three girls so strangely fair they seemed to be a
dream. The first, indeed, was very beautiful, and yet as plump as she
was lovely; then the second maid was tall, superb, and most magnificent,
in rarest furs, with richest wampum bands, the very picture of a perfect
bride; but fairer than them both, as much more fair as swans outrival
ducks, the youngest smiled. And the young chieftain chose her for his
own.

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

With the three girls he went into the day. Par on the rocks above him he
could see his two companions, and a sudden thought came to his mind, for
he was quick to think; and so he called, "I say, let down a rope; I have
three girls here, and they cannot climb." And so the two strong men let
down a cord: then the first fairy-maid went up by it, and then the
second. Now the chief cried out, "It is my turn; now you must pull on
me!" And saying this, he tied a heavy stone, just his own weight, unto
the long rope's end, then bid them haul. It rose, but as it came just to
the top the traitors let it fall, as he supposed they would, to murder
him.

And then the chieftain said unto the elf, "You know the mountain and its
winding ways: bear me upon thy back, and that in haste, to where those
fellows are!" The goblin flew, and in an instant he was by their side.

He found the villains in a deadly fight, quarreling for the maids; but
seeing him they ceased to wrestle, upon which he said, "I risked my life
to bring away these girls; I would have given each of you a wife: for
doing this you would have murdered me. Now I could kill you, and you
both deserve death at the stake, vile serpents that you are; but take
your lives,--you are too low for me,--and with them take these women, if
they wish to wed with such incarnate brutes as you!

They went their way; the women followed then, along the forest paths,
and ever on. Into this story they return no more.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

And then the strong man said to his young bride, "I must return unto my
village; then I'll come again to you; await me here." But she, as one to
elfin magic born, replied, "I warn you of a single thing. When you again
are at your wigwam door a small black dog will leap to lick your hand.
Beware, I say; if he succeed in it, you surely will forget me utterly."
As she predicted so it came to pass.

And so she waited in the lonely wood beside the mountain till a month
was gone, and then arose and went to seek her love. All in the early
dawn she reached the town, and found the wigwam of the saga, more. She
sought a neighboring hiding-place, where she might watch unseen, and
found a tree, a broad old ash, which spread its stooping boughs over the
surface of a silent pool.

An old black Indian had a hut hard by. His daughter, coming, looked into
the spring, and saw a lovely face. The simple girl thought it was hers,
her own grown beautiful by sorcery which hung about the place. She flung
away her pail, and said, "Aha! I'll work no more; some chief shall marry
me!" and so she went to smile among the men.

Then came the mother, who beheld the same sweet, smiling, also girlish
face. She, said, "Now I am young and beautiful again; I'll seek another
husband, and at once." She threw her pail afar and went away, losing no
time to smile among the men.

And then in turn the old black Indian came, and looking in the spring
beheld the face. He knew right

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

well that it was not his own, for in his youth he never had been fair.
So looking up above he saw the bride, and bade her come to him; and then
he said, "My wife has gone away; my daughter, too. You were the cause of
it; it is but right that you should take the place my wife has left.
Therefore remain with me and be my own."

He fares but ill who weds unwilling witch. When night came on they laid
them down to sleep, and then the bride murmured a magic prayer, begging
the awful Spirit of the Wind, the giant Eagle of the wilderness, to do
his worst. A fearful tempest blew, and all night long the old black
Indian was out-of-doors, working with all his power to keep the lodge
from being blown away. As soon as he had pinned one sheet of bark into
its place another blew away, and then a tent pole rattling in the rain
bounded afar. It was a weary work, but all night long the young bride
slept in peace, until the morning came, and then he slept.

Then she arose, and, walking to the wood, sat down beside a stream and
sang a song:—

"There are many men in the world,  
But only one is dear to me.  
He is good and brave and strong.  
He swore to love none but me;  
He has forgotten me.  
It was a bad spirit that changed him,  
But I will love none but him."

And as she sat and sang, the sagamore her husband,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

paddling by in his canoe, heard the sweet song intoned in magic
style, <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184) and all at once recalled
what had been lost,--the two strong giants, the cavern and the elf, the
seven-headed monster and the fight, the sisters and the evil-minded men,
and the black dog who leaped to lick his hand: it flashed upon him like
some early dream brought out by sorcery. He saw her sit beside the
stream, and still he heard her song, soft as a magic flute. He went to
her, and in a minute he was won again.

And then she said, "This world is ever false. I know another, let us go
to it." So then again she sang a magic spell, and as she sang they saw
the great Culloo, the giant bird, broad as a thunder cloud, winging his
way towards them. Then he came; they stepped upon him, and he soared
away. But to this earth they never came again.

 

This very singular legend was obtained for me by Mrs. W. Wallace Brown.
It is from the Micmac, and is in the original from beginning to end a
song, or poem. For this reason I have given it a plain metrical form,
neither prose nor poetry, such being quite the character of the
original. But I have not introduced anything not in the original.

This story consists of a very old Indian legend

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

mingled with a European fairy tale drawn through a French-Canadian
source. The incident of the Elf who eats the food of three men is to be
found in another tale. In one version, the bride, finding that her
husband, though utterly deprived by magic of his memory, has married
again, sails away on the great bird, leaving him forever. I have
naturally rejected this senseless termination in favor of one found in
another form.

The calling on the Lightning to build a wigwam is probably a mistake. It
is more likely that it was summoned to destroy the chief's wigwam, but
the narrator, confused with the subject of the hero's strength, changed
the original. The invocations of Lightning, and subsequently of the
Storm Bird are probably entirely Indian, though there are Norse
invocations to Hroesvelgar, or the Eagle of the Northwest, as we read in
Scott's Pirate.

The black whelp or small black dog is in this tale ominous of evil. It
causes oblivion. In the Edda to dream of the same thing is the most evil
of all Atli's bad dreams (vide the second lay of Gudrun, 41):—

"Seemed to me from my hand  
Whelps I let slip.  
Lacking cause of joy;"

and in the very same song (24) he takes a potion which causes oblivion.
But there is even a third point in the Atlamal in Groenlenzku, which
resembles one in the Indian tale. It is where the half enchantress
Kostbera, warns Högni against leaving her:

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

"From home thou art going:  
Give ear to counsel;  
Few are fully prudent;  
Go another time."

In the Norse lay we are told that to dream of a white bear indicates a
storm, but here it means a strange and terrible event. Long before I met
with this, I observed that the introduction, or mention, of a white
bear-skin in these Indian stories invariably intimates some strange
magical change.

But it is most remarkable of all, that, while the poems of the Edda have
nothing but a very few incidents in common with the traditions of the
western tribes, they are inspired throughout with a strange and
mysterious sentiment or *manner* wonderfully like that of the Wabanaki.
As regards literal resemblance the following coincidences may here be
noted.

In a widely spread Norse tale a very small goblin sustains a long and
obstinate contest with an immense white bear.

The Norsemen invoked the Eagle Giant of the Winds, as Scott has shown in
his song of the Reimkennar. The same being is invoked in this legend.

The whelp, as an omen of evil, is mentioned in the Edda. In this tale he
causes forgetfulness. A potion of oblivion is also mentioned in the
Norse poem in close connection with the omen of the dog.

If we accept the termination of this tale as given in the Micmac poem it
amounts to this: A certain woman causes the whelp to lick the hero's
hand.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This causes
forgetfulness. The hero marries her, and thereby loses his first wife.
In the Edda, Brynhild, who has morally the first claim to Sigurd, says
of Crymhild, "She presented to Sigurd the pernicious drink, so that he
no more remembers me." In the saga of Thorstein, Viking's son the hero,
is made by the witch Dis to utterly forget his bride Hunoor.

The Kalmuk tale of How the Schimm-Khan was Slain contains striking
analogies to this of the Three Strong Men. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185) In it the hero associates with three
men, who take turns to cook. Their food is devoured, as in this tale,
every day by a little old witch who is very strong. He overcomes her by
craft. His companions, instead of drawing him up by the rope, as agreed
on, leave him to perish, in order to possess themselves of a treasure.
There can be no doubt as to the Hindoo origin of this and many more
plots found among the red Indians. But a careful study of the Norse
story convinces me that the tale did not come to the Wabanaki through
any other than a Norse source.

Since writing out the foregoing poem, with the comment, I have received
from Louis Mitchell the Penobscot version of it. It is about twice as
long as the Micmac story, and differs from it very materially. In it the
hero conquers the goblin by getting possession of his red cap. In the
Norse tales the same incident occurs in different forms. He then fights
with a copper demon; also with one of silver and another of

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

gold. Each devil, while he is sharpening his sword, exclaims, "Hurry!
hurry! I am hungry!" The last of the three, the *Kche mitche-hant*, or
great devil, has three heads, which replace themselves when cut off; but
the hero summons a lion (*pee'tahlo*) and an eagle, who devour each a
head, when the demon, to save the last, surrenders. There are old
"aboriginal" incidents in this Passamaquoddy tale, but the European
elements predominate to such an extent as to call for the following
remark from the Indian writer:—

"This story is ended. When Indians in it, as they do in many others,
speak of kings and queens or ships and ivory, I think they got it all
from Europe. But perhaps when the Indians came here from Asia they
brought these stories with them. Thus they very often mention ivory,
calling it white bone. They also mention cities. But these things are
not new, for they were handed down from one generation to another."

I have to add that, while the story agrees with an universally spread
Aryan fairy tale, it is very remarkable that it should add to these,
several strictly Eddaic details, such as the white bear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[319:1](al67.htm#fr_184) Not only the words,
but the peculiar intonations of them, were essential to produce the
proper effect of a magic song. An intelligent white man has left it on
record that it required two years to learn one of these incantations of
only a few lines.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[322:1](al67.htm#fr_185) *Sagas from the Far
East*, London, 1873.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. How a Woman Lost a Gun for Fear of the Weewillmekq'](al68)
