[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](al70)  [Next](al72.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

# TALES OF MAGIC.

### M'téoulin, or Indian Magic.

THE study of magic as it is believed in or understood by the Indians of
America is extremely interesting, for it involves that of all
supernaturalism or of all religion whatever. But if we, declining all
question as to the origin of monotheism, limit ourselves definitely to
what is known of Shamanism alone, we shall still have before us an
immense field for investigation. Shamanism is the belief that *all* the
events and accidents of life are caused or influenced by spirits, and as
fear of suffering is in all men, but particularly the savage, the
strongest moral emotion, the natural consequence is a greater fear of
evil invisible beings. The result of it is a faith that everything which
is obscure or invisible is supposed to be the work of mysterious agents,
generally evil. Thus all disease whatever, all suffering, pain, loss, or
disaster, or bad weather, is at once attributed either to a spirit or to
some enemy who practices witchcraft. The Shaman is the priest or doctor,
who professes to be able, by his counter-charms, to counteract or
neutralize this devil's work.

It will be long ere the scholar definitely determines whether Shamanism
as it now exists originated spontaneously

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

in different countries where the same causes were to be found, or
whether it is *historical*; that is, derived from a single source. I
believe that while darkness, hunger, fear, and similar causes could not
fail to create a rude religion anywhere, as Moncure Conway has shown,
yet that the derivation from one beginning, or at least later
modifications from it, has been very great indeed.

Investigation indicates that it was in Assyria, at a very remote age,
that Shamanism had, if not its origin, at least its fullest development.
The reader who will consult Lenormant's work on Chaldean magic will
learn from it that the fear of devils and the art of neutralizing their
power were never carried to such an extent elsewhere as in the Land of
Bel. Now as Shamanism has at the present day its stronghold among the
Turanian races of Central Asia, it may greatly strengthen the theory,
somewhat doubted of late, of the early Accadian predecessors of the
Chaldeans and their Turanian origin, if we can only prove that their
magical religion was the same as that of the Tartars. So far as my
reading has aided me, I am inclined to believe that they are identical.
"Magic" went so far among, the former that, while they discovered
natural remedies for natural ills, they never doubted that one was as
much the result of sorcery as the other. This theory spread everywhere.

Shamanism, or a vague fear of invisible evils and the sorcerer, may
indeed have sprung up independently in Tartary, Central Africa, Finland,
and North America.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But it is almost
incredible that the use of a drum inscribed with magical figures, the
spirit flight of the angakok or Shaman, and twenty other characteristics
of the art should have become, without transmission, common to all these
countries. Shamanism has probably been at the root of all religions;
there was a great deal of it in all those of the Semitic races, and,
admitting this, it is not difficult to see how from Chaldea and Babylon
it may have found its way into Africa, where black savages, who would
have rejected a higher religion, would grasp greedily at what they
sympathized with. The only real difference between the Voodoo and
Pow-wow practices is that the former is, so to speak, the *blacker* and
more revolting. This is because a low state of culture has induced the
believers in it to retain more of the coarse witchcraft on which
Shamanism was based, or out of which it grew.

For wherever Shamanism exists, there is to be found, in company with it,
an older sorcery, or witchcraft, which it professes to despise, and
against which it does battle. As the Catholic priest, by Bible
incantations or scriptural magic, exorcises devils and charms cattle or
sore throats, disowning the darker magic of older days, so the Shaman
acts against the real *wizard*. Rink tells us that among the heathen
Eskimo the Shaman is sacred, and witchcraft a deadly crime, but that the
latter is the secret survival of a more ancient religion. *Voodoo*,
whether practiced, as it is to-day, in Philadelphia, New York, Havana,
or Senegambia, deals with alleged devils, poisons, chicken

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

bones, the ivory root, unnatural orgies,--all, in short, that can
startle and astonish ignorant natures; it is the combination of the
oldest faith with its successor. Far higher forms are those of the magic
of the black *Takowri* whom one meets divining about the streets of
Cairo, or of the Arab proper, which brings us fairly to the Cabala and
the Jew, Cornelius Agrippa and Eliphas Levi.

It is not difficult to understand how Shamanism, with its drums and
darkened rooms, its conjuring of evil-doers and extraction of diseases
in tangible forms, should have spread from Central Asia to the
Laplanders and Eskimo, and thence to the red Indians. Very little
attention has been paid to the intercourse actually existing at the
present day between these races. I have met with a Passamaquoddy Indian
who spoke French well, who had been educated at a mission school, and
who had been among the Eskimo. As regards legends and folk-lore, no one
can read the Eskimo tales and those of this volume and not feel that the
Algonquin is to the man of the icy north what the gypsy is to the
Hindoo. As regards the early religion of both races, it is simply
*identical*, and it is far too peculiar in its many similar details to
have simply sprung up, as many might assume, from the common likeness in
customs of all savages. For there is in both a great deal of "literary"
culture, especially in the Algonquin, and it would be little less than
miraculous that this too should have assimilated by chance. It does not
help the "opposition" to

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

point out that Algonquin legends declare that their ancestors came from
the west. Even so, they came from the Pacific coast, where Eskimo
Shamanism exists in its most decided forms. But in any case it cannot be
denied that in the red Indian mythology of New England, and of Canada
and New Brunswick, we have a collection of vigorous, icy, powerful
legends, like those of a strong northern race, while those of the middle
continent, or Chippewa, are far feebler and gentler. Hiawatha-Manobozho
is to Glooskap as a flute to a war trumpet.

It is absurd to laugh at or pity the Indian for believing in his magic.
Living as he does in the woods, becoming familiar with animals, and
learning how much more intelligent and allied to man they are than
civilized man supposes, he believes they have souls, and were perhaps
originally human. Balaam's ass spoke once for every Christian; every
animal spoke once for the Indian. If a child can be put to sleep by
singing to it, why cannot insensibility to pain or a cure be caused by
the same process? He is told that the wafer becomes the body of Christ;
this may confirm his belief that the Indian god Manobozho turned bits of
his own flesh or his wife's into raccoons, for food. If it is difficult
for any educated or cultivated man to conceive how, if any condition or
phase of supernaturalism be admitted, any other can be denied, how can
the Indian be logically blamed for believing anything? But the greatest
cause of all for a faith in magic is one which the white man talks about

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

without feeling, and which the Indian feels without talking about it. I
mean the poetry of nature, with all its quaint and beautiful
superstitions. To every Algonquin a rotten log by the road, covered with
moss, suggests the wild legend of the log-demon; the Indian corn and
sweet flag in the swamp are the descendants of beautiful spirits who
still live in them; Meeko, the squirrel, has the power of becoming a
giant monster; flowers, beasts, trees, have all loved and talked and
suing, and can even now do so, should the magician only come to speak
the spell. And there are such magicians. Why should he doubt it? If the
squirrel once yielded to such a power in man, it follows that some man
may still have the power, or that he himself may acquire it. And how
much of this feeling of the real poetry of nature does the white man or
woman possess, who pities the poor ignorant Indian? A few second-hand
scraps of Byron and Tupper, Tennyson and Longfellow, the jingle of a few
rhymes and a few similes, and a little second-hand supernaturalism, more
"accepted" than felt, and that derived from far foreign sources, does
not give the white man what the Indian *feels*. Joe, or Noel, or
Sabattis may seem to the American Philistine to be a ragged, miserable,
ignorant Indian; but to the *scholar* he is by far the Philistine's
superior in that which life is *best* worth living for.

The magic of the Passamaquoddy and Penobscot, like the magician himself,
is called *metéowlin*, *m'déoolin*, or *m'téoulin*. It is the same
effectively as *méda*,

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

which is from the same root. It is a power, but opinions differ as to
how it is acquired. It is certain, as I was told by all old
Passamaquoddy Indian, of Sebayk, near Campobello, that some children are
born *m'téoulin*. They manifest it, even while babes, by being
capricious, eccentric, and malicious. Others acquire the art as they
grow older. From all that I have heard I infer that *m'téoulin* takes
two forms,--one of witchcraft, the other of magic. The former is innate,
or may be acquired; the latter, for aught I know, may be sometimes
inborn, but is generally acquired by fasting, abstinence of other kinds,
and ceremonies. The two are distinctly different. Rink found in
Greenland and Labrador that the Eskimo, as I have said, made this
difference.

I will now give, word for word, the remarks of certain Indians on this
subject, beginning with those of an intelligent and prosperous old man,
who is certainly enlightened and Christianized very much beyond the
average of his race. I had asked him if there were any *m'téoulin*, or
magicians, living. He replied:—

"There are. Many at St. John and Sebayk are still *m'téoulin*. I saw
this myself thirty-five years ago at St. John's. There was a deaf Indian
there. The white men were abusing him. They spat on him. By and by a
*m'téoulin* from St. John's came, a man of thirty-five or forty. I saw
this. The *m'téoulin* asked them not to abuse the deaf and dumb Indian.
They turned on the *m'téoulin*. Then he screamed so

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

horribly, so awfully, and looked so like a devil that the men were
frightened. They fell on their knees, and could not move. They let the
man go."

This is precisely what is narrated by many writers of the Shaman
screaming and distorting of the features. Very few people know of what
the human voice is capable. It can not only be trained to divine song,
but to such demoniacal howling as to deafen and appall even the
guardians of a lunatic asylum. In Lapland, Central Asia, or on Nootka
Sound the initiated are trained in remote solitudes to these utterances,
to which no one can listen without terror. My informant continued:—

"Two or three weeks after I was in another place. We spoke of the
*m'téoulin*. The white folks ridiculed them. I said there was one in
Fredericton, and I said I would bet ten dollars that he would get the
better of them. And they bet that no Indian could do more than they
could. So the *m'téoulin* came. And first of all he screamed so that no
one could move. It was dreadful. Then he took seven steps through the
ground up to his ankles, just as if it had been light snow. When I asked
for the ten dollars, the white men paid. I gave it to the *m'téoulin*."

Among the Greenland Eskimo the sorcerer, writes Rink, "after meeting
with *tomassuk*, or guardian spirits, sometimes manifests it by his feet
sinking into the rocky ground *just as if in snow*." He uses the very
words of the Indian who described the same thing to me. And very
recently in Philadelphia, in fact while

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I was writing the
preceding remarks, a spiritualist named Gordon performed the very same
trick. Having been detected, a full account of the manner of action
appeared in the Press of that city. It was done by a peculiar method of
stooping, and of concealing the stoop behind a skirt. It was a very odd
coincidence that the explanation should thus present itself while I was
seeking it.

This Shaman Eskimo trick was known to the Norsemen. In the Saga of
Thorstein it is said that Ogantun, a noted sorcerer, when stabbed at,
"thrust himself down into the ground, so that only the soles of his feet
could be seen;" and of Kol it was said that "he could pass through the
earth as well as walk upon it."

"Women are sometimes *m'téoulin*. There is one at Psesuk (Bar Harbor)
now, this summer. You have met her. She is -----'s wife. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191.md) If you offend her she can hurt you in
strange ways.

"She is a good doctor. Once she cured a man. When he got well he could
not pay her for the medicine. His name is Louis -----. She asked for her
money; she asked many times; she could not get it. He was going to the
woods, far away, to trap; he said he would pay her when he returned, but
she wanted it then. She said, 'I will never forget this; I will be
revenged.' He went far up the St. John River with his traps; he set them
in the stream for beaver. All

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

that he caught that winter was sticks, and sometimes an eel. Then at the
end of the day he would say to his man, 'It is of no use.' And then they
could hear the witch laughing behind the bushes, and tittering when he
came home. So it went on long. Then he was sorry, and said, 'I wish I
had paid that woman what I owed her.' And at once they heard a voice
from the bushes, or rocks, say, 'Louis, that will do. It is enough.' And
the next day they caught two beaver, and every day two, and so on, till
the season was over.

"This happened in 1872, in Miramichi Waters."

There does not appear to be any single approved method of acquiring
*m'téoulin*. Some, as I have said, are born to it, but they appear to be
wizards or witches. Others are formally trained from boyhood by the
experienced magicians. Others acquire certain gifts by certain
ceremonies or penances. Of this kind was the power obtained in the
manner narrated in the following story, which I heard from an old
Passamaquoddy:—

"There was once a young man who wished to become a very wise and brave
warrior, like his father. And his father said to him, 'I get all my luck
of every kind from my dreams. You can have such dreams; any man can, if
he will do a certain thing; but that thing is not easy for a young man
like you. You must sleep seven nights with a virgin, and never touch
her.'

"The young man thought this over for a few days,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

and then asked his father how it could be arranged or managed.

"'I will tell you,' replied the old man. 'Find a girl; the more
beautiful she is and the more you want her, the stronger the magic will
be. Go to the parents for their daughter as a wife. Cheat them so.
Before you marry get seven bear-skins, and let no man except one know
anything about it. Make him clean them. One skin should be cleaned every
twenty-four hours. Seven days must pass so.'

"The young man was accepted by the parents; he sent the seven bear-skins
to the young woman; they were married; they went to their wigwam. He lay
on the bear-skins; he directed his wife to make another bed and sleep on
it. They lay apart. The bride thought this was strange; she told her
mother of it. The mother said, 'Never mind. By and by it will be all
right.' The wife thought it was all wrong. When seven nights had passed
the bridegroom disappeared. He was not seen in his village for
twenty-five or thirty years. Then he returned to his father. He could
divine all things by dreams. He had but to take the magic bear-skin and
sleep on it, and dream. He could tell where to find good hunting or
fishing. He *foredreamed* war with the Mohawks. Can any man do this?
They say so, and I have known many who tried it in vain. They could not
pass the trial successfully."

"There are stones in the forest with names on them. They give great
power to dream. I have seen

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

in my dreams the *m'téoulin* of ancient times,--the magicians, my father
told me, of long ago. I have seen them diving under the waters from one
island to another. I have seen them dive ten miles.

"When I was young, J. N., who was a great *m'téoulin*, offered to teach
me the art. I could have become one, but I would not. I did not think it
was right.

"Once old J. N. and my grandfather hunted in the woods. It was near
Katahdin, the Great Mountain. <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192.md) And
they wanted everything. They had got out of everything. One night old N.
said, 'I can bear this no longer. Would you like a nice pipe of tobacco?
We have had nothing but meat for four weeks.' So he went away for a
short time; perhaps it was an hour. He returned with a box. There was in
it three pounds of tobacco; there was cheese, rice, and sugar; there was
fifty pounds of provision in all."

This famous *m'téoulin* was long a popular governor of the
Passamaquoddies. I have a curious old brass candlestick, said to be one
hundred and fifty years old, which he owned all his life. The following
remarkable reminiscences; of this very clever old sagamore were given to
me by Marie Sakis, a Penobscot:

"The old governor was a great *m'téoulin*. He had got it among the
Chippewas. He said that it

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

would come to pass that he would die before the next snow-storm. No, he
did not care himself, but my husband's mother did, when she heard this,
and she cried. Then he said, 'Well, I will try to live, or else die in a
month; but it will be a hard fight. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193.md) So he made him a bow, and strung it with
his wife's hair; I and having done this, he shot an arrow through the
smoke-hole of his wigwam. <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194.md)

"All this was at Nessaik, near Eastport. Then he said to his wife, 'Take
one of your leggins and put it on my head.' She did so. Then he took
medicine. A rainbow appeared in the sky, and a great horse-fly came out
of his mouth, and then a large grasshopper. He cried to his wife, 'Do
not kill it!' And then came a stone spear-head. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_195.md)

"'Now,' said the governor, 'this is all right so far, but the great
struggle is yet to come. It is a *weewillmekq'* who has done this.' (You
know what that is: the Passamaquoddies call it *weewilmekq'*. It is a
worm an inch long, which can make itself into a horrid monster as large
as a deer; yes, and much larger. It is *m'téoulin*; yes, it is a great
magician.) I am going to fight it. You must come with a small

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

stick to bit it once, and only a mere tap.' <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196.md) But she would not go. So he went and
fought with the Weewillmekq'. He killed it. It was a frightful battle.
When he returned he smelt like fresh fish. His wife bade him go and wash
himself; but let him bathe as much as he could, the smell remained for
days. The pond where he fought has been muddy and foul ever since.

"The governor could with a gimlet bore a hole in any tree in the woods,
and draw from it as he pleased any kind of wine or other liquor. Once he
was far in the forest with some white gentlemen; he wished to entertain
them. He did this, to their astonishment. He produced tobacco in a
miraculous manner when it was wanted. Then, returning to Eastport, he
went to Mr. Pearce, who kept a store, and showed him that a certain
amount of wine had disappeared from his barrels, and paid him for it. He
never drank wine or spirits himself.

"He once went hunting. He took his wife with him; she was *enceinte*. It
was in midwinter. She had a great yearning for green corn. He put a dish
on the ground, and there fell from above ears of fresh-boiled green corn
into it. 'There,' said he, 'as I promised, you have it.'

"She had a silver cross and beads. One day she lost it, and grieved very
much. He said, 'Put that wooden dish upside down, near the fire.' It was
done, and when she turned it up the cross was under the

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

dish. And he said the Ketawks, or Spirits, had brought it."

The following legend, told me by Tomah Josephs, sets forth another
manner by which *m'téoulin* may be acquired.

"There were two Indian families camped away at some distance from the
main village. In one lived a young man, and every night he would go to
the other wigwams to see some girls. His mother warned him that he would
come to harm, for there was danger abroad, but he never minded her.

"Now, one night at the end of winter, when the ground was bare of snow,
as he was walking along he heard something come after. It had a very
heavy, steady tramp. He stopped, and saw a long figure, white, but
without arms or legs. It looked like a corpse rolled up. He was horribly
frightened, but when it attacked him he grew angry. The object, though
it had no arms, fought madly. It twined round him; it struck itself
against him, and thrashed itself, bending like a fish all about. And he,
too, fought as if he was crazy. He was one of those whose blood and
courage go up, but never down; he could die, but never give in till
dead. Before daylight the Ghost suggested a rest, or peace; the Indian
would not bear of it, but fought on. The Ghost began to implore mercy,
but the youth just then saw in the north *Kival lo kesso*, the break of
day. Then he knew that if he could but endure the battle a little longer
he should indeed get a great victory.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

"Then the Ghost implored him, saying, 'Let me go, and whatever you may
want you shall get, and good luck all your life.' Yet for all this he
would not yield, for he knew that by conquering he would win all the
Spirit had to give. And as the first sun-ray shone on him he became
insensible, and when he awoke it was as from a sleep. But by his side
lay a large, old, decayed log, covered with moss. He remembered that
during the fight he had seemed once to plunge his fist, by a violent
blow, completely into the enemy up to his elbow, and there was a hole in
it corresponding to this wound. He had torn away the other's scalp-lock,
stripping the skin down to the waist; he found a long, hairy-looking
piece of moss ripped from the end of the log to the middle. And all
about lay pieces of moss and locks of his own hair, testifying to the
fury of the fight.

"He was terribly bruised and torn, but that he did not heed, for now he
was another man, and a terrible one. His mother said, 'I warned you of
danger:' but he had conquered the danger. He had all the strength of
five strong men, and all the might and magic of the Spirit; yes, the
Spirit itself was now in him. After this he could do anything, and find
game where no one else could. To conquer a ghost gives power."

To conquer the dead, or to fight terrible spirits, to thereby absorb
their power, and finally to keep them in a struggle until the day shines
on them, is both Norse and Celtic, if not, indeed, world-wide. But

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

the grim spirit of this narrative is Norse; it is that of the hero
wresting from a corpse's hold the sword of victory.

"Farewell, daughter!  
Fleet give I thee,  
Five men's bane,  
If thou it believe."

But the great element or chief cause of magic power among the Indians is
that of Will. It manifests itself in many forms, mere courage being one.
Thus the *Weewillmekq'* confers supernatural ability or other favors
only on those who are not afraid of it. The demon Log, as we have just
seen, gives strength and prosperity to a man for simply fighting like a
bull-dog. Beyond courage, pluck or bottom is with these Indians as
nearly allied to magic as poetry was among the Greeks, or with an
Eschenmayer. When the true magician "gets mad," and continues to get
madder till the end, he is invincible. Allied to this is perseverance.
The Rabbit is rewarded with skill as an enchanter merely for continuing
to try. His very failures have this in them, that he keeps on
resolutely, though in a wrong road. No one can fail to be struck, in
these legends of the Northeast Algonquins, how often a boy, or adult,
when asked if he can do a difficult thing, replies, "I can try." All of
this apotheosis of pluck, perseverance, and patience is *far* more
developed among these legends than in those of the Chippewas or other
western and southern tribes, at least so far as I am familiar with

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

them. It exists wherever there are red Indians, but the Eastern
Algonquin seems to have thought it out more and made more of it than
others have done. Therefore his cycle of myths, or his Edda, occupies a
higher place. It is less chaotic; it is more consistent; it is a chorus
in which every voice is trained to respond to or correspond with the
leader. In this respect it has a remarkable resemblance to the
Scandinavian myths and poems. In its theory that magic power may be
obtained by "penitence,"--I do not mean here "repentance,"--that is by
self-inflicted pain, it agrees with the Hindoo, and in fact more or less
with all religions. But it is only, I believe, in the red Indian and
Hindoo creeds that it is distinctly admitted that man can attain the
power to do both good and evil, or whatever he pleases, if he will only
pay for it by suffering. The doctrine of power through penance is so
simple and obvious in its origin that it would long precede monotheism.
A man exercises himself with great exertion in lifting stones, as in an
Eskimo tale, till he is strong; he practices shooting arrows and running
after them, as in the story of the Chief's Son, till he can outrun them.
Then the, secret of such marvelous deeds is supposed to exist in the
bow, and it becomes a fetich.

A very important part of *m'téoulin* is the materials employed. In Old
World magic these are exclusively objects which startle or disgust,
parts of the human body, dead reptiles, or things singular and rare.
Among the Indians, very commonplace articles are

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

employed indifferently with those of the former kind. The magic consists
not in them, but in the magician and his methods. He has had, let us
say, his dreams, or received, while alone in the forest, his
inspirations, which have told him what to do. He takes the objects
suggested, and with them performs his wonder works. Sometimes he tells
others to do the same with the same things, but in this case he is still
the motive force; it is *his* enchantment. In illustration of this I
give the following legend:—

Far in the woods was an Indian town; near it lived two old people, who
had two beautiful daughters, and no son. The girls were very shy. They
seldom let themselves be seen. They would not listen to the young men.

The chief of the tribe had a fine son, a great hunter, and skilled in
mysteries. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197.md) The young man wanted
one of the girls. His father went to their parents and obtained their
consent, but the girls refused to be married.

There lived in the village a young man who was neither strong, handsome,
nor clever at any kind of work. Hearing that the chief's son had failed
to get one of the shy or proud girls, he said--but all in jest, for he
had but a poor opinion of himself--that he was the right kind of a man
to get them. "If they had, for example, only seen me, now," he
exclaimed,

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "they would have
wished to be married at once!" Then they all laughed, and proposed that
they should go that night and try to see the girls, and how they would
receive the plain looking youth.

So they went quietly, about supper-time, and entered so suddenly that
the girls had not time to hide behind the curtain, and so were obliged
to receive the visitors. After supper they engaged in playing
*Mingwadokadjik*. In this game a ring is hidden in the ashes or sand,
and each player, with a pointed stick, makes a plunge until the ring is
hit, and brought out. (This is Indian *poker*.--T. B.)

So the evening passed, and nothing was said of marriage; and at last the
guests went away, and for some time the young man made a jest of his
having gone courting. One day he was far and alone in the woods, when he
met an old woman of very strange appearance. She was wrinkled and bent
with extreme age. and her head was braided up with a very great, number
of *sakalobeek*, or hair-strings, which hung down to her heels. After
greeting him civilly, she asked him if he was really anxious to marry
one of the beauties whom he had visited. "*O Nugumee*" (grandmother), he
replied, "I do not care about it." "Only if you did," she replied, "I
can give you the one you want, if you will only say so."

Now the young man saw that the old woman was in earnest, and he replied
that in fact he would be very glad to get one of the girls, but that no
girl worth having would look at him. Then the old dame, taking

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

one of her hair-strings, said, "Roll this up, and carry it in your pouch
for a while; <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198.md) and then go, and,
catching an opportunity, toss the cord upon her back. But take care that
she does not know that you have done this, and let it be indeed a secret
to all."

So he took the *sakalobe*, and, visiting the girls once again, threw it
on one of them, more hopeful of success this time. And the cast
succeeded, though she said nothing then. But the next day, alone in the
woods, he met her, for she had followed him. And she said,
"*Tamealeen*?" "Where are you going?" "I am going hunting," he replied.
"But, if you have not lost your way, what are you doing here?" "I am not
lost in the woods," she replied, but said no more. Then he, seeing how
it was, said, "It would be better, though, if I returned with you to
your parents, and told them that I found you lost, and showed you the
way home." And having done this, the girl's father, noting that she
liked the young man, asked him if he wished to marry her; and as both
were willing, and something more, the wedding feast was soon ready, the
friends invited, and the couple settled down.

Some days after, the husband, seeing his wife wearing the magic
hair-string, asked her, "Where did you

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

get that pretty *sakalobe*?" "I found it," she replied, "in my
*'ntuboonk*" (usual sitting place in the wigwam). This caused the young
man to reflect how kindly he had been treated by the old fairy or witch,
and how easily he, without any merit, had won his wife, and then to
think of the deserving young chief's son who had failed. So, taking him
into the woods, they found the old woman, who, kind as ever, did for the
chief's son what she had already done for his friend, and gave him also
a magic hair-string. And using it in the same way he in like manner won
the other sister; and it was indeed well, for she was the one whom he
wanted most. And the two men whose wives were sisters (*wechoosjik*),
were on the best of terms and much together.

Now the young chief reflected that his brother-in-law had been very kind
to him, for little cause, and thought how he could repay him. So he
asked him one day if he would like to be a swift runner. "Truly I
would," replied the other. "Then go and gather some feathers, and let
them blow when the wind is high, and chase them. You will soon be able
to outstrip the wind, and when the art comes it will never depart from
you." Then he did this, and became so swift that no man or beast could
escape him.

Yet again the chief's son said, "Would you like to become strong and
very active?" And as he of course said "Yes," the friend replied, "Dress
yourself in the worst and raggedest garments, and attack the first man
you find. He will catch you by the clothes

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

but do you slip out of them and run." This he did; the first man whom he
met was a lunatic, who gladly grappled for a fight. So he slipped out of
the clothes and ran; but the madman thought the apparel made the man,
and beat it a long time, and left it for dead. But after he had done
this with many men he indeed became strong and active.

Then the chief's son said, "I will teach you quickness of sight, so that
you may perceive animals while hunting, though other men may not. Take a
handful of moose's hairs; hold them firmly in a roll between your thumb
and finger; hold them up in a high wind and let them go. So you will be
able to perceive, in time, all the moose. And to see deer, or any other
animal, you must take their hair and treat it in the same way." So he
did; and by means of this magic became so keen of sight that he beheld
every beast.

Yet again the chief's son said, "Would you see birds where no other men
can?" And he, assenting, was told to strip the feathery part from a
bird's quills (*chekakadega*), and, blowing it into the air, look
carefully in the direction in which it flew. And having practiced this
also, he became very perfect in the art. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199.md)

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

Now, having learned all these things, he asked the chief's son how he
could learn to see the fishes of the sea. And being told that he must
collect all kinds of fishes' bones, and burn them and pound them to
dust, he did so; and, having blown them up into the wind, he could see
all manner of fish and call them to him.

This young man went afar in his thoughts; for reflecting that the whales
were giant-like in power, he wondered what might be done by magic with
them. And his friend said that it was true that the whales could give to
man unearthly power and exceeding long, life. "For," said he, "they
never die till they are killed, and by their aid one may live on till
life borders on immortality." So burning a piece of whalebone
(*pootup-awigun*), he pounded it to powder, and, standing on a rock that
jutted out into the sea, the sorcerer blew the dust seawards. And
erelong he saw dark spots far away, and as they grew to be more numerous
they became larger, and yet more numerous anon, and for every grain of
dust which he blew there came a whale; and yet he blew again seven
times. Then the whole school of immense creatures came towards him; and
he that was largest, or the sagamore of the whales, swimming close to
the man on the rock, said, "Why hast thou called me?" And he replied,
"Make me strong."

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

And the Whale answered, "It is well. Put thy hand in my mouth!" And,
doing this, he found and took out a golden key. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200.md)" Keep that," said the Whale. "While you
have it you will be safe against man, beast, or illness. The foe shall
not harm you; the spirits which haunt the wilderness shall pass you by;
hunger and pain shall not know you; death shall not be in your road."

So the young man thanked the great magician, and went home; and as it
had been promised it came to pass. All was ever well with him; trouble
and trial were with him no more. Those who were in his village never
knew hunger; the wild game abounded, and came to them when called; no
enemy attacked them; the sun and moon smiled on them; they sang the
songs of the olden time, and played the flute in peace.

In time the old chief drew near the end of his life, and his son asked
the friend if his father's days could not be prolonged. But the magician
thought it best to let him pass in peace; and he did so. Then the young
chief offered his place and power to his brother-in-law (*wechoosul*);
but he refused it, and passed his life in aiding his friend in every way
by his power and wisdom. *Kespeahdvoksit* (here the story ends).

 

This legend is little more than an enumeration of the recipes popularly
employed to obtain certain powers.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It may be observed
that it is limited to all that a real Indian requires. It is very
different from what a white man or an Asiatic savage would have wanted;
and there is just enough truth and common sense in the methods
recommended to make the whole plausible. The reader will observe that
the magic hair-string and locks of hair play the same important part in
*m'téoulin* that they did in Old World magic. This is hardly one of the
coincidences which can be attributed to spontaneous development from
similar causes. It may be such, but there may be also an Eskimo
side-gate through which it entered from the other side.

Another magic means was the influencing high and mysterious powers. Of
this the following is an admirable illustration:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_191"></span>[342:1](al71.htm#fr_191.md) I am acquainted with
all the parties, but for obvious reasons suppress their names.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[345:1](al71.htm#fr_192.md) Katahdin, like the
Intervale near North Conway, is haunted and enchanted ground, abounding
in fairies and other marvelous beings. But there is not a mile square of
New England which has not its legends.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[346:1](al71.htm#fr_193.md) In a Chippewa legend a
boy confers magic power on a bow by stringing it with his sister's hair.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[346:2](al71.htm#fr_194.md) This is also mentioned
in a legend where it is said that every arrow killed a supernatural
enemy.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[346:3](al71.htm#fr_195.md) This is all in detail
perfectly Shamanic. The smell of the fresh fish after such a fight is
the same in an Eskimo legend, The horse-fly (*gan*) is Lapp.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[347:1](al71.htm#fr_196.md) In the legend of
Partridge, a mere tap stuns the water-fairy.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[352:1](al71.htm#fr_197.md) In Passamaquoddy,
*N'paowlin*: a man learned in mysteries, a scholar. This is my own
Indian name. It is apparently the same with *boo-öin*; that is, pow-wow
man.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[354:1](al71.htm#fr_198.md) One of the infallible
ancient methods to make anything into a fetich, or amulet, is to carry
it a long time about the person. Familiarity, as Heine observes
(*Reisebilder*), gives a silent life, or apparent sympathy, to even old
clothes. Thus domestic well-known objects become fairies, and thus they
talk to children.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[356:1](al71.htm#fr_199.md) The secret of these
spells is very apparent. But the teacher would make the pupil believe
that the successful result would greatly depend on the color and kind of
the fur or feathers employed. It is curious to observe how, in the
over-refinement of "sport" among gentlemen, the idea that this or that
is "good <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> form" and "the correct
thing," which must be done, has had the effect of establishing much
which is mere fetich. A fox in England and a bear in Canada must be
killed in a certain way by men of caste.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[358:1](al71.htm#fr_200.md) This is a manifestly
modern addition. There is every indication that the story itself is
ancient, probably Eskimo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tumilkoontaoo, or the Broken Wing](al72.md)
