[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](al72)  [Next](al74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU8XY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Algonquin Legends of New England*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1884\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

### Fish-Hawk and Scapegrace. <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202)

(Micmac.)

Two men met and talked: one was Fish-Hawk, the other was Scapegrace. Now
the Fish-Hawk can fly higher than any other ocean bird, and he is proud
and particular as to his food; he is only beaten by the eagle. When he
dives and takes a fish the eagle pursues him; he lets it drop; the great
sagamore of the, birds catches it; but to less than the chief he yields
nothing. But the Scapegrace will eat anything; he is heavy in flying; he
is slow and of low degree.

So when the Scapegrace proposed to the Fish-Hawk that they should become
partners the proud bird was angry in his heart, but said nothing, as he
was crafty, and as it occurred to him that he could punish the other;
and this he was the more willing to do because the Scapegrace actually
proposed to fly a race with him! So he said, "Let us go together to a
certain Indian village." And they went off together.

The Fish-Hawk arrived there far before the other. And on arriving he
said, "Beware of him who will come after me. You will know him by these
signs: he is ugly and heavy; he will bring with him his own food. It is
coarse and common; in fact it is poison. He wishes to kill you; he will
offer it. Do not eat of it, or you will die."

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

Then having been very well entertained himself, he took his departure.
Scapegrace soon appeared, but was treated with great reserve. He offered
his food, and the people pretended to eat it, but took good care to
quietly throw it away. Then he told the chief that he was seeking a
wife, and asked if there were girls to marry in the town. To which the
chief replied, "Yes, there is a mother with several daughters, of the
*Amalchooywech'* or Raccoon tribe."

He went to see the girls. A bad name had gone before him. One of them
stood before the lodge. She saw him, and cried, "*Mahgwis wechooveet*!"
"Scapegrace is coming!" They received him as if he had been Sickness. He
was welcomed like filth on fine clothes. They cried out, "Ulummeye!" "Go
home!" He asked the mother if she had daughters. She answered, "Yes." He
asked her if she would give him one. She replied, "I will not." So he
went his way.

Now when he had gone Fish-Hawk came again, and asked if Scapegrace had
been there. He inquired if all had passed as he predicted. They said it
had. Then it occurred to him to pass himself off for a great prophet, a
wise magician, well knowing that he could make much of it. So he said,
"It is well. Remember that you would have all died but for my foresight.
That wizard would have poisoned you all. But have no fear. In future I
will watch over you."

Then he said to a man of the people that if at any time he should see a
large bird flying over the village it would be an omen of great coming
danger. "Then,"

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

he said, "think of me; call on me, and I will come." So he departed.

The man thought it all over for a long time. He was shrewd and wise. "He
foretold the coming of Scapegrace," he reflected. "Now he pretends to be
a very great sorcerer. We shall see!"

Sure enough, in a few days he saw a bird flying on high. "That," said
he, "must be the *Wis-kuma-gwasoo*." He called him, and he came. "You
spoke," he said, "of danger to our town. What is it?"

"There is great danger. In a few days your town will be attacked by a
Kookwes. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203) Unless you save
yourselves you will all be devoured."

"What shall we do to be saved?" asked the man. "When will he come?"

"In seven days," replied the Fish-Hawk. "Before that time you must take
to your canoes and flee afar. You may get beyond his reach, but you
cannot before that time get beyond the horrible roar of his voice. And
all who hear it will drop dead."

"How can we escape this second danger?" asked the man.

"You must all close your ears, so that you can hear nothing. When the
time is over you may return."

The man's name was Oscoon. <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204) He led
the people away. He closed their ears; he did not close his own. Once he
heard a far-away whoop. It was not very

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

terrible. But he said nothing. After a time the scouts who were sent out
returned. They reported that the Kookwes had departed. They had not even
seen him. It was a great escape.

The people thought much of Oscoon. They made him their chief. In a few
days the Fish-Hawk returned. He spoke to Oscoon: "Did the giant come?"
"He did." "You escaped?" "By following your advice, we did." "And in
which direction did he go?" <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205)
"Surely you, who know so much about him, must know that better than we
do." Then the Fish-Hawk saw that he was found out. He flew away, and
never returned to the town to play the prophet.

He who would cheat must watch his words well.

 

As in the preceding tradition, there has been tacked to this a fragment
of a very poor French tale about a king, a great city, a royal carriage,
and the forest of wild beasts, borrowed from so many old European
romances. But what is here given is apparently really Indian, and it
shows with spirit and humor how men tricked one another, and rose in
life by trickery, in the days of old.

There are naturally contradictory opinions on such

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

a subject as to what constitutes the morality of magic. The old Shaman
or Manitou regarded witchcraft as wicked. The Roman Catholic has taught
the Indian that all sorceries and spells except his own are of the
devil. Hence it came that I got from two Passamaquoddy Indians,
next-door neighbors, the following opinions:—

*Tomah*.--"There was once a man who hated another. So he prayed until he
became a snake," etc.

*Another Indian*.--"If a man wanted to be *m'téoulin* he must go without
food, or sleep, or saying his prayers, for seven days. Yes, that
certainly. He must go far into the woods. He must go again when his
power was used up."

The faith in and fondness for magic were so great among the Algonquins
that there is not one even of their most serious histories into which it
has not been introduced. The Passamaquoddies will narrate an incident of
their wars with the Mohawks. The first time it will all be probable
enough; but hear it again, when the story-teller has become more
trustful, and some of the actors in it or the scene will be sure to end
like a Christmas pantomime in fairy-land. With them *m'téoulin* covered
everything; it entered into every detail of life. I do not think that it
was so deeply felt even by the ancient Babylonians or the modern Arabs
and Hindoos as by our red men. It is no wonder they prefer the Catholic
religion to the Protestant.

There is a Micmac legend which is so magical and mystical, so inspired
with Eskimo Shamanism, that it

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

would not be remarkable if it had been originally a sacred song. This is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[363:1](al73.htm#fr_202) Wiskumagwasoo and
Mahgwis. The Mahgwis, or "Scapegrace," is a kind of sea-gull.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[365:1](al73.htm#fr_203) In Passamaquoddy
*Kewahqu'*, a cannibal giant, who is also a sorcerer.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[365:2](al73.htm#fr_204) Oscoon (M.): the
Liver.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[366:1](al73.htm#fr_205) Here the Fish-Hawk
inadvertently betrays himself. In the Edda, Loki changes himself into a
falcon and flies to Jotunheim. to make mischief, as usual. Odin also
changes himself to a hawk or eagle when he is chased by the giant
Suttung. There is a strong Norse color to all this tale. The Fish-Hawk
is very Loki-like and tricky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant Magicians](al74)
