[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff025)  [Next](lff027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIII

<span class="small">How St. Francis set free the friar who was in sin
with the demon</span>

ONCE when St. Francis was praying in the Place of Porziuncula, he saw by
Divine revelation, the whole Place encompassed about and besieged by the
demons after the fashion of a great army; but none of them could enter
into the Place, inasmuch as these friars were of so great sanctity that
the demons found none into whom they might enter. But while they thus
persisted, it fell upon a day that one of those friars

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

was offended with another, and thought within his heart how he could
accuse him and avenge himself on him; for the which cause, while yet he
cherished this evil thought, the devil, the door being opened, entered
into the Place and set himself upon the neck of that friar. Thereupon
the compassionate and careful shepherd, who ever watched over his flock
seeing that the wolf had entered in to devour his little sheep,
immediately caused that friar to be called to him, and bade him
forthwith reveal the poison of hatred conceived against his neighbour,
through the which he had come into the hands of the enemy. Wherefore,
he, full of fear at seeing himself thus discovered by the holy father,
disclosed all the venom and rancour of his heart, and confessed his
fault and humbly besought penance and mercy; and when he had so done,
and was absolved of his sin, and had received penance, anon, in the
presence of St. Francis, the demon departed; and the friar, thus
delivered from the hands of the cruel beast, through the loving-kindness
of the good shepherd, gave thanks to God, and returning, corrected and
admonished, to the flock of the holy shepherd, lived afterward in great
sanctity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. How St. Francis converted the Soldan of Babylon to
the faith](lff027)
