[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff030)  [Next](lff032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### CHAPTER XXVIII

<span class="small">Of an ecstasy which came to Friar Bernard whereby he
abode from morning even until nones without coming to himself</span>

HOW much grace God ofttimes bestowed upon them who embraced gospel
poverty, and who abandoned the world for love of Christ, is shown forth
in Friar Bernard of Quintavalle, the which, after he had taken the habit
of St. Francis, was very often rapt in God, by the contemplation of
heavenly things. Among other times, it once befel that, being in church
for the hearing of Mass, with all his mind fixed upon God, he became so
absorbed and rapt in God that at the elevation of the Body of Christ he
was nothing aware thereof, and neither kneeled him down nor drew back
his cowl, as did the others, but without winking his eyes abode gazing
fixedly, from morning even until nones, insensible; and after nones,
when he had returned to himself, he went through the Place shouting, in
enraptured tones: "O friars! O friars! O friars! there is no man in this
country so great or so noble but that, if he were promised a most fair
palace full of gold, he would lightly carry a sackful of dung, if
thereby he might gain so noble a treasure". The mind of the said Friar
Bernard was so uplifted to this celestial treasure, promised unto the
lovers of God, that for fifteen successive years he ever went with mind
and face raised toward heaven; and in all that time never did he satisfy
his hunger at table, albeit he ate a little of that which was set before
him; for he used to say that abstinence from that which a man tasteth
not is not perfect abstinence, but that true abstinence lieth in being
temperate in those things which taste good to the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

mouth; and thereby he attained unto such clearness and light of
understanding that even great ecclesiastics had recourse unto him for
the solving of hardest questions and obscure passages of Scripture; and
he made plain unto them every difficulty. And because his mind was
altogether loosed and abstracted from earthly things, he, after the
fashion of the swallow, winged his way to very great heights, through
contemplation; so that, sometimes for twenty days and sometimes for
thirty, he abode alone on the tops of the highest mountains,
contemplating celestial things. For the which cause Friar Giles said of
him that this gift which was given unto Friar Bernard of Quintavalle was
not given unto other men, to wit, that he should feed flying even as
doth the swallow. And by reason of this excellent grace which God had
given him, St. Francis willingly and ofttimes talked with him by day and
by night; whence sometimes it came to pass that they were both found
rapt in God all the night long, in the wood where they had met together
to speak of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. How the devil in the form of Christ Crucified
appeared . . .](lff032.md)
