[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff038)  [Next](lff040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVI

<span class="small">How St. Francis expounded unto Friar Leo a fair
vision which he had seen</span>

ONCE, when St. Francis was exceeding sick, Friar Leo waited on him; and
it befel that, while the said Friar Leo was praying beside St. Francis,
he was rapt in ecstasy and was carried in the spirit to a very great
river, wide and rapid. And, as he waited to see who crossed over it, he
beheld certain friars enter the river laden with burdens, and
straightway they were overthrown by the force of the stream and were
drowned; certain others went a third of the way across; others reached
the middle of the river, and some almost gained the opposite bank; but,
at the last, by reason of the force of the stream and of the burdens
which they bore, all of them fell and were drowned. Now, when he saw
this, Friar Leo had very great compassion for them; and anon, while yet
he stood

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

there, lo! a great multitude of friars drew nigh, all of them without
any burden or load of any kind; resplendent with the light of holy
Poverty. And they entered the river and crossed over it without any
danger; and, when he had seen this, Friar Leo came to himself again.
Then St. Francis, perceiving in spirit that Friar Leo had seen some
vision, questioned him concerning that which he had seen: and, when
Friar Leo had told him all his vision in order, St. Francis said: "That
which thou hast seen is true. The great river is this world; the friars
who were drowning in the river are those who follow not the Gospel
profession and especially with regard to most high Poverty; but they who
passed over without danger are those friars who neither seek nor possess
in this world any earthly or carnal thing, but having food and raiment
are therewith content, following Christ naked on the cross; and gladly
and willingly do they bear the burden and sweet yoke of Christ and of
most holy Obedience; whereby they pass without difficulty from the
temporal life to the life eternal."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. How Jesus Christ . . . caused a rich man to be
converted](lff040.md)
