[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff098)  [Next](lff100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER OF PROFITABLE AND UNPROFITABLE KNOWLEDGE

THE man who would know much, must labour  much and humble himself much,
abasing himself and bowing down his head until he goeth with his belly
upon the ground; and then the Lord will give him much knowledge and
wisdom. The highest wisdom is to do good alway, labouring virtuously and
keeping oneself carefully from every sin and from every occasion of sin,
and to ever think upon the judgments of God. Once Friar Giles said to
one who wished to go to school to get knowledge: "My brother, wherefore
wouldst thou go to school? for I do thee to wit that the sum of all
knowledge is to fear and to love, and these two things suffice thee; for
so much wisdom as he can make use of sufficeth a man, and more he
needeth not. Be not thou over careful to study much for the benefit of
others, but alway study and be diligent to labour at those things which
are useful unto thyself; for ofttimes this befalleth, that we would get
much knowledge to help others, and little to help ourselves; and I say
unto thee that the word of God is not for him that speaketh nor yet for
him that heareth, but is for him that truly doeth it. Certain

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

men which knew not how to swim went into the water to aid those who were
drowning; and it came to pass that they all drowned together. If thou
dost not take good thought for the salvation of thine own soul, how
shalt thou take thought for that of thy neighbours? And if thou dost not
thy own business well, how shalt thou do well that of others? For it is
not believable that thou lovest the soul of another more than thine own.
The preachers of the word of God ought to be the banner, the candle and
the mirror of the people. Blessed is that man who so leadeth others
along the way of salvation that he himself doth not cease to walk in
that way of salvation! Blessed is that man who on such wise urgeth
others to run that he doth not cease to run himself! More blessed is he
who on such wise helpeth others to earn and to be rich and ceaseth not
to enrich himself. I believe that the good preacher admonisheth and
preacheth to himself more than he doth to others. Meseemeth that the man
who would convert and bring the souls of sinners into the way of God,
ought alway to fear lest he be grievously perverted by them, and brought
into the way of sin and of the devil and of hell."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Good and Evil Speaking](lff100.md)
