[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff087)  [Next](lff089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

### CHAPTER OF FAITH

ALL those things which may be thought with the heart, or spoken with the
tongue, or seen with the eyes or handled with the hands, are well-nigh
nothing with regard and in comparison to those things which cannot be
thought, or seen or touched. All the saints and all the wise men who
have passed away, and all those who are in the present life, and all
those who shall come after us, who have spoken or written or who shall
speak or write concerning God, have never said nor shall ever be able to
say so much concerning God as would be a grain of millet with regard and
in comparison to the heaven and the earth, yea even a thousand thousand
times less. For all the Scriptures which spake of God, speak of Him as
it were babblingly, even as doth a mother who babbles with her infant,
that would not understand her words if she spoke in any other way. Once
Friar Giles said to a doctor of law, a layman: "Believest thou that the
gifts of God are great?" The lawyer made answer: "I believe". Whereto
Friar Giles said: "I will show thee that thou dost not believe
faithfully"; and thereafter he said unto him: "What is the worth of that
which thou possessest in this world?" The lawyer replied: "It is worth
perhaps a thousand lire". Then Friar Giles said: "Wouldst thou give
these possessions of thine for ten thousand lire?" The lawyer replied
without hesitation, saying: "Certainly I would give them willingly"; and
Friar Giles said: "It is a thing indisputable that all the possessions
of this world are as nothing in comparison with celestial things:
wherefore then dost thou not give these possessions of thine to Christ
that thou

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

mayest therewith buy those which are celestial and eternal?" Then the
lawyer, wise in the foolish science of the world, answered pure and
simple Friar Giles: "God hath filled thee full of the foolishness of
Divine wisdom," saying: "Dost thou believe, Friar Giles, that there is
any man whose visible and external works are proportionate to his inward
belief?" Friar Giles made answer: "Behold, my dearest brother, it is
certain that all the saints have striven to fulfil in their actions all
that which they understood to be the will of God, to the utmost of their
power; and all those things which they were not able to fulfil in their
actions, they fulfilled with the holy desires of their wills; on such
wise that with the desire of the soul they supplied that which was
lacking in their actions, and so fulfilled the will of God". Then said
Friar Giles: "If any man had perfect faith, in a little while he would
attain to a state of perfection, whereby he would be given full
assurance of salvation. The man that with firm faith awaits that eternal
and supreme and highest Good, what harm or what ill could any temporal
adversity in this present life do him? And the wretched man who awaits
the eternal evil, what shall any prosperity or temporal good in this
world profit him? Nevertheless, albeit a man is a sinner, he ought not
therefore to despair, as long as he lives, of the infinite mercy of God;
for where is no tree in all the world so thorny and gnarled and knotty
that men cannot smooth it and polish it and beautify it and make it
fair: and even so there is no man so evil, nor any sinner in this world
so great that God cannot convert him and adorn him with singular graces
and with the gift of many virtues."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Holy Humility](lff089)
