[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff068)  [Next](lff070.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="small">Ensample against the temptations of the flesh</span>

ONCE, when Friar Giles and Friar Simon of Assisi and Friar Ruffino and
Friar Juniper were met together to talk of God and of the soul, Friar
Giles said to the other friars: "How do ye deal with temptations to
carnal sin?" Said Friar Simon: "I consider the baseness and infamy of
carnal sin, and therefrom follows a great abhorrence, and so I escape".
Said Friar Ruffino: "I fling myself flat upon the ground and continue in
prayer, beseeching the mercy of God and of the Mother of Jesus Christ
until I feel myself wholly freed therefrom". Made answer Friar Juniper:
"When I feel the turmoil of the diabolical carnal suggestion, I
forthwith run and shut fast the door of my heart; and, for the safety of
the fortress of my heart, I occupy myself in holy meditations and holy
desires, so that, when the carnal suggestion

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

cometh or knocketh at the door of my heart, I answer it, as if from
within: 'Begone; for this lodging is already taken, and here no more
folk may enter'; and on this wise never do I allow the carnal thought to
enter into my heart; whereupon, seeing itself conquered, it departeth
from me as one discomfited, and not from me alone but from all the
neighbourhood". Friar Giles made answer: "Friar Juniper, I hold with
thee, because no man may contend better with the fleshly enemy than by
flight; for within the traitor carnal desire and without the senses of
the body make themselves felt as enemies so great and so strong, that,
if we flee not, we cannot conquer them. Therefore, he who would fight in
any other way, for the toil of battle rarely has the victory. Flee vice
then, and thou wilt be victorious."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. How Friar Juniper abased himself for the glory of
God](lff070.md)
