[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff033)  [Next](lff035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI

<span class="small">How St. Francis knew, in their order, the secrets of
the hearts of all his friars</span>

EVEN as our Lord Jesus Christ saith in the Gospel: "I know My little
sheep and they know Me," so the good father St. Francis, like a good
shepherd, knew all the merits and virtues of his companions

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

by Divine revelation, and so likewise he knew their imperfections also;
whereby he was able to provide for all of them the best remedy; to wit,
humbling the proud, exalting the humble, rebuking vice, and praising
virtue; as may be read in the wonderful revelations which he had
concerning that first family of his. Among the which we find that once,
when St. Francis was with his said family in a Place, discoursing of
God, Friar Ruffino was not with them, being in the wood in
contemplation; but, while they continued to discourse of God, lo! Friar
Ruffino \[a noble citizen of Assisi, but a nobler servant of God, a most
pure virgin, sublimated by the noble prerogative of Divine
contemplation, and adorned before God and man with the flowers of
odoriferous conversation\] came forth from the wood and passed by at
some distance from them. Thereupon, St. Francis, beholding him, turned
to his companions and asked them, saying: "Tell me, which, think ye, is
the holiest soul that God hath upon this earth?" Whereto they made
answer and said that they believed it was his own. Then St. Francis said
unto them: "Most dear friars, I am of myself the most unworthy and the
vilest man that God hath in this world; but see ye that Friar Ruffino
who is now coming forth from the wood? God hath revealed unto me that
his soul is one of the three holiest souls in the world; and of a sooth
I tell you that I would not fear to call him St. Ruffino while he is yet
alive, inasmuch as his soul is confirmed in grace and sanctified and
canonised in heaven by our Lord Jesus Christ;" but St. Francis never
spake these words in the presence of the said Friar Ruffino. How St.
Francis knew the imperfections of his friars was clearly seen in like
manner in Friar Elias, whom he often rebuked for his pride; and in that
Friar

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Giovanni della Cappella, unto whom he foretold that he would hang
himself by the neck; and in that friar whose throat was held fast by the
devil what time he was admonished for disobedience; and in many other
friars whose secret defects and virtues he knew clearly by revelation of
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. How Friar Masseo obtained from Christ the virtue
of his humility](lff035.md)
