[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff013)  [Next](lff015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="small">How St. Francis made Friar Masseo turn round and
round many times, and thereafter gat him to Siena</span>

ONE day, while St. Francis journeyed with Friar Masseo, the said Friar
Masseo went a little before: and arriving at a certain place where three
roads met which led to Florence, to Siena and to Arezzo, Friar Masseo
said: "Father, by which way must we go?" St. Francis made answer: "By
that which God shall will". Said Friar Masseo: "And how shall we be able
to know the will of God?" St. Francis answered: "By the sign which I
shall show thee. Wherefore I command thee by the duty of holy obedience,
that in this place where three roads meet, on the spot where now thy
feet are set, thou turn round and round, as children do, and stop not
from turning thyself unless I bid thee do so." Then Friar Masseo began
to turn himself round, and so much did he turn that, by reason of the
dizziness of the head which is wont to be generated by such turning, he
fell divers times to the ground: but, in that St. Francis did not bid
him stop; he, desiring to obey faithfully, gat him up again (and resumed
the said turning). At the last, while he was turning round manfully, St.
Francis said: "Stand still, and move not"; and he stood; and St. Francis
asked him: "Toward which part is thy face set?" Friar Masseo answered:
"Toward Siena". St. Francis said: "That is the way whereby God wills
that we go". Now, as they went by that way, Friar Masseo marvelled that
St. Francis had made him do even as children do, before the worldly folk
who were passing by: nevertheless, for

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

reverence’ sake, he ventured not to say anything to the holy father. As
they drew nigh unto Siena, the people of the city heard of the coming of
the saint, and went forth to meet him; and for devotion they bare him
and his companion even unto the bishop's house, so that they touched no
ground with their feet. In that hour certain men of Siena fought
together and already two of them were slain; but when St. Francis
arrived there, he preached to them so devoutly and holily that he
brought them all to peace and to great unity and concord. For the which
thing the Bishop of Siena, hearing of that holy work which St. Francis
had done, invited him to his house and lodged him with great honour that
day and also the night. And, on the morning of the following day, St.
Francis, who, with true humility, in all his actions sought only God's
glory, rose up early with his companion and gat him thence without the
knowledge of the bishop. For which cause the said Friar Masseo went by
the way murmuring within himself, and saying: "What is it that this good
man hath done? He made me turn round like a child, and to the bishop who
hath shown him so much honour he hath spoken never a word nor thanked
him;" and it seemed to Friar Masseo that therein St. Francis had borne
himself indiscreetly. But afterward, returning to his right mind by
Divine inspiration, and reproaching himself in his heart, he said:
"Friar Masseo, too proud art thou who judgest Divine works, and thou art
worthy of hell for thy indiscreet pride; for yesterday Friar Francis
wrought such holy deeds that if an angel of God had done them they could
not have been more marvellous; wherefore, if he should bid thee throw
stones, thou oughtest so to do and to obey him; and that which he did
upon the way proceeded from Divine inspiration as is shown by the good

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

result which followed thereupon; in that if he had not made peace
between them who fought together, not only would the sword have devoured
the bodies of many, even as it had already begun to do, but also the
devil would have carried away many souls to hell; and therefore art thou
very foolish and proud who murmurest against that which manifestly
proceedeth from the will of God". And all these things which Friar
Masseo said in his heart, as he went before, were revealed of God to St.
Francis. Wherefore St. Francis drew nigh unto him and spake thus: "Hold
fast to those things which now thou thinkest, in that they arc good and
useful and inspired of God; but the first murmuring which thou madest
was blind and vain and proud, and was put in thy mind by the demon".
Then Friar Masseo perceived clearly that St. Francis knew the secrets of
his heart, and he understood certainly that the spirit of Divine wisdom
guided the holy father in all his actions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. How St. Francis laid upon Friar Masseo the service
of the gate . . .](lff015.md)
