[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff045)  [Next](lff047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### CHAPTER XLIII

<span class="small">How Friar Conrad of Offida converted a young friar,
who annoyed the other friars. And how the said young friar, after his
death, appeared to the said Friar Conrad, beseeching him to pray for
him; and how by his prayer he delivered him from the very grievous pains
of purgatory</span>

THE said Friar Conrad of Offida, wonderful zealot of evangelical poverty
and of the rule of St. Francis, was of so religious a life and of so
great merit before God, that Christ the blessed honoured him, both in
life and in death, with many miracles; among the which was this: he
having come, upon a time, as a guest to the Place of Offida, the friars
besought him, for the love of God and of charity, that he would admonish
a young friar who was in that Place, and who behaved himself so
childishly and disordinately and dissolutely that he interrupted both
the old and young of that community in the Divine office, and little or
nothing did he care for the other observances of the Rule. Wherefore,
Friar Conrad, for compassion of that young man and at the prayers of the
friars, one day called the said young man aside, and, in fervour of
charity, spake unto him such efficacious and devout words of
admonishment that, by operation of Divine grace, he forthwith became an
aged man in his behaviour, instead of a child, and so obedient and
obliging and diligent and devout, and therewithal so gentle and
serviceable and so studious of every virtuous thing, that, as formerly
all the community had been disturbed by him, so now by him were they all
contented and consoled; and they loved him much. Now it came to pass, as
God willed it, that, a little

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

while after this his conversion, the said young man died; and the friars
went mourning for him. And, a few days after his death, his soul
appeared to Friar Conrad, while he was devoutly praying before the altar
of the said convent, and saluted him devoutly, as a father. And Friar
Conrad asked him: "Who art thou?" He made answer and said: "I am the
soul of that young friar that died in these days". And Friar Conrad
said: "O my dearest son, how is it with thee?" And he answered: "Through
God's grace and through your teaching it is well with me, seeing that I
am not damned; but for certain sins of mine, whereof I had not time to
purge me sufficiently, I endure very great torments in purgatory: but I
pray thee, father, that, as through thy pity thou didst?' succour me
when I was alive, so now thou wilt vouchsafe to succour me in my
torments, saying some Paternoster for me; for thy prayer is very
acceptable in the sight of God". Then Friar Conrad, courteously
consenting unto his request, said the Paternoster once for him, together
with the *Requiem æternam;* whereupon that soul said: "O dearest father,
what benefit and what relief I feel! Now I beseech thee that thou say it
a second time." And Friar Conrad said it; and, when he had said it, the
soul said: "Holy father, when thou prayest for me I feel myself greatly
eased; wherefore I beseech thee that thou cease not to pray for me".
Then Friar Conrad, perceiving that that soul was much aided by his
prayers, said a hundred Paternosters for him; and, when he had said
them, that soul said: "I thank thee, most dear father, in the name of
God and of the charity which thou hast shown toward me; because by thy
prayers I am delivered from all my torments, and now am I going to the
heavenly kingdom". And, when

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

he had thus spoken, that soul departed. Then Friar Conrad, to give joy
and comfort to the friars, related to them in order all his vision. And
on this wise the soul of that youth went to paradise, through the merits
of Friar Conrad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV. How the Mother of Christ and St. John the
Evangelist appeared . . .](lff047)
