[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff051)  [Next](lff053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### CHAPTER XLIX

<span class="small">How Christ appeared to Friar John of Alvernia</span>

AMONG other wise and holy friars, sons of St. Francis, who, according to
the saying of Solomon, are the glory of their father, there was in our
days, in the said Province of the March, the venerable and holy friar,
John of Fermo, who, by reason of the long time which he dwelt in the
holy place of Alvernia where too he passed from this life, was also
called Friar John of Alvernia; for he was a man of excellent life and of
great sanctity. This Friar John, while he was yet a boy and living in
the world, desired with all his heart to follow the life of penance,
which preserves the purity of both body and soul; wherefore, even as a
very little child, he began to wear the mail-shirt and the iron ring
next his flesh, and to use great abstinence, and, especially when he
sojourned with the Canons of San Pietro of Fermo, who lived sumptuously,
he shunned fleshly delights and mortified his body with exceeding rigid
abstinence; but, inasmuch as he had in that place companions who were
much opposed thereto and who despoiled him of his mail-shirt and
thwarted his abstinence in divers manners; he, being inspired of God,
resolved to leave the world and its lovers and to offer himself wholly
to the arms of the Crucified, assuming the habit of the crucified St.
Francis; and so he did. And having been received into the Order so young
and committed to the care of the master of the novices, he became so
spiritual and devout that, whenever he heard the said master speak of
God, his heart melted like wax before the fire; and he was enkindled
with such sweetness and grace by the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine love, that,
being unable to endure such sweetness sitting still, he would rise up
and, as one drunken with the spirit, would run hither and thither, now
through the garden, now through the wood, and now through the church,
even as the flame and impetus of the Spirit drove him. Thereafter, in
process of time, the Divine grace caused this angelic man to increase
continually from virtue to virtue, and in celestial gifts and Divine
ecstasies and raptures; insomuch so that anon his mind was uplifted to
the splendours of the Cherubim, anon to the ardours of the Seraphim,
anon to the joys of the Blessed, anon to amorous and immoderate
embracings of Christ, not only with inward spiritual delights, but also
with manifest external indications and corporal pleasure. And, once in
particular, was his heart inflamed beyond measure by the fire of Divine
love; and this fire lasted in him for three full years; during which
period he received marvellous consolations and visitations Divine, and
ofttimes was he rapt in God; and, in a word, during the said period, he
seemed all on fire and burning with the love of Christ; and this was on
the holy mountain of Alvernia. But, because God hath singular care for
His children, giving them, at divers times, now consolation now
tribulation, now prosperity and now adversity, as He seeth that their
need is, to preserve them in humility or to enkindle in them a greater
desire for heavenly things; it pleased the Divine goodness, after those
three years, to withdraw from the said Friar John this light and fire of
Divine love, and to deprive him of every spiritual consolation.
Wherefore Friar John, being left without light and without love of God,
was wholly disconsolate and afflicted and sorrowful; for the which
cause, being in such anguish, he went through the wood, running hither
and thither,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

calling with voice and tears and sighs the beloved Spouse of his soul,
who had hidden Himself and departed from him, and without whose presence
his soul found no quiet nor repose; but in no place nor in any manner
might he find again his sweet Jesus, or renew that sweet spiritual
consolation of the love of Christ, which he had enjoyed aforetime. And
this tribulation lasted for many days, in the which he persevered in
continual weeping and sighing, ever beseeching God that of His pity He
would give back to him the well-beloved Spouse of his soul. At last,
when it pleased God to have sufficiently proved his patience and
enkindled his desire, upon a day, while Friar John went through the
aforesaid wood, thus afflicted and troubled, he sat him down for
weariness and leaned against a beech-tree and there abode, with his face
all bathed with tears, gazing toward heaven; and lo! on a sudden Jesus
Christ appeared before him in the pathway whereby Friar John had come;
but He spake no word. Then, Friar John, beholding Him and knowing full
well that it was Christ, forthwith cast himself down at His feet, and
with infinite weeping very humbly besought Him and said: "Help me, O my
Lord, for without Thee, my sweetest Saviour, I abide in darkness and in
woe; without Thee, most gentle Lamb, I am full of anguish and pain and
terror; without Thee, Son of God, most high, I am fulfilled with
confusion and shame; without Thee I am despoiled of every good and am
blinded; for Thou art Jesus Christ, the true light of souls; without
Thee I am lost and damned, because Thou art the life of souls, the life
of lives; without Thee I am barren and dry, because Thou art the
fountain of every gift and of every grace; without Thee I am altogether
disconsolate, because Thou art Jesus our redemption, love and

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

desire, the bread which giveth strength, and the wine which maketh glad
the hearts of the angels and the hearts of all the saints; enlighten me,
Master most gracious, and Shepherd most pitiful, for I am Thy little
sheep, albeit all unworthy". But because the desire of holy men, when
God delays to hear, enkindles them to greater love and merit, Christ the
blessed departed without giving ear unto his prayer and without
answering him a word, and gat Him thence by the aforesaid pathway. Then
Friar John rose up and ran after Him, and anew cast himself at His feet,
and, with holy importunity, laid hold upon Him and held Him, and with
most devout tears besought Him, saying: "O most sweet Jesus Christ, have
mercy upon me in my affliction; hear me out of the abundance of Thy
mercy and for the truth of Thy salvation, and give me back again the joy
of Thy countenance and of Thy pitiful regard, for the whole earth is
full of Thy mercy". And, yet again, Christ departed and spake no word
unto him, nor gave him any consolation; and He did even as doth the
mother to her child, when she makes him desire the breast and follow
after her weeping, to the end that he may thereafter take it the more
eagerly. Wherefore Friar John, with yet greater fervour and desire,
followed Christ, and, when he had overtaken Him, Christ the blessed
turned toward him and looked upon him with glad and gracious
countenance; and, opening His most holy and most merciful arms, embraced
him very tenderly; and as He opened His arms, Friar John beheld
resplendent rays of light issue from the most holy bosom of the Saviour,
which illuminated all the wood, and him also, both in soul and body.
Then Friar John kneeled down at the feet of Christ, and the Blessed
Jesus, even as He had done to the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Magdalene,
graciously offered him His foot to kiss; and Friar John, holding it with
extreme reverence, bathed it with so many tears that, of a truth, he
seemed another Magdalene; and he said, devoutly: "I pray Thee, my Lord,
that Thou look not on my sins, but, by the shedding of Thy most holy
blood, revivify my soul in the grace of Thy love; for Thou hast
commanded us to love Thee with all our heart and with all our soul; and
this commandment may no man fulfil without Thy aid. Aid me, then, most
loving Son of God, that I may love Thee with all my heart and with all
my strength." And while Friar John thus spoke, lying at the feet of
Christ, his prayer was answered, and he received from Him once again the
first grace, to wit the fire of Divine love, and felt himself wholly
renewed and comforted; and, knowing that the gift of Divine grace had
returned to him, he began to thank the Blessed Christ and to devoutly
kiss His feet. And, thereafter, having risen up to look upon the face of
Christ, Jesus Christ held out His most holy hands and offered them to
him to kiss; and, when Friar John had kissed them, he drew nigh and
leaned upon the breast of Jesus and embraced and kissed Him; and Christ,
in like manner, embraced and kissed him. And in this embracing and
kissing Friar John perceived so Divine a fragrance that, if all the
odoriferous graces and all the fragrant things of the world had been
gathered together, the odour thereof would have seemed a stench in
comparison with that fragrance; and therein Friar John was rapt and
consoled and illuminated; and that fragrance endured within his soul for
many months. And from thenceforward, out of his mouth, which had drunk
of the fountain of Divine wisdom in the sacred breast of the Saviour,
there came marvellous and celestial words,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

which changed men's hearts and brought forth much fruit in the souls of
them who gave ear unto him; and in that woodland pathway where stood the
blessed feet of Christ, and for some distance round about, Friar John,
for a long time thereafter, smelled that fragrance and saw that
splendour, whenever he went thither. Now, when Friar John had come to
himself after that rapture, and the corporal presence of Christ had
disappeared, he remained so illuminated in soul, in the abyss of his
divinity, that, albeit he was not a man learned through human study, yet
he marvellously solved and explained the most subtle and lofty questions
concerning the Divine Trinity, and the profound mysteries of the Holy
Scriptures. And ofttimes, thereafter, when speaking before the Pope and
the cardinals, and kings, and barons, and masters, and doctors, he
greatly amazed them all by the sublime words which he spake and by his
profound judgments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L. How . . . Friar John of Alvernia saw many souls
liberated from purgatory](lff053.md)
