[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff032)  [Next](lff034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXX

<span class="small">Of the beautiful sermon which St. Francis and Friar
Ruffino preached in Assisi, when they preached naked</span>

THROUGH continual contemplation, the aforesaid Friar Ruffino was so
absorbed in God that he had become well-nigh insensible and dumb, and
exceeding rarely spoke; and moreover he had neither grace nor courage
nor eloquence in preaching. Nevertheless St. Francis, one day, ordered
him to go to Assisi and preach to the people that which God inspired him
to preach. Whereto Friar Ruffino made answer: "Reverend father, I
beseech thee that thou have me excused and send me not, because, as thou
knowest, I have not the gift of preaching and am a

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

simple man and ignorant". Then said St. Francis: "Inasmuch as thou hast
not obeyed at once, I command thee by holy obedience that thou go to
Assisi, naked as thou wast born, save only for thy breeches, and that
thou enter into a church, thus naked, and preach to the people". At this
command, the aforesaid Friar Ruffino stripped himself, and went to
Assisi, and entered into a church; and, when he had bowed himself before
the altar, he went up into the pulpit and began to preach; whereat
children and men began to laugh, and said: "Behold, now, how these men
do so much penance that they become fools and beside themselves". In the
meantime, St. Francis, considering the prompt obedience of Friar
Ruffino, who was of one of the noblest families of Assisi, and of the
hard commandment which he had given him, began to blame himself, saying:
"How hast thou such great presumption, son of Peter Bernardoni, vile
manikin, as to command Friar Ruffino, one of the first gentlemen of
Assisi, to go naked to preach to the people like a madman? By God, thou
shalt prove in thine own person that which thou orderest others to do."
And anon, in fervour of spirit, he stripped himself naked likewise, and
so gat him up to Assisi, taking with him Friar Leo, that he might carry
his habit and that of Friar Ruffino. And, when the men of Assisi beheld
St. Francis likewise naked they made a mock at him, deeming that he and
Friar Ruffino had gone mad through excessive penance. Then St. Francis
entered into the church where Friar Ruffino was preaching these words:
"Oh most dearly beloved, flee the world and cease from sin; render unto
others that which is theirs, if ye would escape hell; keep the
commandments of God, loving God and your neighbour if ye would go to
heaven; do

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

penance if ye would possess the kingdom of heaven". Thereupon St.
Francis went up naked into the pulpit, and began to preach so
marvellously of the contempt of the world, of holy repentance, of
voluntary poverty and of the desire of the celestial kingdom, and of the
nakedness and shame of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all
they which were at the sermon, men and women in great numbers, began to
weep very bitterly, with wonderful devotion and compunction of heart;
and not there alone, but throughout the whole of Assisi, was there on
that day so great weeping for the passion of Christ that never had there
been the like; and, the people being thus edified and comforted by the
work of St. Francis and Friar Ruffino, St. Francis reclothed Friar
Ruffino and himself; and, thus reclothed, they returned to the Place of
the Porziuncula praising and glorifying God who had given them grace to
conquer themselves through contempt of self, and to edify the little
sheep of Christ by their good example, and to show how much the world is
to be despised. And on that day so greatly did the devotion of the
people increase toward them, that he who might touch the hem of their
garment deemed himself blessed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. How St. Francis knew . . . the secrets of the
hearts of all his friars](lff034.md)
