[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff089)  [Next](lff091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER OF THE HOLY FEAR OF GOD

HE who feareth not, showeth that he hath not aught to lose. The holy
fear of God orders, rules and directs the soul, and maketh it to come
into grace. If any man possesseth any grace or Divine virtue, holy fear
is that which preserves it. And whosoever hath not yet obtained virtue
or grace, holy fear maketh him obtain it. The holy fear of God is a
guide which guideth us to the Divine graces, in that it maketh the soul
wherein it dwells to speedily attain to holy virtue and to the Divine
graces. All creatures which ever fell into sin, would never have fallen
if they had possessed the holy fear of God. But this holy gift of fear
is not given save only to the perfect, because as a

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

man is more perfect so is he more fearful and humble. Blessed is that
man who knoweth himself to be in a prison in this world, and who alway
remembereth how grievously he hath offended his Lord! Much ought man to
fear pride, lest it give him a push and cause him to fall from the state
of grace in which he is, for a man may never be safe when he is among
our enemies; and our enemies are the allurements of this miserable
world, and our own flesh, the which, together with the fiends, is ever
an enemy of the soul. Greater fear doth it behove a man to have lest his
own wickedness should conquer and deceive him, than of any other enemy
of his. A thing impossible is it that man can mount up and ascend to any
grace or Divine virtue, or persevere therein, without holy fear. He who
hath not the fear of God goeth in peril of death and much more of being
utterly lost. The fear of God maketh a man to obey with humility, and
causeth him to bow his head beneath the yoke of obedience; and the
greater fear a man hath the more fervently doth he pray; no little gift
is that of prayer to him unto whom it is given. The virtuous actions of
men, however great they seem to me, are not accounted or rewarded
according to our judgment, but according to the judgment and good
pleasure of God; for God regards not the quantity of the work done, but
the greatness of the love and humility of the doer: and therefore the
safest part for us is always to love and fear with humbleness, and never
to trust in ourselves for any good, ever suspecting those thoughts which
are born in the mind under the appearance of good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Holy Patience](lff091)
