[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff035)  [Next](lff037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIII

<span class="small">How St. Clare, at the bidding of the Pope, blessed
the bread which was upon the table: whereby the sign of the holy Cross
appeared on every loaf</span>

ST. CLARE, most devout disciple of the Cross of Christ and noble plant
of Messer St. Francis, was of such great sanctity that not only bishops
and cardinals, but also the Pope was filled with great longing to see
her and to hear her, and oftentimes visited her in person. Among the
other times was one when the holy father went to her convent to hear her
speak of things celestial and Divine; and, while they thus reasoned
together of divers matters, St. Clare caused the tables to be made ready
and bread to be set thereon, that the holy father might bless it.
Wherefore, when their spiritual discourse was ended, St. Clare kneeled
down with great reverence and besought him to vouchsafe to bless the
bread which was upon the table. The holy father made answer: "Most
faithful Sister Clare, I desire that thou bless this bread and make
thereover the sign of the most holy Cross of Christ, unto whom thou hast
wholly given thyself". St. Clare said: "Most holy father, I pray thee
have me excused, for I should be deserving of great blame, if, before
the Vicar of Christ, I, who am but a vile and worthless woman, should
presume to give this blessing". And the Pope made answer: "To the end
that this be not imputed to presumption but to merit of obedience, I
command thee by holy obedience that thou make the sign of the most holy
Cross over this bread and bless it in the name of God". Then St. Clare,
as a true daughter of obedience, blessed those loaves most

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

devoutly with the sign of the most holy Cross. O marvellous thing! On
all those loaves there instantly appeared the sign of the holy Cross
most fairly cut; thereafter of those loaves part were eaten and part
were preserved in record of the miracle. And the holy father, when he
had beheld the miracle, departed, taking some of the said bread with
him, giving thanks to God and leaving St. Clare with his blessing. At
that time there dwelt in the Convent Sister Ortolana, the mother of St.
Clare, and Sister Agnes, her sister, both of them like St. Clare full of
virtue and of the Holy Ghost, with many other holy nuns and brides of
Christ; to whom St. Francis was wont to send much sick folk; and they by
their prayers and by the sign of the most holy Cross restored health '
to them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. How St. Louis, King of France, in the garb of a
pilgrim . . .](lff037)
