[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff031)  [Next](lff033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIX

<span class="small">How the devil in the form of Christ Crucified
appeared many times to Friar Ruffino, telling him that he was losing the
good which he did, because he was not among those elected to eternal
life. Whereof St. Francis knew by revelation of God, and made Friar
Ruffino to perceive the error which he had believed.</span>

FRIAR RUFFINO, one of the most noble citizens of Assisi and a companion
of St. Francis, a man of great sanctity, was once most violently
assailed and tempted in his soul concerning predestination; whereby he
became exceeding sad and melancholy, in that the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

demon put it into his heart that he was damned and was not among those
predestined to eternal life, and that he was losing that which he did in
the Order. And this temptation continuing for many many days, albeit he
revealed it not to St. Francis for very shame, he nevertheless abandoned
not the observance of the customary prayers and fasts; wherefore the
enemy began to add grief to grief, over and above the battle within,
assailing him also from without by false apparitions. Wherefore, on a
time, he appeared to him in the form of Christ Crucified, and said unto
him: "O Friar Ruffino, wherefore dost thou afflict thyself in penance
and in prayer, when thou art not among those predestined to eternal
life? And, believe me, I know whom I have elected and predestined; and
believe thou not the son of Peter Bernardoni, if he tell thee the
contrary, and also ask him not touching this matter, because neither he
nor others know it, save I alone who am the Son of God; and, therefore,
believe me for certain that thou art of the number of the damned; and
the son of Peter Bernardoni, thy father, and his father, also are
damned, and whosoever follows him is deceived." And, when these words
had been spoken, \[the mind of\] Friar Ruffino began to be so darkened
by the Prince of Darkness, that he lost all the faith and love which he
had had for St. Francis, and cared not to tell him anything thereof. But
that which Friar Ruffino said not to the holy father the Holy Spirit
revealed to him; wherefore St. Francis, seeing in spirit the exceeding
peril of the said friar, sent Friar Masseo for him; to whom Friar
Ruffino replied upbraidingly: "What have I to do with Friar Francis?"
Then Friar Masseo, fulfilled with Divine wisdom and knowing the wiles of
the devil, said: "O Friar Ruffino, knowest thou not that Friar Francis
is as an angel of God, who

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

hath illumined so many souls in the world, and from whom we have
received the grace of God? Wherefore I will that by all means thou come
with me to him; because I see clearly that thou art deceived by the
devil." And when he had thus spoken, Friar Ruffino arose and went to St.
Francis. And seeing him coming afar off, St. Francis began to shout: "O
Friar Ruffino, thou poor wretch, whom hast thou believed?" And when
Friar Ruffino had come unto him, he told him in order all the temptation
wherewith he had been tempted by the demon, both within and without; and
he showed him clearly that he who had appeared unto him was the devil
and not Christ, and that on nowise ought he to consent to his
suggestions; "but when the devil shall say unto thee again: 'Thou art
damned,' do thou answer him thus: 'Open thy mouth, for now I would void
my dung therein'; and this shall be a sign unto thee that he is the
devil and not Christ, that when thou shalt have thus answered him he
will immediately flee away. Also by this token thou oughtest to have
known that he was the devil, because he hardened thy heart to every good
thing, the which is his proper office; but Christ the blessed never
hardens the heart of the faithful man, but rather softens it, according
as He saith by the mouth of the prophet: *I will take away from you the
stony heart and will give you a heart of flesh*." Then Friar Ruffino,
perceiving that St. Francis told him in order all the fashion of his
temptation, was moved to repentance by his words and began to weep sore
and to adore St. Francis as a saint, and to humbly acknowledge his fault
in having concealed his temptation. Thus was he filled with consolation
and comfort by the admonishments of the holy father, and altogether
changed for the better. Thereafter, at the last, St. Francis said unto
him: "Go, son, and

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

confess thyself and forget not thy accustomed diligence in prayer; and
know of a surety that this temptation will be to thee a great benefit
and consolation, as in a little while thou shalt prove." Then Friar
Ruffino returned to his cell in the wood, and lo! while he continued in
prayer, with many tears, the enemy appeared to him in the person of
Christ, according to all outward seeming, and said unto him: "O Friar
Ruffino, have I not told thee not to believe the son of Peter Bernardoni
and not to weary thyself in tears and prayers, because thou art damned?
What doth it profit thee to afflict thyself while thou art alive, when
afterward, when thou shalt die thou shalt be damned?" And forthwith
Friar Ruffino replied to the demon: "Open thy mouth, for now would I
void my dung therein"; and immediately, the devil departed, full of
fierce anger, with such tempest and commotion of the rocks of Mount
Subassio, which was there beside, that the shattering of the rocks which
fell down lasted for a long time; and so mightily did they crash
together that they shot forth horrible gleams of fire through all the
valley; and, for the terrible din which they made, St. Francis and his
companions came forth from the Place in great amazement, to see what new
thing this might be; and even unto this day that exceeding great ruin of
rocks may be seen there. Then Friar Ruffino perceived clearly that it
was the devil who had deceived him; and he returned to St. Francis and
anew flung himself upon the ground and acknowledged his fault, and St.
Francis once more comforted him with sweet words and sent him back to
his cell wholly consoled. There, while he continued in prayer with
exceeding great devotion, the blessed Christ appeared to him, and
enkindled all his soul with Divine love, and said: "Well hast thou done,
son, that thou didst

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

believe Friar Francis, in that he who afflicted thee was the demon; but
I am Christ, thy master; and to make thee very sure thereof I give thee
this sign: As long as thou shalt live, thou shalt never feel any sadness
or melancholy". And, when He had thus spoken, Christ departed leaving
him so full of joy and sweetness of spirit and exaltation of soul, that
day and night he was absorbed and rapt in God. And, from thenceforward,
he was so confirmed in grace and in assurance of salvation that he
became altogether changed into another man; and he would have continued
day and night in prayer and in contemplation of Divine things, if the
others would have let him alone. Wherefore St. Francis used to say of
him, that Friar Ruffino was in this life canonised by Christ, and that,
except in his presence, he would not hesitate to call him St. Ruffino,
albeit he was yet alive on earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. Of the beautiful sermon . . . when they preached
naked](lff033)
