[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff092)  [Next](lff094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### CHAPTER OF THE IRKSOMENESS OF TEMPORAL THINGS

MANY griefs and many sorrows will that wretched man have who setteth his
desire and his heart and his hope on earthly things, for the which he
abandoneth and loseth heavenly things; and finally he will also lose
these earthly things. The eagle flieth very high; but, if she had some
weight tied to her wings she could not fly very high: and thus man by
reason of the weight of earthly things cannot fly high, to wit cannot
attain unto perfection; but the wise man, who tieth the weight of
remembrance of death and of judgment to the wings of his heart, could
not, by reason of great fear, go astray or fly among the vanities and
riches of this world, which are the cause of damnation. Every day we see
the men of the world labour and strive much, and risk great bodily
perils to gain these transitory riches; and after they shall have
laboured and gained much, in a moment they will die and will leave that
which they shall have gained during their life: and therefore this
deceitful world is not to be trusted, for it defraudeth every man which
believeth it, since it is false. But whoso desireth and is minded to be
great and abundantly rich, let him seek and love the riches and the
possessions of eternity, which always satisfy and never cause satiety
and never become less. If we would not err, let us take ensample from
the beasts and birds, which, when they have fed are content, and seek
nothing save their sustenance front one hour to another, when they have
need thereof; and even so should man be content with the necessities of
life temperately and without superfluity. Friar Giles said that the ants
pleased not St. Francis as did the

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

other animals, by reason of the great care which they had to gather
together and to lay by great store of grain in the summer time for the
winter: but he used to say that the birds pleased him much more, because
they gathered together nothing on one day for another. But the ant
setteth us this ensample that we ought not to stand idle in the
summer-time of this present life, to the end that we may not find
ourselves empty and without fruit in the winter of the last and final
judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Holy Chastity](lff094)
