[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff097)  [Next](lff099.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER OF HOLY SPIRITUAL PRUDENCE

O THOU servant of the heavenly King, that wouldst learn the mysteries
and the profitable and virtuous prudence of the holy spiritual doctrine,
open well the ears of the intellect of thy soul, and receive with desire
of heart; and keep carefully in the house of thy memory the precious
treasure of these precepts and teachings and spiritual warnings, the
which I speak unto thee, whereby thou shalt be illuminated and directed
on thy journey, to wit of the spiritual life, and shalt be armed against
the evil and subtle assaults of thy corporeal and incorporeal enemies,
and shalt go with humble boldness, safely voyaging over the tempestuous
sea of this present life, until thou shalt reach the longed-for harbour
of salvation. Then, my

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

son, attend well and mark that which I say unto thee: If thou wouldst
see well, put out thine eyes and be blind; if thou wouldst hear well,
become deaf; if thou wouldst speak well, become dumb; if thou wouldst
walk well, stand still and walk with thy mind; if thou wouldst work
well, cut off thy hands, and work with thy heart; if thou wouldst love
well, hate thyself; if thou wouldst live well, mortify thyself; if thou
wouldst gain much and be rich, lose and be poor; if thou wouldst enjoy
thyself and take thine ease, afflict thyself and be always sorrowful; if
thou wouldst be safe, be ever fearful and suspect thyself; if thou
wouldst be exalted and have great honour, humiliate and revile thyself;
if thou wouldst be held in great reverence, despise thyself and do
reverence to them that do thee despite and dishonour; if thou wouldst
have good always, endure evil always; if thou wouldst be blessed, desire
that all folk curse thee; and if thou wouldst have true rest and
eternal, labour and afflict thyself, and desire every temporal calamity.
O how great wisdom is it to know how to do and to perform these things!
but because these things are great and very high therefore are they
granted by God to but few persons. But verily he who shall study well
all the aforesaid things and shall do them, of him I say that he needeth
not to go to Bologna or to Paris to learn other theology; for if a man
should live 1,000 years, and should do no outward bodily action and
should speak no word with his tongue, nevertheless I say that he would
have enough to do, disciplining himself inwardly in his heart, labouring
within himself in the purifying and directing and justifying of his mind
and of his soul. A man ought not to wish either to see, or to hear, or
to speak of anything save only what is profitable for his soul.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The man who
knoweth not himself is not known. And therefore woe unto us, when we
receive the gifts and graces of the Lord and know not enough to
recognise them: but greater woe to those who neither receive them nor
recognise them, nor even care to obtain and to possess them. Man is made
in the image of God, and as he willeth so he changeth; but the good God
changeth never.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Profitable and Unprofitable Knowledge](lff099.md)
