[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff046)  [Next](lff048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIV

<span class="small">How the Mother of Christ and St. John the Evangelist
appeared to Friar Conrad, and told him which of them suffered the
greater grief for the Passion of Christ</span>

AT the time when there dwelt together, in the territory of Ancona in the
Place of Forano, Friar Conrad and Friar Peter aforesaid, the which were
two brilliant stars in the Province of the March, and two heavenly men;
forasmuch as there was between them such love and charity that they
seemed to be of one selfsame heart and of one soul, they bound
themselves together by this compact: that every consolation, which the
mercy of God should grant them, they would reveal each to the other in
love. Now, after they had made this compact together, it befel that, one
day, while Friar Peter was praying and meditating most devoutly of the
Passion of Christ, and how the most blessed Mother of Christ and St.
John the Evangelist, the well-beloved disciple, and St. Francis were
depicted at the foot of the Cross, as being, by grief of mind, crucified
with Christ; there came upon him a desire to know which of those three
had had greater grief for the Passion of Christ; whether the Mother
which had borne Him, or the disciple which had slept upon His bosom, or
St. Francis who was crucified with Christ. And as he thus devoutly
meditated, the Virgin Mary appeared to him with St. John, the
Evangelist, and with St. Francis, clad in most noble garments of

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

beatific glory; but St. Francis appeared clad in more beautiful vesture
than St. John. And at this vision Peter was sore afraid; but St. John
comforted him and said: "Fear not, most dear friar, seeing that we are
come to console thee touching thy doubt. Know, then, that the Mother of
Christ and I, above all other creatures, were grieved at the Passion of
Christ; but after us St. Francis had greater grief than any other; and
therefore dost thou behold him in so great glory." And Friar Peter asked
him: "Most holy Apostle of Christ, wherefore doth the vesture of St.
Francis show more beautiful than thine?" St. John made answer: "The
reason is this: because, when he was in this world, he wore viler
garments than I". And, when he had thus spoken, St. John gave Friar
Peter a glorious garment, which he carried in his hand, and said unto
him: "Take this garment which I have brought for thee"; and, when St.
John would have clad him therewith, Friar Peter fell to the ground in
terror and amaze, and began to cry: "Friar Conrad, dearest Friar Conrad,
aid me quickly; come hither and behold marvellous things". And, as he
spake these words, that holy vision vanished away. Thereafter, when
Friar Conrad came he told him everything in order; and they gave thanks
to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. Of the holy Friar John of Penna](lff048.md)
