[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff043)  [Next](lff045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLI

<span class="small">How the venerable Friar Simon delivered from a great
temptation a friar, who for this cause was minded to depart out of the
Order</span>

ABOUT the time of the commencement of the Order of St. Francis, and
while he was yet alive, a young man of Assisi, who was called Friar
Simon, entered the Order; the which was adorned and dowered of God with
such grace, and with such contemplation and elevation of mind that his
whole life

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

was a mirror of holiness, according as I have heard from those who were
with him for a long time. Very rarely was he seen out of his cell; and
if, at any time, he was in the company of the friars, he always spake of
God. Never had he learned grammar; yet such profound and high things did
he speak of God and of the love of Christ that his words appeared
supernatural words; whence it came to pass that one evening, having gone
into the wood with Friar James of Massa, to speak of God, he talked so
sweetly of the Divine love that they passed the whole night in that
discourse; and, in the morning, it seemed to them that it had been but a
very little while, according to that which the said Friar James told me.
And, when the said Friar Simon received the illuminations of God's love,
he was filled in spirit with such exceeding sweetness and peace, that
ofttimes, when he felt them coming upon him, he laid himself down upon
his bed; because the tranquil sweetness of the Holy Ghost demanded of
him not only repose of soul, but also of body; and in such Divine
visitations he was often rapt in God, and became altogether insensible
to corporal things. Wherefore, once while he was thus rapt in God and
insensible to the world, burning inwardly with Divine love and with his
bodily senses feeling nothing at all of external things, a certain
friar, wishing to prove if this were really so, and to see if he was as
he appeared to be, went and took a coal of fire and laid it on his naked
foot; and Friar Simon felt nothing, neither did it make any mark upon
his foot, albeit it remained thereon for so long a time that it went out
of itself. The said Friar Simon, when he sat him down at table, or ever
he took bodily food, took spiritual food for himself and gave it to
others, speaking of God. By his devout speech he once converted a youth
of San

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Severino, the
which in the world was a very vain and worldly youth, of noble blood and
very dainty of body; and Friar Simon, having received the said youth
into the Order, kept his secular garments by him; and he abode with
Friar Simon to be instructed in the rules of the Order. Wherefore, the
devil, who seeketh to bring to naught every good thing, vexed him with
so sore a temptation and with such burning lust of the flesh that on no
wise might he resist it; for the which cause he betook himself to Friar
Simon and said unto him: "Give me back my garments which I wore in the
world, for I can no longer resist this carnal temptation". Then, Friar
Simon, having great compassion for him, said unto him: "Sit thou here
with me, my son, a little while"; and he began to speak to him of God,
after such a manner that every temptation left him; and thereafter what
time the temptation returned and he asked for his garments, Friar Simon
drove it away by speaking of God. And when this had been done divers
times, finally, one night, the said temptation assailed him so much more
violently than usual that, for nothing in the world, might he resist it;
and he went to Friar Simon to demand of him, once for all, his secular
garments, in that by no means might he any longer stay. Then Friar
Simon, according to his wont, made him sit by his side, and, as he spake
of God, the young man bowed his head upon the bosom of Friar Simon for .
grief and sorrow of heart. Thereupon Friar Simon, for the great
compassion that he had, lifted up his eyes to heaven and prayed God most
devoutly for him; and he was rapt in God and his prayer was answered; so
that, when he returned unto himself, the young man was wholly freed from
that temptation, as if he had never felt it at all. Moreover the fire of
the temptation

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

was changed into the fire of the Holy Ghost; and, because he had drawn
nigh unto the burning coal, to wit unto Friar Simon, he was all inflamed
with love of God and of his neighbour; so much so that, once, when a
malefactor had been taken and condemned to have both his eyes torn out,
he, to wit, the aforesaid young man, was so filled with pity that he
went boldly to the Rector and in full Council, with many tears and
devout prayers, begged that one of his own eyes might be put out, and
one only of the malefactor's, to the end that he might not lose them
both. But the Rector and his Council, beholding the great fervour of the
charity of this friar, pardoned both the one and the other. Now one day,
the said Friar Simon being in prayer in the wood and feeling great
consolation in his soul, a flock of crows began to annoy him with their
cries; wherefore he commanded them in the name of Jesus to depart
thence, and to return no more; and, thereupon, the said birds gat them
thence and thereafter were never more seen or heard, neither there nor
in all the district round about. And this miracle was evident in all the
territory of Fermo, wherein was the said place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII. Of beautiful miracles which God wrought through the
holy friars . . .](lff045)
