[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff026)  [Next](lff028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIV

<span class="small">How St. Francis converted the Soldan of Babylon to
the faith</span>

ST. FRANCIS, urged thereto by zeal for the faith of Christ, and by the
desire of martyrdom, went once across the seas with his twelve most holy
companions, to betake himself straight to the Soldan of Babylon; and
being come unto a country of the Saracens, where the passes were guarded
by certain

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

cruel men to the end that no Christian who went thereby might be able to
escape death; they, as it pleased God, were not slain, but taken, beaten
and bound, and so led into the presence of the Soldan. And being in his
presence, St. Francis, taught by the Holy Ghost, preached so divinely of
the faith of Christ, that for that faith he even wished to enter into
the fire. Wherefore the Soldan began to have very great devotion toward
him, alike for the constancy of his faith and for the contempt of the
world which he saw in him (inasmuch as he would receive no gift from
him, albeit he was exceeding poor), and also for the zeal of martyrdom
which he saw in him. From thenceforward the Soldan heard him gladly and
prayed him that he would often return to him; granting, to him and to
his companions, leave to preach wheresoever they pleased; and he gave
them a token to the end that they might not be offended by any man.
\[Having this leave then, St. Francis sent his chosen companions, two by
two, into divers regions of the Saracens to preach the faith of Christ.
And he, with one of them, chose a street and, arriving thereat, entered
into an inn to rest himself. And there he found a woman, most beautiful
of body but foul of soul, the which accursed one tempted him to sin. And
St. Francis said: "I accept, let us to bed," and she led him into a
chamber. Then St. Francis said: "Come with me"; and he conducted her to
a very great fire which was burning in that chamber; and in fervour of
spirit he stripped himself naked and cast himself down beside that fire,
on the hot hearthstone; and he invited her to go and undress herself and
to lie with him in that downy and beautiful bed. And, when St. Francis
had thus lain there for a long time, with cheerful face and without
being burned or singed at all, that woman, terrified at so great

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

a miracle and pricked in the heart, not only repented her of her sin and
evil intent, but also turned perfectly to the faith of Christ, and
became of so great sanctity that, through her, many souls were saved in
those lands.\] At last St. Francis, [seeing](errata.htm#6.md) that he could
have no more fruit in those parts, prepared, by Divine revelation, to
return with all his companions to the land of the faithful; and, having
gathered them all together, he returned to the Soldan and took leave of
him. Then the Soldan said unto him: "Friar Francis, I would willingly be
converted to the faith of Christ, but I fear to be so now, because, if
these heard thereof, they would slay both thee and me, with all thy
companions: and seeing that thou canst yet do much good and that I have
certain matters of great moment to conclude, I would not now bring about
thy death and mine; but do thou teach me how I may save myself; I am
ready to do that which thou mayest lay upon me". Then St. Francis said:
"Sir, I now go from thee; but after I shall be come into my own country
and, through the grace of God, shall have ascended into heaven, after my
death, according as it shall please God, I will send thee two of my
friars from whom thou mayest receive the holy baptism of Christ, and
thou shalt be saved, as my Lord Jesus Christ hath revealed unto me. And
do thou, in the meantime, free thyself from every hindrance, to the end
that, when the grace of God shall come unto thee, it may find thee
prepared to faith and to devotion." And this he promised to do, and so
did he. Now when this was done, St. Francis returned with that venerable
college of his holy companions; and after certain years, St. Francis by
bodily death rendered his soul to God. And the Soldan, falling sick,
awaited the fulfilment of the promise of St. Francis, and set guards at
certain

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

passes and ordered that, if two friars should appear in the habit of St.
Francis, they should immediately be brought to him. At that time St.
Francis appeared to two friars, and commanded them to go without delay
to the Soldan to provide for his salvation, according as he had promised
him; the which friars set out immediately, and crossing the sea, were
led before the Soldan by the aforesaid guard; and when the Soldan saw
them, he was exceeding glad and said: "Now know I of a truth that God
hath sent me His servants for my salvation, according to the promise
which St Francis made me by Divine revelation." And, when he had been
instructed in the faith of Christ and baptised by the said friars, thus
born again in Christ, he died of that sickness and his soul was saved
through the merits and prayers of St. Francis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. How St. Francis miraculously healed one who was a
leper both in soul and body . . .](lff028.md)
