[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

<span class="small">How Friar Leo saw a terrible vision in a
dream</span>

ONCE, in a dream, Friar Leo beheld a vision of the making ready of the
Divine judgment. He beheld the Angels making music with trumpets and
divers instruments, and calling together a marvellous great crowd in a
meadow. And on one side of the meadow was set a ladder all rosy red,
which reached from earth even unto heaven, and on the other side of the
meadow was set another ladder all white, which descended from heaven to
earth. On the top of the red ladder, Christ appeared a Lord offended and
exceeding wrath. And St. Francis was nigh unto Christ but a few steps
lower down; and he came farther down the ladder, and with a loud voice
and great fervour called and said: "Come ye, my friars, come
confidently, fear not, come, draw nigh unto the Lord, for He calleth
you". At the voice of St. Francis and at his bidding, the friars went
and climbed up the red ladder with great confidence. And, when they were
all thereon, some fell off the third step, and some off the fourth step,
others off the fifth and the sixth; and at the last all fell, so that
there remained not one upon the ladder. And so great ruin of his friars,
St. Francis, as a pitiful father, was moved to compassion, and besought
the Judge for his sons, that He would receive them to His mercy. And
Christ showed His wounds all bloody, and said unto St. Francis: "This
have thy friars done unto Me". And St. Francis

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

delayed not, but, even as he interceded, came down certain steps, and
cried unto the friars that were fallen from the red ladder and said:
"Come ye, rise up, my sons and friars, be of good courage and despair
not, but run to the white ladder and climb up it, for by it ye shall be
received into the Kingdom of Heaven; run, friars, through paternal
admonishment, to the white ladder". And on the top of the ladder
appeared the glorious Virgin Mary, the Mother of Jesus Christ, all
pitiful and kind, and welcomed those friars; and without any difficulty
they entered into the eternal kingdom. To the praise of Christ. Amen.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

 

 

 

<span class="small">PRINTED BY  
TURNBULL AND SPEARS,  
EDINBURGH</span>

 

 

 
