[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff102)  [Next](lff104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER OF HOLY OBEDIENCE

THE more the Religious abideth beneath the yoke of holy obedience, for
the love of God, the greater fruit will he give of himself to God; the
more he shall be subject to his Superior for the honour of God, the more
free will he be and clean from sin. The true obedient Religious is like
unto a knight well armed and mounted the which overcometh and breaketh
the ranks of his enemies, safely and without fear, because none of them
can hurt him. But he who obeyeth with murmuring and on compulsion, is
like unto an unarmed knight and ill-mounted, the which,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

when he entereth into the battle, will be cast to earth by his enemies,
and wounded by them and taken, and sometimes imprisoned and slain. That
Religious who desireth to live according to his own will and pleasure,
showeth that he would build himself an everlasting habitation in the
abyss of hell. When the ox putteth his neck beneath the yoke, then is
the ground well ploughed and yieldeth good fruit in its season, but when
the ox wandereth where it will, the earth remaineth untilled and wild,
and yieldeth not its fruit in due season. And even so, the Religious who
submitted his neck to the yoke of obedience, bringeth forth much fruit
to the Lord God in due season; but he who obeyeth not his Superior with
a good heart, remaineth sterile and wild and without fruit of his
profession. Wise men and magnanimous submit their necks readily, without
fear and without doubting, to the yoke of holy obedience; but foolish
and fearful men seek to draw their necks from under the yoke of holy
obedience, and thereafter are not willing to obey any creature. I hold
it greater perfection, in the servant of God, to simply obey his
superior, for reverence and love of God, than to obey God Himself, if
God should lay his commands upon him; for he who is obedient to a vicar
of the Lord, would, of a surety, be more obedient to the Lord himself if
He should command him. Also meseemeth that, if any man had promised
obedience to another, and had grace to speak with angels; and if it
befel that, while he was speaking with those angels, he to whom he had
promised obedience called him; I say that he ought forthwith to stop
speaking with the Angels, and ought to hasten to do obedience for the
honour of God. He who hath set his neck beneath the yoke of holy
obedience, and thereafter would withdraw

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

his neck from under that obedience, through desire of following a life
of greater perfection; I say that, if he be not first altogether perfect
in the state of obedience, it is a sign of the great pride which
secretly lieth hid in his soul. Obedience is the path which leadeth to
every virtue; and disobedience is the path of every evil and of every
sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of the Remembrance of Death](lff104.md)
