[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff103)  [Next](lff105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER OF THE REMEMBRANCE OF DEATH

IF man had alway before the eyes of his mind the remembrance of his
death, and of the last eternal judgment, and of the pains and torments
of damned souls, it is certain that never would the wish to sin or to
offend God come upon him. But if it were possible that some man had
lived from the beginning of the world even until now, and, during all
that time, had suffered every adversity, tribulation, pain, affliction
and sorrow, and, if he should die, and his soul should go to receive the
eternal happiness of Heaven, what harm would all that evil do him which
he had borne in the time that was past? And so, likewise, if a man had
had, through all the aforesaid time, every good thing and every delight
and pleasure and consolation of the world, and thereafter he should die
and his soul should receive those eternal pains of Hell, what would all
the good things, which he had enjoyed, in the time that was past, profit
him? A man who was a wanderer said to Friar Giles: "I tell thee that
willingly would I live long in this world and have great riches and
abundance of everything; and I would desire to be much honoured". Unto
whom Friar Giles said: "My Brother, if thou wast lord of all the world,
and couldst live in it for a thousand years, in all the delight

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

of temporal joys, pleasures and consolations, lo! tell me, what reward
or what merit wouldst thou expect to have in this thy miserable flesh,
the which thou wouldst serve and please? But I tell thee that the man
who liveth well in the sight of God, and guardeth himself against
offending God, will surely receive from God the highest good and
infinite eternal reward, and great riches and great honour and life
everlasting, in that never-ending celestial glory, whereto may the good
God, our Lord and King Jesus Christ, bring us, to the praise of the same
Jesus Christ and of his mendicant Francis."

 

 

<span class="small">HERE ENDETH THE TEACHINGS AND NOTABLE SAYINGS OF
FRIAR GILES</span>

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. An ensample of Friar Leo, how St. Francis bade him
wash the stone](lff105)
