<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tago29)  [Next](tago31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T6JE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Time and the Gods*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f28"></span>

*IX*

Then spake Paharn, a prophet of the land of Hurn.

And Paharn said:

"There was one man that knew, but he stands not here."

And the King said:

"Is he further than my heralds might travel in the night if they went
upon fleet horses?"

And the prophet answered:

"He is no further than thy heralds may well travel in the night, but
further than they may return from in all the years. Out of this city
there goes a valley wandering through all the world and opens out at
last on the green land of Hurn. On the one side in the distance gleams
the sea, and on the other side a forest, black and ancient, darkens the
fields of Hurn; beyond the forest and the sea there is no more, saving
the twilight and beyond that the gods. In the mouth of the valley sleeps
the village of Rhistaun.

"Here I was born, and heard the murmur of the flocks and herds, and saw
the tall smoke standing between the sky and the still roofs of Rhistaun,
and learned that men might not go into the dark forest, and that beyond
the forest and the sea was nought saving the twilight, and beyond that
the gods. Often there came travellers from the world all down the
winding valley, and spake with strange speech in Rhistaun and returned
again up the valley going back to the world. Sometimes with bells and
camels and men running on foot, Kings came down the valley from the
world, but always the travellers returned by the valley again and none
went further than the land of Hurn.

"And Kithneb also was born in the land of Hurn and tended the flocks
with me, but Kithneb would not care to listen to the murmur of the
flocks and herds and see the tall smoke standing between the roofs and
the sky, but needed to know how far from Hurn it was that the world met
the twilight, and how far across the twilight sat the gods.

"And often Kithneb dreamed as he tended the flocks and herds, and when
others slept he would wander near to the edge of the forest wherein men
might not go. And the elders of the land of Hurn reproved Kithneb when
he dreamed; yet Kithneb was still as other men and mingled with his
fellows until the day of which I will tell thee, O King. For Kithneb was
aged about a score of years, and he and I were sitting near the flocks,
and he gazed long at the point where the dark forest met the sea at the
end of the land of Hurn. But when night drove the twilight down under
the forest we brought the flocks together to Rhistaun, and I went up the
street between the houses to see four princes that had come down the
valley from the world, and they were clad in blue and scarlet and wore
plumes upon their heads, and they gave us in exchange for our sheep some
gleaming stones which they told us were of great value on the word of
princes. And I sold them three sheep, and Darniag sold them eight.

"But Kithneb came not with the others to the market place where the four
princes stood, but went alone across the fields to the edge of the
forest.

"And it was upon the next morning that the strange thing befell Kithneb;
for I saw him in the morning coming from the fields, and I hailed him
with the shepherd's cry wherewith we shepherds call to one another, and
he answered not. Then I stopped and spake to him, and Kithneb said not a
word till I became angry and left him.

"Then we spake together concerning Kithneb, and others had hailed him,
and he had not answered them, but to one he had said that he had heard
the voices of the gods speaking beyond the forest and so would never
listen more to the voices of men.

"Then we said: 'Kithneb is mad,' and none hindered him.

"Another took his place among the flocks, and Kithneb sat in the
evenings by the edge of the forest on the plain, alone.

"So Kithneb spake to none for many days, but when any forced him to
speak he said that every evening he heard the gods when they came to sit
in the forest from over the twilight and sea, and that he would speak no
more with men.

"But as the months went by, men in Rhistaun came to look on Kithneb as a
prophet, and we were wont to point to him when strangers came down the
valley from the world, saying:

"'Here in the land of Hurn we have a prophet such as you have not among
your cities, for he speaks at evening with the gods.'

"A year had passed over the silence of Kithneb when he came to me and
spake. And I bowed before him because we believed that he spake among
the gods. And Kithneb said:

"'I will speak to thee before the end because I am most lonely. For how
may I speak again with men and women in the little streets of Rhistaun
among the houses, when I have heard the voices of the gods singing above
the twilight? But I am more lonely than ever Rhistaun wonts of, for this
I tell thee, *when I hear the gods I know not what They say*. Well
indeed I know the voice of each, for ever calling me away from
contentment; well I know Their voices as they call to my soul and
trouble it; I know by Their tone when They rejoice, and I know when They
are sad, for even the gods feel sadness. I know when over fallen cities
of the past, and the curved white bones of heroes They sing the dirges
of the gods' lament. But alas! Their words I know not, and the wonderful
strains of the melody of Their speech beat on my soul and pass away
unknown.

"'Therefore I travelled from the land of Hurn till I came to the house
of the prophet Arnin-Yo, and told him that I sought to find the meaning
of the gods; and Arnin-Yo told me to ask the shepherds concerning all
the gods, for what the shepherds knew it was meet for a man to know,
and, beyond that, knowledge turned into trouble.

"'But I told Arnin-Yo that I had heard myself the voices of the gods and
knew that They were there beyond the twilight and so could never more
bow down to the gods that the shepherds made from the red clay which
they scooped with their hands out of the hillside.

"'Then said Arnin-Yo to me:

"'"Natheless forget that thou hast heard the gods and bow down again to
the gods of the red clay that the shepherds make, and find thereby the
ease that the shepherds find, and at last die, remembering devoutly the
gods of the red clay that the shepherds scooped with their hands out of
the hill. For the gifts of the gods that sit beyond the twilight and
smile at the gods of clay, are neither ease nor contentment."

"'And I said:

"'"The god that my mother made out of the red clay that she had got from
the hill, fashioning it with many arms and eyes as she sang me songs of
its power, and told me stories of its mystic birth, this god is lost and
broken; and ever in my ears is ringing the melody of the gods."

"'And Arnin-Yo said:

"'"If thou wouldst still seek knowledge know that only those that come
behind the gods may clearly know their meaning. And this thou canst only
do by taking ship and putting out to sea from the land of Hurn and
sailing up the coast towards the forest. There the sea cliffs turn to
the left or southward, and full upon them beats the twilight from over
the sea, and there thou mayest come round behind the forest. Here where
the world's edge mingles with the twilight the gods come in the evening,
and if thou canst come behind Them thou shalt hear Their voices clear,
beating full seaward and filling all the twilight with sound of song,
and thou shalt know the meaning of the gods. But where the cliffs turn
southward there sits behind the gods Brimdono, the oldest whirlpool in
the sea, roaring to guard his masters. Him the gods have chained for
ever to the floor of the twilit sea to guard the door of the forest that
lieth above the cliffs. Here, then, if thou canst hear the voices of the
gods as thou hast said, thou wilt know their meaning clear, but this
will profit thee little when Brimdono drags thee down and all thy
ship.'"

"Thus spake Kithneb to me.

"But I said:

"'O Kithneb, forget those whirlpool-guarded gods beyond the forest, and
if thy small god be lost thou shalt worship with me the small god that
my mother made. Thousands of years ago he conquered cities but is not
any longer an angry god. Pray to him, Kithneb, and he shall bring thee
comfort and increase to thy flocks and a mild spring, and at the last a
quiet ending for thy days.'

"But Kithneb heeded not, and only bade me find a fisher ship and men to
row it. So on the next day we put forth from the land of Hurn in a boat
that the fisher folk use. And with us came four of the fisher folk who
rowed the boat while I held the rudder, but Kithneb sat and spake not in
the prow. And we rowed westward up the coast till we came at evening
where the cliffs turned southward and the twilight gleamed upon them and
the sea.

"There we turned southwards and saw at once Brimdono. And as a man tears
the purple cloak of a king slain in battle to divide it with other
warriors,—Brimdono tore the sea. And ever around and around him with a
gnarled hand Brimdono whirled the sail of some adventurous ship, the
trophy of some calamity wrought in his greed for shipwreck long ago
where he sat to guard his masters from all who fare on the sea. And ever
one far-reaching empty hand swung up and down so that we durst go no
nearer.

"Only Kithneb neither saw Brimdono nor heard his roar, and when we would
go no further bade us lower a small boat with oars out of the ship. Into
this boat Kithneb descended, not heeding words from us, and onward rowed
alone. A cry of triumph over ships and men Brimdono uttered before him,
but Kithneb's eyes were turned toward the forest as he came behind the
gods. Upon his face the twilight beat full from the haunts of evening to
illumine the smiles that grew about his eyes as he came behind the gods.
Him that had found the gods above Their twilit cliffs, him that had
heard Their voices close at last and knew Their meaning clear, him, from
the cheerless world with its doubtings and prophets that lie, from all
hidden meanings, where truth rang clear at last, Brimdono took."

But when Paharn ceased to speak, in the King's ears the roar of Brimdono
exulting over ancient triumphs and the whelming of ships seemed still to
ring.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](tago31)

</div>
