<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tago22)  [Next](tago24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T6JE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Time and the Gods*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f21"></span>

*II*

Then the King called to Ynath bidding him speak concerning the journey
of the King. Ynath was the prophet that sat at the Eastern gate of the
Temple of Gorandhu. There Ynath prayed his prayers to all the passers by
lest ever the gods should go abroad, and one should pass him dressed in
mortal guise. And men are pleased as they walk by that Eastern gate that
Ynath should pray to them for fear that they be gods, so men bring gifts
to Ynath in the Eastern gate.

And Ynath said: "All knowledge is with the King. When a strange ship
comes to anchor in the air outside thy chamber window, thou shalt leave
thy well-kept garden and it shall become a prey to the nights and days
and be covered again with grass. But going aboard thou shalt set sail
over the Sea of Time and well shall the ship steer through the many
worlds and still sail on. If other ships shall pass thee on the way and
hail thee saying: 'From what port' thou shalt answer them: 'From Earth.'
And if they ask thee 'whither bound?' then thou shalt answer: 'The End.'
Or thou shalt hail them saying: 'From what port?' And they shall answer:
'From The End called also The Beginning, and bound to Earth.' And thou
shalt sail away till like an old sorrow dimly felt by happy men the
worlds shall gleam in the distance like one star, and as the star pales
thou shalt come to the shore of space where aeons rolling shorewards
from Time's sea shall lash up centuries to foam away in years. There
lies the Centre Garden of the gods, facing full seawards. All around lie
songs that on earth were never sung, fair thoughts not heard among the
worlds, dream pictures never seen that drifted over Time without a home
till at last the aeons swept them on to the shore of space. And in the
Centre Garden of the gods bloom many fancies. Therein once some souls
were playing where the gods walked up and down and to and fro. And a
dream came in more beauteous than the rest on the crest of a wave of
Time, and one soul going downward to the shore clutched at the dream and
caught it. Then over the dreams and stories and old songs that lay on
the shore of space the hours came sweeping back, and the centuries
caught that soul and swirled him with his dream far out to the Sea of
Time, and the aeons swept him earthwards and cast him into a palace with
all the might of the sea and left him there with his dream. The child
grew to a King and still clutched at his dream till the people wondered
and laughed. Then, O King, Thou didst cast thy dream back into the Sea,
and Time drowned it and men laughed no more, but thou didst forget that
a certain sea beat on a distant shore and that there was a garden and
therein souls. But at the end of the journey that thou shalt take, when
thou comest to the shore of space again thou shalt go up the beach, and
coming to a garden gate that stands in a garden wall shalt remember
these things again, for it stands where the hours assail not above the
beating of Time, far up the shore, and nothing altereth there. So thou
shalt go through the garden gate and hear again the whispering of the
souls when they talk low where sing the voices of the gods. There with
kindred souls thou shalt speak as thou didst of yore and tell them what
befell thee beyond the tides of time and how they took thee and made of
thee a King so that thy soul found no rest. There in the Centre Garden
thou shalt sit at ease and watch the gods all rainbow-clad go up and
down and to and fro on the paths of dreams and songs, and shalt not
venture down to the cheerless sea. For that which a man loves most is
not on this side of Time, and all which drifts on its aeons is a lure.

"All knowledge is with the King."

Then said the King: "Ay, there was a dream once but Time hath swept it
away."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III](tago24)

</div>
