[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index) [Index](gppt0) [Previous](gppt7)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# GOSPEL PARALLELS FROM PÂLI TEXTS

##### (eighth series)

### by Albert J. Edmunds

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XVI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1902

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May, 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_684">p. 684</span>

## GOSPEL PARALLELS FROM PALI TEXTS.

<span class="small">Translated from the Originals by ALBERT J.
EDMUNDS.</span>

<span class="small">(Eighth Series.)</span>

DECLINE OF THE FAITH.<span id="page_684_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_684_note_1)

<span class="small">WITH REMARKS ON MAITREYA.</span>

>    <span class="small">[Matthew xxiv. 11,
> 12](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#24:11). Many false prophets shall arise, and
> shall lead many astray. And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the
> love of the many shall wax cold.  
>    [Luke xviii. 8](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#18:8). When the Son of man
> cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?</span>

<span id="pp_1"></span>{1} <span class="small">NUMERICAL COLLECTION v.
79.</span>

   MONKS, the following five future dangers (or, fears for the future),
though not arisen now, will hereafter arise. Ye must be awake thereto,
and being awake, must struggle to avert them. What are the five?

   Monks, there will be monks in the far future, wanting in physical,
moral, emotional and intellectual control; and being so, they will
confer Initiation upon others, and will not be able to train them in
superior morals, emotions and intelligence. These, being also without
the aforesaid control, will initiate others in their turn, who will keep
up the same state of things. And so, monks, from corruption of doctrine
\[will come\] corruption of discipline, and from corruption of
discipline corruption of doctrine.

   This, monks, is the first future danger which, though not arisen now,
will hereafter arise. Ye must be awake thereto, and being awake, must
struggle to avert it.

<span id="page_685">p. 685</span>

   Again, monks, there will be monks in the far future, wanting in
control as before, who being so will give asylum to others, and they
will not be able to train them in superior morals, emotions and
intelligence. These will give asylum to yet others, and so \[there will
be\] more corruption of discipline from doctrine, and of doctrine from
discipline.

   This, monks, is the second future danger, which will come and must be
guarded against.

   Again, monks, there will be monks in the far future without physical,
moral, emotional and intellectual control, and being so, when they
discourse upon the Higher Doctrine (*Abhidhammo*) and the Exegesis
(*Vedalla*) they will not be awake, descending into doctrine dark.<span
id="page_685_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_685_note_1) And so, monks, \[there
will be\] corruption of discipline from corruption of doctrine, and
corruption of doctrine from corruption of discipline.

   This, monks, is the third future danger which, though not arisen now,
will hereafter arise. Ye must be awake thereto, and being awake must
struggle to avert it.

   <span id="page_685_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_685_note_2)\[Again\], monks, there
will be monks in the far future, \[wanting in physical, moral, emotional
and intellectual control; and they being thus wanting in physical,
moral, emotional and intellectual control\], there are Dialogues
(*Suttantâ*) spoken by the Tathâgato,--deep, of deep meaning,
transcendental, connected with the<span
id="page_685_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_685_note_3) Void (or, classified
under Void); and when these are recited they will not listen nor give
ear nor present a heart of knowledge; and they will not study those
doctrines, learn them, nor reflect thereon.

   But there are Dialogues poet-made, poetical, thrilling the heart,
suggstive to the heart, the utterances of disciples who are outsiders.
When these are recited they will listen, give ear, and present a heart
of knowledge; these doctrines they will study, learn by heart and
reflect upon.

   And so, monks, \[there will be\] corruption of discipline from
corruption of doctrine, and corruption of doctrine from corruption of
discipline.

<span id="page_686">p. 686</span>

   This, monks, is the fourth future danger which, though not arisen
now, will hereafter arise. Ye must be awake thereto, and being awake,
must struggle to avert it.

   Again, monks, there will be monks in the far future without physical,
moral, emotional and intellectual control; and being so, the Presbyter
monks will be luxurious, loose-lived, taking precedence by their
descent, in seclusion neglecting their charge. They will not strive with
their will for attainment of the unattained, approach to the
unapproached, realisation of the unrealised. The last generation of them
will fall into heresy, and will be luxurious, loose-lived, taking
precedence by descent, in seclusion neglecting their charge. And so,
monks, \[there will be\] corruption of discipline from corruption of
doctrine, and corruption of doctrine from corruption of discipline.

   This, monks, is the fifth future danger which, though not arisen now,
will hereafter arise, and which ye must be awake to, and so struggle to
avert.

   These, monks, are the Five Future Dangers which, though not arisen
now, will hereafter arise, and which ye must be awake to, and so
struggle to avert.

 

   \[Chapter 80 gives a detailed account of future luxuries, such as
building monasteries in towns, villages, and capitals; wearing fine
robes; associating with young nuns, etc.

   [The Buddhist Apocalypse](../../bud/bits/bits102) translated by
Warren is a mediæval treatise, expanded from just such texts as our
present one.\]

 

<span id="pp_2"></span>{2} <span class="small">MINOR SECTION ON
DISCIPLINE (CULLAVAGGO)<span id="page_686_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_686_note_1) x. 1.</span>

   Ânando, if women had not received permission to go forth; from
domestic life and enter the homeless one, under the Doctrine and
Discipline made public by the Tathâgato, then, Ânando, would the
religious life have lasted long: the Gospel (*Saddhammo*) would have
lasted for *a thousand years*. But, Ânando, now that women have received
that permission, the religious life will not last long: the Gospel,
Ânando, will now last only *five hundred years*.

   \[This passage is important as a time-mark in the history of the
Canon, a fact which was pointed out in our provisional preface to this
series of Parallels. (*Open Court*, February, 1900, [p.
115](gppt1.htm#page_115).) <span id="page_687">p. 687</span> In
patristic works written after the Christian era, such as Buddhaghosha's
commentaries and the Great Chronicle of Ceylon, the figures 500 have
been altered to 5000. This was because the 500 years had expired, and
still the faith flourished. Therefore the sacred text has not been
materially altered, and goes back behind the time of Christ. The period
of a thousand years in our text may perhaps be compared with those of
the Mazdean Saviours or the millennium of the Apocalyptical Christ.

   It is to be regretted that the period of decline has been confounded
with that of the second Coming or advent of Metteyyo (Sanskrit,
Maitreyas;<span id="page_687_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_687_note_1) contracted into
Maitreya). Thus, Eitel, in his *Handbook of Chinese Buddhism*, places
this advent five thousand years after Gotamo, which, as we have seen, is
a later exaggeration of the five hundred predicted in the Book of
Discipline. Rhys Davids, in his Manual, probably following Eitel, says
the same; for that learned scholar has never had the leisure to re-write
his book and give full references in the light of his present knowledge.
Pâli learning is still in its infancy. Even Kern, whose *Manual* is
deemed the best by so exacting a critic as Barth, does not give the
original Pâli authority on the Metteyyo prophecy, but a passage in the
late patristic Milindo. This is because the Pâli text in question has
not yet been edited in Roman letters, but must be painfully read in the
character of Siam. The text, however, was briefly referred to by
Oldenberg in 1881, in the first edition of his *Buddha*; but was never,
I believe, given fully, at least in English, until its appearance in
*The Open Court* in 1900.

   Unfortunately Dr. Carus, in his *Gospel of Buddha*, p. 217, has made
the mistake pointed out, of associating the coming of Metteyyo with the
end of the period of purity.

   Owing to the curious coincidence that 500 years is the period between
Gotamo and Jesus, some writers who have accepted the confusion of
Metteyyo with this period, have regarded him as a Buddhist prophecy of
Christ. Were it so, it would be a more remarkable one than any oracle of
Daniel or Isaiah; for nowhere do the prophets clearly state that, at the
end of a definite, non-mystical, mundane term of years, a Saviour would
arise named Love, for such is the meaning of Metteyyo. We have purposely
kept separate, in our Pâli Parallels, these two doctrines of the Second
Coming and the Declension of the Faith.

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span>

   In June, 1900 (*Open Court*, Vol. XIV., [pp. 362,
363](gppt3.htm#pp_7)), we translated the leading Pâli oracle upon the
coming of Metteyyo, under the caption of Second Coming. I may be allowed
to say that the Christian idea of the Holy Ghost was not adduced by me
among the New Testament passages for this Parallel, but was added in the
editor's office. However, as we know that the doctrine of the Comforter
was the Johannine and spiritual form of the grosser Pauline Second
Coming, I have no objection to its standing, though of course the cogent
parallel is the Pauline and Apocalyptic one, i.e., of a physical
re-appearance of Christ.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index) [Index](gppt0)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_684">p. 684</span>

<span id="page_684_note_1"></span>[1](#page_684_fr_1) Translated from
the A*nâgata-bhayâni* (Future Dangers), one of the texts among the
selections of the Emperor Asoko, in his Edict at Bhaba, and found in the
Numerical Collection, V. 77-80. Chapters 77 and 78 deal with the
personal dangers for monks in any age, including Buddha's own. In
Chapter 77 they practice religion for security against the dangers of
the forest: snakes, scorpions, centipedes, etc. In Chapter 78 they
practice it for security in old age or time of trial. We now translate
Chapter 79 entire.

<span id="footnotes_page_685">p. 685</span>

<span id="page_685_note_1"></span>[1](#page_685_fr_1) *Awake* is the
same root as *Buddha* and *Buddhist*, while *dark* is the same word as
the Sanskrit *Krishna*. One might almost suspect a punning allusion to
the later admixture of Buddhism with the Krishna-cult; but our text is
too ancient.

<span id="page_685_note_2"></span>[2](#page_685_fr_2) This paragraph,
except the words in square brackets, is found in the Classified
Collection, xx. 7. The grammatical connection of the clause beginning,
"there are Dialogues," etc., is as awkward in the Pâli as it is in the
English, and seems to indicate a separateness for this passage.

<span id="page_685_note_3"></span>[3](#page_685_fr_3) See, e.g.,
Majjhima 121 and 122, which were very popular dialogues. The Chinese, in
the seventh century, considered them such thorough compendiums of
Buddhism, that many cared for no other Scriptures. (*I-tsing*, p. 51. I
take "nothingness" = *sunnatâ*.)

<span id="footnotes_page_686">p. 686</span>

<span id="page_686_note_1"></span>[1](#page_686_fr_1) Translated in S.
B. E., XX., p. 325 {and in Warren, [p.
447](../../bud/bits/bits099.htm#page_447)}.

<span id="footnotes_page_687">p. 687</span>

<span id="page_687_note_1"></span>[1](#page_687_fr_1) The first
Europeans to transcribe Sanskrit words were the Greeks, and they rightly
transcribed them in the nominative case, thus bringing out the sameness
of the s-ending in Sanskrit, Greek and Latin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
