[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Zoroastrian
Articles](../../zor/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# GOD HYPOTHETICALLY CONCEIVED AS MORE THAN PERSONAL

### BY LAWRENCE HEYWORTH MILLS

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XXI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1907

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, August 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

## GOD HYPOTHETICALLY CONCEIVED AS MORE THAN PERSONAL.

BY LAWRENCE HEYWORTH MILLS.

   IN working out our theme upon the implied ideal elements in
Zoroastrianism we come, in the legitimate course of investigation, upon
the above-mentioned question, not that it is in fact at all mooted, not
even to the least degree either in the Avesta proper, or in the
Zoroastrianism of the traditional and later period; for that lore
whether the original, or that of a secondary stage, is almost purely
like our own. That is to say, it is simple uncoordinated deism and
creationism. But in making an exhaustive examination of all that is
either implied or more fully stated in Zoroastrianism, such a question
as the above naturally arises as a preliminary. Before then we enter
into any detailed discussion of personification, this particular
personification of all others should meet our close attention. We have
dwelt upon the sublime though simple scheme of a pure God with His
clustered attributes,<span id="page_547_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_547_note_1) if indeed qualities so
imposing as the characteristics of a Deity could be said to
"cluster";—better had we said "which surround Him" as the strong rays
spread out from a morning sun.

   And to be thorough, we must not now arrest our thought here at all at
this junction; but we must allow ourselves once for all to think out
even the negative suggestions of the entire system; and just at this
next point in the logical sequence of development we come upon this *per
contra* again, as in addition to that already treated.<span
id="page_547_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_547_note_2) And it is indeed a
curious form of negative which soon transforms itself into a positive;
for in fact we are obliged to proceed here in reference to a
circumstance which, whether really <span id="page_548">p. 548</span>
negative or positive, is yet one of vast as well as of august
intellectual proportions, while it is likewise of acute practical
significance. God might then be conceived of (and let us ponder it well)
as being "hyper-personal."

   But, in order to be exhaustively thorough and thoroughly honest, let
us at once both acknowledge and point one primal objection to our entire
hazardous though necessary discussion; and to do this we must not
hesitate to say that the very mention of our theme here implies a
certain slur upon our familiar and long since endeared image of a Great
Quasi-human Divine Personification. A strangely close reflection upon
our former accustomed modes of thought is indeed here at once contained
in that very word and idea of transcendance which is expressed in the
prefixed word-form *hyper*- (or *super*) of "hyper-personal." For the
mind's attention is at once by this directed to a series of distinctions
which surpass our hitherto generally accepted views upon the sublimest
as well as upon the most awful of all imaginable subjects,—if indeed Our
Adored believed-in Ideal One may be in fact "hyper-personal." That is to
say, in thinking out our ideas with reference to Our One Supremely
Adored Divine Being, and in this way fulfilling our duty both to
ourselves and to others (which, as I need hardly here pause to mention,
is also often at the same time a very dangerous as well as very
necessary procedure) the well-meant results of "some of us might be such
as go out beyond what we generally conceive of as being naturally
"personal" in the usual common-sense meaning of the word, with human
personality as our guide before us to show us and others what we mean by
the terms we use. Or, at all events, our adored concept of the Supreme
Divine Being often seriously transcends what we once allowed ourselves
to contemplate as the mentally constructed image of a once
omni-conscious and omni-rational living and personal Object whose power
takes in all things, although much in a human way. Strange as such a
"transcendance" may be supposed by some of us to be, it is, however, as
it should be, in its interior significance, familiar enough; for I mean
by it merely that unavoidable and stringently searching excursus of
severely analytical minds into the region of what Kant would call "the
ideas," and what we also popularly mean when our faith goes out beyond
the established limits of "poor human reason"; that is to say, when we
look beyond the bounds of the sphere of our mere intellectual
understanding, which I call our "intellection," the limits of which are
clearly marked. For an idea in the Kantian, and indeed in the
common-sense of it, can well go out beyond this range of <span
id="page_549">p. 549</span> intellection;—and such would be any such
conception of the *hyper-personality*,—a concept of a thing outside of
experience, and indeed outside of categorical as of hypothetical
cognition, which last, both of them, can only be conceived of as being
strictly limited by the conditions of space and time, and so of clear
natural conception, for no object in simple nature can be either
cognized, or re-cognized, as being outside of those limits. And further,
as I believe, some very distinguished theologians within that one
communion which of all other Christian Churches, has most the right to
speak for its original, have expressed themselves at times in some such
a sense; that is to say, they prefer at times to imply that God is
"*Hyper-personal*," whatever they, or we, may exactly mean when we make
use of such a word.

 

EXCLUDING DEFINITION IS A PRELIMINARY NECESSITY.

   But first of all in considering the subject, and in order to take in
sharply all its distinctive circumstances, let us bring up before our
mind's eye for a moment, and for a special purpose, that sharply defined
view of the natural universe, which, intellectually only considered, and
closely within the sphere of both our thoughts and our senses, is yet
entirely aside from that One Holy and endeared ideal Being, who, as we
are all so well aware, was once held to dominate that Nature in a sense
which has always appeared to us to be the summit of all power,—strange
as such a proposition of exclusion may, at the first sight of it, appear
to some of us to be. For it is indeed, and as of course, not only quite
possible for us for a moment, and for a special purpose to frame our
concept of the world material without that great Ideal, whose
contemplation we have been accustomed to regard as the very breath of
our expectant spiritual life, but it is yet also at times clearly and
stringently our duty so to do: for strange (and yet again not strange)
to say, the studious consideration of such an opposite can but bring the
great supposed Objective, whether reality or ideality, more firmly than
ever into just outline within our view.

 

THE INTELLECTUAL-MATERIAL, AND THE IDEAL WORLDS.

   Let us then divide the Ideal from the Intellectual and material
worlds, and in doing so let us proceed without either prejudice or
reserve.

   And first of all as regards these expressions just used above, <span
id="page_550">p. 550</span> let us persistently and continuously make
plain what we mean by "intellectual and material" powers, though I have
endeavored to let drop my impressions with reference to them from the
beginning on. Let it be understood then distinctly, and once again for
all, that, in my view upon these two seemingly so divergent forces, I am
wholly with those who see no radical nor essential difference between
them. With me the distinction is between those two combined, the
"intellectual-material" and the "ideal-spiritual";—they are, the first
of them, in my opinion merely varied manifestations of one and the same
objective power identical in essence, and differing from each other
solely in the matter of degree. And on this understanding this
intellectual-material sphere of knowable nature should, as a matter of
stern but yet at times of gratifying duty, be regarded, if only for a
moment, as excluding from itself all thought connection with that One
supreme and glorious Extra-mundane Supposition to which we should never
in one syllable allude without the deepest reverence and joy.

   And this intellectual-material sphere of knowable nature should be
regarded, not only as thus separate from the Supreme Ideal, but, if only
for a moment, as being also entirely aside from and outside of all and
everything whatsoever which might be conceivable as being either ideal,
spiritual, or supernatural.

   The way is so far cleared for our procedure.

\* \* \*

   Nature then, which is phenomenon in substance, transpiring in space
and time, is most certainly upon occasion to be recognized in a somewhat
clearly definable sense of it, as being distinct from God, and in fact
as being in so far apart from Him that it should be considered as the
baldest profanity for us to trifle for one moment with such a
proposition in its serious solemnity, or to consider the possibility of
its denial.

 

THE VAST MIND-FORCE IN NATURE AS A THING UNSPEAKABLE IN MAJESTY.

   And yet there is in nature one vast majestic Power which is almost as
mysterious as the supernature itself, with its supreme adored spiritual
Ideal One,—and in this fact of its magnitude and its majesty it also
nearly approaches in most other particulars that God-idea itself towards
which we all so instinctively turn with our profoundest hope, and before
which we also so willingly in our deepest spiritual affections still bow
down; and this great Power is <span id="page_551">p. 551</span> no less
than *Reason*; or, as I should rather say, it is that startling evidence
of all-controlling and all-incisive *intention*<span
id="page_551_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_551_note_3) which presses upon us
everywhere, and which is as pervading as it is obvious,—though how it
can be conceivably regarded as being in any sense of it extant, is of
course difficult, if not indeed quite impossible, for us to place before
our image-making power; see however farther on. It is a thing never, yet
ever, beginning; for to say that it comes "most to its consciousness in
man" is to say something very hazardous indeed, as well as something
little centrally touching the matter in hand at all; for how many grades
of intellectual beings may there not be above us? as there are *so* many
which, as we are so assuredly convinced, are much beneath us. And
indeed, if forced to hazard a remark, we can only say that the material
manifestations of this Reason are violently everywhere in evidence to us
as the characteristics of the most mighty, as well as the most glorious,
force cognizable to us with the use of our as at present developed
intellectual capacities. And we indeed all believe this so simply, or so
implicitly, that many of my readers may not, at their first startled
thought upon the subject, be able to make out just exactly what I mean
by this all-present All-thought; for it appears to most of us to be a
thing so common, this simple self-thinking of the world itself, that we
can only with difficulty understand how any diligent person with serious
occupations upon his hands, could make it at all an object of laborious
reflection,—especially as there always lurks in it that certain danger
which inheres in every effort to approach any question which concerns
itself with the supernatural, whether thought of in its supernatural
origination, or as supernatural interference after a creation may have
been conceived to have taken place. For every investigation into every
such a realm has been generally regarded as forbidden; that is to say,
as one in regard to which we should always instinctively arrest the
activity of our interpenetrating searchful powers, leaving its
mysterious suggestions unpursued, or else simply solving them in the old
childish opinions of infantile days;—yet they will not be altogether
denied, nor will they cease actually to press themselves upon us,—these
questions. See them indeed everywhere in the crystallizations and in the
symmetric growths of leaves and embryos, as also in such other things as
the siderial mathematics, for they, these almost vivified objects are,
each and all of whatever grade in the scale of being, obviously actuated
by a reasoning force which controls all their exactness with all their
attritions also coordinated, though they, <span id="page_552">p.
552</span> these last, the siderial objects, and their mates, as a
matter of course, are like all things else, slowly wearing off in
measured waste. The greater Greeks, some of them, even actually thought
those moving heavenly forms alive, and self-moved like any conscious
things; but the questions, all of them anent them, nevertheless
continuously and remorselessly revert and force themselves upon us. How
is it, so we forever ask ourselves, that all mechanical as well as all
animal processes follow law so unmistakably? See those celestial globes
chilling from their first-form vapors; they know, each of them, how, in
time to find their places. One must become a sun of a future system,
others the planets of it, each of its particular size, weight and
attributes, even to its climate. So the plutonic rocks follow the same
undeviating laws, hardening from their molten elements; diamonds too
center in the same way as the bubbles ball and dance. Every object,
though it may be inanimate even, from the most enormous to the most
minute, seems also to be inter-adjusted to all others.

   The very animals know from instinctive miracle things hid from man,
though he too has his innings. Wild herds forestall the floods; the
albatross knows exactly where to fly, when man does not even know his
own interests. How does the butterfly find his mate? or the calf his
mother's teats? The crocodile, so they tell us, knows just where to lay
her eggs beyond the reach of Nilus—even the young elephant shelters
himself in his mother's lee; how does he know that he is safe there? All
being seems to throb with intellectual intercommunications.

   This is all stored experience, of course, and collected from past
ages—but where did it all originate? Man too, let us not underrate it,
can measure the heavens and the seas, tracing all things to their
sources, even soul. Not only mind, but moral mind, is everywhere: recall
that miracle of sweetness once named above, the mother-love; see too the
hate, and the revenge;—incomprehensible, all of it, because so original.
Attractions of gravitation have reason in them, obviously; see above,
and below. The universe because of them seems one vast breathing fabric
of sympathy and power, a very cosmos eternally outfolding itself in
myriad forms, infolding itself again. The very microscope reveals
systems as intricate as the telescope. Such is the Mind Force in
All-nature.

 

ITS ADORATION.

   We simply do not adore it because we can only, as it seems, adore a
person, and we ought only to adore a supreme person; and <span
id="page_553">p. 553</span> this Reason is not a person, nor a
hyper-person, nor yet a sub-person;—we do not supplicate it again,
because *we are parts of it* (see below); and how can we supplicate that
whole of which we are ourselves consciously constituent parts?
Supplication would seem then to be mere fixed self-resolve. We do not
supplicate it also because it is *immovable*, for so it seems to be.
Never has it varied from all a past eternity, for so we believe, nor
shall it change by one iota to all an unending future; but, and most of
all, as already implied or said (see also on below) we did not aforetime
adore it because we thought it to be itself the thought of Our Great
Conceived-of Human-Deity, Our "Heavenly Father." His mind in fact we
thought it, and we have ever through life adored it as a part of Him; so
only. But if He be in super-nature, a God-for-Faith, we have no right at
all to identify this Nature-mind with His, for of His Super-intellection
and its workings we have no definable concept whatsoever or at all;
while this Nature-Reason, though we can as little hope to fathom it, we
ever observe it closely in its effects at least, and so at every step.

 

A SENTIMENTAL CLAIM.

   Yet this Nature-Reason has also some deep sentimental religious claim
upon us, as we may in passing mention,—claims on the score of sentiment
and tender days gone by, as well as upon self-reverence, with its
indelible and vested rights, for in it we should indeed reverence our
very selves which should be a truest worship; for it, this Reason, is
our attribute, and we are its;—yes, there is the *reminiscence*, and a
dear and holy thing it is.

   We are orphaned now, the most of us, that is, if only for a moment,
until we can find our one true Faith-God again in His defined supernal
being, not to speak indeed of his transcendant spiritual charcter and
life. For we loved our Nature-God as we adored Him; and this Reason was
indeed to us once His mind, as so we once imagined this
Nature-Reason—this Mind-Attribute. There is a sweetness in that past
thought of it which lingers on still, none the less though it was
sometimes rather trivial, and occasionally somewhat low. We can not fail
with delight to recall its joys, as we do our boyhood's visions.

 

THIS REASON IS YET THE WORLD-SOUL.

   But yet this Reason, though no longer the super-exalted, nor yet the
Person-Mind of the Supreme Ideal Faith-God, is yet the <span
id="page_554">p. 554</span> great soul of all reasoned life and life's
reasoning, involving in its effective applications all strengths, joys,
hopes and sorrows. Morals, too, are also there in it, and sovereign
purpose with them, but above all there is esthetics; for we are parts of
a world all calm with beauty, and throbbing with bright wishes based on
truth and love, strange that we did not think it more out before, for
the reasons given. But whatever be the cause of our deficiency just
here, we have driven this neglect through inadvertence, if not through
misapprehension, quite too far on. For this Thought as it exists, is the
grandest force in all the Nature-universe; not to revere it is most
certainly to err. If this Reason in the world be like that of man in so
far as that it makes the world non-maniac (see below), and
non-imbecile,—then we have no need to recall it as a basis for our
profound future reverence that we once believed God made it as a human
thing and as Himself a quasi-human Person. We need only to *look at it
as it is*; for if God be separate from nature, as spirit is separate
from matter, and if this Nature be thus inspired, as we have shown
above, then do we think it decent of us to suppose that Our Divine
Spirit-Lord will ever turn His back upon it

   Our Faith-God Ideal turn His back on Reason! the Holy One of All
Holies, turn His back on all that holds the world in sanity, indifferent
to all that love is nourishing, to all that truth is defending, to all
that mercy is redeeming! Ah no, the Faith God Ideal, our One ever
supremely to be adored, is not indifferent to this; nor is He to be
thought adverse to it. He in fact stands ideally related to it; in
shutting out poor nature's realm from His as profane I only mean to shut
out its identities from His.

   His whole Supreme Heart, although ideally beyond our ken or
intellection, still yearns to it (as, with devout speech-figure, we may
say)—still yearns in a sub-sense over it. He adores it too, if so we can
imagine of it, just as Ahura burned sacrifice to Mithra,—as kings call
nobles "Lords." It is the all-in-all left in our poor nature of power
and truth, and as Our Ideal-Faith-Supreme-One reveres it, so should we!

 

THE WORD IS NIGH THEE.

   It does not hold itself aloof in awful impressiveness far from us and
aloft; it is close around us as a sweeping sea, or touching each of us
with lightest finger, while it stares us in the very face. Why should we
indeed not in a sub-sense adore it, as our great Ideal One so doubtless
does? But to adore it we must define <span id="page_555">p. 555</span>
from all else, separating it even from the Great ldeal totally, the
August One from the less august other, else we profane Him; for to touch
Him with our intellection is to insult Him, just as to look at
Nature-Reason mixed with Him is to lose its point. This latter awes us
totally, while it subdues us for our good; its only mystery is alas that
it does not shut out infamy, but, whether Hyper-Demon or sub-divinity,
no one doubts that It is sublime; for it is that alone which makes our
universe be-souled.

 

THOROUGHNESS INEXORABLY DEMANDED.

   In fact it is that alone which makes it sentient cosmos. And surely
as we differentiate it from our ldeal One-God in our all-hallowed
reverence, we should do so for the moment *thoroughly*; for every
instant that we leave it inevitably constituent with Him, we are resting
in *irreverence*. Thought is the first circumstance in the entire
Nature-Objective All-World aside from Him; and yet He is beyond all its
bounds of circumstance. Yes, we can revere it, this Nature All-World
with its Nature All-Soul, not idolatrously—may God forbid! We can yet
even in a certain sense adore it as the All-thought in our great
world-system directing the incessant combinations of destined effects in
the outfolding and infolding of a vast mass of nature as a reasoned
universe of atoms vivified; and this is the very next thing in power to
that endeared old idea of a great human God-person in the sky; for it is
the most solemn as well as the most tender of all things thinkable.

 

TO INTERPENETRATE AND SEARCH IT OUT.

   Why then should we not collect our points of thought against it? for
it is susceptible of apprehension, if not of comprehension. It is a
great mystery of mysteries, but are not all things else the very same?
See even the great known force of gravitation; where did it come from?
Yes, like that last, or first, great power just briefly named above, it
was *beginningless*; its effects, however, are, like that of the great
inclusive Thing just mentioned, obvious to us on every side and at every
instant in space and time, and its mystery consists ever thus alone in
*origin*; but this is thus the same with all things natural. Absolute
origins are for ever inexplicable, the simplest as the greatest. Why
should we indeed for one instant ask why all material particles
gravitate towards all other, a stone falling to the ground? Can there be
indeed anything more helpless <span id="page_556">p. 556</span> to
explain? That it is "simple fact" is our only answer, adding that it is
"rational" fact, which last however we could not in some cases say.

   Like the Nature-Universe itself, explanation is merged in
"non-origin," in its recognition of course I mean; for "origin" is the
chief theme of explanation or discussion. Yes, we should collect our
points of thought against it, this mystery in nature. It is meet and
right for us, nay, it is our bounden duty so to do; but there are
hindrances and many,—and above all one chief one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Zoroastrian Articles](../../zor/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_547">p. 547</span>

<span id="page_547_note_1"></span>[1](#page_547_fr_1) See "God and His
Immortals" in *The Open Court* of January and March, 1907.

<span id="page_547_note_2"></span>[2](#page_547_fr_2) See "God and His
Immortals, Their Counterparts," *The Open Court*, March, 1907.

<span id="footnotes_page_551">p. 551</span>

<span id="page_551_note_3"></span>[3](#page_551_fr_3) Aristotle.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
