[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Christian
Articles](../../chr/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# ST. CATHARINE OF ALEXANDRIA

### part one

### by Paul Carus

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XXI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1907

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, August 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_664">p. 664</span>

## ST. CATHARINE OF ALEXANDRIA<span id="page_664_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_664_note_*).

   WE have seen in a former article ("The Bride of Christ," published in
*The Open Court* for August) that the tradition of the bride of Christ
has its ultimate foundation in the myths of pre-Christian saviours; but
we noted at the same time that according to the rigidly ascetic
traditions of the early Church this marriage was to be a purely
spiritual and symbolic one; and that the legend finally crystallized
around the name of Catharine the pure one, in spite of the incongruity
of the age in which the best known saint of this name was supposed to
have lived. In the domain of myth as well as legend we move in an
atmosphere that is above time and space, and so there is no
inconsistency in the fact that St. Catharine of Alexandria lived at the
end of the third century, more than two hundred years after the death of
Jesus. This discrepancy only helped to denote the entire absence of
carnal love which fact is further emphasized by representing the mystic
marriage usually (though not always) as taking place between the Christ
child and an adult virgin.

   As to the historical facts of St. Catharine's life a critical
investigation of ancient records yields no result. From a purely
scientific standpoint St. Catharine of Alexandria is an unhistorical
figment, but for all that the legend is quite circumstantial in details.

   Catharine is reported as being of royal parentage and as having
received an unusually good education. She is revered by the Church as
the patron of philosophy, science and learning, and some philosophical
schools, as for instance the University of Paris, have selected her as
their tutelary saint.

   The legend further asserts that Emperor Maxentius, anxious to
establish the truth of idolatry, arranged a public debate between <span
id="page_665">p. 665</span> her and the most prominent pagan sages, but
she defeated them in every way so as to humiliate their authority.
lncensed at her success the Emperor first tried to influence her by
threats and flattery, but when he saw that nothing could move her, he
ordered her to

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca01.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">ST. CATHARINE.<br />
By Ghirlandajo, 1449-1494. In the Borghese Palace at Rome.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

be tortured on a spiked wheel, and then to be beheaded. The date of her
martyrdom has been fixed on November 25, 307.

<span id="page_666">p. 666</span>

   The oldest reference to St. Catharine is made in the *Menologium
Basilianum*, a collection of legends compiled for Emperor Basil II who
died in 886. In this she is called Aikaterina, and the report runs as
follows:

   "The martyr Aikaterina was the daughter of a rich and noble prince of
Alexandria. She was very beautiful, and being at the same time highly
talented, she devoted herself to Greek literature as well as to the
study of the languages of all nations, and so she became wise and
learned. And it happened that the Greeks held a festival in honor of
their idols; and seeing the slaughter of animals, she was so greatly
moved that she went to the King Maximinus and expostulated with him in
these words: 'Why hast thou left the living God to worship lifeless
idols?' But the Emperor caused her to be thrown into prison, and to be
punished severely. He then ordered fifty orators to be brought, and bade
them to reason with Aikaterina, and confute her, threatening to burn
them all if they should fail to overpower her. The orators, however,
when they saw themselves vanquished, received baptism, and were burnt
forthwith, while she was beheaded."

   The report of the *Menologium* has been elaborated in other versions
of which we have two in Greek, one by Simeon Metaphrastes (10th
century), another by Athanasius. Upon the latter the Latin legend of St.
Catharine is founded, from which again all later versions in Italian,
French, and Old English have been derived. We must make special mention
of the version made by Jean Mielot at the request of Philip the Good of
Burgundy, because in addition to the incidents mentioned above it
contains the story of the mystic marriage of St. Catharine to the
Saviour which, however, is believed to have been derived from an older
source.

   Marius Sepet tells us of the marriage of King Costus with Queen
Sabinella and the birth of their daughter, Catharine, who from a tender
age was most carefully eduated in all the arts and sciences. She
distinguished herself in all virtues, especially in wisdom and moral
purity. King Costus died, and Queen Sabinella retired to Mount Ararat
where she was converted to Christianity by Ananias, a godly hermit. When
she tried to induce her daughter to adopt the new faith she defended
paganism with all the arguments of profane science, and her mother was
unable to convince her.

   Catharine had scarcely reached her eighteenth year when the grandees
of the empire sought her hand in marriage and her mother was anxious to
have her choose a good husband who would be a worthy leader and could
protect the kingdom against all its enemies.

<span id="page_667">p. 667</span>

|                                                                                      |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
|                                  ![](pc-sca02.jpg)                                   |
| <span class="small">By Andrea del Sarto, 1486-1531. In the Cathedral at Pisa.</span> |

<span id="page_668">p. 668</span>

But Catharine refused all suitors and said: "Bring me a bridegroom who
is as learned, as beautiful, as noble, as rich,—in short, is of equal
rank with me, and I am ready to accept him for my husband." The story
continues in the modernized version of M. Sepet as follows:

   "One evening when mother and daughter lay sleeping together, the
Queen of Heaven, the glorious Virgin Mary, appeared to them surrounded
by a great host of patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors,
virgins, and many other saints, all of whom shone in radiant beauty. The
Virgin Mary approached St. Catharine and said to her:

   "'Look, my daughter! all these are kings, and indeed the greatest in
the kingdom of my Son, the Emperor of Glory. I know that thou art still
unwedded. If thou wouldst have any one of these for a bridegroom choose
the one which best pleases thee and I will bring it about that thy
desire shall be fulfilled!'

   "But St. Catharine answered that she did not wish to marry any one of
them. Thereupon Jesus Christ himself, the Emperor of Glory, appeared
unto her in the presence of his gentle mother and a countless host of
angels. Mary, the Blessed Virgin, said to Catharine, 'Wouldst thou
choose this one for thy Bridegroom?'

   "And when Catharine beheld his beauty, power, and wisdom, she
fervently replied, 'Yea! Him do I desire whosoever he may be,—him and
none other.' But Sabinella, her mother, looked at her with astonishment
and said, 'How darest thou select for thy bridegroom one whom so many
kings obey? Be content to choose one of the other nobles for thy
husband, for all are great and mighty princes.'

   "But the daughter sighed and answered, 'Dear mother mine! blame me
not that I should wish this one for my husband, for I see none here who
far surpass myself in all things excepting him alone. Oh, go at once and
seek out the Empress, his mother, that she may soften his heart and that
he may accept me as his bride, for if I may not be his handmaiden, I
will never marry another.'

   "The mother went at once to that lady and offered her daughter to her
as bride for her son, the Emperor. The Queen of Heaven and of the angels
then spoke to her well-beloved Son, 'Dearest Son, desirest thou this
maiden for thy bride?' But he answered, 'No, my Mother, I desire her
not. Rather remove her from thee, for she is not a Christian. I am the
King of Christians, and must never have a pagan bride. But if she will
be baptized, I give her my word <span id="page_669">p. 669</span> that I
shall betroth her soon afterwards by giving her a ring as to my spouse.'

   "After this miraculous vision had vanished, Queen Sabinella and her
daughter awoke and told each other what they had seen as an actual
occurrence. But from this time on Catharine wept constantly and said
that she would nevermore find rest until she had received the Emperor of
Glory as her husband. Impatient to be

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca03.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">THE HOLY FAMILY AND ST. CATHARINE.<br />
By Luca di Signorelli, 1441-1523. In the Pitti Palace at Florence.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

baptized she urgently besought her mother to take her at once without
delay to the godly hermit, and her request was complied with.

   "When they had come together to the hermitage the mother told Ananias
privately the vision as related above. The pious hermit, suddenly
enlightened by our Lord Jesus Christ, called Catharine and her mother
and said to them, 'The Emperor whom you have seen was our Saviour Jesus
Christ and the Queen was his mother, <span id="page_670">p. 670</span>
the glorious Virgin Mary. The hosts which you saw with them were their
companions, the angels and saints of Paradise.'

   "The godly hermit added that if Catharine wished for her bridegroom
this Heavenly King whom she saw in her vision, she must needs become a
Christian."

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca04.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">THE HOLY FAMILY AND ST. CATHARINE.<br />
By Giacobo Francia.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   The story tells how Catharine became a pious Christian and received
baptism at the hands of Ananias, after which follows an account of the
mystic marriage.

<span id="page_671">p. 671</span>

   "Once, when St. Catharine was praying fervently in her chamber, Jesus
Christ, the King of Glory, appeared before her, clad in fine apparel and
accompanied by a great throng of angels and saints. As testimony that he
accepted St. Catharine for his bride he placed a real ring upon her
finger and promised to perform great things for her if she would remain
faithful in her love, and when our Lord Jesus Christ had disappeared she
knew at once that vision was to be understood in a spiritual sense. She
was completely converted to a great divine love and reverent tenderness
toward Jesus Christ, her spouse. From this time forth she often received
great tasks of consolation from him, and in order that she might take
comfort in him more fully she consecrated all her time and all her study
and meditations to prayer and the reading and contemplation of Holy
Scripture. As formerly she had studied most zealously and had become
learned in vast numbers of volumes of profane science, now, after her
conversion she applied herself to the books of Holy Scripture,
especially to the writings of the Evangelists, giving to these her
attention above all else. She said to herself: 'Alas, sinner that I am,
how long have I wasted my time in the darkness of profane books! Oh
Catharine, here is the Gospel of thy spouse. Put all thy heart upon its
teachings as faithfully, and constantly as thou canst in order that thou
mayest attain the light of truth.'

   "Reflecting day by day within her own heart, and questioning also day
by day the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom she loved to
speak of him, she became a wonderful teacher of truth. Some say that the
ring with which Jesus Christ had wedded her was received and preserved
in the City of Alexandria, of Egypt, after the death and passion of
Madame St. Catharine."

   We have not been able to compare this modernized version with Marius
Sepet's manuscript, but we would be interested to know whether the
original contains mention of St. Catharine taking cognizance at once
that "the vision was to be understood in a spiritual sense." In apparent
contradiction to it are other passages which insist on the reality of
both the vision and the marriage, in token of which a real ring is left
on her finger. According to the ascetic atmosphere of Christian
mythology the spirituality of this marriage relation is a matter of
course and so the narrator of the legend impresses his audience with the
belief that St. Catharine is not merely the bride of Christ in the sense
that any nun may be so considered, but in the special and true meaning
of the word.

   In some versions of the legend it is claimed that when St. <span
id="page_672">p. 672</span> Catharine was tortured on the wheel no blood
came from her wounds, but milk, which is characteristic of her as the
representation of absolute purity, because according to the Old
Testament notion blood is regarded as impure.

   The Roman Breviary for November 25, the day of our saint, contains
the account of St. Catharine's life, as approved by the Church, and
reads in the English version as follows:

   "This Katharine was a noble maiden of Alexandria, who from her
earliest years joined the study of the liberal arts with fervent faith,
and in a short while came to such a height of holiness and

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca05.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">ST. CATHARINE WITH THE EVANGELISTS MATTHEW AND JOHN.<br />
Ascribed to Stephen Master. Presented by Queen Victoria in 1863 in fulfilment of the wishes of the late Prince Consort, to the National Gallery, London.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

learning, that when she was eighteen years of age, she prevailed over
the chiefest wits. When she saw many diversely tormented and haled to
death by command of Maximin, because they professed the Christian
religion, she went boldly unto him and rebuked him for his savage
cruelty, bringing forward likewise most sage reasons why the faith of
Christ should be needful for salvation.

   "Maximin marveled at her wisdom, and bade keep her, while he gathered
together the most learned men from all quarters and offered them a great
reward if they would confute Katharine and <span id="page_673">p.
673</span> bring her from believing in Christ to worship idols. But the
event fell contrariwise, for many of the philosophers who came to
dispute with her were overcome by the force and skill of her reasoning,
so that the love of Christ Jesus was kindled in them, and they were
content even to die for his sake. Then did Maximin strive to beguile
Katharine with fair words and promises, and when he found it was lost
pains, he caused her to be hided, and bruised with lead-laden whips, and
so cast into prison, and neither meat nor drink given to her for a space
of eleven days.

   "At that time Maximin's wife and Porphyry the Captain of his host,
went to the prison to see the damsel, and at her preaching believed in
Jesus Christ, and were afterwards crowned with martyrdom. Then was
Katharine brought out of ward, and a wheel was set, wherein were
fastened many and sharp blades, so that her virgin body might thereby be
most direfully cut and torn in pieces, but in a little while, as
Katharine prayed, this machine was broken in pieces, at the which marvel
many believed in Christ. But Maximin was hardened in his godlessness and
cruelty, and commanded to behead Katharine. She bravely offered her neck
to the stroke and passed away hence to receive the twain crowns of
maidenhood and martyrdom, upon the 25th day of November. Her body was
marvelously laid by Angels upon Mount Sinai in Arabia."

   Note here that in the Breviary the pagan prince is called Maximin,
while in the legend he is identified with Maxentius, who was beaten by
Constantine in the battle of Saxa Rubra, and after his defeat was
drowned in the Tiber. In this way the legend of St. Catharine had become
closely affiliated with the final victory of Christianity.

   According to Mielot St. Catharine addresses Christ in a prayer before
her execution, and he answers her from out of a cloud with these words:
"Come thou, my much beloved, come my bride! The gate of heaven is open
to thee. The dwelling of eternal peace is prepared for thee and awaits
thy coming. The glorious hosts of virgins descend with great rejoicing
to thee with a crown of victory. Come therefore and be assured that I
will graciausly grant thee all those favors which thou askest. Yea I
promise to extend all help, assistance and comfort which thou askest me
also to those who in pious faith revere thy passion and will call on
thee in danger and extremity. I promise to them all these benefits and
the grace of heaven."

   According to the legend Mt. Sinai became the burial place of St.
Catharine's body, and Marius Sepet claims that the beginning <span
id="page_674">p. 674</span> of the public worship of St. Catharine dates
from the discovery of her tomb on Mt. Sinai in the eighth century.

   He says:

   "The worship of Catharine spread very rapidly among the

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca06.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">ST. CATHARINE'S DELIVERANCE.<br />
From Mielot's <em>Vie de Ste. Catherine</em> as revised and modernized by M. Sepet.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Christians of the Orient and in the whole Greek Church, whence it
penetrated into the Occident and was received also in the Latin Church.
This happened before the crusades, for the French National <span
id="page_675">p. 675</span> Library contains two manuscripts of the old
Latin legend dating from the time of the first crusade. The crusades by
encouraging and facilitating pilgrimages to the holy places of the
Orient, have undoubtedly contributed much to the spread of the fame and
the worship of St. Catharine, whose relics rest in a monastery on Mt.
Sinai."

   It is impossible to tell how old the legend of the mystic marriage
may be, but it seems sure that as soon as it appeared on record it
spread with great rapidity and became very soon afterwards well-nigh the
most popular of all legends. Its popularity kept at its height between
the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, and we may not go astray if we
assume that the currency of the unwritten tales prepared the rapid
acceptation of the legend when it first made its appearance in literary
shape.

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca07.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">ST. CATHARINE'S MARTYRDOM.<br />
From the <em>Little Pictorial Lives of the Saints</em>.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   In ecclesiastical art St. Catharine is represented with a spoked
wheel which in consequence of this is called St. Catharine's wheel.
Frequently she carries in her hand a palm branch or books, both in token
of the eminent position which she holds on account of her great
learning. The most celebrated illustrations of her life are frescoes by
Avanzi and Altichieri in the church of St. George at Padua, completed in
1377, and by Masaccio in the church of St. Clement at Rome made in the
fifteenth century.

   Not only are there many altarpieces in the churches of Catholics (and
even some in Protestant countries) which have come <span
id="page_676">p. 676</span> down from pre-Reformation times, but our art
galleries also contain many valuable pictures of St. Catharine including
representations of her mystic marriage. All of them bear witness to the

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca08.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF ST. CATHARINE<br />
Artist known as the "Master of the St. George Legends."</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

tenderness with which the idea was cherished at that time all over
Catholic Christendom.

   The Art Gallery of Cologne possesses perhaps the richest collection
of St. Catharines. Among them is a triptych, an altarpiece <span
id="page_677">p. 677</span> consisting of a center with two wings, which
contains a series of twelve illustrations of the life of St. Catharine
by an unknown painter commonly designated as the Master of the St.
George

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;"><img src="pc-sca09.jpg" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="small">SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF ST. CATHARINE<br />
Artist known as the "Master of the St. George Legends."</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Legends. We see that even in this subject the artist remains faithful to
his favorite topic, for he introduces the motive of the dragon fight
into the Catharine legend.

<span class="small">\[TO BE CONCLUDED.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](pc-sca2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_664">p. 664</span>

<span id="page_664_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_664_fr_*) We have tried to
make the illustrations in this article and the preceding one on "The
Bride of Christ" as complete a collection as possible of reproductions
of valuable paintings which have for their subject St. Catharine or the
Mystic Marriage; and we wish to acknowledge herewith our indebtedness
for the very great assistance toward this end which has been rendered
ungrudgingly by members of the staff of the Chicago Public Library.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
