[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fiwa17)  [Next](fiwa19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVI

### TALES OF FETICH BASED ON FACT

THE view-point of the native African mind, in all unusual occurrences,
is that of witchcraft. Without looking for an explanation in what
civilization would call natural causes, his thought turns at once to the
supernatural. Indeed, the supernatural is so constant a factor in his
life, that to him it furnishes explanation of events as prompt and
reasonable as our reference to the recognized forces of nature. Mere
coincidences are often to him miracles.

In the large mass of materials which I gathered from all native sources
of information for the formulation of the philosophy of fetichism, as
presented in the former part of this work, I found many remarkable tales
some of whose incidents were probable, and which to me were explicable
on natural grounds, but which my native friends believed were the effect
of witchcraft power. I did not dispute them. To do so would either have
closed their lips or made them omit the witchcraft element from any
subsequent stories they might narrate to me. I thus secured these tales
as a purely native product.

I did not use a note-book, fearing that its presence would hamper the
freedom of the story-teller, but listened carefully and wrote down the
interview immediately at its close. Not all knew that I was writing for
publication. That knowledge would have interfered with the simplicity of
their utterances. Of my several informants, some were ignorant, some
heathen, some Christian, only a few well educated. Of the most
intelligent of my informants, two allowed me to take notes as they were
speaking, and I really wrote from dictation; they considerately spoke
slowly, so that I should miss nothing, while I wrote rapidly and at the
same time had to translate their language into English. Of those two,
one was able to give part of the interview in English. The thoughts in
these stories are entirely native. So are most of the words. I tried to
retain the narrators' own structure of sentences, sacrificing a little
of English for the sake of native idioms. The prevalence of short words
is due to my effort at exact translation of their own words.
Occasionally I have used longer words of Latin origin because I had
forgotten their word, and in an effort to repeat their idea. The
shortness of the sentences is due to the natives' graphic and animated
style of speaking. Long sentences are foreign to their mode of speech.

The following two stories are illustrative of the native belief,
mentioned in Chapter IV, that we possess not only our physical body, but
also an essential or "astral" form, in shape and feature like the body.
This form, or "life," with its "heart," can be stolen by magic power
while one is asleep, and the individual sleeps on unconscious of his
loss. If the life-form is returned to him before he awakes, he will be
unaware that anything unusual has happened. If he awakes before that
portion of him has been returned, though he may live for a while, he
will sicken and eventually die. If the magicians who stole the "life"
have eaten the "heart," he sickens at once, and will soon die.

## I. A WITCH SWEETHEART.

A certain man loved a woman whom he expected to marry. He visited her
regularly. Whenever he intended to visit her, he always notified her
thus: "I will be coming such a day" or "such an hour." Then she would
say, "Yes." But it happened on a particular day when he told her, "I'll
be coming to-night," she said, "No, not to-night, wait till next night."
He replied, "No, for I will come to-night." But she refused, "No, I do
not want you to come to-night." Then he asked,"What is your objection?
Hitherto you have let me come when I pleased. What is the matter
to-night?" So she said, "I do not want you to come, because I will be
absent to-night." "Where are you going?" he asked. To this she gave as
answer only, "Don't come! I don't want you to come!" So the man said,
"All right! I will not come. If you don't want me, then I'm not coming."
So he left her, very much surprised at what she had said, and began to
think something was going wrong; he thought he would like to know for
himself what it was.

This woman was one of those who belonged to the Witch Society, and
engaged in its plays. But the man had not suspected this, and did not
know that she was one of those who played.

The native belief is that when a witch or wizard has seized some one to
"eat" his "life" or do him other harm, if there be a non--society
witness hidden or in the open, the odor of that witness weakens the
witch power, and the attempt at witchcraft fails.

This man, not suspecting the real state of the case, but in order to
know what was going on with the woman, came softly and hid near her
house, where he might be able to see whether any one went in or came
out. Soon he heard the door of her house open. He saw her come out of
the house without any clothing, and she quietly pulled the door to after
her and closed it, and then walked away from the place. All this the man
saw, but he said nothing. He stood outside waiting, waiting until she
should return. After a long while, as be was tired standing, he thought
he would go into the house and hide himself somewhere. It was not long
after this that he heard a little noise outside, and looking through the
apertures of the bamboo wall saw her and others with her, men and women.
Some of them were carrying the form of a man on their shoulders. Others
spread out on the ground green plantain leaves, and stretched the form
on the leaves. Each of the party had a knife, and they began their work
of cutting the form into pieces. While thus occupied, they saw that
their knives would not penetrate. Some of them began to step around,
peeping into recesses as if they were looking for something. Still
trying to cut, their knives seemed dulled; no one of them could succeed
in cutting out a single piece. So they stopped, and began to sharpen
their knives, and again tried to cut, using more force in their efforts.
They worked rapidly, for they had to hasten, as there were signs of
approaching day.

As they still were unable to make any incisions after the sharpening of
the knives, they thought it very strange, and began to suspect that some
one was near witnessing what they were doing. So some of them began to
search in different directions; they sniffed to detect the odor of a
person. This they did over and over again, and came back, and again
sharpened their knives, and again they failed. And then they would again
go around, sniffing for a human being.

At last, as it was near morning, they had to give up their intention of
cutting into this form. So they had to take it up again on their
shoulders and carry it back to where they had brought it from, and lost
their feast.

Then the woman came back to her house, very much disappointed and
excited. Though it was still dark, it was so near daybreak that she did
not go to bed, but took a light, and began to hunt all through her
house, having at last begun to suspect that perhaps her lover was there.
Finally she found him where he was hiding. She was very angry, saying,
"Who told you to come here? What brought you? And when did you come? Did
I not tell you not to come to-night?" But he turned on her, saying, "But
where have you yourself been? And what have you yourself been doing? I
came here expecting to find another man here. But that is not what I
saw!"

She trembled, saying, "Have you been here a long time?" And he
significantly said, "Yes, I have!" Then, furious, she said, "Now you
have seen all that we were doing, and you have found me out! And as you
have discovered that I am engaged in witchcraft, and lest you tell
others about it, you shall see that I will put an end to your life! You
shall not go out of this house alive!" So she pulled out her knife. But
the man was quite strong, and though he had no weapon, made a hard
fight. He was stronger than the woman, was able to get away from her,
and left the house just before daylight.

From that day their friendship was broken; neither cared again to see
the face of the other. The man informed on the woman. But she was not
prosecuted; for no one was able to make specific complaint that they had
lost their "heart-life." That form had been restored to its person
unrecognized and uninjured. No one out of the society, not even the
victim himself, knew of the attempt that had been made on him.

## II. A JEALOUS WIFE.

A man of the Orungu tribe in the Ogowe region had several wives, of whom
the chief, commonly called the "queen" or head-wife, had no children.
This was a grief to her and a disappointment to the husband. But one of
his younger women, who had now become his favorite, had a baby, and the
head-wife was jealous of her.

The husband still retained the older one as the bearer of the keys and
in direction of the other women, though he was beginning to doubt her,
as be suspected her of witchcraft. But he said nothing about it, not
being sure.

It is believed that witches can enter houses without opening doors or
breaking walls, and can do what they please without other people knowing
of it at the time. So one night this man and his young wife were
sleeping in the same bed with their little babe. Suddenly, after
midnight, the mother happened to wake up startled. She missed her baby
from the bed. She looked and looked all over the bed from head to foot,
and did not find it. Then she was frightened, woke up her husband
gently, and told him in a whisper, The child is missing! I don't see the
child!"

The husband told her to get up and light a gum-torch (for there were
coals smouldering on the clay hearth used as a fireplace), that they
might look for the child. She did so, and both hunted, looking under the
bedstead and elsewhere, but did not find the child. Then they examined
the windows and door; for perhaps the child had been taken out by some
one. The door and windows were all properly fastened. The mother was
very much troubled; but her husband, keeping his own counsel, advised
her not to scream or make a noise, but said, "Let us go back to bed, but
not to go to sleep; and let the room be dark again." So the wife put out
the torch, leaving the room in darkness; and they returned to bed. Then
the husband said, "Maybe we can prove or see something before morning"
(for be suspected); and he added, "Whoever or whatever has taken the
child out so secretly, will secretly bring it back. So we must not
sleep, but watch."

So both lay awake in bed for a few hours. Then, just before morning,
while it was still dark, they heard a little noise outside near the
house, like the rustling of wings and the panting of breath. They were
both anxious, and had their eyes wide open. Soon they saw the room
flashed full of a bright light from the roof. \[Witchcraft people are
noted for having a light which they can thus flash.\] Then the wife, as
soon as she saw the light, quietly nudged her husband; and be returned
the pressure, to let her know that he was aware, and also to intimate
that she should continue silent as himself; and they pretended to be
sleeping soundly.

Soon they saw the figure of a woman descend from the low roof, but with
no hole in the roof. The figure came to the bedside and lifted up the
edge of the mosquito-net with one hand, in the other holding a child. As
soon as she attempted to put the baby back in its place, between the
father and mother, the father, as he was the stronger, and nearer to the
figure on the outside of the bed, got up quickly, and seized both hands
of the woman before she had time to let go of the child and escape from
the room. He said aloud to the mother, "Get up! Your baby has been
missing. Now light the light, and we will see the person face to face
who has taken the child out!"

The young mother did so, and they discovered that it was the head-wife
who had brought in the child.

Then, when the father felt the body of the babe, it was limp and burning
with fever.

As it was so near daylight the father did not delay, but began at once
to make a fuss, and shouted for the people of the village to gather
together. And he began a "palaver" (investigation) immediately. When all
the people had assembled to hear the palaver, both the father and the
mother related what had passed during the night, about their missing the
child, and its return.

The head-wife, being accused, was silent, having nothing to say for
herself; for she was both ashamed and afraid to confess that she had
been eating the life of the baby. But all the people knew that such
things were done, and they believed that this woman had done with the,
baby whatever she wanted to do while she had it outside that night.

Then the father of the child tied up the head-woman, and said to her,
"Now I have you in my hands, I will not let you go until you give back
the baby's life, and make it well again." \[The belief is that if the
"heart-life" has not been eaten the victim can recover.\] This she was
not able to do, for she had eaten its "heart." So the next day the baby
died. And the husband executed that head-woman by cutting her throat.

The above incident was told me at Libreville by a very intelligent
Mpongwe as having actually occurred in the Gabun region. It is fully
believed that walls are no obstacle to the passage of the bodies of
those possessing the power of sorcery. The "light" spoken of I have
seen. I do not know what it was. From a small point it would flash with
starlike rays. It was carried by a man, who disappeared when pursued. A
Christian native told me that he once pursued it, and caught the bearer
with a torch concealed in a hollow cylinder; the flashing was caused by
his thrusting it in and out of the cylinder.

## III. WITCHCRAFT MOTHERS.

(On an itineration in my boat on the Ogowe interior, in 1890, 1 came to
a village of the Akele tribe, whose inhabitants were in an intense state
of excitement. All the men were brandishing guns and spears or daggers;
women were gesticulating and screaming; the loins of all were girded for
fight; and a few only of the older men and some strangers were appealing
for quiet.

Among the latter was a native trader of the Mpongwe coast tribe. His
trade interests made for peace. I knew him, as he had received some
education in our Gabun school.

I saw that in such confusion it would be useless to attempt to ask a
hearing for my gospel message. I did not wait to inquire the cause of
the day's commotion, and passed on to another village.

Subsequently the Mpongwe man told me the story. Though slightly educated
and enlightened, he was not a Christian and believed in fetiches. His
account, therefore, was from the heathen standpoint. I cannot repeat his
own wording, but the outline of the story is exactly his.)

In that village were two slave women, each married to a free husband.
Each was expecting to become a mother,--No. 1 in three months, and No. 2
in six months. They were friends; and, unknown to their husbands, were
members of the Witchcraft Society, and were accustomed secretly to
attend and take part in the society's midnight meetings and plays. Just
what is the nature of those plays is not quite certain, but it is known
that wild orgies of dancing constitute a part of them.

These two women, that they might be freer for their dancing and other
movements, were accustomed, in going to the meetings, to divest
themselves temporarily of their unborn babes. This they were able to do
by witchcraft power, in virtue of which the possessor can pass, or cause
any one else to pass, uninjured through any material object, as a ray of
light passes through glass.

This they did on their way to the meeting-place on the edge of the
forest. They laid their babes on the grass in a secluded spot, and
resumed them on their return. As they did so, No. 1 observed that hers
was a male, and No. 2 that hers was a female. They did this many nights
in succession.

Subsequently No. 2 began to be envious of No. 1 in the possession by the
latter of a male child. The husband of No. 2 had been very anxious for a
son. She knew that if she could present him with a son be would be very
proud, and would enlarge her position and privileges in the family. So,
one night, she did not wait for her friend No. 1 to return with her,
but, excusing herself from the play, came back on the path alone. Coming
to where the two babes were lying, she deliberately exchanged her own
girl for the boy of No. 1.

The latter stayed very late at the play,--so late that, as she hasted
home, fearful lest the morning light should find her on the path (a
dangerous thing to a witch-player), on coming to where the babes had
been deposited, she snatched up the remaining one without examining it,
and, supposing it to be hers, resumed the natural possession of it.

Shortly after this, the nine months of No. 1 were fulfilled, and she
bore a child which, to her surprise, she saw was a female. She made no
remark, as she immediately suspected what had been done. She waited
three months, until the days of No. 2 also were fulfilled. At the birth
of the child of No. 2 there was great rejoicing by the husband in the
possession of a son. He made a great feast, and called together a large
gathering of people. Among them was not invited the woman No. 1; for she
and No. 2 were no longer friendly, though neither of them had said
anything.

In the midst of the rejoicings No. 1 made her appearance, though
uninvited, and striding among the guests, went silently into the
bedroom, carrying a three-months-old female babe. She went to the side
of the bed of No. 2, laid down the female child, saying, "There 's your
baby!" snatched up the male infant, saying, "This is mine!" and strode
out of the room into the street and on the way to her house.

A scream from No. 2 startled the crowd of guests; word was passed that
the boy was being stolen, and No. 1 was pursued and brought back; but
she desperately refused to give up the boy. The whole village was at
once thrown into confusion.

That was the state of affairs on the day that I arrived there. My
informant told me that he and others induced the crowd to quiet, by
saying that the matter could better be settled by a talk than by guns,
by sitting down in council than by standing up in fight.

On being brought before the council or palaver, No. 1 was calm and firm.
She still held to the boy-baby. She said she was willing to be judged,
but demanded that No. 2 should also be made to confront the council. The
sense of guilt of the latter made her weak and unable to face the friend
she had wronged.

Charged with stealing, No. 1 made a bold speech. She said, "Yes; I have
taken my own! If that be stealing, I have stolen!" And then she told the
whole truth of the witchcraft plays of herself and No. 2. The latter,
overcome with shame for her crime, did not deny; she admitted all. And
No. 1 closed her defence by saying, "So this other woman has nothing
about which to make complaint. She has her child, and I have mine, and
that settles the matter."

The crowd was amazed, and the husbands were ashamed at finding that
their wives were witches. The husband of No. 2 was no longer disposed to
fight after his wife had admitted that the boy-baby was not her own. The
matter was dropped, as no one was really harmed. Neither husband was
disposed to fine the wife of the other for her witchcraft., as both were
guilty.

The guests ate the feast, but the host had no satisfaction in its now
useless expenditure except that it was considered sufficient reparation
to the husband of No. I for his own wife's original theft.

## IV. THE WIZARD HOUSE-BREAKER.

(The incidents narrated in the following three stories, The Wizard
House-Breaker, The Wizard Murderer, The Wizard and his Invisible Dog, my
informant asserted were actual occurrences; Nos. IV. and VI. occurring
in the Gabun region, and the parties known. The witchcraft part of the
stories consists in the strange light which wizards and witches are said
to possess; it is under their control to display or hide, and it gives
them power to overcome time and space. The scene of No. V. is on the
Ogowe River.)

There were a husband and wife who had been married a number of years.
She had a child, a little boy. The husband had a brother; and this
brother had taken a strong fancy to the woman, and wanted to possess
her. Secretly he was asking her to live with him. But the woman always
refused, saying, "No, I do not want it!" Then this brother's love began
to change to anger. He cherished vexation in his heart toward the woman,
and asked her, "Why do you always refuse me? You are the wife, not of a
stranger, but of my brother. He and I are one, and you ought to accept
me." But she persisted, "No, I don't want it!"

The brother's anger deepened into revenge. He possessed nyemba
(witchcraft power), and determined to use it.

One day this woman had to go to her plantation; and she arranged for the
journey, taking her little boy with her. Before she left the village to
go to the plantation, she told the townspeople, "I will remain at the
plantation for some days, to take care of my gardens; for I am tired of
losses by the wild beasts spoiling my crops." But the other women said,
"Ah! your plantation is too far; it is not safe for you to be by
yourself." But she said, "I cannot help it; I have to go." She was
brave, and persisted in her plan, and made all preparations. On a set
day, with her basket on her back, her child on her left bip, and her
machete in her right hand, the started. She went on, on, steadily;
reached the plantation, and rested there the remainder of that day with
her child. After her evening meal she shut the door of the hut and went
to bed. The door was fastened with strings and a bar, for the plantation
hamlets had no locks.

She awoke suddenly about midnight, and thought she heard a noise
outside. She listened quietly. Then she heard the sound again. Presently
she discovered by the noise that some one was trying to climb upon the
top of the but, for the roof was low. Soon, then, she observed that this
person was trying to break open the palm-thatch of the low roof. She
still lay quietly. But she remembered a big spear which the husband
always kept in one of the rooms of that hut; so she slowly got out of
bed, and very softly went to the corner of the room where the spear was
standing, and returned to bed with it.

The breaking of the thatch continued. Soon she saw the room filled with
a strange light, and then she saw a man trying to enter the roof head
foremost. She bravely kept still, and watched his head and shoulders
enter. She could not see his face, and did not know who he was. But she
did not wait for certainty; she thrust the spear upward at the man's
head. Immediately the figure disappeared, and she heard a heavy thud as
he fell to the ground into the street outside.

She now began to be frightened; she no longer felt safe, and dreaded
what might happen before morning. So she began to get ready to return to
town that very night. She girded her loin garment, fastened the cloth
for carrying her child, took her machete, hasted out of the hut, and
started for her village. In her fear she ran, and rested by walking.
Thus, alternately running and walking, she reached the village so
exhausted and weak with loss of sleep that when her husband's door was
opened shff fell fainting on the floor. He and others were alarmed, and
asked, "What? What's the matter?" As soon as she was able to speak, she
told the whole story. They asked her, "Did you see the person? Do you
know him?" She said, "No; only one thing I know: it was a man, and he
fell into the street."

So, when daylight came, the husband and others went to the plantation to
see whether they could find the man. When they reached the plantation,
they were very much surprised to see that the man was this brother. He
was lying dead, with the spear in his neck.

The husband was not vexed at his wife for the death of his brother; he
was pleased that she had so well defended herself.

## V. THE WIZARD MURDERER.

(My informant asserted that this really happened in the Ogowe.)

The parties are a husband and wife, their two little children, and a
younger brother of the husband. One of the children, a boy, was a lad
old enough to understand affairs.

The brother-in-law loved the woman, and secretly tried to draw her
affections to himself; but to all his solicitation she gave only
persistent refusal. Thus matters went on, he asking and she refusing;
and then his love turned to hatred. It happened one day that the husband
and wife had a big quarrel of their own. The wife was so angry that she
said she would leave him, take the children, and go to her father's
house. But that home'was far away, and could not be reached in one day.
Other wornen tried to prevent her going, as she would have to spend the
night in the forest on the way; but she insisted.

Leaving her clothing and other goods, she started off with the two
children, a little food, and her machete. Trying to make the journey in
one day, she walked very fast. But when the sun had set, and soon
darkness would fall, the lad said, "Mother, as we cannot reach there
to-nigbt, don't you think we 'd better stop and arrange a sleeping-place
before dark, and let the spot be a little aside from the public path?

The mother said, "Yes; that is good!" Then she gave the babe to the lad
to hold, while she with her machete began to cut away bushes and clear
the ground for a convenient sleeping-spot. After she had cut away some
bushes, the lad watching her, saw that she was clearing a space larger
than was needed for herself. He asked her, "Do you intend that we all
shall sleep in that one place,--you and baby and I?" The mother said,
"Yes." But he said, "Why, no! Fix two places,--I by myself, and you and
baby in another place." The mother replied, "No, I cannot let you sleep
alone in this forest; I want you near me." However, the lad insisted:
"But if anything happens to us in the night, then we will be lost all
together. I am not willing that we should be all in the same place."

So the lad began to search for a place for himself, and came to a big
tree which was not very far from his mother's chosen spot. He called her
to him, and said, "I have found a good place. Just you clear for me
behind this big tree, and dig a trench for me to lie in, just below the
level of the ground." The mother did so.

After the two spots were cleared, they ate their little evening meal,
and night came. Then the lad said, "Now I go to lie in the trench, and
you sprinkle leaves over me to bide me, and then you go to your
sleeping-place. And if anything happens to me at night, I promise I will
not cry out; I will remain silent. And you promise that if anything
happens to you, you also will not cry out, nor call to me." The mother
agreed, and both went to sleep.

Not long after this, both were awakened by a strange flashing light, and
the mother saw some one coming to the place where she was lying. Then
the light was suddenly extinguished; and she saw a man near her, and
recognized that he was her brother-in-law. She was exceedingly alarmed,
knowing that he did not come with good intent. In her fright she hoped
to gain time by pretending to be friendly with him. So she exclaimed,
"Oh! My young husband! Now you have come after me, so that your
brother's wife will not have to sleep in the forest alone. Now we will
make friendship and be good friends." But he replied in anger: "Friends,
you say? You shall see what kind of friends I will make with you
to-night! You, the woman who hates me! Where is the lad?" She,
determined to shield the child, said, "The lad did not come with me; he
preferred to stay in town with--his father." The man replied, "You are
not telling me the truth. Tell me where the lad is!" But she persisted
in her statement, "He is left in town with his father."

Then the man walked about in search of the lad, going even very near to
where be was lying awake in the trench. But the leaves hid him, and his
uncle did not discern that the ground had been disturbed. Returning to
the woman, he said, "Good! you are telling the truth. I don't see the
lad. But now I am ready to attend to you. You shall see." So he
approached the woman to seize her. She was so paralyzed with fear that
she neither attempted to run away, nor, though her machete was lying
near, did she lay hold of it.

Even had she done so, she was too weak with her journey to defend
herself. The man snatched up the babe that still was sleeping, and
looking around for a rough, projecting root, violently flung the babe
against it. It made no cry; and both he and the mother supposed it was
instantly killed. Then be drew his machete, which he had made very
sharp, and began to cut and slash the woman. She pleaded and cried for
help; but there was no help near. She fell, covered with wounds, and
died on the spot. All this the lad saw and heard. After killing the
mother, the man began again to search for the lad, but did not find him;
and, as it was now after midnight, he left the place to go back to town.

Soon after he was gone, the lad, exhausted with terror and fatigue, fell
asleep. But be awoke again in the early daylight. Arising from his
trench, he went with grief and distress to see the two corpses. Looking
at his mother's blood covered form, he saw that she was dead. Looking at
his baby brother lying on the root, he took up the little form, sobbing,
"Only I am alive. Even this little child was not spared. Am I to go on
my journey all alone?" Examining the limp body still. further, it seemed
still to show signs of life; and he said to himself, "I think I will try
to save it. I am strong enough to carry it to my mother's people, to
whom I shall tell this whole story."

So he took up the cloth in which his mother had carried the child,
adjusted it for himself, placed the unconscious form in it, and started
on his journey. A short distance beyond brought him to a brook. Before
be crossed it, he stooped to take a drink of water. Tben examining the
little body again, he felt that it was not stiff and was still warm.
Said he, "Ah! perhaps it has a little life! I better give it a drink."
So he tried; and the baby drank, He rejoiced. "So perhaps it will be
alive. I better bathe it." And be did so. Then he crossed the brook, and
journeyed on. Before he reached his grandfather's village, he crossed
another brook, and bathed the babe, and gave it a drink as at the first
brook.

On his arrival at the village the people were surprised to see him
without his mother. His grandfather at once wanted to know his story and
why he had come there alone. Said he, "Please, before I tell my story,
try to save this baby."

After the people had looked to the baby's needs and saw that it might
live, they gathered together to listen to what the lad had to say. When
they had heard his account, they started back with him to find his
mother's corpse. They took it up and carried it to her husband's
village, there to hold palaver over the death. As soon as they reached
the village, instead of announcing themselves as visitors to the
husband, they went straight to the brother-in-law's house. They found
him sitting in the veranda. They laid the corpse at his feet. This so
startled him that a look of guilt showed on his face. Looking at the
party who had brought the corpse, he saw among them the lad; and at once
he felt sure that this lad had been a witness of his crime. He lost his
self-control, and began to scold, "What do you put this thing at my feet
for? Take it away!"

Then all the townspeople gathered around him, being horrified at the
news of the woman's death. The husband called them all to a council, and
the palaver was held at his house. There the grandfather and the lad
told the whole story.

The brother-in-law began to enter a denial; but the busband said, "No,
you are guilty! and because we are brothers, and we are one, the guilt
is also mine; and I will confess for you. You are guilty. Your actions
show it. Why did you become so angry as soon as you saw the corpse at
your feet?"

But the wife's family said to the husband, "We have no quarrel with you.
We want only the person who killed our sister, and a fine of money for
our loss."

Then the husband said, "You are right; this man killed her. Take him,
and for a fine take his slaves and other property. He has deliberately
deprived me of a wife, and my children of a mother. Take all he owns."
It was so done; and the assemblage dispersed.

## VI. THE WIZARD AND HIS INVISIBLE DOG.

(This, my informant asserted, actually happened at the town of
Libreville, Gabun.)

One night a young woman was alone in her house. She was married; but,
that particular night, the husband was absent.

After she had gone to her bed for the night, she slept, but not very
soundly. Half awake, she thought she heard something moving in the front
reception-room (ikenga). She had lowered the lamp in her bedroom, but it
still gave enough light for her to see. She slightly opened the
mosquito-net on one side and began to look and listen. But she saw no
one nor anything unusual in her room. But as the door between her
bedroom and the reception-room was slightly ajar, she looked toward its
opening, and thought she saw a figure moving in that room. She felt sure
there was some one there. So she stepped softly out of the bed, and
peeped through the narrow opening of the door. Sure enough, there was a
man.

She was frightened, but controlled herself. She was puzzled to know how
he had got into that room, whose outer door she knew she had fastened
before she went to bed. She crept quietly back to her bed, and then
began to shout, "Who is that? How did you get in? I see you!" There was
no answer. The figure ceased moving, and stood still. The woman again
cried out, "Who are you? When did you come in? What do you want?" The
man replied in a low voice, "It is I!" She rejoined, "Who is 'I'? Are
you only 'me'? Who are you? How did you succeed in entering? Go out!" So
he apparently opened the door and went out. She was so frightened that
she did not immediately. follow him, nor did she make a public outcry.

Awhile afterward she recovered self-control, and arose and went into the
outer room, and assured herself that the outside door was fast, as she
had left it. She believed he had entered the closed door by witchcraft
art.

The next morning she told her village people the story; but she was
afraid to mention the man's name (for she knew who he was), because many
people thought he possessed power as a wizard, and she feared he would
revenge himself on her. She told his name only to her mother.

Not long afterward he came again to her house when she was alone at
night, but did not enter. He came to the outside wall against which be
knew her bedstead stood. Lying there, she could see his form through the
cracks in the bamboo wall. She saw this as she happened to awake from
sleep. She saw his figure standing still, and she heard a sound as of
the tinkling of a bell moving about, such as natives tie to the necks of
their dogs in hunting. The wizard had brought with him this time a small
invisible beast to whose neck the invisible but audible bell was
attached; and she beard a sound along the bottom of the.wall, as if the
animal was scratching a hole for its master's entrance. This time she
was so alarmed that she screamed aloud to the people of the village; and
then, through the chinks in the wall, she saw passing by in the street
the figure of the same man.

The very next day the woman began to be sick of a fever. For several
days she was quite ill, and people began to be alarmed for her. Her
sickness grew very much worse. Her people sent for a Senegal man, living
in Libreville, who had quite a reputation as a doctor in that kind of
sickness. When this doctor came, she was able to speak only in a low
voice, and she recounted to him what had happened. He asked her to
mention the precise spot on which the man had stood outside of the wall
of her house. She described to her mother the particular spot, and the
mother took the doctor to show him. He scraped up clay from the place
and mixed it in a small bowl of cold water. He directed that after she
had been given a bath morning and evening this muddy water should be
rubbed over her body. She said that when it was thus rubbed over her
skin, her flesh temporarily felt as if it was paralyzed.

Her sickness continued more than a month, and then she recovered. Soon
after her recovery the man who had attempted to enter her room, and who
was suspected of having caused her sickness by witchcraft art, suddenly
left Gabun, and went to another country.

## VII. SPIRIT-DANCING.

Antyande, a Mpongwe woman of the town of Libreville, Gabun, is a leader
of a company of ten or a dozen women in a certain native dance called
"ivanga," which is performed only by women. Some dance it only as an
exhibition of their gymnastic skill; others mix with it fetich and
witchcraft arts, and claim that their movements are under spirit power.
Antyande, more than the other women of the company, uses witchcraft in
her performances. She seems almost to glide through the air, alighting
on the knees of sitting spectators without giving them the impression of
weight, gyrating on small stools without moving the stools from their
position, and making many other wonderful physical contortions in an
exceedingly graceful and easy manner. She even goes to graveyards at
night, accompanied by three or four men and women, to get what they call
the spirits of the dead. It is said by some of the men who have gone
there with her that they do not understand what she does, but that it is
so very strange and awful that they are afraid. The reason why she goes
for these abambo (ghosts) of the graves is that she may be spry and
alert, and able to do with her body whatever she pleases. She claims
also to be accompanied by a leopard and a bush-cat that are visible to
her but not to others. As these animals are noted for their quick and
agile movements, and are under her witch-power control, they are able to
impart to her these qualities.

In January, 1902, she was dancing her ivanga, and there was a woman
among the spectators who had been drinking to the point of intoxication.
In her foolishness she determined to help Antyande by assuming to be
directress to keep the spectators in order. But, being drunk, she could
not do so; she only made disorder. In attempting to make matters
straight she only made them crooked. Antyande asked her to get out of
her way. Many, also, of the spectators begged the woman to cease
interfering; but she would not, and finally she vexed Antyande by
spoiling her movements in getting too close in front of her. Antyande's
patience was exhausted, and she suddenly revealed a secret that
astonished many even of her intimate acquaintances, saying, "Whoever is
related to this drunken woman, please tell her to get out of my way
while I am dancing, because my dance is not a mere gymnastic exercise. I
have leopards and bushcats about me, and if she comes too near me, and
the tails of these animals should twist around her legs, then she will
get a sickness: and if that happens, her people must not hold me
responsible for it, for I have given you this warning." This surprised
many of the people; for they had supposed she was nothing more than an
unusually graceful dancer, and that her success was purely physical.
Now, publicly, she admitted that the power in her limbs and body causing
her graceful undulations was a supernatural one. So some of the women
laid hold of the drunken woman, and induced her to get out of the way.

While dancing, Antyande wears a wide belt called "ekope," which is made
with white and red stripes, and adorned with fringes of small bells in
bands like sleigh-bells. It is known that her ekope has been heard and
seen moving as if in the rhythm of a dance in her own room when she was
not visibly there. Those who beard the sound of its bells would think
she was there practising the dance; but when they went to look, they saw
it moving, but did not see her. A few months afterward, a report came
at'night to the villages that Antyande was very much excited and could
not sleep; that she had gone to her room for the ekope, and that it was
not there. So she began to make a great fuss, and begged her associates
to keep watch and go with her to search for the missing ekope. Some of
these friends were willing; others were not, and these went to their
beds. She then went to other villages and told the people there: "My
ekope has gone out on a promenade. Have you seen it?" These people were
among the chief dancers of her band. But they told her they did not know
where the ekope was. So she began to ejaculate a prayer: "Oh, please,
you went out for a walk; come back to me, for if you do not return, then
I am lost. It will be death to me." Just before daylight, as she was
still wandering about with her friends, and singing ivanga songs to
attract her ekope, suddenly she and two of her friends beard the
tinkling of the bells among the bushes lining a certain road which
passes by a Roman Catholic chapel. They all went in the direction of the
sound of the bells, and entering a cluster of the bushes, they saw the
ekope moving to and fro. She was so--glad to see it, and she bade one of
her companions to go and get it. But the woman was afraid, and refused,
saying, "Me! Oh, no! Go and get it yourself!" So she went to it, singing
her ivanga song, seized it, and brought it to her house.

As she is noted for her grace and skill in that particular dance,
another woman, by name Ekâmina, asked her to give her power such as
hers, as she also wished to be leader of another band of ivanga dancers.
Antyande assented, saying, "Well, do you want spirits with it?" The
other replied, "Yes, I want two." So the two women, with a young man to
escort them, went at night to the graves and obtained the two desired
spirits. It is these which give them spirit power. When under their
influence, their bodies are thrilled with a new essence which makes them
very light and causes them to act and speak as if insane. The two women
came back to Antyande's village, and she performed all the magic
ceremonies that Ekâmina wanted.

Some time after this, when Ekâmina had practised much and had danced
publicly several times, people began to say to her that she danced very
well, and soon she was invited to give exhibitions in various places.

One day it happened that the two women had arranged to dance on the same
night, each with her own party, at villages quite distant from each
other. Antyande asked Ekâmina to give up her play for that night and
join with her, "for," said she, "I want to make mine grand; and you wait
for yours another day." But Ekâmina was not willing. Antyande tried to
get her to change her mind, and was very much displeased because she
refused. Ekâmina said, "I will not give up, for my dance is by special
invitation at Añwondo village, so I have to go." (Libreville is three
miles long; one end is called "Glass," and Añwondo is at the other end.)
Ekâmina lived at Glass, and on her way to Añwondo she had to pass the
village of Antyande. The latter said to herself, "As Ekâmina is not
willing to do as I wish, and I was the one who gave her this power, I
will watch her as she passes, and see what I will do." So, when Ekâmina
passed at night with her party to Añwondo, Antyande watched her chance
as Ekâmina neared her. She went behind her, and did some magic act which
would make the latter powerless to dance and not be aware of--her loss
of power. When Ekamina reached Añwondo and commenced her play, she was
not able to dance at all. She tried till midnight, and failed. She
suspected that Antyande was the cause of the failure, for the latter had
not been friendly since their unsatisfactory talk. So she took a portion
of her party that same night back to Antyande's village, told the latter
her trouble, and begged her, "Please, if you have taken away the power,
give it back, so I may finish the dance tonight." Antyande said, "No;
you would not listen to me. I am a chief dancer, and you are praised as
the same. Go and dance!" Ekamina said, "But please give me back the
power; I am not able to dance without it." Antyande replied, "No, go to
the graveyard and get other spirits there for yourself." So there was no
dance done by Ekamina that night.

## VIII. ASIKI, OR THE LITTLE BEINGS.

People believe that Asiki (singular "Isiki ") were once human beings,
but that wicked men, wizards and witches, or other persons who assert
that they have memba (witchcraft powers), caught them when they were
children and could not defend themselves, nor could their cries for help
be heard when playing among the bushes on the edge of the forest. These
wicked persons out off the ends of the children's tongues, so that they
can never again speak or inform on their captors. They carry them away,
and bide them in a secret place where they cannot be found. There they
are subjected to a variety of witchcraft treatment that alters their
natures so that they are no longer mortal. This treatment checks their
entire physical, mental, and moral growth. They cease to remember or
care for their former homes or their human relatives, and they accept
all the witchcraft of their captors. Even the hair of their head
changes, growing in long, straight black tresses down their backs. They
wear a curious comb-shaped ornament on the back of their head. It is not
stiff or capable of being used as a comb, and is made of some twisted
fibre resembling hair. The Asiki value it almost as a part of their
life.

These Asiki will sometimes be seen walking in paths on dark nights, and
people meet them coining toward them. It is believed that in their
meeting, if a person is fearless by natural bravery, or by fetich power
as a wizard or witch, and dares to seize the Isiki and snatch away the
"comb," the possession of this ornament will bring him riches. But
whoever succeeds in obtaining that"comb"will not be allowed to remain in
peaceful possession of it. The poor Isiki will be seen at night
wandering about the spot where its treasure was lost, trying to obtain
it again.

It happened in the year 1901 that there was a report, even in civilized
Gabun, about these Asiki,-that two of them were seen near a certain
place on the public road at that part of the town of Libreville known as
the "Plateau," where live most of the French traders and government
officers. A certain Frenchman, who is known as a freemason, in returning
from his 8 p.m. dinner at his boarding-house to his dwelling-place,
observed that a small figure was walking on one side of the road,
keeping pace with him. He accosted it, "Who are you?" There was no
answer; only the figure kept on walking, advancing and retreating before
him.

Also, a few nights later, a Negro clerk of a white trader met this small
being on that very road, and near the spot where the Frenchman had met
it, and it began to chase the Negro. He ran, and came frightened to his
employer's office, and told him what had happened. His employer did not
believe him, laughed at his fears, and told him he was not telling the
truth. The very next night the Frenchman, the trader, and other white
men and Negro women were sitting in conversation. The trader told the
story of his clerk, whereupon the Frenchman said, "Your clerk did not
lie; he told the truth. I have myself met that small being two or three
times, but I made no effort to catch it." The women told him of the
comb-ornament which Asiki were believed to wear, and of the pride with
which Asiki regarded it, and the value it would be to any one who could
obtain it. Then the Frenchman replied, "As the little being is so small,
the very next time I see it I will try to catch it and bring it here, so
that you can see it and know that this story is actually true."

On a subsequent night they two--the Frenchman and the trader--went out
to see whether they could meet the Isiki. They did not meet with it that
night; but a few evenings later the Frenchman went alone, and met the
Isiki near the place where it had first been seen. The Frenchman ran
toward it and tried to catch it; but it being very agile eluded his
grasp. But, though he failed to seize its body, he succeeded in catching
hold of its "comb," and snatched it away, and ran rapidly with it toward
his house. It did not consist of any hard material as a real comb, but
was made of strands resembling the Isiki's hair, and braided into a
comb-like shape. The little being was displeased, and ran after him in
order to recover the ornament. Having no tongue, it could not speak, but
holding out one hand pleadingly and with the other motioning to the back
of its head, it made pathetic sounds in its throat, thus inarticulately
begging that its treasure should be given back to it. On nearing the
light of the Frenchman's house it retreated, and he showed the ornament
to other white men and some native women. (So positive was my informant
that the names of these men and women were mentioned to me.) He said to
the trader, "You doubted your clerk's story. Have you ever seen anything
like this in all your life?" They all said they had not. It was reported
that many other persons hearing of it went there to see it.

From that night the little being was often seen by other Negroes. It was
always holding out its hand, and seemingly pleading for the return of
its "comb." This made the Negroes afraid to pass on that road at night.
The Frenchman also often met it; it did not chase him, but followed
slowly, pleading with its hands in dumb show, and occasionally making a
grunting sound in its throat. This it did so persistently and annoyingly
that the Frenchman was wearied with its begging, and determined that the
next night he would yield up the "comb." But he went prepared with
scissors. He found the little being following him. He stopped, and it
approached. He held out his hand with the ornament. As the Isiki jumped
forward to snatch at it, the Frenchman tried to lay hold of its body;
but it was so very agile that, though it had come so near as to be able
to take the comb from the Frenchman's hand, it so quickly twisted itself
aside as to elude his grasp. He however succeeded in getting his bands
in its long hair, and snipped off a lock with his scissors. The Isiki
ran away with its recovered treasure, and did not seem to resent the
loss of a portion of its bair. This bair the Frenchman is said to have
shown to his companions at their next evening conversation, and I was
given to understand that he had sent it to France. It was straight, not
woolly, and long.

These Asiki are supposed not to die, and it is also believed that they
can propagate; but so complete has been the parent's change under
witchcraft power that the Isiki babe will be only an Isiki and cannot
grow up to be a human being.

It is asserted that Asiki are now made by a sort of creative power (just
as leopards and bush-cats are claimed to be made, and used invisibly) by
witch doctors.

1 am only writing these tales, I am not explaining them. Some of the
statements in the above story are too circumstantial to be denied. But
there is a wide margin for uncertainty as to what one might see after
the conviviality of an 8 p.m. West African dinner. In my sudden leaving
of Gabun in June, 1903, 1 had not time to interrogate the men and women
named as having seen the Isiki's tress of hair.

## IX. OKOVE.

(The incidents of this story really occurred, and independent of the
fetich belief in okove power, are true. At the request of my native
informant the names of the two tribes are suppressed, for the sake of
the living descendants of the two kings.)

There was an old king of one of the principal tribes of West Equatorial
Africa who had great power and was held in great respect and fear; there
was none other his equal.

He had brothers and cousins. One of these cousins had a servant, a
slave, who had been bought from an interior tribe. It happened that this
man had not always been a slave, but in the tribe from which he had been
sold he was a freeman. The charge on which he had been sold by his own
tribe was that of sorcery and witchcraft murder, the death penalty for
which had been commuted to sale into slavery. He was deeply versed in a
mystery of a certain fetich or magic power called "Okove." He possessed
it so powerfully that no one was able to overcome him in contests of
strength, and people were greatly afraid of him.

So his owners intended to get rid of him by selling him out of the
country. To do this, they planned to catch him in the daytime; for he
exercised his okove power chiefly at night, when he could change himself
into a powerful being ready to overcome any one who should resist him.

One night when this great king, who also possessed the okove power
(though it was not generally known), went out to inspect, he saw a big
tall man walking up and down near his premises. The king said to him,
"Ho! who are you?" The man answered, "It is I." The king asked," Who is
I?" The man replied daringly, "I have already told you that I am I." So
the king asked again, "Who are you? Where did you come from? And what
are you doing here?" The man said, "I go everywhere, and do what I
please at other people's places, and--so I have come here." The king
commanded him, "But, no, not at this place. This is mine. Go back to
your own!"

The slave gave answer, "No I that is not my habit. No one can master
me!"

The king again ordered him, "Go!" He flatly refused, "No!" The king then
said plainly, "Are you not willing to leave my premises?"

He replied," No, I never turn away from anyone. I go away when I please.
When I am ready, I will go back to my place." At this the king,
restraining himself, slowly said, "Be it so!" and turned away, leaving
the slave standing in his yard.

The next day the king sent word for his cousin the owner of the slave to
come; to whom, when he had arrived at the house, the king told how he
had seen the man at night. And he inquired, "What does he do? Why does
he leave his place on the plantation and come to my place at night?" The
cousin was surprised to hear this, exclaiming, "So! indeed! he comes
here at night?" Then he went back to his house, and calling the slave,
asked him about this matter. "Do you go around at night, even to the
king's place?" The man said, "Yes." His master said, "Why do you do
that? Do you hear of other lower-caste people daring to go to the king's
at night?" He answered, "No; but it is I who do as I please." His master
told him, "No; you better return to the plantation, and live among the
other slaves." He replied "I will go, but not now." His master asked
him, "But what are you waiting for?" He only repeated, "Yes; but not
now."

The very next night, on the king's going out as usual, be found this
slave again at his place, and said to him, "So I you here again?" The
man replied, "Yes; just what I told you last night, that I do what I
please, and I can master anybody." Then the king said, "I warn you
plainly, clear off from my place!" He replied, "No, I do not intend to
clear out; but I am ready for a fight."

The king asked, "You really want a fight with me?" The man
answered,"Yes, I am ready for it." Said the king, "It is well."

The fight began, each with his full okove power. In such contests, the
power is able to change the contestants' bodies to many forms. The slave
was quick in his use of them. His first change was to the form of a big
gorilla. This also the king met. As the fight went on, the next form was
into that of leopards. The fight went on, with frequent changes; the
slave always being the first to change. After a while the slave seemed
to be growing tired, and the king asked him, "Are yon through?" He
answered, "No, only resting." Again the fight was resumed. Finally, the
slave took an eagle's form; the king did the same.

Presently the slave seemed to hesitate, and the king said, "You said you
wanted a fight. Well, let us go on with it." They continued; but the
slave seemed to be exhausted, and the king said, "Now, are you willing
to leave the place?" He answered, "No; my fatigue is not yet so great as
to make me leave your place." The king had held his power in reserve,
and had been tolerant of the man's audacity; but he now resumed his
human form, took his gun (the slave had none), and aiming it, off it
went, and wounded him. Being wounded, the slave had to acknowledge that
he was overcome, and he had to go. When morning came, the slave was not
able to get up to go about his work, and remained in bed. The gun-shot
wound was a small one, and he was conscious that he was dying of some
other cause. He sent some one to the master's house to ask him to come.
When his master came, he said, "Ah! master! I have something to say to
you. Please plead for me!" The master said, "Plead for you! For what?"
The slave then told him, "I went around last night to the king's place.
He told me to leave, and I was not willing to do so. So we had a great
fight. And I am conquered. But please plead for me, that he may make me
well."

The master replied, "Did I not advise you not to go there, but rather to
stay at your plantation?" He assented. "But please plead, and I will
stay at the plantation."

The master answered, "I do not think the king will be willing to help
you." Nevertheless, being a cousin, he went privately to the king, and
told him all that the slave had told him. The king refused, saying, "No,
I am not going to do anything for him. He must die." The next day the
slave was dead.

(Another illustration of that king's okove power was narrated to me.)

There had been ill-feeling between this king's tribe and an adjacent
inferior tribe who had killed two of the king's chief men without cause,
coming suddenly upon them at night in their fishing-camp. The king's
people were very much troubled about it, and asked to be led to war. But
the old king said, "You young people'don't know anything. If you go to
war, there will be much blood shed on both sides. Leave the matter with
me. I will attend to it myself."

So at night he went by himself to the town of the king of the offending
tribe, and remained there waiting in ambush on the path. Early next
morning four of the women belonging to that town had gone to their
gardens with their baskets to get food. The old king followed them
secretly. After all of. them had filled their baskets, two lifted them
upon their backs and started to return to their town. The other two were
just stooping (as is the custom in lifting burdens, leaning forward on
one knee in order to place their backs against the basket, with a strap
passing around the basket and over their foreheads), when the king came
behind them and struck their necks with his okove. They instantly died
in that stooping position.

The two women who had gone on ahead reached their town without knowing
what had happened to the other two. They waited in town a long time for
the two absent ones to come. But when they did not make their
appearance, the people began to ask those women about the other two.
They said they knew nothing about the delay, only that they had left
them ready to come and preparing to lift their baskets. The townspeople,
anxious because it was late in the day, went out to search for the
women. They found them on the path, dead by their baskets. They examined
their bodies for some mark or wound or sign of a blow. There was none.
This very much perplexed them, for they did not suspect the cause of
their death. They carried the dead bodies to town. The next night the
king went again to that same town, and he happened to meet the other
king at the boat-landing of the town. So the old king made complaint to
the other why the servants of the latter had killed his two chiefs. The
other made no reply, having no justification of what his people had
done.

Then the old king said, "As your people have done this, there is war
between us"; and he struck him with his okove. And he added, "Do you
know that I have already begun war with your people? Did you not find
two of your women dead yesterday at your gardens? I killed them. But I
am not through with you, I want you to pay a fine, and I want the man
who killed my two chiefs, for the lives of the two women are not
equivalent to those of my two chiefs."

The other king felt he was conquered by some unseen power, and did not
resist. He agreed to give up the murderer and pay a fine. The next day
he had the murderer caught and brought before a council. He told them
that the old king of the other tribe wanted the life of that man and a
sum of money for the lives of his two chiefs.

They began to collect on the spot goods and food of all kinds, and many
things of little value, with which to make simply the appearance of a
full canoe. They tied the prisoner, put him in the canoe, and went with
him and the goods to the old king. He received them.

But at night he went again to the other king, and began to rebuke him,
saying that what he had sent was not sufficient. The other made a
protest: "I have given you enough,--the lives of the two women, the one
man, and goods equivalent to two more lives. I have thus given you five
for your two."

But the old king, in tribal pride, reckoned the sex and social position
of his two men greater than any five of an inferior tribe, and said,
"How dare you speak to me like that? You shall surely die!" He struck
him with his okove, and went away.

The next day the other king was not able to leave his bed and sent for
many of his people to come, saying that be had a special word to speak
to them. They came, and he told them all about the death of the two
women, and all that had occurred between him and the old king. "And
now," he said, "I am dying. We are overcome. It is useless to resist. I
want you to remember, as long as the world stands, never to fight or
quarrel with the tribe of that king."

Then he turned his face to the wall and died.

## X. THE FAMILY IDOLS.

(To a village on the St. Thom6 or left bank of Gabun Bay, or "River,"
away up a winding mangrove stream, and on the edge of the forest that
was broken by pieces of prairie, I went, in February, 1903, to visit a
friend, a sick Christian woman, who was in the care of a relative of
hers named Adova.

There were only five huts in the village. At the first one from the edge
of the prairie, which was assigned to me in which to sleep, on a bench
outside under the low eaves, was a roughly carved wooden idol, about
fourteen inches in height. From the dressing of the hair of its head, I
supposed it to be intended for a female. Its loins were covered with a
narrow strip of cloth. Near it was what could scarcely be recognized as
a dog, its head looking more like a pig's, and its tail more like an
alligator's. The figures were chalked and painted; and near them were a
few gourd utensils for eating and drinking, and some medicinal barks.

Subsequently, at night, in a curtained-off comer of my room, I saw three
low baskets, in each of which was a pair of wooden images not six inches
high. They were chalked, and adorned with strips of various-colored
cloth. In each basket also was a wooden bourglass-shaped article that
seemed intended for a double bell. Pieces of medicinal barks filled up
the spaces in the baskets. The images were relics of ceremonies held
over twins born long ago in the family.

At the other end of the village, in a very small roughly built hut, open
on one side, were two other idols,--one, a male, standing and chalked
and painted. The female in an ornamented box was not visible; near them
was a nondescript animal.

The story of these idols, as told me by my friend (who has since died),
is more especially connected with this pair.)

### PART I. OKÂSI

It was made by a Loango man, a fetich doctor, very many years ago. The
Mpongwe family that to-day owns these relics had sent south to Loango,
to the Fiât or Ba-Vili tribe, to bring to Gabun for this special purpose
this celebrated magician.

When he arrived, the chief of the family who had summoned him went with
him off to the forest, with all the medicines, and so forth, which the
Loango man had brought. This occurred on that same left side of the
"river" where I was visiting.

The magician began to explain everything in the way of directions about
the medicines that were to be put into the hollow of the abdomen of the
idol (and which to-day is still covered by a small round mirror fastened
over it). After explaining all these matters, he gave also all the
orunda (prohibitions), *viz.*: The idol must not be allowed to fall on
its face; it must have a small hut for shelter from rain and sun: it
must be given a light at night, at least of coals of fire. After this,
he began to carve the idol. After making the male of the pair, and
before making its female, he made a duplicate of the male, exactly like
it, except that it was only an imitation without any magic power; and,
instead of medicines, only powdered charcoal was put into the hollow in
its abdomen, which, however, was to be covered with glass, exactly as
the real one.

When these two idols were finished, the two men, the magician and the
chief of the family, went with them far into the forest. The Loango
said, "I will put these here, and when we go back to your town I will
give the power of olâgâ, \[a certain kind of spirit\] to one--of your
women. If she receives it properly, she herself, without knowing our
path, will come to this forest, and will make no mistake in choosing the
real idol from the imitation; and she will bring it to me in the town."
(It is a rule with the native sorcerers that if the one who aspires to
the power should make a mistake in this choosing, she must pay a fine of
from $60 to $100.)

When all was arranged, the Loango man said, "Now let us go back to
town." So they turned back. But when they had gone half of the way, he
said to himself, "This Gabun man now knows everything, and where the
idols are, and which is the real one. It is his sister who wishes to
receive the power; he will go and tell her everything, and she will make
no mistake, not by reason of her possessing power, but by his private
information." So the Loango said, "Go you to the town, await me there; I
will come soon." And he turned back into the forest by himself, took up
the two idols from where he had laid them down, went in another
direction and hid them there, and then returned to town.

He then gave the power to the woman, and said, "Go and bring the olâgâ."
She started, went with only a little power, and was going at random; but
before she had gone half-way, she came under the full power. Then she
turned her face right and left, and gave an olâgâ yell, seeking to know
which way the power would lead her. At once then she knew which was the
way; and she went running and shouting frantically, under the influence
of this power, to the precise spot, and took up the real idol, making no
mistake about the imitation one. Holding it aloft, she returned,
shouting and dancing, under the Delphic frenzy. She entered the town
singing and dancing in the street, and then laid the idol at the feet of
the Loango man. He took it, and knew it was the right one. He then went
to the forest and brought also the other, the duplicate. When he
returned, he went with it and the real one to the ogwerina (backyard) to
show to the Gabun man the slight difference in the two (which he knew by
a private mark). In doing this he had to take off the little mirrors and
show the difference between the medicines and the charcoal. And he again
closed the mirrors. Then, just to test the woman, the magician said to
her, "Go and bring me the idol I have left in the ogwerina." She went
there, still under the power, and with a frenzied scream seized the
right one and brought it to him. He was half glad and half disappointed;
for had she mistaken, he would have received more money.

Then the townspeople held a great dance, and the Loango taught them
special songs for the olâgâ. The female of the pair of idols had also
been made about the same time as the male, but with no special ceremony.

All being finished, the magician named his fee for his services, was
paid, and went back to Loango.

This idol was intended as a family fetich, to protect the family at
night, and to kill any one who would attempt to injure any of the
members. The name of this male of the pair was Okâsi.

The name of the other one, that was under the eaves of the hut in which
I slept, was kâkâ-gi-bâlâ-dyambo-gi-bâlâ-ve. These are Shekyani words,
and mean "A-great-log-may-rot-but-a-spoken-word-dies-never." That meant
that if an enemy came and injured any one in the town, the wrong would
never be forgotten and would surely be avenged. That idol might almost
stand for a statue of Vengeance.

The above proverb comes from a tale of a cruel old Shekyani chief.

### PART II. BARBARITY.

Once there was a very Powerful Shekyani chief named Ogwedembe. He had
many sons and daughters and slaves and slave children and nieces and
nephews. He had also a brother. His principal delight was in fighting
and killing.

Ogwedembe used to go out on excursions, and would say to his company,
"Now we are out of town." That meant that all restraint was cast aside,
and that he was ready to kill the first person they might meet, even
without a cause.

One day when they were out and were passing through a thick forest, they
saw a man up a tree who had come for palm-wine and had filled two of the
gourd-bottles used for that purpose. So Ogwedembe shouted to
him,"Indeed! what are you doing there? Have you not heard that Ogwedembe
and his brother are out of town? Come down quickly and meet us here!"

The man did not dare disobey, and came down. Ogwedembe took the gourds,
and said, "You may have one; I and my brother will drink the other."
After the drinking, Ogwedembe stripped the man of his clothing, leaving
him standing naked and trembling. In his terror the man did not attempt
to escape.

Ogwedembe drew his knife, and repeated his questions, "Who told you to
come here? Did you not know that Ogwedembe and his brother were out in
the forest? Now I will fix you; and you can carry the news to your town
that Ogwedembe and his brother are in the forest."

He then seized a portion of the man's body, and with his butcher-knife
horribly mutilated him. The man started, bleeding, to go to his town,
and died on the way.

The section of country in which Ogwedembe's portion of the Shekyani
tribe lived was south of Gabun, toward the Orungu people at the mouth of
the Nazareth branch of the Ogowe River. Sometimes he and his brother
would travel in their war canoes all the way from their place, and,
passing Gabun, would go on northward to attack the Benga of Cape
Esterias without cause and in sheer ruthlessness.

Some of his daughters and sisters were married to Mpongwe chiefs at
Gabun. At times his daughters and nieces would go and visit him. They
would be received with firing of guns and other great demonstrations,
and on leaving would be laden with presents.

About twenty years ago one of his sisters, named Akanda, died in the
prime of life. She lived at Gabun, her husband a Mpongwe. (She was the
mother of Adova, my hostess, who is apparently about sixty years of age,
and has a younger brother apparently about thirty years of age.) So,
when that sister died, Ogwedembe came to Gabun, on the St. Thomè side,
to the funeral. My sick friend happened to be there at the time (for, by
family marriage, she is a cousin to Adova) and saw the old chief.

Ogwedembe, according to native custom, demanded of the husband a fine
for his sister's death (as if due to lack of proper care of her). When
that was paid, as a sign that no ill-will was retained, Ogwedembe was to
give the widower another wife.

During this discussion Ogwedembe kept saying, "I wish my sister had not
been married to a Mpongwe, for it is not your custom to shed blood for
this cause. But I feel a great desire to kill some one. If this had been
a Shekyani marriage, I would have gone from town to town killing as I
chose." The Mpongwe replied, "But we have no such custom." He answered,
"Yes, I know that. I only said what I would like to do, though your
tribal custom will not allow me to do it."

His demand of a fine being finally yielded to and paid, to show his
peaceful intentions, he gave the husband one of his daughters, a widow
who had with her two children,--a son and a daughter,--and who afterward
bore him other children.

Ogwedembe's bloody instincts' were suppressed at that funeral, and he
remained awhile after the close of the mourning ceremonies, making
friendly visits among his Mpongwe sons-in-law, and then went back to his
Sbekyani country.

A short time after that the eldest daughter of that woman Akanda (my
hostess Adova) and her husband Owondo visited Ogwedembe. He made a great
welcome for them, with dancing and rejoicing of various kinds. Every day
be sent his people to fish and hunt, to obtain food for Adova and the
children she had with her.

Before Adova left, Ogwedembe called his principal wife and his
grandchildren, and said, "When I die, you who are here in Shekyani, do
not remain here, but go to Gabun and live with Akanda's children all the
rest of your life." When he finally died, they obeyed and came to St.
Thomè, of Gabun, bringing their idols with them.

The one female image that was under the eaves of the house in which I
slept was for guarding their families; but the three sets of twins were
to prevent their mothers from becoming barren.

### PART III. THE RIGHT OF SANCTUARY.

(It was an ancient and universal custom that a refugee, by clasping the
knees of the king of any other tribe, could claim his protection. The
king was bound to accept the claim. The obligation he thus assumed was
sacred.)

While Adova was there at Shekyani country, visiting Ogwedembe, there
came to him an Orungu man with a little slave boy, carrying a box. As
soon as they entered the town, both of them came to Ogwedembe, and
kneeling and clasping his feet, claimed his protection, and promised
voluntarily to be under his authority.

The old chief, without asking the cause of their flight or their reason
for coming to him, assented, and summoned the town to make the Ukuku
(Spirit-Society of Law) ceremony of installing the man and his slave boy
as members of their Shekyani tribe.

Adova and her husband were very kind to this adopted "brother," and he
at once became exceedingly intimate with them.

At night this new man had been assigned to the house occupied by
Ogwedembe, in a room near him, so that he could watch him that be should
not run away, now that he belonged to Ukuku. But it was not known that
this man possessed all the power of nyemba (sorcery). Ogwedembe also had
power for fighting, and a certain amount of knowledge that warned him
not to be deceived by sorcerers.

After two days, on the third night, this man rose, and tried to go to
Ogwedembe's room, to put some witchcraft medicine on him. But Ogwedembe
saw him coming, rose, seized his staff, walked toward the man in the
darkness, and struck him violently on the head. The man fell. But
neither of them uttered any word, nor made any outcry.

Very early in the morning Ogwedembe got up, went out, and sat on the
veranda of his house. He called to Adova, "Come, I want to tell you
something." She came, and be said, "I had a bad dream last night. If any
one comes to you to-day to ask you to make medicine for a sore head, do
not do it." "Who is it?" she asked. He refused. "No, I will not tell
you. But I know that before to-day is over some one will come to you,
but do not help him."

The Orungu got up late that day and looked and felt dull. When he left
his room, he sent his boy to call Adova. The boy went. She came to him.
He said, "Can't you find medicine for a headache? I did not sleep well.
My head pains too much." She said, "I do not know a medicine for that
kind of headache." The old chief was sitting near, and, looking
significantly at the Orungu, said to Adova, "Yes, that is right."

The next night the man said, "I do not wish to sleep here to-night. I
will go to an adjacent village, and will be back in the morning." "Well,
go," assented Ogwedembe, "but be sure to be back in the morning." And
the man said, "Ye."

Scarcely had he left the town to go to the other village, when there
came to Ogwedembe three people from a certain Orungu town carrying a
message from their Orungu chief, thus: "The chief sent us, saying,
'Please give up this man who came to you and who claimed your
protection. Give up the man. You do not know his habits; they are the
habits of a worm that in eating spoils only the best. He, with his
sorcery, always aims at killing the greatest. If you do not give him up,
there will be war; for our chief has had this same demand made on him
from a third chief whose people this man has been killing, and our chief
will have to make war with you.'"

Ogwedembe laughed. "You say' war' to me? That is nothing to me. You
cannot do it. War cannot touch me."

When the message of the Orungu chief was being sent to Ogwedembe, some
of the attendants on the delegation had awaited half-way on the route,
and only the three had brought the message. Ogwedembe said to these
three messengers, "Go and call your chief, and we will talk about it."

The chief came. (All this while the man was away at the other village,
not having kept his promise to return.)

Ogwedembe said to the Orungu chief, "It is impossible. The law is
sacred. I will not give him up." But in his heart he felt, "I am
protecting a sorcerer who has tried to kill me; better I take the money
for his extradition, and send him away." He and the chief went on
discussing. The point was made that the sorcerer having himself broken
his obligation, by attempting to injure his adopted father, relieved
that father of his Ukuku duty of protection.

Ogwedembe began to yield, and to name the number of slaves that should
be given him as the price of giving up the man. The Orungu chief
demurred to the price: "It is too much!" So Ogwedembe brought down the
price to six slaves,--three slaves, and three bundles of goods equal to
the price of three slaves. And it was so settled. Then the Orungu chief
said, "I will go in haste to my town to get you the goods; but as to the
three slaves, this man's boy must be counted as one of them."

There was a dispute over this, Ogwedembe claiming that the boy was not
guilty of any crime, and that his right to protection still existed. The
Orungu insisted that the boy, being a slave, must follow the fortunes of
his master, must be extradited as one with him, and then would of their
own will be released by them from the penalty of his master's guilt.
Ogwedembe consented. So the Orungu chief and his people went to get the
goods, on the promise that Ogwedembe would have the man caught and ready
to be delivered to them.

At once Ogwedembe sent word to the man to fulfil his promise of
returning to the town, and told his sons to be ready early next day to
have the man caught and tied, ready for delivery on arrival of the
goods.

Next day Ogwedembe, seeing the man coming to him, came out of his house
to meet him, and speaking ewiria (bidden meaning), called out to his
people, "Sons, have you tied up the bundle of bush-deer meat?" "Oh yes,
father, we'll have it ready just now," as they came running to him. Then
they suddenly fell upon the man, dragged him inside the house, began to
strip off his clothing, and tied him. He at once knew that there was no
mercy, and he did not resist; but he said to his boy, "Call me Adova and
her husband."

But she knew he was naked, so she told her husband to go and hear what
the man had to say. Owondo went, and the man said, "Owondo, I have no
friends here; only you and Adova have been kind to me, so I call you my
friend. Untie this small strip of cloth I have about my waist. I have
four silver dollars there. I am going to die. These dollars are of no
use to me; you and your wife take them. My box is in Adova's care; she
must have the few things in it." So Owondo untied the girdle, took the
money, and went out.

Shortly afterward the Orungu people came, bringing the goods and slaves,
and took away the man. He was taken by the three messengers to the
half-way camp, where they had left their attendants. There were no
houses there for shelter, and only their mosquito-nets as tents. They
stopped there with the intention of passing the night, and next day of
going on to their Orungu town.

When it came evening they began to prepare their sleeping-places, and at
bedtime one by one they went to lie down. A large branch from an
overhanging tree fell very near the bed of one of the Orungu leaders,
which was adjoining that of the sorcerer. So they all said, "Ah! we see
what is being done by his arts. If this has begun so soon, who knows
what will happen before morning? Let us start at once."

So they all made ready that very night, and went out of the forest, down
to the beach, and got into their boat (as they had come part of the way
by sea).

Not long after they had started the sea became very rough. Soon the boat
capsized, broke to pieces, and all their goods were lost. They all
escaped ashore, but the sorcerer was missing. They waited on the beach
until daylight, and then found his loin cloth washed ashore. (His hands
had been tied.) They believed that he had caused the storm, and was
willing to die with them in the general destruction rather than survive
to be put to death by the torture to which sorcerers were usually
subjected.

So these people sent back word to Ogwedembe and to the nearer villages
to let them know what had happened to them, and they returned to their
Orungu country by land.

The little slave boy, who had been left with Ogwedembe as one of the
three to be given as the price of extradition, was shortly afterward
given by him as a present to the sick friend I was visiting that day.
She stated that he was a most faithful servant and affectionate
attendant on her infant daughter. He stayed with her, and died in her
service a few years later, about 1883; and she mourned for him, for she
had treated him, not as a slave, but as a son.

## XI. UNAGO AND EKELA-MBENGO.

(In the presence of theosophy, telepathy, thought-transference,
astrophysics, and wireless telegraphy, the following Benga legend has at
least a standing-place. It was written more than forty years ago by an
educated native in the Benga dialect. I translate it into English,
preserving some of the native idiom.)

Unago and Ekela were great friends. They lived, Unago at Mbini in Eyo
(Benito River); Ekela at Jeke in Muni (the river Muni, opposite Elobi
islands in Corisco Bay. The two rivers are at least forty miles apart;
Ekela is supposed to make the journey in two hours.)

They were accustomed, if one killed a wild animal, to send for the
other. One day Unago killed a hog. Then he sent for his friend Ekela. He
at Mbini said, "Oh, Chum Ekela I start you out very early in the morning
hither. Come to eat a feast of pig." And his children would say,
"Father, your friend at Jeke, and you right here, will he hear?" Said
he, "Yes, he will hear." And so Ekela, off there, would say to his
children, "Do you hear how my friend is calling to me?" His children
answered, "We do not hear." Says he, "Yes, my friend has called me to
eat pig there to-morrow."

Before daybreak Ekela takes his staff and his fly-brush and starts. When
the sun is at the point of shining at Corisco, he reaches Mbini. Unago
says to his children, "Did I not say to you that he can hear?"

And so they eat the feast; the feast ended, they tell narratives. In the
afternoon Ekela says, "Chum, I 'm going back." Unago says, "Yes."

Having left him after escorting him part of the way, this one goes on,
and that one returns. When Ekela, going on and on, reaches clear to
Jeke, then day darkens. When his children see the lunch which he brings,
then they believe that he has been at Mbini.

## A PROVERB: MANGA MA EKELA.

(Manga means "the sea"; secondarily, "the sea-beach"; thirdly, by
euphemism, "a latrine," or "going to a latrine." For the sea-beach is
used by the natives for that purpose, they going there immediately on
rising in the morning. They stay, of course, but a short time. If one
should stay very long, this proverb would be used of him, because Ekela,
when he went, stayed and made a journey of fifteen or twenty miles.)

Ekela was accustomed, if he started out early to the seaside in the
morning, to say, "I am going to manga"; then he went on and on, clear on
to Hondo (a place at least fifteen miles distant). Passing Hondo, his
"manga," would end only wherever he and his friend Unago met. There
having told their stories, they then each returned. This one went to his
village, and that one to his village. When Ekela was about to go back to
his village, then be would leave his fly-brush at the spot where he and
his friend had been; and when he would arrive at home, he would say to
his children, "Go, take for me the fly-brush which was forgotten of me,
there at the sea, on the place where I was. Follow my foot-tracks." When
the children went, it was step by step to Hondo, and the foot-tracks
were still farther beyond.

The children, wearied, came back together unto their father, and said,
"We did not see the brush." When be went another morning, then he
himself brought it.

## XI. MALANDA--AN INITIATION INTO A FAMILY GUARDIAN-SPIRIT COMPANY.

(Manjana was my cook at Batanga in 1902. He is a young married man with
several small children. He is of a mild, kindly disposition, obliging
and smiling, without much force of character, slightly educated,
civilized in manner and dress, but without even a pretence of
Christianity; at heart a heathen, though a member of the Roman Catholic
church, into which he consented to be baptized as the means of obtaining
in marriage his wife, who had been raised in that church.

His Romanism sat lightly on him, for be voluntarily attended my
Protestant evening-prayers, taking his turn with others in reading
verses around in the chapter of Scripture for the day; then be liked to
take part in the general conversation which followed about native
beliefs and native customs.

Yâkâ, or family fetich, is no longer, at Batanga, a matter of dread,
even to the heathen; so Manjana was not afraid to tell me freely what
happened when he was initiated into it as a lad. I wrote down his story
hastily, as soon as he left that evening. I later wrote it out in full,
while it was all fresh in my memory. I could not exactly reproduce his
graphic native words, so I did not attempt them. The description is my
own. But I followed exactly the line of his story, and used only his
thoughts. He said:

"I knew that a house was being built on the edge of the forest, a short
distance from our village. I and other lads and young men assisted the
strong adult men who were building it. But I did not then know for what
purpose or why it was being built. I remembered afterward that no girls
or women were either assisting or even lounging about it, watching the
process of building and chatting with the workmen, as when other houses
were built. I did not know that they had been told not to look there. I
remembered afterward that the house was located separately from the
other houses of the village, but that did not just then strike me as
strange. Somewhat similar houses had been built, as temporary sheds in
making a boat or canoe. Such houses are built rapidly, and not with the
same care as is used in the erection of dwellings. So it did not occur
to me as noticeable that this house was finished in the short time of
two weeks. One gable of it was left open.

Nor did I connect its erection with the fact that a prominent man of our
family had died just two weeks before. I know now that, in the manner of
his death, or in things that happened immediately afterward, the elders
of the family had seen inauspicious signs that made them fear that evil
was being plotted against us. As I now know, some six or eight of our
leading adult male members of the family had had a secret consultation,
and had decided that Malanda should be invoked.

I did not then know much about Malanda. I knew the name, that it was a
power, that it was dreaded; but how or why I had not been told.

I know now that while this house was being built one or two other men
were carving an image of a male figure; also, that when the house was
completed, that very night some of those elders had secretly disinterred
the corpse that had been already two weeks in its grave, and had brought
it to that house. There they had extracted two teeth, and had fastetened
them in the hollowed-out cavities representing the eyes and had hidden
them there by fastening over them, with a common resinous gum of the
forest, two small pieces of glass. And they had stood the image, painted
hideously, on the cover of a large box, made of the flexible inner bark
of a tree, at the closed end of the house.

Then they had cut off the head of the corpse and had scooped out its
rotten brains. These they had mixed with chalk and powdered red-wood and
the ashes of other plants, and had tied up the mixture carefully in a
bundle of dry plantain leaves. I already knew and had seen such things
regarded as very valuable "medicine," used to rub on the forehead or
other parts of the body. Then they had tied the headless corpse erect
against a side wall of the house, keeping its arms extended by cross
pieces of wood.

The first that I knew that anything unusual was about to occur was early
one morning, just after the completion of the house, when the voices of
the elders were heard in the street, "Malanda has come!" The women and
girls were frightened. They knew they were not to look at Malanda. And
we lads were oppressed with a vague dread that subdued us from our usual
boisterous plays. We knew the name "Malanda." It was a power, it was
mysterious. Mystery is a burden; it might be for good or for evil.

Immediately all the adult men went into the forest. In about an hour
they returned, bearing on their shoulders a long, large log of a tree.
They cast it into the middle of the street, facing the sun. The hour was
about 8 a.m.

They sternly ordered about twenty of the young men and lads to sit down
on the log. The mystery that had burdened me now fell heavier. Our
mothers and sisters were afraid to look on us, even with sympathy. These
men were our fathers and uncles and elder brothers, but their voices
were harsh, their faces set with severity, their eyes had no light of
recognition as relatives, and their hands handled us roughly. I was
dazed and helpless in my own village and among my own relatives, but not
a word of pity nor a look of even kindness from a single person! Each of
the twenty also was too occupied with his own destiny to speak to a
fellow victim. As far as our treatment was concerned we might have been
slaves in another tribe. With no will of our own we blindly did as we
were bidden.

We were told to throw our heads back, bending our necks to the point of
pain, and to stare with unblinking eyes at the sun. As the sun mounted
all that morning, hot and glaring, toward the zenith, we were sedulously
watched to see that we kept our heads back, arms down, and eyes
following the burning sun in its ascent. My throat was parched with
thirst. My brain began to whirl, the pain in my eyes became intolerable,
and I ceased to hear; all around me became black, and I fell off the
log.

As each one of us thus became exhausted or actually fainted, we were
blindfolded and taken to that house. On reaching it still blindfolded I
knew nothing that was there. I smelled only a horrible odor. The same
rough hands and hard voices had possession of me. Though blindfolded, I
could feel that the eyes that were looking on me were cruel. It was
useless to resist, as they began to beat me with rods. My outcries only
brought severer blows. I perceived that submission lightened their
strokes. When finally I ceased struggling or crying, the bandage was
removed. The horror of that headless corpse standing extending its
rotting arms toward me, and the staring glass eyes of the image overcame
me, and I attempted to flee. That was futile. I was seized and beaten
more severely than before, until I had no will or wish, but utter
submission to the will of whatever power it might be, natural or
supernatural, into whose hands I had fallen. When all twenty of us had
been thus reduced to abject submission, we were treated less severely.
Some kindness began to be shown. Our physical wants were looked after
and regarded. Food and drink were supplied us. I observed an occasional
look of recognition.I began to feel that I was being admitted into a
companionship. There was something manly in the thought of being
entrusted with a secret to which younger lads were not admitted and from
which all of womankind were debarred. This gave me a sense of elevation.
There were some people whom I could look down upon! It began to be worth
while to have suffered so much. I began to be accustomed to the corpse
of my relative. True, I was a prisoner; but the days were relieved by a
variety of instructions and ceremonies practised over us by the doctor.

At first we were, in succession, solemnly asked whether we were
possessed of any witchcraft power ("o na jemba?" Have you a witch?)
Elsewhere we all would have indignantly denied having any such evil
doings. But in the face of that corpse, under the presence of the
unknown power to which we were being introduced, in the hands of a
pitiless inquisition, and with the obliteration of our own wills, we did
not dare lie. Would not the power know we were lying? We told what we
imagined to be the truth; some admitted, some denied.

The Yâkâ bundle was opened; sorne of its dust was added to the
brain-mixture (already mentioned). Of this compound an ointment was
made. On the breasts of those who denied were drawn commendatory
longitudinal lines of that ointment. On the breasts of those who
admitted were drawn corrective horizontal lines with the same mixture.
Instructions appropriate to our respective condition, as witch possessed
or non-possessed, were given by the doctor.

We were interested also in watching the digging of a pit in the floor of
the house. When this had reached a depth of over six feet, a tunnel was
driven laterally under one of the side walls, and opening), out, a rod
or two beyond, where a low hut was built to conceal it. Into this tunnel
the doctor and three or four of the strongest of the elders carried the
corpse, and left it there for about ten days, the doctor passing much of
that time with it.

After we had been in the house almost twenty days, although still
confined, I did not feel that I was a prisoner; I was deeply interested
in seeing and taking part in this great mystery. I no longer dreaded the
dead. Even if physical pain were yet to be inflicted on me, I would take
it gladly as the price of a knowledge which ministered to manly pride. I
was being made a sharer in the rights and possession of the family
guardian-spirit.

A few days after this the corpse, now reduced almost to a skeleton, was
brought up from the tunnel, and bisected longitudinally. The halves were
laid a few feet apart, parallel and a short distance away from the two
sides of the house. We were gathered in two companies against the walls,
and were told to advance toward each other, carefully stepping over, and
by no means to tread on, our half of the remains. And the two companies
met in the centre.

We now felt we were free, though not formally told so. We had made a
fearful oath of secrecy. We preferred to remain and assist in the final
order of the house. The doctor and elders now disarticulated the
skeleton (for such it was, the man being dead now at least five weeks,
and the decomposed flesh having almost all fallen away). The bones were
put into the bark box on which stood the image. They were an addition to
the contents of the Yâkâ, or family fetich. Then, at the close of three
weeks' confinement in the house, we emerged in procession, the elders
bearing the box and the image on the top, and proceeded to the village
street. There the box and image were set; and a joyous dance was started
with drum and song, with all the people of the village, male and female.
A sheep or goat was killed, and a feast prepared. While the dance was
going on, the elders around the box were bowing and praying to the image
on their knees. From time to time a man would parade by, lifting his
steps high and bowing low, and as suddenly erecting himself and strongly
aspirating, "Hah! hah!" And the village was glad, for it felt sure no
evil could now come to it. I was safe, and ready, at the next time of
danger, to assist in torturing the next younger set of lads, for was I
not a freeman of the family guardian-spirit?

The box and image were stowed away in a back room of the village
headman's dwelling, who would often take a plate full of food to it, as
a sacrifice, and sometimes an offering of cloth or other goods; and the
village felt safe.

Nevertheless, the house was not torn down; it stood empty and unused.
But if, even a year later, evil still fell on the village, the elders
knew that something about the Malanda had not been rightly performed.
And it must all be done over again with the next dead adult male (never
a female) and with a new lot of neophytes.

A woman may be subjected to a part of the above ceremonies if she is
suspected of witchcraft, or if, on examination, she confess to using
black art. To purge her of this evil, and to counteract the consequences
of what she may have done, she is taken to the little hut over the end
of the tunnel, and some of the above described ceremonies are performed
over her; but she is never taken into the house, nor into the presence
of the corpse.

## XIII. THREE-THINGS CAME BACK TOO LATE.

(The following narrative was told me by a Batanga native Christian woman
who, herself less than thirty years of age, is a great-granddaughter of
the man one of whose wives was the witch of this story. I bade her, in
giving me the account, to speak, not from her present Christian
standpoint and her only slight superstitious bias, but from the full
heathen view-point. The confusing mixture of singular and plural
pronouns referring to the witch is an exact reproduction of my
informant's words.)

The great-grandfather was a heathen and a polygamist. He had four wives.
One of them was a member of an interior tribe, the Boheba, more
heathenish and superstitious than his own Batanga coast tribe. Unknown
to him, she was a member of the Witchcraft Society, had power with the
spirits, and they with her, attended their secret night meetings, and
engaged in their unhallowed orgies.

The husband, though not a member of the society, had acquired some
knowledge of witchcraft art, and, though without the power to transform
himself, as wizards did, was able to see and know what was being done at
distances beyond ordinary human sight.

One night she arose from her bed to go and attend a witchcraft play. She
left her physical "house," the fleshly body, lying on the bed, so that
no one not in the secret, seeing that body lying there, would think
other than it was herself, nor would know that she was gone out. In her
going out she willed to emerge as Three-Things, and this triple unit
went off to the witchcraft play. The husband happened to see this, and
watched her as she disappeared, saw where she went, and, though distant
and out of sight, knew what she was doing. So he said to himself, "She
is off at her play; I also will do some playing here; she shall know
what I have done."

Among the several things of which followers of witchcraft are afraid,
and which weaken their power, is cayenne pepper. So this man gathered a
large quantity of pepper-pods from the bushes growing in the behu
(kitchen-garden), and bruised them in a mortar to a fine soft pulp. This
he smeared thoroughly all over the woman's unconscious body as it lay in
her bedroom. He left not the smallest portion of her skin untouched by
the pepper,--from her scalp, and in the interstices of her fingers and
toes, minutely over her entire body.

Meanwhile, with the woman at her play, the night was passing. The
witches' sacred bird, the owl, began its early morning warning boot. She
prepared to return. As she was returning, the flrst morning cock-crow
also warned her to hasten, lest daybreak should find her triple unit
outside of its fleshly "house." So the three came rushing with the speed
of wind back to her village. Her husband was on the watch; he heard this
panting sound as of a person breathing rapidly, and felt the impulse of
their wind as she reached her hut and came in to re-enter their house.

He saw her approach every possible part of the body, seeking to find
even a minute spot that was not barred by the pepper. She searched long
and anxiously, but in vain; and in despair they went and hid herself in
a wood-pile at the back of one of the village huts, waiting in terror
for some possible escape.

All this the husband saw silently. When morning light finally came, be
knew that this wife was dead, for her life-spirit had not succeeded in
returning to its body within the specified time. It was therefore a dead
body. But he said nothing about it to any one, and went off fishing.

As the morning hours were passing while be was away and the woman's door
of her hut was still closed, his children began to wonder and to say,
"What is this? What is the matter? Since morning light our father's wife
has not come out into the street." After waiting awhile longer, their
anxiety and curiosity overcame them, and they broke in the door. There
they saw the woman lying dead. They fled in fear, saying, "What is this
that has killed our father's wife?" They went down to the beach to meet
him as be returned from fishing, and excitedly told him, "Father, we
have found your Boheba wife dead!" The man, to their surprise, did not
seem grieved. He simply said, "Let another one of my wives cook for me;
I will first eat." Still more to their surprise, he added, "And you, my
children, and all people of the village, do not--any of you dare even to
touch the body. Only, at once, send word to her Boheba relatives to
come."

This warning he gave his people, lest any of them should sicken by
coming close to the atmosphere that the witch had possibly brought back
with her from her play.

By the time he had fmished eating, the woman's relatives had arrived.
They were all heavily armed with guns and spears and knives, and were
threatening revenge for their sister's death.

The man quietly bade them delay their anger till they had heard what he
had to say; and took them to the woman's hut, that they
themselves--might examine the corpse, leaving to them the chance of
contamination.

They examined; they lifted up the body of their sister, and searched
closely for any sign of wound or bruise. Finding none, but still angry,
they were mystified, and exclaimed, "What then has killed her?" And they
seated themselves for a verbal investigation. But the man said, "We will
not talk just yet. First stand up, and you shall see for yourselves." As
they arose, the man said, "Remove all those sticks in that wood-pile.
You will find the woman there." So they pulled away the sticks; and
there they found Three-Things. "There!" said the husband, "see the
reason why your sister is dead!" At that the relatives were ashamed, and
said, "Brother-in-law! we have nothing to say against you, for our eyes
see what our sister has done. She has killed herself, and she is worthy
to be punished by fire." (Burning was a common mode of execution for the
crime of witchcraft.)

In her terror at being unable to get back into her mortal body, the
Three-Things, all the while she was hidden in the wood-pile, had
shrivelled smaller and smaller until what was left were three deformed
crab-sbaped beings, a few inches long, with mouths like frogs. These,
paralyzed with fear, could not speak, but could only chatter and
tremble.

So the relatives seized these Three-Things, and also carried away the
body; and, followed by all the people of the village, they burnt it and
them on a large rock by the sea.

That rock I pass very often as I walk on the beach. At high tide it is
cutoff from the shore a distance of a few yards; at low tide one can
walk out to it. It is only a few hundred yards from our Batanga Mission
Station.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Fetich in Folk-Lore](fiwa19)
