[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fiwa14)  [Next](fiwa16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII

### THE FETICH--SUPERSTITION IN CUSTOMS

THE observances of fetich worship fade off into the customs and habits
of life by gradations, so that in some of the superstitious beliefs,
while there may be no formal handling of a fetich amulet containing a
spirit, nor actual prayer or sacrifice, nevertheless spiritism is in the
thought, and more or less consciously held.

In our civilization there are thousands of professedly Christian people
who are superstitious in such things as fear of Friday, No. 13, spilled
salt, etc. In my childhood, at Easton, Pa., I was sent on an errand to a
German farmhouse. The kind-hearted Frau was weeding her strawberry bed
in the spring garden-making, and was throwing over the fence into the
public road superfluous runners. I asked permission to pick them up to
plant in my own little garden. She kindly assented, and I thanked her
for them, whereupon she exclaimed, "Ach! nein! nein! Das ist no goot!
You say, 'Dank you'; now it no can grow any more!" I was too young to
inquire into the philosophy of the matter. Surely she would not forbid
gratitude. I think the gist of what she thought my error was, that I had
thanked her for what she considered a worthless thing and had thrown
away. I do not think she would have objected to thanks for anything she
valued sufficiently to offer as a gift.

The difference between my old Pennsylvania-Dutch lady and my "Number 13"
acquaintances, and my African Negro friend is that to the former, while
they are somewhat influenced by their superstition, it is not their God.
To the latter it is the practical and logical application of his
religion. Theirs is a pitiable weakness; his a trusted belief.

It would be impossible to enumerate all the thousands of practices
dominated by the superstitious beliefs of the Bantu,--practices which
sometimes erect themselves into customs and finally obtain almost the
force of law. Many of these are prevalent all over Africa; others are
local.

## RULES OF PREGNANCY.

Everywhere are rules of pregnancy which bind both the woman and her
husband. During pregnancy neither of them is permitted to eat the flesh
of any animal which was itself pregnant at the time of its slaughter.
Even of the flesh of a non-pregnant animal there are certain parts--the
heart, liver, and entrails--which may not be eaten by them. It is
claimed that to eat of such food at such a time would make a great deal
of trouble for the unborn infant. During his wife's pregnancy a man may
not cut the tbroat of any animal nor assist in the butchering of it. A
carpenter whose wife is pregnant must not drive a nail. To do so would
close the womb and cause a difficult labor. He may do all other work
belonging to carpentering, but he must have an assistant to drive the
nails.

In my early years on Corisco Island, and while I was expecting to become
a father, I was one day superintending the butchering of a sheep. It was
not necessary that I should actually use the knife; that was done by the
cook; but I stood by to see that the work was done in a cleanly manner,
and that in the flaying the skin should be rolled constantly away, so
that the hair should not touch the flesh. In the dissection I assisted,
so that the flesh should not be defiled by a carelessly wounded entrail.
My servant was amazed, and said my child would be injured. He was still
more shocked when Mrs. Nassau herself came to urge haste and to secure
the liver for dinner.

Among the station employees oil Corisco in 1864 was an ex-slave, a
recent convert, whose freedom had been purchased by one of the
missionaries. The native non-Christian freemen begrudged him his
position as a mission employee; for his wages were now his own, and
could no longer be claimed by his former master. Some of his
fellow-servants, freemen, put off on him, as much as they could, the
more menial tasks. It was incumbent, therefore, on the missionaries to
see that be was not oppressed by his fellows. Clearing of the graveyard
was a task no one liked to have assigned to him; and it was often thrown
on poor Evosa. One day a newly arrived missionary, the Rev. George
Paull, the noblest of my associates these forty years, who just then
knew little of the language or of native thought or custom, ordered
Evosa to take his hoe and clean the cemetery path. Evosa bluntly said,
"Mba haye!" (I won't). "You won't! You refuse to obey me?" "Mba haye!"
"Then I dismiss you." Evosa went away, much cast down. Some of his
fellow-Cliristians came to me saying they were sorry for him, and asked
me to interfere. "But," I said, "he should obey; the work is not hard."
"Oh! but be can't do it!" "Why not?" "Because his wife is pregnant."
Immediately I understood. Evosa may not have believed in the
superstition, but for all that, if he did the work and subsequently
there should be anything untoward in his wife's confinement, her
relatives would exact a heavy fine of him. We had not required our
converts to disregard these prohibitions, if only they did not actually
engage in any act of fetich worship. I was careful to say nothing to the
natives that would undermine my missionary brother's authority; but
privately I intiniated to Mr. Paull that I thought that if be had been
fully aware of the state of the case, be would not have dismissed the
man. He was just, and reversed the dismissal. Evosa was pardoned also
for the bluntness of his refusal; it was a part of his slavish
ignorance. In conclusion, I warned him that he should have explained to
Mr. Paull the ground of his refusal, and should have asked for other
work. He had not supposed that tlie white man did not know; wid the
asking of excuse is a part of politeness tbat has to be taught. Almost
every new missionary makes unwise or unjust orders and decisions before
be learns on what superstitious grounds he is treading. Not all are
willing to be rectified as was my noble brother Paull.

In the burial of a first-born infant the lid of the coffin is not only
not allowed to be nailed down, but it must not entirely cover the
corpse; a space must be left open (generally above the child's head);
the superstition being that if the coffin be closed, the mother will
bear no more children.

## OMENS ON JOURNEYS.

Almost every traveller in Africa, in publishing his story, has much to
say about the difficulties in getting his caravan of porters started on
their daily journey. His detailed account of slowness, disobedience, and
desertions is as monotonous to the reader as they were distressing to
himself. Did he but know it, the fault was often largely his own. The
man of haste and exactitude, that has grown up on railroad time-tables,
demands the impossible of aborigines who never have needed to learn the
value of time. Anglo-Saxon, Teutonic, and even Latin diligence expects
too much of the happy-go-lucky African. The traveller fumes, and frets,
and works himself into a fever. He would gain more in the end if he
would *festina lente*. He would save himself many a quarrel or case of
discipline (for which he earns the reputation of being a hard master;
and for which, further on in the journey, he may be shot by one of his
outraged servants) if he only knew that superstition had met his
servant, as the angel "with his sword drawn" met Balaam's ass, "in a
narrow place"; and that servant could no more have dared to go on in the
way than could that wise ass who knew and saw what his angry master did
not know.

Mr. R. E. Dennett, for many years a resident in Loango among the Bavili
people, and author of "Seven Years among the Fjort," recognizes this in
"A Few Signs and Omens," contributed recently to a Liverpool weekly
journal, "West Africa." What he says of the Fyât (Fiot) tribes is
largely true of all the other West African tribes. "They have a number
of things to take into consideration, when setting out upon a journey,
which may account for many of those otherwise inexplicable delays which
so annoy the white man at times when anxious to start 'one time' for
some place or other.

"The first thing a white man should do is to see that the Negro's
fetiches are all in order; then, when on the way, he must manage things
so that the first person the caravan shall meet shall be a woman; for
that is a good sign, while to meet a man means that something evil is
going to happen. Then, to meet the bird Kna that is all black is a bad
sign; while the Kna that has its wings tipped with white is a good sign.

"The rat Benda running across your path from left to right is good; from
right to left fairly good; should it appear from the left and run ahead
in the direction you are going, 'Oh! that is very good!' but should it
run towards you, well, then the best thing for you to do is to go back;
for you are sure to meet with bad luck!

"See that your men start with their left foot first, and that they are
'high-steppers'; for if their left foot meet with an obstacle, and is
not badly hurt, it is not a bad sign; but if their right foot knocks
against anything, you must go back to town.

"See that you do not meet that nasty brown bird called Mvia, that is
always crying out, 'Via, via'; for that means 'witch-palaver,' and
strikes consternation into your people. Nobody likes to be reminded of
his sins or witch deeds, and be condemned to be burnt in the fire; and
that is what 'via' means.

"Then there is that moderately large bird with wings tipped with white
called 'Nxeci,' also reminding one of 'witch-palaver,' and continuously
crying out, 'Ke-e-e,' or 'No.' You had far better not start.

"Take care also to shoot the cukoo o Nkuku before it crosses your path;
for if you allow it to pass, you had better return; it is a bad omen.

"Then, concerning owls: see that your camp at night is not disturbed by
the cry of the Kulu (spirit of the departed), that warns you that one of
you is going to die; or that of the Xi-futu-nkubu, which means that you
may expect some evil shortly. On the other hand, let the Mampaulo-paulo
hoot as much as it likes; for that is a good sign.

"Then look out that the snake Nduma does not cross your path; for that
is a sign of death, or else of warning to you that you should return and
see to the fetich obligations the iron bracelet Ngofu reminds you of.
Examine your men, and ask those who wear the bracelet the following
questions: Have you eaten the flesh of anything (save birds) on the same
day that it was killed? Have you pointed your knife at any one? Did you
know your wife on the Day of Rest (Nsâna, Sunday)? Have you looked upon
a woman during a certain period of the month? Have you eaten those long
'chilli' peppers instead of confining yourself to the smaller kinds?

"You must send those who have not the bracelet, together with those who
have not been true to ngofu, back to town, to set this 'palaver' right.
Take great care of your fowls, and see that you have no ill-regulated
cock to crow between 6 P.M. and 3 A.M., as that means that there is a
palaver in town to which your men are called, so that it may be settled
at once.

"Then, there is that large bird Knakna, whose cry warns your men that
there is something wrong with the fetich Mabili ('the east wind,' on the
gateway at the east entrance to each town), and this knowledge will hang
as a dead weight on all their energies until they have just run back to
town to see what the matter may be.

"Get your men to sleep early, lest they should see the 'falling stars ';
for it means that one of their princes is about to die, and that is
disquieting. Then don't let it thunder out of season; for that portends
the death of an important prince.

"And if you determine to go out fishing, and meet the rat Benda (as
above noted), go or not, as the signs command you. If you meet the bird
Mbixi that sings 'luelo-elo-elo,' go on your way rejoicing; or when the
little bird Nxexi, true to nature, sings 'xixexi,' all is well; but when
it sings, 'tietie,' go back, for you will catch nothing.

"Then there is the wild dog Mbulu; well, that must not cross your path
at starting. You laugh? Well, so did Nyambi, the brother of my headman,
Bayona; and what bappened? Nyambi had come down from the interior with
his master; and after a short stay was ordered back to his trading post,
his master saying that he would follow him shortly. A friend handed him
a son of his for him to educate, and to attend upon him; in fact, to be
his 'boy.' Everything being ready, be set out from Loango; and the first
thing they met on the road was the wild dog. Now Nyambi was a plucky
Bantu and took no notice of this warning, but continued on his way. On
reaching the forest country in Mayomba, the boy entrusted to him ran
away. Nyanibi, true to his trust, came after him back to his town, to
see that the boy was once more placed in the care of his father, and so
to avoid any further complications. Then he once more started on his
way, and, nearing the forest country again, was bitten severely on the
foot by a snake. He tied a rag around his leg just under the knee, and
another just above his ankle, and squeezed as much blood as he could
from the wound itself. Then he hobbled into the nearest town, and waited
there for assistance from his family, to whom he had at once despatched
a messenger. They sent men and women to bring him back to Loango, where
he arrived in a very weak condition, and with a fearful sore on his
foot,--an awful warning to all those who will not take the omens sent to
them in earnest! What! you still laugh? Well, there is no hope for you;
you are too persistent, and have not read the story of the rabbit and
the antelope, and of the trap laid for the former.\[1\] And if you keep
on laughing at these superstitions of the natives, don't blame any one
if they call you a 'rabbit,' and refuse to follow you in your wanderings
through their land. Most haste is

\[1. Tale 23, p. 93, my "Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Fiort."\]

very often worst speed in Africa; and the white man who ignores all but
physical difficulties does well to stay his impatient hand when about to
strike his most provoking and apparently dilatory black carrier, who is
beset by endless moral obstacles retarding his progress as no physical
difficulties can."

When I was beginning my pioneering of the Ogowe River in
September-November, 1874, 1 had with me one Christian coast native. I
completed my canoe's crew with four heathen Galwa, placed myself under
the patronage of the Akele chief Kasa, resided in his village, and
bought from him a site, Belambila, for my mission station, about a mile
distant from him. Daily I went with my crew in the canoe to work at the
building of a temporary house on the Belambila premises. One day a
water-snake crossed the canoe's bow, and I struck at it. The Christian
looked serious, and the four heathen laid down their paddles. It was
sufficiently disastrous that the snake had crossed our path; I had made
matters worse by attempting to injure it. They said, "You should not
have done that." "Why?" "Because somewhere and sometime it will follow
us and will bite us. Let us go back to Kasa's." I refused, and insisted
on our proceeding with the day's work. I might better have yielded to
their request. It was as if I were under an Ancient Mariner's curse. My
snake was as bad as his albatross. My men either could not or would not.
Everything went wrong. They worked without heart and under dread. What
they built that day was done with so many mistakes that I had to tear it
down. I did not fully appreciate at that time, but I do not now think
that they were intentionally disobedient or recalcitrant. Just as well
compel a crew of ignorant sailors to start their voyage on a Friday. The
fear of ominous birds and other animals is over all Africa. In
Garenganze, according to Arnot, "many have a superstitious dread of the
horned night-owl. Its cry is considered an evil omen, which can only be
counteracted effectually by possessing a whistle made out of the
windpipe of the same kind of bird.

"Jackals, wild dogs" also are very much disliked. The weird cry of one
of these animals will arouse the people of a whole village, who will
rush out and call upon the spirit-possessed animal to be quiet and leave
them, or to come into the village, and they will feed and satisfy it.

"When travelling, they are careful to notice the direction this animal
may take. Should its cry come from the direction in which they are
going, they will not venture a step farther until certain divinations
have been performed that they may learn the nature of the calamity about
to befall them." \[1\]

The chameleon is an object of dread to all natives wherever I have
lived. I have never met, even among the most civilized, any man or woman
who would touch one. For friendship, or to make a sale, they would bring
it to me at the end of a long stick, in my various efforts at zodlogical
and other collections.

The millepedes they also dread. I handle them with impunity, and my
little daughter, on the Ogowe, in 1888 did so too, under my example. But
her young Negro companions soon made her afraid. True, the adult
millepede ejects a dark liquid which stained my hands and which natives
said was poisonous if taken internally. (That I never tested.)

A native friend, one of my Batanga female church-members, a sincere
Christian, of bright mind but limited education, told me recently (1902)
of her belief in the chameleon as a bad omen. She was visiting relatives
a dozen miles north. Word was sent her to return, as another relative, a
woman in my Bongaheli village, was dangerously ill. Her host told her to
go, and advised her to gather on the way a certain fern, parasitic on
trees, that is used medicinally in the disease of which the woman was
sick. My friend started on her day's journey, came to the tree, and was
about to pluck the ferns when she observed a chameleon clasping the
tree; it stood still and looked at her. She instantly

\[1. Arnot.\]

left the tree, abandoned the ferns, went back to tell her host that a
chameleon was in possession of them and had stared at her, and that it
was useless to gather the medicine, for she was sure their relative was
dead. And she resumed her journey, coming back to Bongaheli in order to
attend the mourning. It was true; the relative was dead, and the
mourning had begun. Her belief was not shaken when I reminded her that
that chameleon was only doing just what all chameleons do when they are
not walking, and when confronted by any one. They all clasp the branch
on which they happen to be, and stare at their supposed pursuer, if
unable to escape.

## LEOPARD FIENDS.

Formerly a strange superstition said that on him who should kill a
leopard there would come an evil disease, curable only by ruinously
expensive ceremonies of three weeks' duration, under the direction of
the Ukuku (Spirit) Society. So the natives allowed the greatest ravages,
until their sheep, goats, and dogs were swept away; and were aroused to
self-defence only when a human being became the victim of the daring
beast. The carcass of a leopard, or even the bones of one long dead,
were not to be touched.

While I was living at Benita, about 1869, the losses by leopards became
so great that, in desperation, some of the braver young men, under my
encouragement, determined that the depredator should be caught. (Nothing
was just then said about what should be done with it when caught.) A
trap was built in one of the villages, and baited with a live goat. Soon
a leopard was entrapped. What to do with it was then the question. Some
favored leaving it alone till they could ask permission of Ukuku to kill
it, even if they had to pay heavily for the permission. Others, who had
heard me laugh at their superstition, proposed that I should be asked to
shoot it. They came at night; I willingly and promptly went with my
Winchester repeating rifle, which could easily be thrust into the chinks
between the logs of which the trap was built. When the animal was shot,
came the question, Who should remove it? None would touch it.

Among my employees were two young men of another tribe with whom that
superstition did not exist. With their aid I lifted the carcass upon a
wheelbarrow, and took it to a place where I could comfortably skin it.
Some objected to my retaining the skin. They wanted the whole animal put
out of sight. But the majority agreed that the skin should be my
compensation for my rifle's service. Then a deputation carefully
followed me out on the prairie, to see that the spot where the skinning
was to be done was not near any of their frequented paths. After the
flaying was complete, what was best to do with the carcass? The majority
objected to its being buried, fearing to tread over its grave. So I sent
the two young men in a canoe, to sink the carcass out in the river's
mouth toward the sea. Even then there were those who for two weeks
afterward would eat no fish caught in the river.

With this fear of the leopard was united a superstition similar to that
of the "wehr-wolf" of Germany, *viz*., a belief in the power of human
metamorphosis into a leopard. The natives had learned, from foreigners
who were ignorant of the fact that there are no tigers in Africa, to
call this leopard fiend a "man-tiger." They got their fears still more
mixed by a belief in a third superstition, *viz*., that sometimes the
dead returned to life and committed depredations. This belief was not
siniply that disembodied spirits (mekuku) returned, but that the entire
person, soul and body (ilina na nyolo), rose temporarily from the grave,
with a few changes (among the rest, that the feet were webbed). Such a
being, as mentioned in a previous chapter, was called "Uvengwa." At one
time, while I was at Benito, intense excitement prevailed in the
community: doors and shutters were violently rattled at night; marks of
leopard's claws scratched doorposts; their tracks lay on every path;
women and children in lonely places saw their flitting forms, in the
dark were knocked down by their spring, or heard their growl in the
thickets. It was difficult to decide, in hearing these reports, whether
it was a real leopard, a leopard fiend, or only an uvengwa. To native
fear, th-ey were practically the same. I felt certain that the uvengwa
was a thief disguised in a leopard skin. Under such disguise murders
were sometimes committed. By bending my thumb and fingers into a
semiclosed fist, I could make an impression in the sand that exactly
resembled a leopard's track; and this confirmed my conclusions as to the
real cause of the phenomenon.

The pioneer of the Gabun Mission, Rev. Dr. J. L. Wilson, in 1842, found
the wehr-wolf superstition prevalent among all the tribes of Southern
Guinea. The leopard "is invested with more terror than it otherwise
would have, by a superstitious apprehension on the part of the natives,
that wicked men frequently metamorphose themselves into leopards and
commit all sorts of depredations, without the liability or possibility
of being killed. The real leopard is emboldened by impunity, and often
becomes a terrible scourge to the village be infests. I have known large
villages to be abandoned by their inhabitants, because they were afraid
to attack these animals on account of their supposed supernatural
powers."

At Gabun, about 1865, there still remained a jungle on one side of the
public road that constituted the one street of the town of Libreville,
as it followed the curve of the bay for three miles. There were frequent
alarms and occasional murders along lonely parts of that road. The
natives believed that the leopard fiend was a beast; the French
commandant believed it was a human being. He had the jungle cut away.
Since then, no mangled bodies have been found there.

Among the Garenganze people, in 1884, Mr. Arnot often chid them "for
their want of bravery in not hunting down the many wild animals that
prey around their towns, carrying off the sick people, and frequently
attacking and seizing solitary strangers. They excused themselves by
explaining that these wild animals are really 'men of other tribes,'
turned, by the magic power they possess, into the form of lions,
panthers, or leopards, who prowl about to take vengeance on those
against whom they are embittered. In defending this absurd theory, one
man said it was not possible for a Luba and a Lamba man to go out into
the country together without one stealing a march on his neighbor,
getting out of sight, and returning again in the form of a lion or
leopard, and devouring his travelling companion. Such things, they say,
are of daily occurrence amongst them; and this foolish superstition
leads them not only to tolerate the wild animals about, but almost to
bold them sacred."

This particular superstition still exists extensively. As late as 1898,
it is stated of the Barotse of Southeast Africa: "They believe that at
times both living and dead persons can change themselves into animals,
either to execute some vengeance or to procure something that they wish
for: thus a man will change himself into a hyena or a lion in order to
steal a sheep, and make a good meal off it; into a serpent, to avenge
himself on some enemy. At other times, if they see a serpent, it is one
of the 'Matotela' or slave tribe, which has thus transformed himself to
take some vengeance on the Barotse." \[1\]

## LUCK.

There exists a custom, even among the civilized, for the seller of an
article to hold back a small portion after his price has been paid. When
I first met with this custom, I was indignant at what seemed like
stealing; and yet it was so open, and without any attempt at
concealment, that I was amazed. One who brought for sale a bunch of
plantains twisted off and took away one of its "fingers." Another who
had just been paid for a peck of sweet potatoes deliberately picks off
one tuber. Another who brought a gazelle for sale would not complete the
bargain till I had consented that be might remove the gall-bladder and a
portion of the liver. I learned that all these were for "luck": in order
that the garden whence came that plantain bunch or potato

\[1. Declè.\]

should be blessed with abundance; and the hunter, that be might be
successful in his next hunt. The gazelle is credited with being a very
artful animal, the cunning being located especially in the liver.

One might ask why, if those pieces are so needed for luck, the owner did
not take them before selling, and while they were still his own and
under his entire control. I do not know their exact thought; but the
statement was that the chances of good luck were greater if the pieces
of plantain, potato, meat, etc. were abstracted after the article had
actually passed out of the seller's possession.

On the Ogowe, at Lake Azyingo, in 1874, I was present at the cutting up
of a fernale hippopotamus which a hunter had killed the night before. By
favor of the native Ajumba, chief, Anege, I was allowed to see the
ceremonies. They were many; of most of them I did not understand the
significance; and the people were loath to tell me, lest I should in
some way counteract them. Even my presence was objected to by the mother
of the hunter (he, however, was willing).

After the animal had been decapitated, and its quarters and bowels
removed, the hunter, naked, stepped into the hollow of the ribs, and
kneeling in the bloody pool contained in that hollow, bathed his entire
body with that mixture of blood and excreta, at the same time praying
the life-spirit of the hippo that it would bear him no ill-will for
having killed it, and thus cut it off from future maternity; and not to
incense other hippopotami that they should attack his canoe in revenge.
(Hippos are amphibians, but are generally killed in the water.) He kept
choice parts of the flesh to incorporate into his luck fetich.

Mr. Arnot mentions the same custom in Garenganze:

One morning I shot a hyena in my yard. The chief sent up one of his
executioners to cut off its nose and the tip of its tail, and to extract
a little bit of brain from the skull. The man informed me that these
parts are very serviceable to elephant hunters, as securing for them the
cunning, tact, and power to become invisible, which the hyena is
supposed to possess. I suppose that the brain would represent the
cunning, the nose the tact, and the tip of the tail the vanishing
quality." The stomach of the hyena is valued by the Ovimbundu (of
Southwest Africa) as a cure for apoplexy.

## TWINS.

Mr. Arnot states that in Garenganze "cases of infanticide are very rare.
Twins, strange to say, are not only allowed to live, but the people
delight in them." Though they are not regarded as monstrosities
deserving death, as among the Calabar people on the West Coast, it is
nevertheless considered necessary that certain preservative ceremonies
should be performed on the infants and their parents.

Mr. Swan, an associate of Mr. Arnot, describes a ceremony be was
unexpectedly made to share in while on a visit to the native king Msidi:
"My attention was drawn to a crowd of folk, mostly women, who
approached, singing and ringing a kind of bell. They formed in lines
opposite to us. In front of the rest were a man and woman, each holding
a child not more than a few days old. I learned that the little ones
were twins, the man and woman holding them being the happy parents, who
had come to present their offspring to the king. They wore nothing but a
few leaves about their loins,--a hint to Msidi, I suppose, that they
would like some cloth.

"After chanting a little, an elderly woman came forward, with a dish in
her left hand and an antelope's tail in her right. When she reached
Msidi, I was astonished at her dipping the tail in the dish and dashing
the liquid over his face. Msidi's wife had a like dose. But my surprise
increased when she came to us and gave us a share. What was in the dish
I cannot say, but it struck me as possessing a very disagreeable odor.
This discourteous creature was the Ocimbanda (fetich doctor). She did
not cease her dousing work till she had favored all sitting around. The
king then went into the house, and his wife came out with some cloth,
which she tied around the mother's waist; and then a piece of cloth was
given to the husband. The friends had brought some native beer; and when
Msidi came out, he went to one of the pots, filled his mouth, spouting
the beer in his wife's face; she did the same to him, after which the
spouting became general.... They told me it was their custom to act thus
when twins are born."

In the Benga tribe, thirty-five years ago, I observed that if one of a
pair of twins died, a wooden image was substituted for it on the bed or
in the cradle-box, alongside of the living child. I strongly suspected
Animism in the custom; but some Christians explained that the image was
only a toy, so that the living babe should not miss the presence of an
object resembling its mate.

Names of twins are always the same, in the same cognate tribes. In Benga
they are always Ivaha (a wish) and Ayenwe (unseen). These names are
given irrespective of sex. But not every man or woman whom one may meet
with these names is necessarily a twin. They may have inherited the name
from ancestors who were twins.

All over Africa the birth of twins is a notable event, but noted for
very different reasons in different parts of the country. In Calabar
they are dreaded as an evil omen, and until recently were immediately
put to death, and the mother driven from the village to live alone in
the forest as a punishment for having brought this evil on her people.

In other parts, as in the Gabun country, where they are welcomed, it is
nevertheless considered necessary to have special ceremonies performed
for the safety of their lives, or, if they die, to prevent further evil.

In the Egba tribes of the Yoruba country they become objects of worship.
As in other parts of Africa where twins are preserved, they are given
twin names; which, of course, differ in different languages. Among the
Egbas the firstborn is Taiwo, *i.e.*, "the first to taste the world,"
and the other Kehende, *i.e.*, "the one who comes last."\[1\] About
eight

\[1. See "Niger and Yoruba Notes."\]

days after their birth, or as soon as the parents have the money for the
sacrificial feast, they invite all relatives on both sides, neighbors
and friends together. Various kinds of food are prepared, consisting
chiefly of beans and yams. A little of each kind of food is set apart
with some palm-oil thrown upon it, and the small native plates or basins
containing it are set before the children in their cradle. They are then
invoked to protect their mother from sickness, to pity their parents and
remain with them, to watch over thern at all times. I quote in this
connection the following from a West African newspaper:

"After the ceremony an elderly man or woman who has been a twin is
called upon to split the kola nuts, in order to find out whether the
children will live or die. This is their way of asking the god or
goddess to answer their requests (and it is singular that this throwing
of kolas may be done repeatedly until the reply is favorable to the
inquirer). Thus: if a kola nut is split into four parts in throwing it
down, they say, "You Idol, please foretell if the children will live
long or die.". If all the four pieces of the kola fall flat on their
backs, or all flat with their faces to the ground, or if two of them
fall with their faces downward and the other two upward, then in each of
those cases the reply is favorable, and it means they will live long and
not die. But if three pieces of the kola should turn their faces to the
ground and only one fall flat on its back, or if the three pieces should
turn their faces upward and only one downward, the reply is unfavorable,
and it means that the children will die before long. In such cases they
continue throwing the kola nut indefinitely until they obtain their
wish; or, in rare cases of total failure, the subject of inquiry is
reserved till a future time, when they hope the idol may speak more
favorably. Thus, twin children are worshipped every month.

"In some cases, where the parents have the means, an invitation goes
round to as many twins as they can get to partake of the sacrificial
feasts. Of course, the people enjoy themselves at the feast.

"The twins have everything in common; they eat the same kind of food and
wear the same dress. If one of them should die, the mother is bound to
make a wooden image to represent the dead child. This kind of image is
generally about a foot in length, and is made of Ire wood, which is
flexible and durable. It is carved in such a manner as to represent the
human anatomy."

These images, substitute for a dead twin, are used very extensively
among all the tribes of Africa. Various reasons are given for their use:
that the surviving twin shall not be lonely; that the departed one may
be sure it is not forgotten; and other reasons. The images are retained
as family fetiches, to ward off evil from the mother.

"If both children should die, the mother must have two wooden images,
and regard them as her living children; she worships them every morning
by splitting kola nuts and throwing down a few drops of palm-oil before
them. Of course, the occasional feasts follow in their due course, and
as oftentimes as she may happen to see them in her dreams.

"If they should live, and both are males, they make engagements and
marry at the same time. If one is male, and the other is female, their
dowry must be given the same day; the parents believe that if things
done for them are not alike or do not go together, one will soon die."

## CUSTOMS OF SPEECH.

Superstition mingles in customs of speech. There is the custom of Kombo,
existing to-day. Something about the act of sneezing is considered
uncanny. A phrase or a cabalistic word, intended as an adjuration or a
protestation in the nature of a prayer for protection or blessing, is
very commonly ejaculated by one who sneezes and sometimes when one
stumbles. (In the old despotic days of native kings, in the Benito
region, if a king, on first emerging from his house in the morning,
should happen to stumble, be would order the nearest person in sight to
be killed.) That word is uttered by an adult for

\[1. From a West African Newspaper.\]

himself, by a parent or other relative for an infant child. It may be an
archaism whose meaning has been forgotten. Generally the Kombo is an
epigrammatic phrase invented by the individual himself, and to be used
only by him.

Sometimes, instead of a phrase, the single word "Kombo!" as representing
the custom, is uttered.

Some forty years ago the ejaculation, before the invariable "Mbolo"
salutation was uttered, that was used by visitors to the Mpongwe king on
the south side of the Gabun estuary, was, "What evil law has God made?"
The response was, "Death!" Little as the heathen natives liked to talk
of death, their use of that word to their king was in the nature of a
good wish that he might escape the universal law. And the "Mbolo!" (gray
hairs) that followed was a wish that he might live to have gray hairs.

His son, an edueated man and a nominal Romanist, is now saluted quite as
formally, but the ejaculation has been changed to a more respectful and
Christian recognition of God.

## OATHS.

Blasphemy of the Divine name, so fearfully common in professedly
Christian countries, is almost unknown to the African heathen. Though
the native name for God, Anyambe, is improperly used in names of persons
(which is not intended for disrespect), it is not often actually
blasphemed. An equivalent blasphemy, is occasionally practised in the
misuse of the name of their great and sacred spirit-society. In the
Benga tribe "Saba?" and "Sabali?" used interrogatively, mean only
"True?" "Is that so?"; but, used positively, they are of the nature of
an oath, especially when the society's name (Ukuk) was added: "Saba n'
Ukuku" (True! by Ukuk!).

On the Ogowe River, in the Galwa tribe, the name of that society was
Isyoga, more commonly spoken of as Yasi. In the initiation into it the
neophytes were taught a long and very solemn adjuration, that could be
uttered only among the initiated, as an oath; but they were allowed
commonly to use simply its title "Yasi," the utterance of that one word
being accompanied by a downward sweep of the right hand over the left
arm from shoulder to hand. It was not permitted to women to speak this
word.

In no tribes with which I have lived was this "By-the-Spirit" oath used
so much as among the Galwa of the Ogowe. It became monotonously
frequent, in and out of season, in all conversations and on the
slightest assertion or the simplest excitement.

I became very tired of "Yasi! Yasi! Yasi!" and that sweep of the right
hand, for the doing of which the canoe paddle or a tool was laid down.
And, by the way, the more of a liar a man was, the more frequent and
vociferous was he in his persistent use of "By Yasi!"

## TOTEM WORSHIP.

Totem worship is found in Africa, though nothing at all to the extent to
which it existed among the Indian tribes of the United States, and
especially Alaska.

In Southern Africa it exists among the Bechuanas (who, however, are not
pure Bantu); not in the form of carving and setting up poles in their
villages, but in the respect which different clans give to certain
animals, *e.g.*, one clan being known as "buffalo-men," another as
"lion-men," a third as "crocodile-men," and so forth. To each clan its
totem animal is sacred, and they will not eat of its flesh. In some
parts this sanctity is regarded as so great that actual prayer and
sacrifice are made to it. But in most of the Bantu tribes this totem
idea does not exist as a worship. Indeed, the animal (or part of an
animal) is not sacred to an entire clan, but only to individuals, for
whom it is chosen on some special occasion; and its use is prohibited
only to that individual. Only in the sense that it may not be used for
common purposes is it "sacred" or "holy" to him.

## TABOO.

Taboo" is a Polynesian term, and indicates that which man must not touch
because it belongs to a deity. The god's land must not be trodden, the
animal dedicated to the god must not be eaten, the chief who represents
the god must not be lightly treated or spoken of. These are examples of
taboo where the inviolable object or person belongs to a good god, and
where the taboo corresponds exactly with the rule of holiness. But
instances are still more numerous, among savages, of taboo attaching to
an object because it is connected with a malignant power. The savage is
surrounded on every side by such prohibitions; there is danger at every
step that he may touch on what is forbidden to him, and draw down on
himself unforeseen penalties."\[1\]

This idea exists very largely in the Gabun and Loango coasts: as
described in a previous chapter, the custom is there called "orunda";
e.g., such and such an animal (or part of an animal) is "orunda," or
taboo, to such and such a person.

The Portuguese Roman Catholic missionaries to the Kingdom of Kongo, more
than two hundred and fifty years ago, found this custom "of interdicting
to every person at their birth some one article of food, which they were
not through life, upon any consideration, to put into their mouths. This
practice was regarded \[by those Roman Catholic priests\] as specially
heathenish, and was unconditionally" forbidden.

Explanation may here be found why a church which two hundred years ago
had baptized members by the hundreds of thousands, with large churches,
fine cathedrals, schools, colleges, and political backing, and no other
form of Christianity to compete with it, shows in Kongo to-day no
results in the matters of civilization, education, morality, or pure
religion. Its baptism was only an outward one, the heathen native gladly
accepting it as a powerful charm. For each and all his heathen fetiches
the priest simply substituted a Roman Catholic relic. The ignorant
African, while he learned to bow to the Virgin, kept on worshipping also
fetich. The Virgin was only just another fetich. The Roman Catholic
priests were to him only another set of powerful fetich doctors. They
commanded that, instead of the orunda, "the

\[1. Menzies, History of Religion, p. 71.\]

parents should enjoin their children to observe some particular
devotion, such as to repeat many times a day the rosary or the crown, in
honor of the Virgin; to fast on Saturdays; to eat no flesh on
Wednesdays; and such other things as are used among Christians."

A similar substitution was made in the case of a superstition of the
Kongo country which exists universally among all African tribes to-day,
*viz*., "to bind a cord of some kind around the body of every new-born
infant, to which were fastened the bones and teeth of certain kinds of
wild animals." In place of this, the Roman Catholic records enjoin "that
all mothers should make the cords with which they bound their infants,
of palm-leaves that had been consecrated on Palm Sunday, and, moreover,
guard them well with other such relies as we are accustomed to use at
the time of baptism."

Thus the heathen, in becorning a baptized "Christian," left behind him
only the name of his fetich ceremonies. Some new and professedly more
powerful ones were given him, which were called by Christian names, but
which very much resembled what he had been using all his life. His
"conversion" caused no jar to his old beliefs, nor change in its
practice, except that the new fetich was worshipped in a cathedral and
before a bedizened altar.

## BAPTISM.

Forty years ago, on Corisco Island, I found the remains of a custom
which resembled baptism.\[1\] Before that time it was very prevalent in
other parts of the Gabun country, whose people probably had derived it,
like their circumcision, from East Africa and from Jewish traditions. As
described at that time, "a public crier announces, the birth, and claims
for the child a name and place among the living. Some one else, in a
distant part of the village, acknowledges the fact, and promises, on the
part of the people, that the

\[1. See an illustration of it on p. 102 of my "Crowned in Palm-Land";
an infant is lying on a plantain leaf in the street.\]

new-born babe shall be received into the community, and have all the
rights and immunities pertaining to the rest of the people. The
population then assemble in the street, and the new-born babe is brought
out and exposed to public view. A basin of water is provided, and the
headman of the village or family sprinkles water upon it, giving it a
name, and invoking a blessing upon it, such as, that it may have health,
grow up to manhood or womanhood, have a numerous progeny, possess much
riches, etc."\[1\] The circumcision of the child is performed some years
later.

## SPITTING.

The same Benga word, "tuwaka," to spit, is one of the two words which
mean also "to bless." In pronouncing a blessing there is a violent
expulsiou of breath, the hand or head of the one blessed being held so
near the face of the one blessing that sometimes in the act spittle is
actually expelled upon him.

This blessing superstition exists among the Barotse of South Africa
(whose dialect is remarkably like the Benga). "Relatives take leave of
each other with elaborate ceremony. They spit upon each other's faces
and heads, or, rather, pretend to do so, for they do not actually emit
saliva. They also pick up blades of grass, spit upon them, and stick
them about the beloved head. They also spit on the bands: all this is
done to warn off evil spirits. Spittle also acts as a kind of taboo.
When they do not want a thing touched, they spit on straws, and stick
them all about the object." \[2\]

## NOTICE OF CHILDREN.

Recently (1903), in passing through a street of Libreville, I saw seven
women sitting on the clay floor of the wide veranda of a house. In their
arms or playing on the ground were a number of children. I was attracted
by their gambols, and stopped on my way, and having saluted the mothers,
I began to notice the children. The women knew me by sight,

\[1. Wilson, Western Africa.

2\. Declè.\]

but I was a stranger to most of them. I thought they would be pleased by
attention to their children. There were seven of them; and I exclaimed,
"Oh! so many children!" And I began counting them, "One, two, three,
four--" But I was interrupted by a chorus from the mothers, of "No! no!
no! Stop! That is not good! The spirits will hear you telling how many
there are, and they will come and take some away!" They were quite vexed
at me. But I could not understand why, if spirits--can see, they would
not know the number without hearing my count. Perhaps my enthusiastic
counting brought the number more obviously to the attention of the
surrounding spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: Fetich--Its Relation to the Future Life--Ceremonies
at Deaths and Funerals](fiwa16)
