[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph04)  [Next](rph06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH TRANSLATION

It would be presumption on my part were I to follow the example of the
German translator and write a lengthy preface on the merits of this
book. It would be but a poor imitation, at best. Any one willing to take
the trouble to study the biography of the author and his German
translator will admit that the devotion to impassionate philosophy of
the one and the intimate acquaintance with Talmudic lore and Jewish
Religious Philosophy of the other justly grant them undisputed authority
to speak on the subject treated of in this work, and entitle them to a
respectful hearing by all those desiring an unalloyed exposition of the
Kabbalah. I lay claim to none of these qualifications, and will
therefore confine my remarks to the make-up of this translation.

My efforts have been directed primarily to a popularization of the
subject treated here, and I have therefore avoided, as much as possible,
any complicated phrases or obscure expressions often met with in works
treating subjects of this or similar nature. My notes are rather of an
explanatory nature and tend to enlighten the reader on some points he
may not be familiar with. At times, though, I was compelled to take the
part of a critic; especially where I met with discrepancies between the
French original and the German translation. In such cases I was
naturally compelled to look for arbitration in the original sources, and
I had to venture my own opinion at times when neither the translation of
the author nor that of the German

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

translator seemed to render the true meaning of the original Hebrew or
Aramaic text (as, for example, note 15 and note 46 in Part II, Chap.
III).

I have translated all the notes made by Dr. Jellinek, and followed his
example in omitting the translation of the Appendix. His reason for
doing so seems to me to be justified. There are English translations of
these extracts, and, besides, such diatribes do not contribute to the
knowledge of and enlightenment on the Kabbalah with which this work is
concerned. I have added, instead, an Appendix by Dr. Jellinek on the
"Bibliographical Notices on the Zohar" which, I am sure, will amply
repay the reader for my omission of the Appendix of the French text. I
have also added an Index for the convenience of those readers who may
wish to use this book as a reference.

For any inaccuracies and mistakes which may have crept into this
translation I ask the indulgence of the kind reader and critic, and I
shall ever be thankful for any corrections offered in good faith. The
task of translating was to me by no means an easy one; for the work
developed mostly during the minutes snatched from an often busy
practice, and during the hours usually assigned to physical and mental
rest--from midnight to dawn.

I. SOSSNITZ.

New York, May, 1926.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the German Translation of the First French
Edition](rph06)
