[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph07)  [Next](rph09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

# PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR

A doctrine with more than one point of resemblance to the doctrine of
Plato and Spinoza; a doctrine which in its form rises at times to the
majestic tone of religious poetry; a doctrine born in the same land, and
almost at the same time, as Christianity; a doctrine which developed and
spread during a period of more than twelve centuries in the shadow of
the most profound mystery, without any supporting evidence other than
the testimony of a presumptive ancient tradition, and with no apparent
motive than the desire to penetrate more intimately into the meaning of
the Sacred Books--such is the doctrine found in the original writings
and in the oldest fragments of the Kabbalah <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) when shifted and purified of all their
dross.

It occurred to me that, at a time, when all historical researches, and
the history of philosophy in particular, have

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

acquired so much importance; at a time when the belief is prevalent that
the human mind may reveal itself in its entirety only in the totality of
its works--that such a subject, considered from a viewpoint far above
every sect or party spirit, may justly lay claim to participation. That
even the difficulties which surround such a subject, and the obscurity
offered in its ideas as well as in its language, may promise indulgence
to one daring to treat it.

But this is not the only reason why the Kabbalah recommends itself to
the attention of serious minds. It should be remembered that from the
beginning of the sixteenth century until the middle of the seventeenth
century, it exercised a considerable influence over theology,
philosophy, natural science and medicine. It was the spirit of the
Kabbalah which inspired a Pico de la Mirandola, a Cornelius Agrippa, a
Reuchlin, a Paracelsus, a Henry Morus, a Robert Fludd, a Van Helmont,
and even a Jacob Boehm, the greatest of all those who went astray in
searching for an universal science, one science that would take upon
itself to show us the very essence of the connection of all things in
the very depths of divine nature. Less bold than a modern critic soon to
be mentioned, I dare not now pronounce the name of Spinoza.

I do not pretend to have discovered an entirely unknown land. On the
contrary, I must say that years will be required for a review of all
that has been written concerning the Kabbalah, if it were only from the
moment when the press first bared its secrets. But what contradictory
opinions, what impassioned judgments, what fantastical hypotheses, and,
taking it all together, what inassimilable chaos in that mass of Hebrew,
Latin and German books published under all forms, and furrowed by
citations in all languages! And mark well, that the discord shows itself
not only in the appreciations of the doctrines to be made known, or in
the so very complicated problem of their origin, but presents itself in
no less a conspicuous manner in the very exposition of the doctrines.
For that reason the more modern way of

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

studying the matter is not to be considered useless if it bases its work
upon original documents, upon the best accredited traditions, and upon
the most authentic texts; and, if at the same time, it embraces all that
is good and true in previous researches.

But before entering upon this plan of research, I deem it necessary to
set before the reader a rapid review of the works which gave rise to
this original idea, and which, in some measure, contain the elements of
this work. It will thus be possible to have a more correct idea of how
far science succeeded with this mysterious subject, and of what nature
is the task endowed upon us by our predecessors. To accomplish that task
is the aim of this preface.

I shall not speak of the considerable number of modern Kabbalists who
wrote in Hebrew. Individually, their distinguishing features are of so
little importance, and, save for a few exceptions, they penetrate so
little into the depths of the system, that it would be very difficult
and equally tedious to mention each one separately. Suffice it to know
that they divide themselves into two schools, both founded in Palestine
at about the same time, the middle of the sixteenth century. One was
founded by Moses Corduero, <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) the other
by Isaac Luria <span id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_13.md) who was regarded by a
few Jews as the forerunner of Messiah.

Notwithstanding the superstitious veneration which these two instilled
into their students, both were but commentators who lacked the gift of
originality. Corduero, at least, kept close to the meaning of the
original writings, although not entering deeply

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

into their spirit; while Luria almost always deviated from the true text
in order to give free rein to his reveries which, in reality, were
dreams of a diseased mind--aegri somnia vana. I need not say which of
the two I have consulted most frequently; but I can not refrain from
remarking that the prevailing opinion places more importance with the
latter.

I shall set aside those writers who made but a passing mention of the
Kabbalah; writers like Richard Simon, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[4](#fn_14) Burnet (Archaeologic Philosoph. ch. 4.md) and
Huttingen; <span id="fr_15"></span>[5](#fn_15.md) or those who, confining
their researches to biography, bibliography and history proper, do no
more than indicate the sources where to look, as, for instance, to
Wolf, <span id="fr_16"></span>[6](#fn_16.md) to Basnage, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[7](#fn_17.md) and to Bartolocci; <span
id="fr_18"></span>[8](#fn_18.md) in a word, to writers who are content to
sum up, sometimes to repeat what others have said. To the latter class
belong, as far as our subject is concerned, the authors of the
"Introduction to the Philosophy of the Hebrews," <span
id="fr_19"></span>[9](#fn_19.md) and the modern historians of philosophy
who more or less, copied Brucker, as Brucker himself put under
contribution the more neo-platonic and Arabic than the Kabbalistic
dissertations of the Spanish rabbi Abraham Cohen Herrera. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[10](#fn_20.md) After all these eliminations I have still
to put forth prominently a number of authors who have made a more
serious study of the esoteric doctrine of the Hebrews, or to whom we
must at least accord the credit of having drawn that doctrine from the
profound obscurity where it had remained hidden until the close of the
fifteenth century.

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

The first who revealed to Christian Europe the name and the existence of
the Kabbalah, was a man who, despite the deviations of his ardent
imagination, despite the dashing ardor of his enthusiastic mind, and
perhaps even because of the force of these brilliant defects, gave
vigorous impulsion to the ideas of his century, we mean--Raymond Lullus
(Raimundus Lullus). It would be difficult to say just how far Raymond
Lullus was initiated in this mysterious science, and what influence it
exercised over his own doctrines.

Under no consideration will I affirm with a historian of
philosophy <span id="fr_21"></span>[11](#fn_21.md) that Raymond Lullus drew
from this science the identity of God and Nature. That much is certain,
though, that he had a lofty idea of the Kabbalah, and that he regarded
it as a divine science and as a true revelation, whose light shone for
the illumination of the rational soul; <span
id="fr_22"></span>[12](#fn_22.md) and it is permitted to suppose that the
artificial methods used by the Kabbalists to link their opinions with
the words of the Holy Writ, and their frequent use of the substitution
of numbers and letters for ideas and for words, contributed a great deal
to the invention of the Great Art (Ars Magna). It is worthy of note that
Raymond Lullus has already made the distinction between ancient and
modern Kabbalists more than two and a half centuries before the
existence of the two contending schools of Luria and Cordovera, the
period to which some modern critics wished to ascribe the birth of the
entire Kabbalistic science. <span id="fr_23"></span>[13](#fn_23.md)

The example given by the Majorcan philosopher remained unimitated for a
long time; for after him the study of Kabbalah was forgotten until the
time when Pico de la Mirandola and

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Reuchlin came to
throw light again upon a science which, save to a circle of adepts, was
until then known only by name and existence. These two men, who were
equally admired by their century, for the boldness of their minds and
for their extensive learning, were yet very far from entering into all
the depths and into all the difficulties of the subject.

Pico de la Mirandola made efforts to reduce to a few propositions <span
id="fr_24"></span>[14](#fn_24.md)--the sources of which he does not
indicate and between which a connection can hardly be found--a system
just as extensive, just as many sided and just as strongly built as the
one which is the subject of our investigations. It is true that these
propositions were originally intended for public discussion and for
development by argumentation; but in the state in which they reached us
they are unintelligible, not only because of their brevity, but also
because of their isolation; and it is surely not in a few far-fetched
digressions, scattered haphazardly through works of the most diverse
character, that one would hope to find the unity, the development or the
proofs of truth which we have a right to demand from a work of such
importance.

The other one was not carried so far away by his imagination; he was
more systematic and more lucid, but he was less learned and,
unfortunately, had not the gift of drawing from the richest sources
which were most worthy of his confidence. No more than the Italian
author who, though born after him, was in advance of him on this
road, <span id="fr_25"></span>[15](#fn_25.md) did Reuchlin cite his
authorities; but it is easy to recognize in him the scant critical
spirit of Joseph of Castile <span id="fr_26"></span>[16](#fn_26.md) and not
of the spurious Abraham ben Dior, <span id="fr_27"></span>[17](#fn_27.md) a

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

commentator of the fourteenth century, who mingled Aristotelian ideas
and all that he knew of the Greek traditions as interpreted by the
Arabians, with his Kabbalistic knowledge. Besides, the dramatic form
adapted by Reuchlin is neither precise nor serious enough for such a
subject; and it is not without vexation that one sees him graze the most
important questions in order to establish, by means of a few indefinite
analogies, an imaginary affiliation between the Kabbalah and the
doctrine of Pythagoras.

Reuchlin contended that the founder of the Italian school was a disciple
of the Kabbalists, to whom he owed not only the foundation but also the
symbolical form of his system as well as the traditional character of
his teachings. Whence arise those subtleties and perversions which
equally disfigure the two orders of ideas that one endeavors to mingle.
Of the two works which have established Reuchlin's fame, only one, "de
Arte Cabbalistica" (published in Hagenau, 1517, fol.), contains an
ordered exposition of the esoteric doctrine of the Hebrews; the other,
("de Verbo Mirifico") which, in fact, was the first published, <span
id="fr_28"></span>[18](#fn_28.md) is only an

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

introduction to the first volume. This introduction, however, is
conceived from a personal viewpoint, although it appears to be a simple
development of a more ancient idea. It is in this book that the author,
under pretence of defining the names consecrated to God, gives free
course to his mystical and venturesome spirit; it is there that he makes
efforts to prove in a general manner, that all religious philosophy,
whether of Greece or of the Orient, originated in the Hebrew books; and
it is here that he lays the foundation for that which later on is called
the "Christian" Kabbalah.

Dating from that epoch Kabbalistic ideas became the object of more
general interest, and they came to be regarded as serious and important
not only in works of erudition, but also in the scientific and religious
movements of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It is at that time
that there appeared successively the two works of Cornelius Agrippa, the
learned and curious imaginations of Postel, the repertory of the
Christian Kabbalists published by Pistorius, the translations of Joseph
Voysin, Kirchner's researches on Oriental Antiquity as a whole, and,
finally, the résumé and perfection of all these works, the "Kabbalah
Unveiled."

In Cornelius Agrippa we find a dual personality; one, the author of "de
Occulta Philosophia" (published in Cologne in 1533 and 1531), the
enthusiastic defender of all the reveries of mysticism, the impassionate
adept of all the fantastic arts; and the other, the discouraged skeptic
who deplores the uncertainty and the vanity of the sciences." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[19](#fn_29.md) It is certainly not the first
personality, as one might suppose, which rendered the most service to
the study of the Kabbalah. On the contrary, by losing sight of the

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

metaphysical side of the system, i.e., of its very essence and real
source, and by adhering solely to its mystic form, developing the latter
to its ultimate consequences--astrology and magic, he contributed not a
little in turning away from the Kabbalah the grave and serious minds.

But Agrippa, the skeptic, Agrippa recovered from all his intoxications,
and, so to speak, restored to the use of reason, recognized the rare
antiquity of the Kabbalistic ideas and their relationship to the various
sects of Gnosticism; <span id="fr_30"></span>[20](#fn_30.md) and it was
also he who pointed out the resemblance between the diverse attributes
recognized by the Kabbalists, otherwise called the ten Sefiroth and the
ten mystic names spoken of by St. Jerome in his letter to Marcella. (De
Occulta Philos., lib. 3, ch. 11.)

As far as I know, Postel was the first to translate into Latin the most
ancient and the most obscure monument of the Kabbalah: "The Book of
Formation" (Sefer Yetzirah), <span id="fr_31"></span>[21](#fn_31.md) a work
ascribed at times by a fabulous tradition to the patriarch Abraham, at
times even to Adam himself. As far as can be judged from this
translation, which is as obscure as its text, it appears to us in
general to be faithful. But nothing useful can be gathered from the
commentaries which follow the text and in which the author, simulating
the apostle of some new religion, uses his wealth of erudition to
justify the deviations of an unruly imagination. Postel is also credited
with an unpublished translation of the Zohar which we have searched for
in vain among the manuscripts of the royal library.

Pistorius has set for himself a more useful and a more modest aim. He
endeavored to unite in one single collection all the writings published
on the Kabbalah or imbued with its spirit; but

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

for unknown reasons he stopped his work when it was but half done. Of
the two enormous volumes which were originally to comprise the work, one
was devoted to all the Kabbalistic books written in Hebrew, and,
consequently, under the influence of Judaism; the other was devoted to
the Christian Kabbalists, or to use the words of the author, "to those
who professing Christianity are always distinguished by a pious and
honest life, and whose writings, therefore, no one would repulse as
Jewish ramblings." <span id="fr_32"></span>[22](#fn_32.md) This was a wise
precaution taken against the prejudices of his age. But only the last
volume appeared. <span id="fr_33"></span>[23](#fn_33.md)

This volume contains, besides the Latin translation of the Sefer
Yetzirah and the two works of Reuchlin already mentioned, also a
mystical, altogether arbitrary commentary on Pico de la Mirandola's
theses, <span id="fr_34"></span>[24](#fn_34.md) a Latin translation of the
work of Joseph of Castile which served as basis for "de Verbo Mirifico"
and, finally, different treatises of two Jewish authors, one of whom was
led by the study of the Kabbalah to embrace Christianity; this one Paul
Ricci (Paulus Riccius), the physician of Emperor Maximilian I; the other
is the son of the renowned Abravanel, or Judah Abravanel, better known
as Leon the Hebrew. <span id="fr_35"></span>[25](#fn_35.md) The latter
doubtless merits a distinguished place in the general history of
Mysticism by his "Dialogues on Love," <span
id="fr_36"></span>[26](#fn_36.md) of which there are

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

several translations in French. <span id="fr_37"></span>[27](#fn_37.md)
But, as his work bears but indirectly upon the Kabbalah, it will be
sufficient to point out casually from one of the most important
viewpoints the ideas whence similar conclusions were drawn.

Ricci, who paid more attention to the allegorical form than to the
mystical foundation of the same traditions, contents himself by
following Reuchlin's lead at a distance; and like him, he tries to
demonstrate, by Kabbalistic procedure, all the essential beliefs of
Christianity. This is the character of his work "Of the Heavenly
Agriculture." <span id="fr_38"></span>[28](#fn_38.md) He is also the author
of an introduction to the Kabbalah <span id="fr_39"></span>[29](#fn_39.md)
in which he confines himself to the summing up, somewhat briefly, the
opinions expressed by his predecessors. But unlike them he does not date
back the tradition which he explains, to the patriarchs or to the father
of the human race. He is content in the belief that these traditions
were already in vogue at the time when Christ began to preach his
doctrine, and that they have paved the way for the new covenant; for,
according to him, those thousands of Jews who adopted the Gospel without
abandoning the faith of their fathers were no others but the Kabbalists
of those days. <span id="fr_40"></span>[30](#fn_40.md)

I shall yet mention here Joseph Voysin, whose chief merit

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

about the Kabbalah is that he faithfully translated from the Zohar
several texts on the nature of the soul, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[31](#fn_41.md) and then hasten to works more important
at least because of the influence they exerted.

The name of Kirchner can not be spoken without deep reverence. He was a
living encyclopedia of all the sciences. No science was entirely beyond
his prodigious learning, and there are several, notably Archaeology,
Philology and Natural Sciences, that are indebted to him for important
discoveries. But it is also known that this remarkable scholar did not
shine through those qualities which go to make up the critic and the
philosopher, and that at times he exhibits even uncommon credulity. Such
is the character he shows all through his exposition of the doctrines of
the Kabbalists. <span id="fr_42"></span>[32](#fn_42.md) Thus, he does not
doubt for a moment that the Kabbalah was first brought to Egypt by the
patriarch Abraham, and that from Egypt it spread gradually through the
remainder of the Orient, mingling with all the religions and all the
systems of philosophy. But, while conceding this imaginary authority and
this fabulous antiquity, he despoils the work of its real merits. The
profound and original ideas, the bold creeds the Kabbalah contains, and
the striking views it darts into the foundations of every religion and
morality, escape entirely his feeble perception, which is struck only by
the symbolical forms, the use and misuse of which seem to exist in the
very nature of mysticism. The Kabbalah exists for him only in this gross
envelope with its thousands of combinations of numbers and letters, its
arbitrary ciphers, and, finally, its more or less fantastic procedure by
means of which it forces the sacred script to lend such meaning as to
find access to minds rebellious to all authority save the Bible. The
facts and the texts which I have brought together in this volume aim to
destroy this strange point of view and, therefore,

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I shall not dwell
upon it any longer. I will say only that Kirchner, just like Reuchlin
and Pico de la Mirandola, knew but the works of the modern Kabbalists,
the majority of whom halted midway on the road to wisdom at the dead
letter and senseless symbols.

On the subject occupying us, there is today no work more complete, more
exact and more worthy of respect due to much labor and sacrifice, than
that of Baron of Rosenroth or "the Kabbalah Unveiled." <span
id="fr_43"></span>[33](#fn_43.md) There are precious texts in that book
which are accompanied by generally faithful translations, among them the
most ancient fragments of the Zohar, the most important work of the
Kabbalah; and where there are no texts it gives extensive analyses and
very detailed tables. It contains also either numerous extracts or
entire treatises from modern Kabbalists, a kind of dictionary which
prepares us more for the knowledge of things than of words.

And, finally, under pretext, and perhaps in the sincere hope of
converting the adepts of the Kabbalah to Christianity, the author
collected all the passages of the New Testament which show any
resemblance to their doctrine. Yet, there must be no illusion as to the
character of this great work; like its predecessors it does not throw
any more light on the origin, the transmission or the authenticity of
the most ancient monuments of the Kabbalah. In vain, too, will one look
there for a regularly ordered and complete exposition of the Kabbalistic
system. It contains only such material which, perforce, must enter into
a work of this nature; and, even when considered from this single point
of view, it is not beyond the lash of criticism. Although much too
severe in some of his expressions, Budde was not unjust when he said:
"it is an obscure and confused work in which the necessary and the
unnecessary, the useful and the superfluous, are thrown together
pell-mell, in the same chaos." <span id="fr_44"></span>[34](#fn_44.md)

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

With a better choice, his work might have been richer and less
extensive. In fact, why did he not leave the dreams of Henry Morus,
which have nothing in common with the mystic theology of the Hebrews, in
their proper place, that is in the collected works of this author? And I
would say the same of the pretended Kabbalistic work of Herrera. This
Spanish rabbi, remarkable for his philosophical erudition, was not
content to substitute the modern traditions of the school of Isaac
Luria <span id="fr_45"></span>[35](#fn_45.md) for the true principles of
the Kabbalah; but he found also the secret of disfiguring these
principles by mingling with them the ideas of Plato, Aristotle,
Plotinus, Avicenna and Pico de la Mirandola--in short, all that he knew
of the Greek and Arabian philosophy.

Modern historians of philosophy have taken chiefly Herrera for their
guide in the interpretations of the Kabbalah, probably because of the
didactic order of his dissertations and the precision of his language.
And as such a guide has been accepted, no wonder that quite recent
origin has been ascribed to this science, or that it was looked upon as
a faint imitation, a badly disguised plagiarism of the other well known
systems! Finally, since the author of the "Kabbalah Denudata" was not
willing to adhere to the most ancient sources and to acquaint us through
more numerous quotations with the originality and interesting facts
hidden in the Zohar, why this predilection for the commentaries of Isaac
Luria, which no one in possession of his reason can stand reading? Would
not the sacrifices and the laborious vigils which, by the author's own
avowals, it cost him to bring to light those sterile chimeras, have been
better employed upon the long chain of Kabbalists still too little
known, beginning at Saadia, around the tenth century, and ending with
the thirteenth century at

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nachmanides? In
this way, by including all the traditions composing the Zohar, we would
have had before our eyes the entire chain of Kabbalistic traditions,
starting with the moment when they were first written down until the
point when their secret was completely violated by Moses de Leon. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[36](#fn_46.md) Had this task been too difficult, it
would, at least, have been possible to have devoted some space to the
esteemed works of Nachmanides, <span id="fr_47"></span>[37](#fn_47.md) the
defender of the celebrated Moses hen Maimon, and whose Kabbalistic
knowledge inspired admiration so intense that it was said to have been
brought to him by the prophet Elijah from heaven.

Despite its gaps and its numerous imperfections, Rosenroth's
conscientious labor will stand forever as a monument of patience and
erudition, and it will be consulted by all who will want to know the
products of thought among the Jews, or by those who wish to observe
mysticism in all its forms and in all its results. It is owing to his
deeper knowledge of the Kabbalah, that this doctrine has ceased to be
studied exclusively either as an instrument of conversion or as an
occult science. It has taken a place in philosophical and philological
research, in the general history of philosophy and in rational theology
which has attempted by its light to expound some of the difficult
passages of the New Testament.

The first whom we see taking this direction is George Wachter,
theologian and distinguished philosopher, who, because of the
independence of his mind, was falsely accused of Spinozaism, and who was
the author of an attempt to reconcile the two

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

sciences to which he had consecrated equal devotion. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[38](#fn_48.md) Wachter's attention was first turned to
the Kabbalah in this way: A protestant of the confession of Augsburg,
seduced by this system to which he was otherwise a stranger, converted
himself publicly to Judaism, discarded his real name (Johann Peter
Speeth) and took the name of Moses Germanus. He foolishly challenged
Wachter to imitate him and engaged with him in a correspondence from
which sprang a little book entitled "Spinozaism in Judaism." (Amsterdam,
1699, 12mo, in German.)

The book does not throw much light upon the nature or upon the origin of
the Kabbalistic ideas, but it raises a question of the highest interest:
Was Spinoza initiated in the Kabbalah, and what influence did this
doctrine exert upon his system? Until then it was the almost general
opinion among scholars that there is quite a close affinity between the
most important points of the science of the Kabbalists and the
fundamental dogmas of the Christian religion. Wachter undertook to
demonstrate that these two orders of ideas are separated by an abyss;
for, in his opinion, the Kabbalah is nothing but atheism, the negation
of God and the deification of the world, a doctrine which he believed to
be that of the Dutch philosopher and to which Spinoza gave a more modern
form.

We need not investigate here whether the two systems, per se, are well
or ill-judged, but whether there is some ground for the theory of their
affinity or for their historical succession. The sole proof given (for I
do not count more or less far-fetched analogies and resemblances)
consists of two very important passages, indeed, one drawn from
"Ethics," the other from Spinoza's letters. The last named reads: "When
I affirm that all things exist in God, and that in Him all things move,
I speak like St. Paul, like all the philosophers of antiquity, although
I express myself in a different way, and I even dare to add: like all
the ancient Hebrews, as far

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

as can be judged by certain of their traditions which have been altered
in many ways." <span id="fr_49"></span>[39](#fn_49.md) Evidently, nothing
but the Kabbalistic traditions are referred to in these lines; for those
which the Jews collected in the Talmud are either recitals (Haggadah) or
ceremonial laws (Halakah).

The passage from "Ethics" is still more decisive. Having spoken of the
unity of substance, Spinoza adds: "It is this principle which some of
the Hebrews seem to have perceived as through a cloud when they thought
that God, the Intelligence of God and the objects under the action of
that intelligence, as of one and the same thing." <span
id="fr_50"></span>[40](#fn_50.md) The historical sense of these words can
not be mistaken if we juxtapose them with the following lines translated
nearly literally from a Kabbalistic work, the most faithful commentary
to the Zohar: "The knowledge of the Creator is not like the knowledge of
the Creatures; for with the latter the knowledge is apart from the known
subject. This is designated by the following terms: the thought, he who
thinks and that which is thought of. The Creator, on the contrary, is
Himself the Knowledge, the One who knows, and the One known. God's way
of knowing does not really consist in applying His thought to things
outside of Himself. It is by cognizing and knowing Himself that He also
cognizes and knows all that exists. Nothing exists that is not united
with Him and which He could not find in His own substance. He is the
prototype of all Being, and in Him all things exist in the purest and
most accomplished form; so that the perfection of the creatures is in
this very existence by virtue of which they find themselves united

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

with the source of their being; and in measure as they deviate from it,
they sink from that sublime and perfect state." <span
id="fr_51"></span>[41](#fn_51.md)

What conclusion can be drawn from these words? Is it that the ideas and
the Carthesian method, that the altogether independent development of
reason, and above all, that individual estimates as well as the errors
of genius, count for nothing in the most audacious conception of which
the history of modern philosophy can give an example? This would be a
strange paradox which we would not even attempt to refute. Moreover, it
is easy to see by the very citations given as authority, that Spinoza
had but a very summary and uncertain idea of the Kabbalah, the
importance of which he could have recognized only after the creation of
his own system. <span id="fr_52"></span>[42](#fn_52.md) But, strangely,
having stripped Spinoza of all originality for the benefit of the
Kabbalah, Wachter turned that doctrine itself into a miserable
plagiarism, a characterless compilation to which have contributed all
the centuries during which it remained unknown, all the countries where
the Jews were dispersed, and, consequently, the most contradictory
systems. How could such a work be more atheistic than theistic? Would it
not teach pantheism rather than one God distinct from the world? Above
all, how had it taken in the "Ethics" the form of severe unity, the
inflexible vigor of the exact sciences?

But we must do Wachter the justice to say that he modified his opinions
considerably in a second volume on the same subject. (Elucidarius
Cabbalisticus, Rome, 1706, 8 vo.) Thus, according to him, Spinoza is no
longer the apostle of atheism, but a true savant who, enlightened by a
sublime science, recognized the

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

divinity of Christ and all the truths of the Christian religion. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[43](#fn_53.md) He naively confesses that he judged him
previously without having known him, and that he was influenced against
him by prejudices and excited passions when he recorded his first
impressions. <span id="fr_54"></span>[44](#fn_54.md) He makes equally an
honorable apology to the Kabbalah by distinguishing two essentially
different doctrines by that name: the modern Kabbalah lies under the
weight of his scorn and anathema; but the ancient Kabbalah which,
according to him, lasted until the council of Nice, was a traditional
science of the highest order, the origin of which loses itself in
mysterious antiquity. The first Christians, the oldest fathers of the
Church, had no other philosophy; <span id="fr_55"></span>[45](#fn_55.md)
and it is this philosophy which led Spinoza upon the road of Truth. The
author stubbornly insists upon this point and makes it the centre of his
researches.

Though in its entirety very superficial, and at times far from accurate,
this parallel between the doctrine of Spinoza and that of the Kabbalists
contributed not a little to the enlightenment of the minds as to the
true significance of the Kabbalah; I speak of its character and its
metaphysical principles. That parallel led to an examination which
proved that the theory which had caused so much surprise and scandal,
the theory that God is an unique substance and the immanent cause and
real nature of all that is, was not new, that it appeared already
before, at the cradle of Christianity, under the very name of the
religion. But this idea is also met with somewhere in a no less remote
antiquity. Where, then, is the origin of this idea to be looked for? Is
it Greece, or Egypt of the Ptolomaeans that have given it to

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Palestine? Is it
Palestine which found it first? or is it necessary to go back still
further into the Orient?

Such are the questions which occupied the minds primarily, and such also
is the meaning attached to the Kabbalistic traditions since that time by
all save a few critics who are peculiarly attentive to nothing but form.
It is no longer a question of a certain method of interpretation applied
to Holy Writ, nor of mysteries far beyond reason, which God Himself
revealed whether to Moses, to Abraham or to Adam, but it is a question
of a purely human science, of a system representing within itself the
entire metaphysics of an ancient people, and, therefore, of great
interest to the history of the human mind, once more a philosophical
viewpoint that dislodged Allegory and Mysticism.

This spirit is shown not only in Brucker's exposition, where it is
perfectly in place, but it seems also to be generally prevalent. Thus,
in 1785 a learned association, the Society for the Investigation of
Antiquities at Cassel, opened an academic competition on the following
topic: "Does the doctrine of the Kabbalists, according to which all
things are engendered by the emanation of the very essence of God, come
from the Greek philosophy or not?" Unfortunately, the answer was much
less sensible than the question. The work which carried off the
prize--very little known and not deserving to be known--certainly does
not cast any new light upon the very nature of the Kabbalah and what
concerns the origin of this system, it contents itself with reproducing
the most defaced fables. <span id="fr_56"></span>[46](#fn_56.md) It shows
the Kabbalistic ideas in the hymns of Orpheus and in the philosophy of
Thales and Pythagoras; it makes them contemporaries of the patriarchs,
and, without any hesitation it hands them to us as the ancient wisdom of
the Chaldeans. It is less surprising when it is known that the author
was of the sect of the Illuminati who, following the

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

example of all such associations, dated its annals back to the very
cradle of humanity. <span id="fr_57"></span>[47](#fn_57.md)

But Rational Theology--as it is called in Germany--that is that
absolutely independent method of expounding the Holy Scriptures, of
which Spinoza gave an example in his Theologic-Political tractat, made
frequent use of the Kabbalah. As I said before, it made use of it for
the purpose of explaining divers passages in the letters of St. Paul
which referred to the heresies of that day. It desired also to find
therein the explanation of the first verses of the Gospel of St. John,
and tried to make it useful either for the study of Gnosticism or for
the study of ecclesiastic history in general. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[48](#fn_58.md) Tiedemann and Tennemann, at the same
time, had given the Kabbalah a kind of deed of possession in the history
of philosophy, which was at first consecrated to it by Brucker. There
soon appeared the school of Hegel which could not fail to make use of a
system wherein it found, under another form, some of its own doctrines.

A reaction against this ever famous school was surely not slow in
coming, and it is evidently under this sentiment that the useless work
"Kabbalism and Pantheism" was written. The author of that little book
strives to prove, at the expense of the evidence, that there is no
resemblance between the two systems which he undertakes to compare; for
it often happens that the passages which he uses as bases of his
arguments are diametrically opposed to the deductions he draws from
them. Besides, as far as erudition is concerned, he is far inferior to
most of the writers who preceded him; and does not surpass them either
by criticism of the sources or by philosophic appreciation of the ideas,
not-withstanding the pedantic attire and luxury of citations with which
he pleases to surround himself.

Finally, Herr Tholuck, a man who is justly entitled to eminent rank
among the theologians and orientalists of Germany,

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

recently also desired to contribute to this subject his knowledge and
skilled criticism. But as he concerns himself with one particular point,
the origin of the Kabbalah, and as any appreciation of his opinions
would demand profound discussion, I have reserved comment of him for the
body of this work, as a more opportune time. This refers also to all the
modern writers, whose names, although deserving a place here, have as
yet not been mentioned.

Such are, in substance, the efforts made until now for the discovery of
the meanings and the origin of the Kabbalistic books. I do not wish to
have the conclusion drawn that all must be started anew again because
one is struck only by those books which are incomplete. On the contrary,
I am convinced, that the labors and even the errors of such
distinguished minds can not be ignored without punishment to those
wishing seriously to study the same subject. Even were it possible, in
fact, to approach the original monuments without any aid, it would,
nevertheless, always be necessary to know beforehand the various
interpretations which have been given to them to the present day; for
each one of these correspond to a viewpoint well founded in itself, but
which becomes faulty when one sticks to it exclusively.

Thus has the Kabbalah--to corroborate what has just been said and to sum
up briefly the foregoing--been accepted by some who had in view only its
allegorical form and mystical character, with mystic enthusiasm as an
anticipated revelation of Christian dogmas; others took it as an occult
art, struck by the strange figure, the queer formulas under which it
loves to hide its real intention, and by the relations it incessantly
establishes between man and all parts of the universe; others, finally,
took hold above all of its metaphysical principles and tried to find
therein an antecedent, either honorable or dishonorable, of the
philosophy of their times.

It is easy to understand that with partial and incomplete studies
governed by various prejudices, one can find all this in

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

the Kabbalah without necessarily contradicting the facts. But, in order
to have an exact idea and to find the place which it really holds among
works of intelligence, it should be studied neither in the interest of a
system, nor in the interest of a religious belief; on the contrary, one
will endeavor for the sake of truth only, to furnish to the general
history of human thought some elements as yet too little known. This is
the aim I desire to reach in the following work for which I spared
neither time nor research.

AD. FRANCK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxvii:1](rph08.htm#fr_9.md) The Hebrew word ‏קבלה‎
(Kabbalah), as its root ‏קבל‎ indicates, expresses the action of
receiving: a doctrine received by tradition. The word Masorah (‏מסורה‎)
designates the action of transmitting; a doctrine transmitted by
tradition. The orthography herein used has been used in Germany a long
time (Kabbalah instead of Cabbala). It seems the orthography best fitted
to the pronounciation of the Hebrew term, and it is the orthography
recommended as most exact by Raymond Lullus in his book "de Auditu
Kabbalistico." <span id="fr_10"></span>[1a](#fn_10.md)

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxvii:1a](rph08.htm#fr_10.md) The possible reason
that the Kabbalists preferred to call their doctrine ‏קבלה‎ (acceptio)
and not ‏מסורה‎ (traditio)--compare Peter Beer: Geschichte, Lehren and
Meinungen aller bestandenen and noch bestehenden religioesen Secten der
Juden u. s. w. Vol. II, p. 4--may be found in their desire to avoid a
name in which the term "teaching" is especially conspicuous; for the
secret doctrine was to be imparted only to the pious who has been well
tried and who has attained full manhood. Jellinek.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxix:2](rph08.htm#fr_11.md) In Hebrew the name is
‏ר׳ משה קורדואירז‎, and perhaps the pronounciation should be Cordovero.
Of Spanish origin, he flourished toward the middle of the sixteenth
century, in Sephath, in Lower Galilee. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) His principal work was the "Garden of
Pomegranates" (‏פררם רמונים‎) published in Cracow. His little treatise
on Mystic Ethics, "Deborah's Palm Tree" (‏תמר דבורה‎), was published in
Mantua in 1623.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxix:\*](rph08.htm#fr_13.md) More correctly in
Upper Galilee.--Jellinek.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxix:3](rph08.htm#fr_12.md) In Hebrew Luria's name
was ‏ר׳ יצחק אשבנזי‎ or, abbreviated ‏האר״ י‎. He also died in Sephath
in 1572. Apart from detached treatises which show no proof of
authenticity, he published nothing more. But his disciple, Chaim Vital,
collected all his opinions into one system and embodied them under the
title ‏עץ חיים‎.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxx:4](rph08.htm#fr_14.md) Critical History of the
Old Testament, tome I, ch. 7.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxx:5](rph08.htm#fr_15.md) Thes. philolog. and in
other writings--Discursus gemaricus de imcestu, etc.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxx:6](rph08.htm#fr_16.md) Bibliotheca Hebraica,
Hamb., 1721. 4 vols. 4 to.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxx:7](rph08.htm#fr_17.md) Histoire des Juifs,
Paris and the Hague.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxx:8](rph08.htm#fr_18.md) Magna Bibliotheca
Rabbinica. 4 vols. fol.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxx:9](rph08.htm#fr_19.md) J. F. Buddeus,
Introductio ad Historiam philosophiae Hebraeorum, Halle, 1702 and 1721.
8 Vo.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxx:10](rph08.htm#fr_20.md) Yerira or Herera,
belonged to the seventeenth century. His chief work, "Porta Coelorum"
(the Gate of the Heavens) was composed in Spanish, his mother tongue,
and translated first into Hebrew then into Latin by the author of the
Kabbalah denudata. (This will be spoken of further on in this book.)

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxxi:11](rph08.htm#fr_21.md) Tennemann, Geschichte
der Philosophie, Vol. VIII, p. 837.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxxi:12](rph08.htm#fr_22.md) Dicitur haec doctrina
Kabbala quod idem est secundum Hebraeos ut receptio veritatis cujus
libet rei divinitis revelatae animae rationali . . . Est igitur Kabbala
habitus anima rationalis ex recta ratione divinarum rerum cognitivus;
proper quod est de maximo etiam divino consequutive divina scientia
vocari debet.--"De Auditu Kabbalistico, sive ad omnes scientias
introductorium." Strasburg, 1651.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxxi:13](rph08.htm#fr_23.md) Ibid, as above. The
opinion here mentioned will be fully discussed further on, in Part I of
this book.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxxii:14](rph08.htm#fr_24.md) Conclusiones
cabalisticae, numero XLVII, secundum secretam doctrinam sapientium
Hebraeorum, etc. Vol. I, p. 54 of his works, Basle edition. They were
first published at Rome in 1486.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxxii:15](rph08.htm#fr_25.md) Reuchlin was born in
1455; Juan Pico de la Mirandola in 1465.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxxii:16](rph08.htm#fr_26.md) In Hebrew ‏יוספ
גיקטילא‎, Joseph ben Abraham Gikatilla. He was the author of a book
entitled: "The Gate of Light" ‏שער אורת‎ which Paul Ricci translated
into Latin and which Reuchlin apparently took as basis for his "de Verbo
Mirifico."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxxii:17](rph08.htm#fr_27.md) He is known under
the name of ‏ראב״ד‎ (RABD), i.e., Rabbi Abraham ben David, or ben Dior.
His commentary on the Sefer <span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>
Yetzirah (in Hebrew) was printed with the text at Mantua in 1562, and at
Amsterdam in 1642. Because of the likeness in names, ben Dior was for a
long time confounded with another widely known Kabbalist, who died at
the beginning of the eighteenth century, and who was the teacher of
Moses de Leon, to whom it was attempted to attribute the compilation of
the Zohar. (See Geiger's "Scientific Journal for Jewish Theology," Vol.
II, p. 312.)

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxxiii:18](rph08.htm#fr_28.md) Published in Basle
in 1494, fol. As this work is extremely rare and of great interest to
the history of Mysticism, I feel obliged to give here a summary idea of
its contents. Like "de Arte Cabbalistica" it is in the form of a
dialogue carried on by three persons: an epicurean philosopher named
Sidonius, a Jew named Baruch, and the author himself, who translated his
German name by the Greek word Capnio. The dialogue is divided in as many
books as persons. The first book, devoted to a refutation of the
Epicurean philosophy, is nothing more than a simple reproduction of the
arguments generally used against that system. We shall not linger here
any longer.

The second book aims to establish that all wisdom and all true
philosophy came from the Hebrews; that Plato, Pythagoras and Zoroaster
have drawn their religious ideas from the Bible, and that traces of the
Hebrew language are found in the liturgy and in the sacred books of all
other nations. The author finally arrives at the explanation of the
different names of God. The first, the most celebrated of all, the ego
<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span> sum qui sum, (the "I Am that I Am"
‏אהיה‎), is translated in Plato's philosophy by τὸ ὄντοως ὤν. The second
name, the one we translate by He (‏הוא‎), i.e., the sign of the
immutability of God and of His eternal identity, is found also in the
Greek philosophy, in the θατερὸν as opposed to ταυτὸν.

In the Sacred Scriptures God is called by still another name, a third
name--Fire (‏אש‎); and, in point of fact, was it not in the form of a
burning bush that God first appeared to Moses on Mount Hereb? Is it not
He whom the prophets called the devouring fire? And again, is it not He
of whom John the Baptist spoke when he said "I baptize you with water,
but the one who cometh after me shall baptize you with fire"? (Matthew
III, 11). The fire of the Hebrew prophets is identical with the Ether
(αἰθήρ) spoken of in the hymns of Orpheus. But all these names given to
God are, in reality, but one name, which shows us the divine substance
under three different aspects.

Thus, God is called the Existence because all existence emanates from
Him. He calls Himself Fire, because it is He who illumines and vivifies
all things. Finally He is always *He*, because He eternally remains like
Himself amidst the infinite varieties of His works. As there are names
which express the substance of God, so there are names which relate to
His attributes, and of such are the ten Sefiroth or Kabbalistic
categories to be mentioned frequently in this book. But when abstraction
is made of all the attributes of God, and even of every definite point
of view under which the divine substance can be considered; when an
effort is made to represent the Absolute Being as retired within
Himself, showing no definable relation to our intelligence, then He is
designated by the name to pronounce which is forbidden--by the thrice
holy Tetragrammaton that is to say by the word Jehovah (‏שם
המפורש‎--Shem Ha-mforesh.)

There can be no doubt that the Tetractys of Pythagoras is an imitation
of the Hebrew Tetragrammaton, or that the cult of the Dekas was invented
in honor of the ten Sefiroth. It would be difficult to form an idea of
all the wonders the author discovers in the four letters that form, in
Hebrew, the word Jehovah. These four letters allude to the four
elements, to the four essential qualities of bodies (the point, the
line, the plane and the solid), to the four notes of the musical scale,
to the four streams in the earthly paradise, to the four symbolical
figures of the chariot of Ezekiel, etc. What is more, every one of these
letters, when considered separately, offers us a no less mysterious
significance.

The first (‏י‎--Yod) which is also the sign of the number ten and which,
by its form, calls to our mind the mathematical point, teaches us that
God is the beginning and the end of all things; for the point is the
beginning, the first unit, and the ten is the end of all enumeration.
The number five, expressed by the second letter (‏ה‎--Heh) shows us the
union of God and of Nature; of God as represented by the number three,
that is to say, by the Trinity; of visible Nature as represented,
according to Plato and Pythagoras, by the Dyad. The third letter
(‏י‎--Vav) is the sign of the number six. Now this number, venerated
also by the Pythagorean school is found by uniting the Monad, the Dyad
and the Triad, which is the symbol of all perfection. The number six is
symbolical also, from another standpoint, of

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

This page entirely footnote text--JBH.

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

This page entirely footnote text--JBH.

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

the cube, of the solids or of the world; we must, therefore, believe
that the world bears the imprint of divine perfection. The fourth letter
‏ה‎--Heh), finally, is the same as the second, and, consequently, we
find ourselves once more in the presence of the number five. But here it
corresponds to the human soul, the rational soul, which holds the centre
between heaven and earth, just as the number five holds the centre in
the decade, the symbolical expression of the totality of all things.

And now we come to the third book, which has for its object the
demonstration of the principal dogmas of Christianity by the same
methods. The whole book is given by the mouth of Capnio; for it is upon
the ruins of the sensualistic or exclusively pagan philosophy and upon
the pretended Kabbalistic traditions, interpreted by Baruch in the
preceding book, that the edifice of Christian theology is to be erected.
A few examples will, I hope, suffice to give an idea of the method
followed by the author, and of the way in which he affixes his general
views to the history of religions. In the very first verse of the book
of Genesis, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth," he
finds the mystery of the Trinity. In fact, by arresting our attention at
the Hebrew word (‏ברא‎--Bara) which we translate by "create," and by
considering each one of the three letters that form it as the initial of
another word entirely distinct from the first, we obtain three terms
which mean Father, Son and Holy Ghost (‏אב-בן-רוה הקדש‎--Av-Ben-Ruach
Hakodesh).

In the words taken from the Psalms (Ch. CXVIII, v. 22), "The stone which
the builders rejected has become the chief corner stone," we find, by
use of the same method, the two first persons of the Trinity
(‏אבן‎--Aven, ‏בן‎--Ben, ,‏אב‎--Av). It is again the Christian Trinity
that Orpheus wished to designate in his "Hymn to the Night" by the words
νύξ, οὐρανός, because Night, the engender of all things, can be αἰθήρ,
nothing less than the Father. The Heavens, this Olympus, which embraces
all beings in its immensity, and which is born of the Night, means the
Son; and finally, Ether, called by the ancient poet "the breath of
fire," is the Holy Ghost. Translated into Hebrew the name Jesus
‏י״ה״ש״ו״ה‎) is the name of God plus the letter ‏ש‎ (Shin) which in the
language of the Kabbalists is the symbol of fire or light of which St.
Jerome spoke in his mystical interpretation of the alphabet as the sign.
of the Word (λόγος). This mysterious name is, therefore, a complete
revelation which shows us that Jesus is God Himself, conceived as Light
and Word (λόγος), or the Divine Word.

Even the symbol of Christianity, the cross, is plainly indicated in the
Old Testament, either by the tree of life which God placed in the
earthly paradise, or by the supplicating attitude of Moses when he
spread his arms towards heaven to implore for victory of Israel over
Amalek; or, finally, by the miraculous rod which changed the bitter
waters into sweet in the desert Morah. According to Reuchlin, God
manifested Himself to man under three different aspects during the three
great religious periods ordinarily distinguished since the creation, and
to each of these aspects there corresponds a name which characterizes
Him perfectly. During the reign of Nature He is called the "Almighty"
(‏שדי‎--Shaddai) or, rather, the "Fructifier," the "Maintainer of Man."
Such is the God of Abraham and of all the patriarchs.

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> During the reign
of Law, or from the time of the revelation of Moses to the beginning of
Christianity, Ile is called the "Lord" (‏אדני‎--Adonai). because He is
King and Lord of the chosen people. During the reign of Grace, He is
called "Jesus," the "Deliverer," (‏יהשוה‎--Y’hoshu-ah) a point of view
that does not lack truth and grandeur.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxxvi:19](rph08.htm#fr_29.md) "De Incertudine et
vanitate scientiarum." Cologne, 1527; Paris, 1529; Antwerp, 1530.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxxvii:20](rph08.htm#fr_30.md) "Ex hoc
cabalisticae superstitionis judaico fermento prodierunt, Auto, Ophitae,
Gnostici et Valentiniani haeretici, qui ipsi quoque cum discipulis suis
graecam quamdam cabalam commenti sunt," etc. De Vanitate scient, c. 47.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxxvii:21](rph08.htm#fr_31.md) Abrahami
patriarchae liber Jezirah, ex hebraeo versus et coinmentariis
illustratus a Guilelmo Postello. Paris, 1552, 16mo.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxxviii:22](rph08.htm#fr_32.md) Scriptores collegi
qui christianam religionem professi, religiose honesteque vixerunt et
quorum propterea libros, tanquam judaicam delirationem, detestari nemo
potest.--Praef., p. 2.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxxviii:23](rph08.htm#fr_33.md) Artis
cabalisticae, h.e. reconditae theologiae et philosophiae scriptorum.
Tome I. Basel, 1587, fol.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxxviii:24](rph08.htm#fr_34.md) Archangeli
Burgonovensis interpretationes in selectiora obscurioraque Cabalistorum
dogmata. Ib. supr.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxxviii:25](rph08.htm#fr_35.md) An exhaustive
character sketch of him and his times (by Delitsch) is given in Fuerst's
"Orient," Year 1840.--Jellinek.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxxviii:26](rph08.htm#fr_36.md) They were
translated into Italian under the title, "Dialoghi de amore, composti
per Leone Medico, di natione hebreo e di poi fatto christiano," Rome
1535, 4to, and Venice, 1541. It is to be noted, though, that he is cited
by Herrera among the Jewish philosophers (philasophorum nostratium) as
Rabbi Judah Abarbanel. (Irir. Porta coelor. Dissert. II, ch. 2).

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxxix:27](rph08.htm#fr_37.md) There is one Latin
translation by Sarasin; three French by Sauvage, Pontus de Thiard and du
Pare; four Spanish by Montesa, Garcilasso de la Vega, Yahija and Juan
Costa of Arragonia.--Jellinek.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxxix:28](rph08.htm#fr_38.md) "De celesti
Agricultura," comprising four books. The first is a refutation of the
philosophers who repulse Christianity as contrary to reason; the second
is directed against modern Judaism, against the Talmudic system, and
endeavors to prove through symbolic interpretation of the Scriptures
that all the Christian dogmas are found in the Old Testament; the third
aims to reconcile the opinions which divide Christianity by making each
one do his part, and by calling all to catholic unity; in the fourth
volume only does the author treat of the Kabbalah and of the use that
can be made of it for the conversion of the Jews.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxxix:29](rph08.htm#fr_39.md) Isagoge in
Cabbalistarum eruditionem et introductoria theoremata cabalistica.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxxix:30](rph08.htm#fr_40.md) ". . . Cabala cujus
praecipui (haud dubie) fuere cultores primi hebraeorum Christi auditorum
et sacram ejus doctrinam atque fidei pietatem amplectentium, aemuli
tamen paternae legis." De Coelesti Agricultura, lib. IV, ad init.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xl:31](rph08.htm#fr_41.md) Disputatio cabalistica
R. Israel filii Mosis de anima, etc. Adjectis commentariis ex Zohar;
Paris, 1655. His Theologia Judaeorum contains nothing of the Kabbalah.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xl:32](rph08.htm#fr_42.md) Oedipus Aegyptiacus,
vol. II, part I. This work was published at Rome from 1652 to 1654.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xli:33](rph08.htm#fr_43.md) Kabbala Denudata, seu
Doctrina Haebraeorum transcendentalis, etc., tome II, Solisb., 1677, 4
to, tome II, liber Zohar restitutus. Franck, 1684, 4to.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xli:34](rph08.htm#fr_44.md) "Confusum et obscurum
opus, in quo necessaria cum non necessariis, <span id="page_xlii">p.
xlii</span> utilia cum inutilibis, confusa sunt, et in unum velut chaos
conjecta."--Introd. ad Philos. hebr.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xlii:35](rph08.htm#fr_45.md) He himself said that
having been taught by Israel Serug, the immediate disciple of Luria, he
was of Luria's school.--Porta coelor IV, eh. 8).

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xliii:36](rph08.htm#fr_46.md) Information
concerning all the names cited will he found in the first part of this
book.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xliii:37](rph08.htm#fr_47.md) Nachmanides or Moses
hen Nachman, called by abbreviation Ramban (‏רמב״ן‎, was born in
Granada, and flourished toward the close of the thirteenth century. He
was a doctor, a philosopher and, more than all, a Kabbalist. His chief
works are: "Commentary on the Pentateuch" ‏ביאור על התורה‎ "The Book of
Faith and Hope" (‏ספר אמונה והבטחון‎) and the "Law of Man" ‏תורת האדם‎.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xliv:38](rph08.htm#fr_48.md) The work in which he
pursued that aim has for title: "Concordia rationis et fidei, sive
Harmonia philosphiae moralis et religionis Christianae." Amst., 1692,
8vo).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xlv:39](rph08.htm#fr_49.md) Omnia, inquam, in Deo
esse, et in Deo moveri cum Paulo affirmo, et forte etiam cum omnibus
antiquis philosophis, licet alio modo, et auderem etiam dicere, cum
antiquis omnibus Hebraeis, quantum ex quibusdam traditionibus, tametsi
multis modis adulteratis conjicere licet.--Epist. XXI.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xlv:40](rph08.htm#fr_50.md) Hoc quidam Hebraeorum
quasi per nebulam vidisse yidentur, qui silicet etatuunt Deum, Dei
intellectum, resque ab ipso intellectas, unum et ideas esse.--Eth. part
II, prop. 7, Schol.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xlvi:41](rph08.htm#fr_51.md) Moses Cordovero,
"Pardes Rimonim," fol. 55a.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xlvi:42](rph08.htm#fr_52.md) He knew the modern
Kabbalists much better, or, at least some of them, against whom he did
not spare some abusive epithets: Logi etiam et in super novi nugatores
alique kabbalistas, quorum insaniam numquam mirari satis potui. (Tract.
theolo. polit., ch. 9.) It would be absurd to wish to apply this phrase
to the Kabbalists in general.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xlvii:43](rph08.htm#fr_53.md) Non defuerunt viri
docti, qui posthabita philosophia vulgari, reconditam et antiquissimam
Hebraeorum sectarentur. Quos inter memorandus mihi est Benedictus de
Spinoza, qui ex philosophiae hujus rationibus, divinitatem Christi atque
circa veritatem universae religionis christianae agnovit.--Elucid. Cab.
praef., p. 7.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xlvii:44](rph08.htm#fr_54.md) Ib. supr., p. 13.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xlvii:45](rph08.htm#fr_55.md) Haec philosophia, ab
Hebraeis accepta, et sacris Ecclesiae patribus tantopere commendata,
post tempora nicaena mox expiravit.--Ib. supr.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xlviii:46](rph08.htm#fr_56.md) On the nature and
origin of the Kabbalists' doctrine of Emanation. Riga, 1786, 8.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xlix:47](rph08.htm#fr_57.md) See Tholuck, de Ortu
Cabbalae, Hamb., 1837, p. 3. Tholuck, de Ortu Cabbalae, 1837, p. 4.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xlix:48](rph08.htm#fr_58.md) Kabbalismus et
Pantheismus by M. Freystadt, Koenigsberg, 1832.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](rph09.md)
