[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph12)  [Next](rph14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

# PART TWO

### CHAPTER I

#### THE DOCTRINE CONTAINED IN THE KABBALISTIC BOOKS. ANALYSIS OF THE SEFER YETZIRAH

Despite the credulity of some and the skepticism of others, the two
books which we have recognized as the true monuments of the Kabbalah
will alone furnish us the necessary material for the exposition of this
doctrine. Only on rare occasions, when compelled by absolute necessity
of the obscurity of the text, shall we have the commentaries intervene.
Yet, the innumerable fragments of which these books are composed, and
which have been borrowed without selection and without insight from
different epochs, are far from offering us a perfectly uniform
character. Some develop only the mythological system, the most essential
elements of which are to be found already in the Book of Job and in the
Visions of Isaiah.

With a wealth of detail they acquaint us with the functions of angels as
well as of demons, and refer to ideas which have been popular for too
long a time to be associated with a science that was considered a
terrible and inviolable secret at its very inception. Other fragments,
undoubtedly the latest, show such servile proclivity and such
narrow-minded pharisaism as to resemble the talmudic traditions
which, <span id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208) because of pride and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

ignorance, were mixed with the views of a fantods sect whose very name
inspired idolatrous respect. Those fragments, finally, which make up the
greatest number, teach us, as a whole, the true belief of the ancient
Kabbalists. They make up the source which supplied all men who were more
or less interested in the philosophy of their time, and who wished in
modern times to pass as the disciples and propagators of the ancient
Kabbalists. We must emphasize, though, that this distinction applies to
the Zohar only. As to the Book of the Formation which we shall analyze
first, although not very extensive, and although it does not always lift
our mind to very high regions, offers us, nevertheless, a very
homogenous composition of rare originality. The encircling clouds of the
commentators' imagination will disperse of themselves, if, instead of
searching therein, as they did, for the mysteries of an ineffable
science, we see there an effort of awakening reason to perceive the plan
of the universe and the bonds which connect to one common principle all
the elements presented to us collectively.

Neither the Bible, nor any other religious monument has ever explained
the world, and the phenomena of which it is the stage, except by leaning
on the idea of God, and by setting itself up as the interpreter of the
supreme will and thought. Thus we see in the book of Genesis light
springing from nothingness at the word of Jehovah. Having drawn the
heavens and the earth from chaos, Jehovah makes Himself the judge of His
work and finds it worthy of His wisdom; to give light to the earth, He
fastens the sun, the moon, and the stars to the firmament. When He takes
of the dust and breathes into it the breath of life to let afterwards
escape from his hands the last and most beautiful

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

of His creatures, He has already declared His purpose to form Man in His
image.

In the work, of which we attempt to render account, an opposite line of
procedure is followed; and this difference is very significant when it
springs up for the first time in the intellectual history of a people;
it is by the spectacle of the world that one is raised to the idea of
God; it is by the unity which reigns in the works of creation that the
unity as well as the wisdom of the Creator is demonstrated. It is for
this reason, as we have said before, that the entire book is, so to
speak, but a monologue spoken by the mouth of the patriarch Abraham. It
is supposed that the contemplations contained in the book are the same
which led the father of the Hebrews from the worship of the stars to the
worship of the eternal God. The character just noted is so evident, that
it was commented on and very correctly defined by a writer of the
twelfth century. "The Sefer Yetzirah," said Judah Halevi, <span
id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_210) "teaches the unity and omnipotence of
God by means of various examples, which are multiform on one side and
uniform on the other. They are in harmony with regard to the One, their
Director. . . ." <span id="fr_211"></span>[3](#fn_211)

So far everything is within bounds of reason; but instead of looking in
the universe for the laws that govern it in order to read in these very
laws the divine thought and wisdom, an endeavor is made to establish a
gross analogy between the things and these signs of the thought, or the
means by which the wisdom is making itself heard and maintained among
men. Before we go any further, let us note that mysticism, at whatever
time and under whatever form it manifests itself, attaches
[immeasurable](errata.htm#9)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

importance to everything that represents outwardly acts of intelligence,
and it is not so long since that a well-known French writer wanted to
prove that the art of writing was not a human invention, but was a
present given to humanity by revelation <span
id="fr_213"></span>[4](#fn_213)

The question here is of the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet
and of the first ten numbers which, while preserving their proper value,
serve also to express the value of all the others. Brought together
under a, common point of view, these two kinds of signs are called the
thirty-two *marvelous paths of Wisdom*, "with which" says the text--"the
Eternal, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, the Living God, the King
of the. Universe, the God full of Mercy and Grace, the God Sublime, Who
dwells in Eternity, Whose name is high and holy, founded His Name."
(First chap., 1st Mishnah.)

To these thirty-two paths of Wisdom, which are not to be confounded with
the subtle distinctions of an entirely different order admitted in their
place by the modern Kabbalists, <span id="fr_214"></span>[5](#fn_214) we
must add three other forms designated by three terms of very doubtful
meaning, but which do resemble closely, by their grammatical genealogy,
at least, the Greek terms which designate the subject, the object, and
the very act of thought. <span id="fr_215"></span>[6](#fn_215) We
believe it has been shown previously that these detached words are
foreign to the text; nevertheless, we must note the fact that they have
been understood quite differently, in a way repugnant neither to the
general character of the book, nor to laws of etymology, by the Spanish
writer <span id="fr_216"></span>[7](#fn_216) mentioned above.

He expresses himself on this subject as follows: "The first

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of these three terms (S’far), <span id="fr_218"></span>[8](#fn_218) is
used to designate the numbers, which alone gives us a means of
appreciating the disposition and the proportions necessary for each body
in order to attain the purpose for which it was created; for the measure
of length, of capacity, and of weight, <span
id="fr_219"></span>[9](#fn_219) as well as of motion and of harmony, are
all regulated by numbers. The second term (Sippur) signifies the word
and the voice; for it is the Divine Word, the voice of the Living God,
that produced the beings in all their different forms, whether internal
or external. It was to that second term that allusion was made in the
words: 'And God said let there be light, and there was light.' The third
term (Sefer) signifies the writing. The writing of God is the work of
the Creation; the Word of God is His writing; the thought of God is His
word. Thus, the thought, the word, and the writing <span
id="fr_220"></span>[10](#fn_220) are one

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and the same in God, while in man they are three." <span
id="fr_221"></span>[11](#fn_221) This interpretation has the merit that,
while [ennobling](errata.htm#10), it also characterizes well this
strange system that confounds the idea with the generally known symbols
in order to make the idea somewhat visible in the total as well as in
the different parts of the universe,

Under the name of Sefiroth, which play such a prominent part elsewhere
but which appear here for the first time in the language of the
Kabbalah, the ten numbers, or the abstract enumerations are first taken
notice of. <span id="fr_222"></span>[12](#fn_222) They are represented
as the most general and therefore as the most essential form of all that
is, and if I may use the expression, as the categories of the universe.
Thus, according to the ideas interpreted by us, we must always meet with
the number ten when searching from any viewpoint for the first elements
or the invariable principles of the world. "There are ten Sefiroth; ten,
and not nine; ten, and not eleven: try to understand them in your wisdom
and in your intelligence; exercise constantly on them your researches,
your speculations, your knowledge, your thought and imagination, place
all things upon their principle, and re-establish the Creator on

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

his base." <span id="fr_223"></span>[13](#fn_223) In other words, the
divine action as well as the existence of the world equally shape
themselves to the eyes of the intelligence under this abstract form of
ten numbers; each one of which represents some infinity, whether that of
space, of time, or of some other attribute.

This, at least, is the meaning which we attach to the following
proposition: "To the ten Sefiroth there is no end, either in the future
or in the past, either in good or in evil, either in height or in depth,
either in the East or in the West, either in the South or in the
North." <span id="fr_224"></span>[14](#fn_224) It must be noted that the
different aspects under which the infinite is considered here, are
few--no more, no less; this passage, therefore, teaches us not only the
general character of all the Sefiroth, but we see herein to what
elements and principles they correspond. And as these different
viewpoints, although opposite--two to two, nevertheless belong to one
idea, to one infinite, it is added: <span
id="fr_225"></span>[15](#fn_225) "The ten Sefiroth are like the ten
fingers, <span id="fr_226"></span>[16](#fn_226) five against five, but
amidst them is the link of unity." (ch. I, Prop. 3.) The last words give
us the explanation as well as the proof of all the preceding.

Without exactly deviating from the relations presented by the external
things, this conception of the Sefiroth bears, nevertheless,

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

an eminently abstract and metaphysical character. Were we to subject it
to a strict analysis, we would find therein, subordinated to the
infinite and to absolute unity, the ideas of time, space, and of a
certain unchangeable order without which there is neither good nor evil
even in the sphere of the senses. But here is a somewhat different
enumeration, which in appearance, at least, assigns a greater share to
the material elements. We will confine ourselves to the translation:

"The first of the Sefiroth, One, is the spirit of the living God,
blessed be His name, blessed be the name of the One who lives in
Eternity! The Spirit, the Voice, and the Word, that is the Holy Ghost.

"Two is the breath proceeding from the spirit, <span
id="fr_227"></span>[17](#fn_227) in it are graven and carved the
twenty-two letters which form, nevertheless, but one single
breath. <span id="fr_228"></span>[18](#fn_228)

"Three is water, which proceeds from the breath or from the air. Into
the water He dug darkness and void, mud and clay, and graved it like a
(garden) bed, <span id="fr_229"></span>[19](#fn_229) carved it like a
wall and covered it in the shape of a roof."

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

"Four is fire which comes from the water, and with which He made the
throne of His glory, the celestial wheels (Ophanim), the Seraphim and
the angelic servitors. With the three together He built His habitation,
as it was written: "He made the winds His messengers, and His ministers
a flaming fire." <span id="fr_230"></span>[20](#fn_230)

The six following numbers represent the different extremities of the
world, that is to say, the four cardinal points (East, West, North and
South), as well as height and depth. Those extremities have for emblems
the different combinations which may be formed with the first three
letters of the word Jehovah, <span id="fr_231"></span>[21](#fn_231),
 <span id="fr_232"></span>[22](#fn_232)

Thus, apart from the different points distinguishable in space, which in
themselves hold nothing real, all the elements of which the world is
composed evolved one from the other, becoming more and more material in
measure as they receded from the Holy Spirit, their common origin. Is
not this what is called the doctrine of emanation? Is not this the
doctrine which denies the popular belief that the world was evolved from
nothing? The following words may help perhaps to free us from
uncertainty: "The end of the ten Sefiroth is tied to their beginning as
the flame to the fire-brand, for the Lord is One and there is no second
to Him; and what will you count before the One?" (Prop. 7.)

To impress upon us that we are dealing here with a great mystery which
enjoins discretion even with ourselves, the following words are
immediately added: "Close your mouth that you speak

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

not, and your heart that you do not ponder; and if your heart be too
hasty, bring it back to its place, for therefore it is said: hasten and
return, <span id="fr_233"></span>[23](#fn_233) and it is upon this that
a covenant was made." (Ch. I, prop. 8.) <span
id="fr_234"></span>[24](#fn_234) I suppose that the last words were
meant to allude to some oath used by the Kabbalists to conceal their
principles from the masses. The singular comparison contained in the
first of the two passages is frequently repeated in the Zohar; we shall
find it there enlarged, developed and applied to the souls as well as to
God. Let us add here, that at all times and in all spheres of existence,
in the consciousness as well as in the external nature, the formation of
things by way of emanation has been represented by the radiation of
flames or of light.

Another theory, one that made a brilliant career in the world, and which
presents itself here with a remarkable character, blends with this
theory, provided, we do not make the distinction more apparent than
real. It is the theory of the "Word," of the Word of God identified with
His spirit and considered not only as the absolute form, but as the
generating element, and as the very substance of the universe. In fact
it is not the question here of substituting everywhere (for the sake of
avoiding anthropomorphism) the divine thought and inspiration for God
Himself whenever He intervenes as a human person in the biblical
stories, as is done in the Chaldaic translation of Onkelos. The book now
under consideration expressly states, in a concise, yet clear language,
that the Holy Spirit, or the Divine Spirit, forms with the Voice and the
Word one and the same thing; that it successively puts forth from its
bosom all the elements of physical nature. Finally, it is not only what
is called in the language of Aristotle "the material principle of
things," but it is the Word become World. Moreover, we must bear in mind
that this part of the Kabbalah deals with the world only, and not with
man or humanity.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

All these considerations, which cover the first ten numbers, hold a very
distinct place in the Book of Formation. It is easily seen that they
apply to the universe in general, and that they consider more the
substance than the form. In the consideration now before us, the
different parts of the universe are naturally compared, and the same
effort is made to bring them under a common law, as was done before to
resolve them into a common principle; and in the end more attention is
paid to the form than to the substance. For their foundation they have
the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. But we must not forget
the extraordinary role attributed already in the first part of the work
to these outward signs of thought. Considered entirely in relation to
the sounds they represent, the twenty-two letters stand, so to speak, on
the boundary line between the intellectual and the physical world; for
if, on the other hand, they are resolved into one single material
element, the breath or air, they are, on the other hand, indispensable
signs to all languages, and consequently the only possible or
unalterable form of the mind.

Neither the system as a whole, nor the literal meaning, permits us to
give a different interpretation to the words quoted above. "The number
two (or the second principle of the universe) is the air which comes
from the spirit. It is the breath in which are graven and carved the
twenty-two letters which, all united, form but one single breath." Thus,
by an odd combination which does not lack a certain grandeur, and which
is explainable and comprehensible at least, the simplest articulations
of the human voice, the signs of the alphabet, hold here a role entirely
similar to the one held by the ideas in Plato's philosophy. It is by
their presence, by the impression which they leave in things, that we
recognize a supreme intelligence in the universe in all its parts; and
it is finally through them that the Holy Spirit reveals itself in
nature. This is the meaning of the following proposition: "With the
twenty-two letters, by giving them a form and a figure, and by mingling
and combining them in

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

different ways, God made the soul of all that is formed, and of all that
shall be formed <span id="fr_235"></span>[25](#fn_235) And on these same
letters the Holy One, blessed be He, founded His sublime and holy
name," <span id="fr_236"></span>[26](#fn_237)

Those letters are divided into different classes called the "three
mothers," the "seven doubles," and the "twelve simples." <span
id="fr_237"></span>[27](#fn_238) It is entirely useless for the aim we
have in view to give the reason for those strange names. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[28](#fn_239) Moreover, the function of the letters
is wholly encroached by the division that we have noted, and by the
numbers resulting from the division, or, to speak more clearly, an
attempt is made to find, per fas et nefas (whether right or wrong), the
numbers three, seven and twelve in the three regions of nature; 1, in
the general composition of the world; 2, in the division of the year, or
in the distribution of time of which the year is the principal unit; and
3, in the structure of man. Although not stated explicitly, we find here
the idea of the macrocosm and of the microcosm, or the belief that man
is only the image, and, so to speak, the summary of the universe.

In the general composition of the world the mothers, that is to say, the
number three, represent the elements, which are: water, air and fire.
Fire is the substance of the heavens; by condensation

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

water becomes the substance of the earth; finally, between these two
antagonistic principles is air, which separates and reconciles them by
dominating them. (Ch. III, prop. 4, b.) The same sign recalls the
principal seasons in the division of the year: summer, which responds to
fire; winter, which in the East is generally marked by rains or by the
predominance of water; and the temperate season which is formed by the
union of spring and autumn. The same trinity, finally, is seen in the
formation of the human body, in the head, the heart or breast, and the
belly or stomach. These are, if I am not mistaken, the functions of the
different organs which a modern physician has called: "the tripod of
life." (Ch. III, prop. 7.)

The number three seems here, as in all other mystical combinations, to
be such an indispensable form that it is taken also as the symbol of the
moral man in whom is discernible, according to the original expression,
"the scale of merit, the scale of culpability, and the tongue of the law
decides between the two." <span id="fr_241"></span>[29](#fn_241)

By the seven doubles are represented the contraries, or at least such
things of this world which may serve two opposite ends. There are seven
planets in the universe, whose influence is now good, now bad; there are
seven days and seven nights in the week; there are seven gates in the
human body; the eyes, the ears, the nostrils and the mouth; and,
finally, the number seven is also the number of the happy or unhappy
events which may effect a man. But this classification is too arbitrary
to deserve a place in this analysis. (Ch. IV, prop. 1, 2, 3.)

The twelve simples, of which we yet have to speak, respond to the twelve
signs of the zodiac, to the twelve months of the year, to the principal
parts of the human body, and to the most important attributes of our
nature. These last, which alone have some right to our interest, are
sight, hearing, smell, speech, nutrition, generation, action or touch,
locomotion, anger, laughter, thought and sleep. (Ch. V, prop. I, 2.) As
will be seen here,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

it is the beginning of the spirit of investigation, and although we have
often been surprised by its methods or by its results, yet, this in
itself is proof of its originality.

Thus, the material form of intelligence, represented by the twenty-two
letters of the alphabet, is also the form of all that is; for, beyond
man, the universe and time, nothing but the infinite can be conceived.
These three things are also called "the faithful witnesses of truth."
(Ch. VI, prop. 2.) Despite the varieties observed therein, each one
constitutes a system which has its centre and, in some way, its
hierarchy; "for," says the text, "Unity prevails over the three, the
three over the seven, and the seven over the twelve, but each part of
the system is inseparable from all the other parts." <span
id="fr_242"></span>[30](#fn_242) The celestial dragon is the centre of
the universe, the heart is the centre of man; finally, the revolutions
of the zodiac form the basis of the years. The first, it is said, is
compared to a king upon his throne; the second to a king among his
subjects; the third to a king in war. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[31](#fn_243)

We believe that this comparison was meant to indicate the perfect
regularity reigning in the universe, and the contrasts which exist in
man without destroying his unity. In fact, it is added that the twelve
principal organs which form the body of man "are aligned one against
another, as in order of battle. Three of them serve love, three produce
hatred, three give life, and three summon death. <span
id="fr_244"></span>[32](#fn_244) Thus evil confronts good, and from evil
comes forth evil only." (Prop. 9.) But immediately the remark is made
that one can not be understood without the other.

Finally, above these three systems, above man, above the universe, and
above time; above letters as well as above the numbers of the Sefiroth,
"is the Lord, the true king Who reigns

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

over all things from the place of His holiness forever and ever." <span
id="fr_245"></span>[33](#fn_245) Following these words, which form the
true conclusion of the book, comes the dramatic final event, of which we
have spoken before--the conversion of Abraham, the idol worshipper, to
the religion of the true God.

The final word of this system is the substitution of absolute unity for
every form of dualism; the dualism of Pagan philosophy which would find
in matter an eternal substance whose laws are not always in accord with
the Divine Will, as well as the dualism of the Bible, which by the idea
of creation sees [indeed (?)](errata.htm#11) in the Divine Will, and
consequently in the Infinite Being, the only cause, the only real origin
of the world, but which, at the same time, regards these two things, the
universe and God, as two substances, absolutely distinct and separate.
In the Sefer Yetzirah, God is really considered as the Infinite Being
and therefore indefinable; God, in the full extent of His power and of
His existence, is above, but not outside (extra) of the letters and
numbers, that is to say, not outside of the principles and of the laws
which we distinguish in this world.

Each element has its source in a superior element, and all elements have
their common origin in the Word, or in the Holy Spirit. It is in the
Word also that we find the invariable signs of thought which repeat
themselves in some way in all the spheres of existence, and through
which all that *is* becomes an expression of the same design. And that
Word itself, the first of the numbers, the most sublime of all the
things we can count and define--what else is it but the most sublime and
the most absolute of all the manifestations of God, that is, the supreme
thought of intelligence? Thus, in the highest sense, God is both the
matter and the form of the universe. And not only is He *that* matter
and *that* form, but nothing exists, or can exist, outside (extra) of
Him. His substance is at the bottom of every thing, and therefore

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

all bear His imprint, and all are symbols of His supreme intelligence.

This bold deduction, apparently so audacious and strange to the
underlying principles, is the basis of the doctrine set forth in the
Zohar. But the way followed there is entirely different from the one
outlined here before our eyes. Instead of rising gradually, by the
comparison of the particular forms and the subordinate principles of
this world, to the supreme principle, to the universal form, and,
finally to the absolute unity, it is this result, the absolute unity,
which is admitted first of all. It is supposed, it is invoked on all
occasions as an uncontested axiom; it is unrolled, as it were, to its
full extent, while at the same time, it is shown in a more brilliant and
more mysterious light. True, the bond which might exist between all the
deductions obtained in that way is broken by the external form of the
work, but the synthetic character which permeates it is, nevertheless,
pronounced and visible.

We may say, then, that the Book of Brightness begins just where the Book
of Formation ends. The conclusion of one serves as the premises of the
other. A second difference, deserving more worthy notice, separates
these two monuments, and finds its explanation in a general law of the
human mind. We shall see, namely, internal forms, invariable conceptions
of thought, substituted for the letters and the numbers, in a word,
*ideas*, in the widest and in the noblest meaning of the word. The
divine word (λόγος), instead of manifesting itself exclusively in
nature, will appear to us above all in man and in intelligence; it will
be called the "[archetype](errata.htm#12)" or "celestial" man: Adam
Kadmon, ‏אדם עלאי, אדם קדמון‎. <span id="fr_246"></span>[34](#fn_246)

In certain fragments whose high antiquity can not be contested, we see,
without prejudice to Absolute Unity, thought itself taken for universal
substance, and the regular development of that

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

power set in place of the somewhat gross theory of emanation. Far be it
from us to indulge the insensate thought of finding among the ancient
Hebrews the philosophical doctrine which reigns almost exclusively in
Germany today; but we do not fear to maintain, and we hope to
demonstrate, that the principle of that doctrine and even the
expressions appropriated exclusively by the school of Hegel, are found
in the forgotten traditions we are now endeavoring to bring to light.

This transformation that we point out in the Kabbalah, this passing from
symbol to ideas, is reproduced in all great philosophical and religious
systems, and in all great conceptions of the human intellect. Do we not
see so in rationalism the different forms of the language, in which
Aristotle's logic was almost entirely composed, turn, in Kant's logic,
to the constitutive and invariable forms of thought? In idealism, did
not Pythagoras and the system of numbers precede the sublime theory of
Plato? And in another sphere, were not all men represented as issuing
from the same blood? Was not their fraternity found in the flesh before
it was found in the identity of their duties and their rights, or in the
unity of their nature and their task? This is not the place to dwell any
longer upon a general fact; but we hope to have made clear at least the
relations existing between the Sefer Yetzirah and the more extensive and
more important work, <span id="fr_247"></span>[35](#fn_247) the
substance of which we shall soon give.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[123:1](rph13.htm#fr_208) This judgment on the
Talmud by the author is, on the whole, unjust. The Talmud is a work
compiled by many authors, and ought not to suffer the guilt of
individual authors. Furthermore, the differing elements contained must
be separated. Considered in the light of revelation, the Halakah is the
necessary consequence of Mosaism; the <span id="page_124">p. 124</span>
Haggadah, <span id="fr_209"></span>[a](#fn_209) wherever appearing in
the mystic-allegoric-fantastic form, is generally an offspring of
orientalism.--Jellinek.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[123:a](rph13.htm#fr_209) By Halakah is meant
the entire legal part of Jewish tradition. Haggadah stands for the
non-legal part of Jewish tradition and falls under the heading of
folk-lore, history, illustrations, etc., mostly for a moralizing
effect.--Transl.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[125:2](rph13.htm#fr_210) Spanish philosopher
and Hebrew poet. c. 1085-1140.--Trans!.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[125:3](rph13.htm#fr_211) Cuzari, IV, 25.
Instead of the Hebrew text which few would understand, we cite the
excellent Spanish translation from Jacob Abendana. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[a](#fn_212) "Ensena la deydad y la unidad por cosas
que son varias y multiplicadas por una parte, pero per otra parte, son
unidas y concordantes, y su union proscede del uno que los ordena."

<span id="fn_212"></span>[125:a](rph13.htm#fr_212) I am taking here the
English translation by Hartwig Hirschfeld.--Transl.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[126:4](rph13.htm#fr_213) M. de Bonald,
Recherches Philosoph., ch. III. See also de Maistre, Soirees de
Saint-Petersbourg, tome II, p. 112 ff.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[126:5](rph13.htm#fr_214) Introduction to
Abraham ben Dior's commentary on the Sefer Yetzirah, Mantua edition.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[126:6](rph13.htm#fr_215) ‏בספר וספר וספיר‎
Sefer Yetzirah, ch. I, first proposition (Mishnah).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[126:7](rph13.htm#fr_216) Judah ha Levi of
Andalusia wrote his religious-philosophical book "Cuzari" in Arabic.
This was translated into Hebrew by Judah ibn Tibbon. From the Hebrew
translation, Abendana completed in Spanish, Buxtorf, a Latin, and lately
D. Cassel and Dr. Yolowicz <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> commenced a
German translation, of which two numbers appeared until now. <span
id="fr_217"></span>[a](#fn_217)--Jellinek

<span id="fn_217"></span>[126:a](rph13.htm#fr_217) Cassel's German
translation is now complete. There is also an English translation from
the original Arabic by Dr. Hartwig Hirschfeld.--Transl.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[127:8](rph13.htm#fr_218) The three words ‏ספר‎
(S’far), ‏ספור‎ (Sippur) and ‏ספר‎ (S’for) signify according to the
author of the Cuzzari: Number, Language (Speech, Narration),
Writing.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_219"></span>[127:9](rph13.htm#fr_219) Abendana's
translation of the two words of the original text ‏השיעור והפלום‎ by "la
cantidad y el peso" is incorrect. He uses the same words to translate
also ‏והמשורה והמשקל‎. To further develop this would lead us too far, as
we would have to refer to the Arabic.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_220"></span>[127:10](rph13.htm#fr_220) It may interest the
reader to know the direct translation of this passage, and I give here
Dr. Hirschfeld's English translation: "As to S’far it means the
calculation and weighing of the created bodies. The calculation which is
required for the harmonious and advantageous arrangement of a body is
based on a numerical figure; expansion, measure, weight, relation of
movements, and musical harmony, all these are based on the number
expressed by the word S’far. No building emerges from the hand of the
architect unless its image has first existed in his soul. Sippur
signifies, the language, or rather the divine language, the voice of the
words of the living God. This produced the existence of the form which
this language assumed in the words: 'Let there be light,' 'let there be
a firmament.' The word was hardly spoken when the thing came into
existence. This is also Sefer, by which writing is meant, the writing of
God means His creatures, the speech of God is His writing, the will of
God is His speech. In the nature of God, therefore, S’far, Sippur, and
Sefer are a unity, whilst they are three in human reckoning."--Transl.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[128:11](rph13.htm#fr_221) Quizo dezir en la
palabra Sephar la cantidad y el peso de los cuerpos criados, por quanto
la cantidad en modo que sea el cuerpo ordenado y proporcionado, apto
para lo que es criado, no es sino por numero; y la medida, y la
cantidad, y el peso, y la proporzion de los movimientos, y la orden de
la harmonia todo es por numero, que es to que quiere dezir Sephar. Y
Sipur quiere dezir la habla e la vox, pero es habla divina, voz de
palabras de Dioz vivo, con laqual es la existencia de la cosa en su
forma exterior y enterior, de laqual se habla, come dixo y dixo Dios sea
luz, y fue luz. Y Sepher quiere dezir la escritura; y la escritura de
Dios son sus criaciones; y la palabra conque el Sephar, y el Sipur, y el
Sepher en Dios son una cosa, y en el hombre son tres.--Cuzary, Discors.,
vol. 4 S 25.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[128:12](rph13.htm#fr_222) ‏עשר ספירות בלי מה‎
(Esser S’firoth b’lee mah--Ten Sefiroth without what (anything). This
expression in itself as well as the developments following it, compel
this interpretation and permit no others, like those of "Sphere" which
is based on the Greek (Sphaira), or the idea of brightness, conveyed by
the word "Sapphir" (‏ספיר‎). The book of Raziel, despite the
extravagances contained in it, came near the truth on this point. ‏כל
ההשבונות בלולות בלי מה לשון שתימה‎--Raziel, edit. Amsterdam, Vol. Sb.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[129:13](rph13.htm#fr_223) Sefer Yetzirah. Ch.
I, proposition 9. (Should be prop. 4.--Transl.)

<span id="fn_224"></span>[129:14](rph13.htm#fr_224) Ch. I, proposition
4. (Should be prop. 5.--Transl.)

<span id="fn_225"></span>[129:15](rph13.htm#fr_225) Unless the author
pleases to disregard the order in which the propositions of the Sefer
Yetzirah are given in the original text, he can, not very well say here
"it is added (on ajoute)"; for this, the third proposition, really
precedes the previous one, fifth proposition (wrongly given as the
4th).--Transl.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[129:16](rph13.htm#fr_226) The author's own
conception of this passage may have induced him to insert the words "de
la main (of the hand)," but they are not to be found in the original
text, and are very properly omitted by Dr. Jellinek in his German
translation. I can not refrain from quoting the exquisite remark by Dr.
Philipp Bloch (Geschichte der Entwickelung der Kabbala and der
juedischen Religionsphilosophie--History of the development of the
Kabbalah and of the Jewish Religious Philosophy) to this unimpaired
translation of this passage. He says: "As it is not spoken here
specifically of the fingers of the hand, it refers as well to the
fingers (toes) of the feet. Thus is symbolized here the diverging
polarity which always converges again in an indifferent point."--Transl.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[130:17](rph13.htm#fr_227) ‏רוח מרוח‎. The same
word (‏רוח‎--Ru-ah) has the meaning of air, and spirit; therefore, we
might have just as well said "the spirit which proceeds from the
spirit." But then it would have to be admitted that the spirit
engendered water, an inference which is less probable than the version
we have chosen. Moreover, the first number does not present God Himself,
but the spirit of God; consequently the second number can not be
anything but the expression of that spirit, the breath into which the
twenty-two letters in some way finally resolved themselves.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[130:18](rph13.htm#fr_228) The translation of
this proposition is not complete. I shall attempt its translation
according to Dr. Bloch: "Two is the breath which comes from the spirit.
In it He graved and formed 22 letters and the principle of which are
three mothers (basic elements), seven doubles and twelve simples." In
another version is added: "In them (are) the four heavenly regions
(cardinal points), East and West, North and South, and a breath (wind)
is in every one of these."--Transl.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[130:19](rph13.htm#fr_229) The author
disregarded entirely the original text in this phrase, and Dr. Jellinek,
in his German translation, tried to save the situation by correcting at
least one word of it. The original Hebrew text has: ‏חקקן כמין ערונה‎
which Dr. Bloch very correctly renders with "He grave them in the shape
of a (terrace-like, Gesenius) garden bed." The author's rendition of
this phrase with "etendue ensuite en forme de tapis--spread out, then,
in the shape of a carpet," is explainable only <span id="page_131">p.
131</span> by assuming that he misunderstood the etymology of the word
‏ערוגה‎--Arugoh, which he probably took as a derivation of
"‏ארג‎--orag," to weave, written with an "Aleph;" while the real root of
the word is "‏ערג‎--orag," to ascend, to mount, to rise, and written
with an ‏ע‎--Ain. The Hebrew word for carpet is "‏מד‎--Mahd" or
"‏שמיכה‎--Smehah."--Transl.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[131:20](rph13.htm#fr_230) This proposition is
also not rendered strictly according to the original Hebrew text, and I
shall again refer to Dr. Bloch's translation as the truer one. It should
read: Three is water (which comes) from the fire. In it He graved and
formed the throne of Glory, the Seraphim, Ophanim, Holy Beasts and
Ministering Angels, and of these three He formed His dwelling, for it is
written: Who maketh angels spirits; His ministers a flaming fire.
(Psalms, CIV).--Transl.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[131:21](rph13.htm#fr_231) Ch. I, from prop. 9
to prop. 12.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[131:22](rph13.htm#fr_232) I H W H
(‏יהוה‎)--Transl.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[132:23](rph13.htm#fr_233) Referring to Ezekiel
I, 14: "And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning."--Transl.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[132:24](rph13.htm#fr_234) I have again
deviated from the translation of the author and of Dr. Jellinek in order
to adhere to the original Hebrew text.--Transl.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[134:25](rph13.htm#fr_235) ‏עשרים ושתים אותיות
חקקן חצבן שקלן והמירן צרפן יצר בהן נפש כל היצור ובפש כל העתיד לצור.‎ Ch.
II prop. 2. <span id="fr_239"></span>[a](#fn_236)

<span id="fn_236"></span>[134:a](rph13.htm#fr_239) Not fully translated.
The literal translation is as follows: (With the) twenty-two letters
(which) He carved them, graved them, weighed them and changed them
around, He formed in them the soul of all that has been formed and the
soul of all that will be formed.--Transl.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[134:26](rph13.htm#fr_236) ‏אלו ב׳ב אותיות שבהם
יסד הקב״ה שמו מרום וקדוש.‎

<span id="fn_238"></span>[134:27](rph13.htm#fr_237) ‏אלו ב׳ב אותיות יסוד
שלוש אמות ושבע כפולות ושתים עשרה פשטות.‎ Ch. I, prop. 8.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[134:28](rph13.htm#fr_238) The simples
represent one sound only; the doubles express two sounds, one mild, the
other hard. To the first class belong the following letters: ‏הוז חטי לן
מעצק‎; the last class is represented by these two words: ‏בגד כפרת‎.
Finally, in the word ‏אמש ‎are gathered the three mothers, one of which
the ‏ש‎, because it is a sibilant letter, represents fire; the second
‏מ‎ which is silent, represents water; and, finally, the first letter
‏א‎, which is slightly aspirate, is the symbol of air. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[\*](#fn_240).

<span id="fn_240"></span>[134:\*](rph13.htm#fr_240) It should also be
mentioned that ‏א‎ (Aleph) is the first letter in the word ‏אויר‎
(Ahveer)--air, ‏מ‎ (Mem) is the first letter of the word ‏מים‎
(Ma-yim)--water, and ‏ש‎ (Shin) is the last letter of the word ‏אש‎
(Aysh)--fire. Compare ch. III, prop. 3.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_241"></span>[135:29](rph13.htm#fr_241) ‏אמש יסודן בף חובה
וכף זכות ולשון הוק מכריע בנתיים.‎ III, prop. 1.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[136:30](rph13.htm#fr_242) ‏אהד על נבי שלשה,
שלשה על גבי שבעה, שבעה על גבי שנים עשר.‎ Ch. VI. prop. 13.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[136:31](rph13.htm#fr_243) ‏הלי בעולם כמלד על
כסאו. גלגל בשנה כמלךּ במדינה. לב בנפש במלךּ במלחמה.‎--Ch. VI, prop. 7.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[136:32](rph13.htm#fr_244) ‏שנים עשר עומדים
במלהמה שלשת אוהבים שלשה שונאים שלשת מחיים שלשה ממיתימ.‎ Ch. VI, prop.
11.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[137:33](rph13.htm#fr_245) ‏אל מלךּ נאמז מושל
בבולם ממעון קדשו ועד עדי עד.‎ After having been applied in its entirety
to the ten Sefiroth, this passage appears only in part in the place
indicated. The four last words are cut short.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[138:34](rph13.htm#fr_246) ‏אדם עלאי‎ (Adam
Eelo-o), literally: High man, therefore: Ideal man, Celestial man. ‏אדמ
קדמון‎ (Adam Kadmon),, literally: Previous man, therefore: Archetype
man.--Transl.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[139:35](rph13.htm#fr_247) The Amsterdam
edition of the Zohar consists of three great volumes in octavo, each one
of which contains nearly six hundred pages in rabbinical characters,
very finely and very closely printed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Analysis of the Zohar. Allegorical Method Of The
Kabbalists](rph14)
