[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph17)  [Next](rph19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

# PART THREE

### CHAPTER I

#### SYSTEMS WHICH OFFER SOME RESEMBLANCE TO THE KABBALAH

#### RELATION OF THE KABBALAH TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATO

The systems which, because of their nature, or because of the age which
has given rise to them, seem likely to have served as basis and pattern
for the esoteric doctrine of the Hebrews, are partly philosophical and
partly religious. To the first belong the systems of Plato, of his
unfaithful Alexandrian disciples, and Philo, whom we can not possibly
confound with the latter. Of the religious systems we can mention at
present Christianity only, and that in a general way. Right here,
though, I wish to state frankly that none of these grand theories of God
and Nature can explain to us the origin of the traditions with which we
have previously become acquainted. It is this important point we wish to
establish first.

No one will deny that there is a great analogy between the Platonic
philosophy and certain metaphysical and cosmological principles taught
in the Zohar and in the Book of Formation. On both sides we see the
Divine Intelligence or the Word shaping the universe according to types
contained within Himself before things were brought forth. On both sides
we see numbers play the role of intermediaries between the ideas,
between the supreme idea and the objects which are the incomplete
manifestation in the world of this idea. On both sides, finally, we find
the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

dogmas of the pre-existence of the souls, of reminiscence and of
metempsychosis. These various resemblances are so striking that the
Kabbalists themselves--I refer to the modern Kabbalists--recognized
them, and in order to explain them, they thought it best to make Plato a
disciple of Jeremiah, <span id="fr_423"></span>[1](#fn_423) just as
others made Aristotle a disciple of Simon the Just. <span
id="fr_424"></span>[2](#fn_424)

But will any one dare to conclude from such superficial relations that
the works of the Athenian philosopher inspired the first authors of the
Kabbalah? and what is more astonishing, that this science, of strange
origin and the child of a heathen mind, was held in such a high regard
and considered such a deep mystery by the Mishnah? Strange to say, those
who hold to this opinion are just the very critics who look upon the
Zohar as a mere invention at the close of the thirteenth century, and
let it therefore come into existence at a time when Plato was not known;
for no one will claim that the scattered citations in the works of
Aristotle, and the caustic criticism accompanying them, can give a
conception of the Platonic doctrine.

In no case can the actual affiliation of the Kabbalah with the Platonic
philosophy be admitted, a view we shall now endeavor to submit to our
scrutiny. I shall not rely upon external reasons which will be more
opportune later on. I shall only remark here that the resemblances first
noticed in the two doctrines are soon wiped out by their differences.
Plato acknowledged (in abstracto) two principles: spirit (causa
intelligens) and matter--the intelligent cause and the inert substance;
although from what he says, it is hard to have as clear an idea of the
second as of the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

first. The Kabbalists, on the contrary, encouraged by the
incomprehensible dogma of a creation ex nihilo (from nothing), admitted
as basis of their system the absolute unity; a God Who is, at once, the
cause, the substance and the form of all that is, as well as of all that
can be.

Like every one else, they too acknowledge the struggle of good and evil,
of spirit and matter, of power and resistance; but they subordinate this
struggle to the absolute principle and ascribe it to the difference
which necessarily exists in the generation of things between finite and
the infinite, between all individual existence and its limitation,
between the furthest points of the scale of beings. This basic dogma,
which the Zohar sometimes interprets by deep philosophical expressions,
appears already in the Sefer Yetzirah, under quite a phantastic and
coarse form, it is true, but at the same time, clear enough to permit
the belief in its originality, or to reject, at least, the intervention
of the Greek philosopher. When we compare the theory of ideas and the
theory of the Sefiroth with each other, and these two with the lower
forms that flow from them, we shall find them separated by the same
distance, and we can not help understanding it otherwise, noticing as we
do, dualism on one side and absolute unity on the other.

By creating an abyss between the intelligent principle and inert matter,
Plato can see in the ideas nothing but forms of the intelligence, I mean
of that supreme intelligence of which our intelligence is but a
conditional and limited part. These forms are everlasting and
incorruptible like the principle to which they belong; for these forms
are themselves the idea and the intelligence, there can consequently be
no intelligent principle without them. In this sense they represent also
the essence of things, since the latter can not exist without form or
without the imprint of the divine idea. But they (the forms) can not
represent all that exists in the inert principle, neither can they
represent the principle itself; and yet, since the principle exists, and
since it

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

exists, like the first, in all eternity, it is necessary that it have
also its own essence, its distinctive and invariable attributes,
although it is subject to all changes.

We reject the argument that Plato meant to point out matter as a mere
negation, that is to say, the boundary which circumscribes each
particular existence. This role he assigns (in Phoebus, p. 334, trans.
of Victor Cousin) expressly to the *numbers*, the principle of every
boundary and of every proportion. But along with the numbers and the
productive and intelligent Cause, he admits also that which he calls the
"Infinite," which is more or less susceptible to that from which the
things are produced, in short--matter--or, to be more exact, substance
separated from causality. There are therefore existences, and this is
the point we are driving at, or rather forms of existence--unchangeable
modes of being--which find themselves necessarily excluded from the
number of ideas. This is not the case with the Sefiroth of the Kabbalah,
among which we see matter itself (‏יסוד‎--Y’sod) figure. The Sefiroth
represent both the forms of existence and those of the idea, the
attributes of the inert substance, that is to say, of the passivity or
the resistance as well as the forms of the intelligent causality, since
they consider them perfectly identical.

The Sefiroth are therefore divided into two great classes, which are
designated by the metaphysical language of the Zohar as the "Fathers"
and the "Mothers," and these two, apparently opposite, principles,
coming from one inexhaustible source--the Infinite (Ayn Sof)--unite
again into one common attribute which is called the "Son," whence they
separate under a new form to unite anew. Therefore the trinitarian
system of the Kabbalists, which no one can possibly confound with the
Platonic trinity.

Having made reservations for our further discussions, it must be
admitted that in consideration of such different foundations, the
Kabbalistic system, even if brought forth under the influence of the
Greek philosophy, may still claim originality. For absolute originality
is exceedingly rare, and perhaps never to be found in

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

metaphysics; and it is known that Plato himself does not owe everything
to his own genius. All great conceptions of the human mind on the
supreme cause, on the first existence and on the generation of things,
have shown themselves under a more or less coarse veil before assuming a
character really worthy of reason and science. Thus, a tradition which
is not derogatory to the independence and to the fertility of the
philosophical spirit, may become admissible.

And yet, notwithstanding this protecting principle, we maintain that the
Kabbalists had no connection whatever, at least directly, with Plato.
Indeed, if we picture these people having drawn from the source of the
most independent philosophy, and having been nourished by this jesting
and pitiless dialectic which puts everything to question and which
destroys as often as it builds up; if we imagine also that, even by a
superficial reading of the "Dialogues," they were initiated into all the
elegance of the most refined civilization, are we then able to
understand the irrational, the rude and unbridled imagination in the
most important passages of the Zohar? Can we explain that extraordinary
description of the "White Head," those gigantic metaphors mingled with
puerile details, that supposition of a secret revelation older than that
of Sinai, and, [finally](errata.htm#20), those incredible efforts, aided
by the most arbitrary means, to find their doctrine in the Holy
Scriptures.? <span id="fr_425"></span>[3](#fn_425)

In these different characters I recognize, indeed, a philosophy which,
springing from the bosom of an eminently religious people, dares not
admit its own audacity, and which, for its own satisfaction, tries to
cover itself with the cloak of authority. But I can not reconcile these
characters with the perfectly free choice of a strange and independent
philosophy which openly avers that

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

it holds its authority, power and enlightenment from reason only.
Moreover, the Jews never denied their foreign teachers, nor did they
refuse to pay respect to other nations for the knowledge they sometimes
borrowed from them. <span id="fr_426"></span>[4](#fn_426) Thus we are
told by the Talmud that the Assyrians furnished them with the names of
the months, of the angels and with the characters of the letters which
they use to this day for the writing of their holy books. <span
id="fr_427"></span>[5](#fn_427) Later on, when the Greek language began
to spread among them, the most venerable teachers of the Mishnah spoke
with admiration of it, <span id="fr_428"></span>[6](#fn_428) and
permitted even its use at religious ceremonies in place of the
scriptural text. <span id="fr_429"></span>[7](#fn_429) During the Middle
Ages, when the Jews were initiated by the Arabs into the philosophy of
Aristotle, they did not hesitate to give the same honor to this
philosopher as to their own, except, as we said before, that they made
him a disciple of their oldest teachers, and ascribed a book to him in
which they picture the head of the Lyceum acknowledging upon his
deathbed the God and the Law of Israel. <span
id="fr_430"></span>[8](#fn_430)

Finally, in a very remarkable passage previously quoted by us, we are
informed by the Zohar itself that the books of the Orient come very
close to the Divine Law and to some views taught by the School of Simeon
ben Yohai. <span id="fr_431"></span>[9](#fn_431) It is added only that
this ancient wisdom was taught by the patriarch Abraham to the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

children begotten from his concubine, and by whom, according to the
Bible, the Orient was populated. What then would have prevented the
authors of the Kabbalah from dedicating also a souvenir to Plato? Could
they not just as easily as their modern followers have him schooled by
some prophet of the true God? According to Eusebius <span
id="fr_432"></span>[10](#fn_432) this is exactly what Aristobulus <span
id="fr_433"></span>[11](#fn_433) did when, after interpreting the Bible
in accordance with the philosophy of Plato, he did not hesitate to
accuse the latter of having taken his knowledge from the books of Moses.
The same strategy is used by Philo against the head of the
Portico. <span id="fr_434"></span>[12](#fn_434),  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[13](#fn_435)

We are, therefore, entitled to the opinion that the origin of the
Kabbalistic system is not to be looked for in the so-called Platonism.
Let us see if we can find it with the philosophers of Alexandria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_423"></span>[214:1](rph18.htm#fr_423) Compare my review on
Lindo's English translation of the "Conciliator" by Manasseh ben Israel
in Fuerst's "Orient" of 1848, col. 348.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_424"></span>[214:2](rph18.htm#fr_424) Compare Aree-Nohem
(The Roaring Lion) by Leon de Modena, ch. XV, p. 4-4 (edited by Dr.
Julius Fuerst, Leipzig, 1840). Others maintain that Aristotle, while in
Palestine with Alexander the Great, saw the works of Solomon, and that
these furnished him the principal elements for his philosophy. See
‏שבילי אמונה‎ (Paths of Faith), by R. Meir Aldoli. (Should be
Aldabi--Jellinek.)

<span id="fn_425"></span>[217:3](rph18.htm#fr_425) This last argument is
a weak one; for it has been at all times the task of the Jewish
religious philosophers to carry into the Bible the given contents of a
philosophy. It has been done so from the time of Saadia to the time of
Hirsch. As to the arbitrary means, it is part of the nature of mysticism
to look for and find symbols to replace its ideas. Indeed, Neoplatonism
came forth from Platonism.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_426"></span>[218:4](rph18.htm#fr_426) We must take into
consideration that the Talmudists were very scrupulous about mentioning
the name of the originator of an opinion. Compare especially Abboth, ch.
6, the saying: ‏כל האומר דבר בשם אומרן‎ (One who mentions anything in
the name of the one who said it (at first), brings redemption into the
world).--Jellinek

<span id="fn_427"></span>[218:5](rph18.htm#fr_427) Jerusalem Talmud,
Rosh-Hashanah ‏שמות הטלאסים והתדשים עלו עמהם מבבל‎ (The names of the
angels and of the months came with them from Babylon). At another place
(Tract. Sanhedrin, ch. XXI) it says, in speaking of Ezra, that the
characters of the letters were changed by him, ‏נשתנה הכתב על ידו‎ and
that these characters are still called ‏אשורי‎ (Assyrian).

<span id="fn_428"></span>[218:6](rph18.htm#fr_428) The Talmudist applied
the Biblical passage ‏יפת אלהים ליפת‎ (May God enlarge the boundary of
Japhet), Genesis IX, 27, to the Greek language.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_429"></span>[218:7](rph18.htm#fr_429) Babylonian Talmud,
Tractat Megillah, ch. I, Tract. Sota, ad fin.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[218:8](rph18.htm#fr_430) This book is called
‏ספר התפוח‎, Book of the Apple.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[218:9](rph18.htm#fr_431) Zohar, part I, fol.
99, 100. Sect. ‏וירא‎.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[219:10](rph18.htm#fr_432) Eusebius of
Caesarea, considered the father of Church history, (264-340).--Transl.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[219:11](rph18.htm#fr_433) Aristobulus of
Paneas, Jewish Alexandrian philosopher of the second or third century B.
C.--Transl.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[219:12](rph18.htm#fr_434) Quod omnis probus
liber, p. 873, Ed. Mangey.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[219:13](rph18.htm#fr_435) Refers to the
philosopher Zeno (360-270 B. C.), founder of the school of Stoics, so
called because the disciples were taught on a "stoa" or porch.--Transl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Relation of the Kabbalah to the Alexandrian
School](rph19)
