[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rph21)  [Next](rph23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### RELATION OF THE KABBALAH TO THE RELIGION OF THE CHALDEANS AND PERSIANS

Were we to find within the present circumscribed limits of our
investigation a people, distinguished by its civilization as well as by
its political power, which exercised an immediate and lasting influence
upon the Hebrews, we could evidently find within the bosom of such a
people the solution of the problem we have raised. We find these
conditions complied with, even beyond the unreasonable demands of the
critic, in the Chaldeans and Persians who were united into one nation by
the arms of Cyrus and by the religion of Zoroaster. And, indeed, can we
think of a more appropriate event in the life of a people that could
change its moral constitution and modify its ideas and customs as the
memorable exile that has been called the Babylonian captivity? Is it
possible that the seventy years sojourn of the Israelites, priests and
laymen, teachers and common people, in the land of their conquerors,
exerted no influence on either side? We have already cited a talmudical
passage wherein the elders of the synagogue openly acknowledge that
their ancestors brought with them from the land of their exile the names
of the angels, the names of the months and even the letters of the
alphabet.

It is impossible to suppose that the names of the months were not
accompanied by certain astronomical knowledge, <span
id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_656.md) probably

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

of such a nature as we have met in the Sefer Yetzirah, and that the
names of the angels were separated from the entire celestial and
infernal hierarchy adopted by the Magi. It has also long since been
noted that Satan appears for the first time in the sacred writings in
the story of the Chaldean Job. <span id="fr_659"></span>[2](#fn_659.md)
This rich and learned mythology, which has been adopted by the Talmud
and spread in the Mishnah, constitutes also the poetical part and, if I
may use the expression, the outer cover of the Zohar. But we do not wish
to insist upon this long known fact. Disregarding the Chaldeans, who
left no visible or reliable trace, and who, besides, were morally and
materially conquered by the Persians before the return of the Jews to
the Holy Land, we shall prove the presence, if not of the most general
principles, but of nearly all the elements of the Kabbalah in the Zend
Avesta and the religious commentaries depending upon it.

We wish to remark, incidentally, that this vast and admirable monument
which has been known to us for more than a century, at this epoch, when
we so eagerly follow up all sources, did not yet render all the service
to historic philosophy--the true science of the human mind--which the
latter justly expects of it. We do not pretend to fill the gap; but we
hope to show the trans-mission of ideas between Persia and Judea, as we
have already done in part, with reference to Judea and Alexandria.

We must first point out that all chronologists, whether Jewish

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

or Christian, <span id="fr_660"></span>[3](#fn_660.md) agree that the first
deliverance of the Israelites who remained captives in Chaldea since
Nebuchadnezzar (Ezra, I, 1) took place during the first years of the
reign of Cyrus over Babylon, 536 to 530 before the Christian era. The
divergence of opinion confines itself to this very limited period. If we
are to believe the calculations of Anquetil-Dupperon, <span
id="fr_661"></span>[4](#fn_661.md) Zoroaster had already commenced his
religious mission in 549, that is at least fourteen years before the
first return of the captive Hebrews to their fatherland. Zoroaster was
then forty years old; the most brilliant epoch of his life had begun,
and continued until 539. During these ten years Zoroaster converted to
his law the entire court and kingdom of king Gustasp, believed to have
been Hystaspis, father of Darius. During these ten years the reputation
of the new prophet dismayed even the brahmins of India, and when one of
these came to the court of Gustasp for the purpose of overpowering the
one he called impostor, he and all that were with him were compelled to
yield to the irresistible power of their adversary. From 539 to 524,
finally, Zoroaster openly taught his religion in the capital of the
Babylonian empire, which he converted entirely by connecting wisely his
own teachings with the already existing traditions. <span
id="fr_662"></span>[5](#fn_662.md)

Is it reasonable to suppose that the Israelites, who witnessed such a
revolution, and returned to their fatherland at a time when that
revolution spread its most vivid brilliancy and, consequently, must have
left the strongest impression upon their minds--is it possible, I say,
that they took with them no trace of it, not even in their most secret
opinions and ideas? Must not

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the great question of the origin of evil, which until then remained
untouched by Judaism, and which is, so to speak, the centre and starting
point of the religion of the Persians, must it not have acted powerfully
upon the imagination of these people of the Orient, who were accustomed
to explain everything by divine intervention and to ascend in similar
problems to the source of things? It can not be argued that because they
were crushed under the weight of their misfortune they remained
strangers to all that happened around them in the land of their exile.
The Scriptures themselves point to them with some satisfaction as being
instructed in all the sciences and, consequently, in all the ideas of
their conquerors, and admitted with the latter to the highest dignities
of the empire.

This is just the character of Daniel, Zerubabel and Nehemia, <span
id="fr_663"></span>[6](#fn_663.md) the two latter playing such an active
part in the deliverance of their brethren. But this is not all. Besides
forty thousand people who returned to Jerusalem under Zerubabel, a
second emigration, headed by Ezra, took place under the reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, about seventy years after the first emigration.
During this interval the religious reform of Zoroaster had time to
spread to all parts of the Babylonian empire, and to take deep root in
the minds of the people. From the return to their land until the
conquest by Alexander the Great the Jews always remained the subjects of
the Persian kings. And even after this event, until their total
dispersion, they seemed to have looked upon the Euphrates, the banks of
which they once bathed with their tears, as their second fatherland when
their eyes and minds turned to Jerusalem. The Babylonian Synagogue arose
under the civil and religious influence of the "Heads of Captivity"
(‏ריש גלותה‎--Raysh G’lutho), and it co-operated with the one in
Palestine for the definite organization of Rabbinic Judaism. <span
id="fr_664"></span>[7](#fn_664.md)

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

Wherever they found an asylum, at Sura, at Pompadita and at Nehardea,
they founded religious schools which flourished no less than those of
the metropolis. Among the teachers who sprang from their midst we
mention Hillel the Babylonian, who died about forty years before the
advent of Christ, and who was the teacher of that Yohanan ben Zakai who
played such a great role in the Kabbalistic stories previously quoted.
These same schools produced also the Babylonian Talmud, the final and
most complete expression of Judaism. From the enumeration of these facts
alone we may conclude that no nation exerted upon the Jews such deep
influence as the Persians; that no moral power could have penetrated so
deeply into their spirit as the religious system of Zoroaster with its
long train of traditions and commentaries.

But all doubt vanishes when we pass from the purely external relations
to a comparison of the ideas which represent in the two nations the most
exalted results and the very foundations of their respective
civilizations. However, to avoid the suspicion that we have founded
beforehand the origin of the Kabbalah upon isolated and purely
incidental resemblances, we shall point out in a few words and by some
examples the influence of the Persian religion upon Judaism in general,
before demonstrating all the elements of the Kabbalistic system in the
Zend Avesta. Far from being a digression, this part of our research will
contribute no little to the strengthening of our opinion, and I hasten
to add that I do not at all intend to speak of the fundamental dogmas of
the Old Testament. For, since Zoroaster himself continually refers to
traditions much older than he, it is not necessary, yes, it is even not
permissible from the standpoint of impartial criticism, to regard the
following as having been borrowed from his doctrine: the six days of the
creation, so easily recognized in the six Gahanbars; <span
id="fr_665"></span>[8](#fn_665.md) the earthly paradise and the

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

ruse of the demon who, in the shape of a serpent, kindled the revolt in
the soul of our first parents; <span id="fr_666"></span>[9](#fn_666.md) the
terrible punishment and the increasing forfeiture of the latter who,
after having lived like angels, were obliged to cover themselves with
the skins of animals, to wrest the metals from the bowels of the earth
and to invent all the arts by which we subsist; <span
id="fr_667"></span>[10](#fn_667.md) finally, the last judgment with its
accompanying terrors, with the resurrection in spirit and flesh. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[11](#fn_668.md) All these beliefs are found, it is
true, in

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

just as explicit a form in the Bundehesh <span
id="fr_669"></span>[12](#fn_669.md) and in the Zend Avesta as in
Genesis; <span id="fr_670"></span>[13](#fn_670.md) but we repeat again that
we are fully convinced that the source is to be looked for at a much
earlier age. 'We can not say the same of Rabbinical Judaism, which is
much more modern than the religion of Zoroaster. The traces of Parseeism
are here, as we shall soon ascertain, very visible, and we shall soon
see what light can be thrown upon the origin of the Kabbalah when we
keep in mind that the oldest teachers of this mysterious science are
also counted among the doctors of the Mishnah and among the most
venerated elders of the Synagogue.

When side by side with the wisest maxims on the application of life,
when alongside the most consoling thoughts on mercy and divine justice,
we find also in Judaism traces of the darkest superstition, we must look
for the cause of these, especially in the terror instilled by its
demonology. The power the latter ascribes to the evil spirits
(‏שדים‎--Shaydim, ‏רוחות‎--Ruheth) is so great that at every moment of
his life man may think himself surrounded by invisible enemies who are
set upon the loss of his body as well as of his soul. Man is not yet
born, and they await him already at the cradle to contend with him for
God and the tenderness of a mother. Hardly may he see the light of this
world, when they assail his head with a thousand perils, and his
thoughts with a thousand impure visions. In short, woe to him if he does
not resist forever! For, before life has yet completely left the body,
they come to take possession of their prey.

Now then, in all ideas of such a nature there is a perfect similarity
between the Jewish traditions and the Zend Avesta. According to this
latter monument the demons or the devils,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

those children of Ahriman and darkness, are just as numerous as the
creatures of Ormuzd. There are more than a thousand species who present
themselves under all kinds of forms, and who wander over the earth to
spread disease and sickness among man. <span
id="fr_671"></span>[14](#fn_671.md) "Where," asks Zoroaster of Ormuzd, "is
the place of the male, where the place of the female devis; where roam
the devis in mobs from fifty, from a hundred, from a thousand, from ten
thousand, and, finally, from all sides? . . .  <span
id="fr_672"></span>[15](#fn_672.md) Destroy the devis that enfeeble man and
those that produce sickness, those that carry off the human heart as the
wind sweeps away the clouds." (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 113.)

This is the way the Talmud expresses itself on the same subject: "Abba
Benjamin said: 'No creature could withstand the evil creatures
(‏מזיקין‎--Mazikin), had the eye the faculty of seeing them.' Abbaye
adds: "They are more numerous than we, and surround us as a ditch
surrounds a field." "Every one of us," says Rab Hunna, <span
id="fr_673"></span>[16](#fn_673.md) "has a thousand of them to the left and
ten thousand to the right side. When we feel ourselves pressed in a
crowd, it is because of their presence; when our knees give way under
our body, they alone are the cause; when we feel as though our
extremities had been broken, it is to them again that we must attribute
this suffering." <span id="fr_674"></span>[17](#fn_674.md) "The devis,"
says the Zend Avesta, "unite with one another and reproduce themselves
as man does." (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 336.) But they reproduce themselves
also through our own impurities, through the disgraceful acts of
self-abuse, and even through the involuntary licentiousness provoked by
a voluptuous thought during sleep. According to the

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Talmud the demons
resemble the angels in three things, and in three other things they
resemble man. Like the angels they read the future, have wings and fly
in a moment from one end of the world to the other; but they eat, drink,
reproduce and die as man does. <span id="fr_676"></span>[18](#fn_676.md)
Furthermore, they all originated from the lascivious dreams that
troubled the nights of our first father during the years passed in
solitude, <span id="fr_677"></span>[19](#fn_678.md) and the same cause even
today produces the same effect in his descendents. <span
id="fr_678"></span>[20](#fn_680.md) Certain formulated prayers, therefore,
were adopted by Jews and Parsees, whose power is to avert such
calamity. <span id="fr_679"></span>[21](#fn_681.md) The same phantoms, the
same terrors, finally, besiege these as well as the others at their last
moment.

Man scarcely dies, say the Zend books, when he is taken possession of
and questioned by the demons. (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 164.) The Daroudj
(the demon) Nesosh comes in the form of a fly, places himself upon the
head and beats him mercilessly. (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 316.) The soul,
separated from the body, arrives then at the bridge Tchinevad, which
separates our world from the invisible world; there it is judged by two
angels, one of whom is Mithra, of colossal proportions, with ten
thousand eyes, and holding a club in his hand. <span
id="fr_680"></span>[22](#fn_682.md) The rabbis, retaining

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

the same basic idea, picture it still more frightfully. "When man," they
say, "who is about to leave this world, opens his eyes, he notices in
his house an extraordinary light, and standing before him he sees the
angel of the Lord clothed in light, his body studded with eyes and his
hand holding a flaming sword. At the sight of this the dying man is
seized with fright which. permeates his body and spirit. His soul flees
gradually to all the extremities, as one desiring to change his place.
But when he comes to know that it is impossible for him to escape, he
looks into the face of the one standing before him and delivers himself
entirely into his power. If the dying man is a righteous one, the divine
presence (Shekinah) appears to him and the soul soon disappears beyond
the body." <span id="fr_683"></span>[23](#fn_683.md)

This first test is followed by another, which is called the torture or
the ordeal of the grave (‏היבוט הקבר‎--; Hibut Hakover). <span
id="fr_684"></span>[24](#fn_684.md) "As soon as the dead is put in his
grave, the soul unites again with him, and opening his eyes, he sees
two <span id="fr_685"></span>[25](#fn_685.md) angels who come to judge him.
Each holds in his hand two fiery rods (others say fiery chains), and the
soul and the body are judged at the same time for the evil they have
done together. Woe to the man when he is found guilty, for no one will
defend him! At the first blow all his limbs are dislocated; at the
second, all his bones are broken. But his body is soon reconstructed and
the punishment begins anew." <span id="fr_686"></span>[26](#fn_686.md)

We must value these traditions the more, since they have been taken
nearly literally from the Zohar, from where they

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

passed into the purely rabbinical writings and into the popular
collections. We can add to these beliefs a host of religious customs and
practices, equally commanded by the Talmud and the Zend Avesta. Thus the
Parsee, when leaving his bed in the morning, must not make four steps
before having put on the holy girdle which is called the Kosti, <span
id="fr_687"></span>[27](#fn_687.md) under the pretext that during the night
he had been contaminated by contact with the demons, and he must not
touch any part of his body before having washed his hands and face three
times. <span id="fr_688"></span>[28](#fn_688.md) We shall find the same
duties, based upon the same reasons, with the followers of the
rabbinical law; <span id="fr_689"></span>[29](#fn_689.md) with the
difference that the Kosti is replaced by a garment of another shape. The
disciples of Zoroaster and the followers of the Talmud consider
themselves duty bound to greet the moon at its first quarter with
prayers <span id="fr_690"></span>[30](#fn_690.md) and thanksgivings. <span
id="fr_691"></span>[31](#fn_691.md) The practice of keeping from the dead
or from the newborn the demons who try to take possession of them, are
nearly the same with both. <span id="fr_692"></span>[32](#fn_692.md)

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

The Parsee as well as the Jew carry their devotion, if I may say so,
even to profanation. There are prayers and religious duties for every
moment, for every action, for every situation of the physical and moral
life. <span id="fr_693"></span>[33](#fn_693.md) Although we do not lack
material for further expansion on this subject, <span
id="fr_694"></span>[34](#fn_694.md) we think it time to finish this
parallel. But even the fantastic and eccentric facts which we have
collected lend greater certainty to the conclusion which we draw from
them. For it is surely not in such beliefs and in such actions that we
can invoke the general laws of the human mind. We believe, though, we
have demonstrated that the religion, that is to say the civilization of
ancient Persia, left numerous traces in all parts of Judaism; in its
celestial mythology as represented by the angels; in its infernal
mythology, and, finally, in the practice of the outward cult. Are we now
to believe that its philosophy, that is, the Kabbalah, alone escaped
this influence? Is such an opinion probable, when we know that the
Kabbalistic tradition developed in the same manner, in the same time,
and, like the oral law of the Talmudic tradition, it rests upon the same
names? Far be it from us to content

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

ourselves with a simple conjecture, no matter how well founded, on a
subject of such a grave nature. We shall take up one by one all the
essential elements of the Kabbalah, and show their perfect resemblance
with the metaphysical principles of the religion of Zoroaster. This
method of procedure, although not very learned, must appear at least as
most impartial.

1\. The part played in the Kabbalah by the Ayn Sof, the infinite without
name and without form, is given by the theology of the Magi to eternal
time (Zervane Akerene), and, according to others, to limitless
space. <span id="fr_695"></span>[35](#fn_695.md) We want to note right here
that the term "space" or "absolute place" (‏מקום‎--Mokaum) has become
with the Hebrews the very name of the divinity. Furthermore, this first
principle, this only and supreme source of all existence, is only an
abstract God, without direct action upon the beings, without active
relation to the world, and consequently, without any appreciable form to
us; for good as well as evil, light as well as darkness are still
huddled together in His bosom. <span id="fr_696"></span>[36](#fn_696.md)
According to the sect of the Zervanites, whose opinion has been
conserved by a Persian historian, <span id="fr_697"></span>[37](#fn_697.md)
the principle we just mentioned, Zervan himself, would be, like the
crown of the Kabbalists, but the first emanation of the infinite light.

2\. The "Memra" of the Chaldean translators is easily recognized in the
following words by which Ormuzd himself defines the "Honover" or the
creative word: "The pure, the holy, the speedy Honover, I tell it to
you, O wise Zoroaster! was before the heavens, before the waters, before
the earth, before the herds, before the trees, before the fire, the son
of

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ormuzd, before the
pure man, before the devis, before all the existing worlds, before all
the good things." But the very same word Ormuzd created the world, and
by it he acts and exists. (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 138.) But the word
existed not only before the world; although "given by God,"--as the Zend
books say-- <span id="fr_698"></span>[38](#fn_698.md) it is eternal as He
is. It takes the part of mediator between limitless time and the
existences that flow from its bosom. It embraces the source and model of
all perfection, and has the power to realize them in all beings. <span
id="fr_699"></span>[39](#fn_699.md) What establishes, finally, its
resemblance with the Kabbalistic "Word," is that it has a body and a
spirit, that is to say, that it is the Spirit and the Word at the same
time. It is the Spirit, because it is no less than the soul of Ormuzd,
as he himself expressly said; (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 415) it is the Word
or the body, that is to say the spirit become visible, because it is at
the same time the law and the universe. (Zend Av., vol. III, p. 325,
595.)

3.. In Ormuzd we find something that resembles fully what the Zohar
calls "person" or "face" (‏פרצוף‎--Partsuf). He, Ormuzd, is in fact the
highest personification of the creative word, of that "excellent word"
of which his soul is made. It is in him also rather than in the highest
principle, in the eternal time, that we are to look for the union of all
the attributes ordinarily ascribed to God, and which make up His
manifestation, or, in the language of the Orient, the most brilliant and
purest light. "In the beginning," say the sacred books of the Parsees,
"Ormuzd, elevated above everything, was with the supreme wisdom, with
the purity and in the light of the world. This luminous throne
(‏מרכבה‎--Merkaba), this place inhabited by Ormuzd, is the one called
the primitive light." (Zend Av., vol. III, p. 343.) Like the celestial
man of the Kabbalists, he combines in him the

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

true knowledge, the highest intelligence, the greatness, the goodness,
the beauty, the energy or the strength, the purity or the splendor; it
is he, finally, who had created, or formed at least, and who nourishes
all beings. <span id="fr_700"></span>[40](#fn_700.md) These qualities in
themselves and their resemblance to the Sefiroth can not, of course,
lead us to any conclusion; but we can not help noticing that they are
all united in Ormuzd, whose role, in relation to infinity and to
unlimited time, is the same as that of the Adam Kadmon in relation to
the Ayn Sof. Indeed, if we are to believe an already quoted historian,
there existed among the Persians a very numerous sect in whose
estimation Ormuzd was the divine will manifested in a highly resplendent
human form. <span id="fr_701"></span>[41](#fn_701.md) It is also true that
the Zend books say nothing of how Ormuzd brought forth the world, in
what manner he himself and his enemy sprang from the bosom of the
Eternal, and, finally, what constitutes the primitive substance of
things. <span id="fr_702"></span>[42](#fn_702.md) But when God is compared
to light, when the efficient cause of the world is subordinated to a
higher principle, and the universe considered as the body of the
invisible word, we must necessarily consider the beings as isolated
words of that infinite light. We wish also to remark that the gnostic
pantheism is more or less connected with the fundamental principle of
the theology of the Parsees. <span id="fr_703"></span>[43](#fn_703.md)

4\. According to the Kabbalistic belief, as well as according

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

to the Platonian system, all beings of the world existed at first in a
more complete form in the invisible world. Each one of them has in the
divine thought its invariable model, which can come to light here below
only through the imperfection of matter. This conception, wherein the
dogma of pre-existence is mingled with the principle of the theory of
ideas, is found also in the Zend Avesta under the name of "Ferouer." The
greatest orientist of our days explains this word as follows: "It is
known that by "Ferouer" the Persians understood the divine type of each
intelligently endowed thing, its idea in the thought of Ormuzd and the
higher spirit that breathes in it and watches over it. This meaning is
supported by the tradition as well as by the texts." <span
id="fr_704"></span>[44](#fn_704.md)

The interpretation of Auquetil-Duperron agrees perfectly with this
one, <span id="fr_705"></span>[45](#fn_705.md) and we shall not cite all
the passages of the Zend Avesta that confirm it. We would rather point
out a very remarkable coincidence on one particular point of this
doctrine between the Kabbalists and the disciples of Zoroaster. We still
recall that [magnificent](errata.htm#32.md) passage in the Zohar where the
souls, about to be sent to earth, represent to God how they will suffer
while away from Him; what misery and contamination awaits them in our
world. Well then, in the religious traditions of the Parsees the
Ferouers make the same complaint, and Ormuzd answers them nearly as
Jehovah answers those souls which are grieved over leaving heaven. He
tells them that they were born for struggle, to combat evil and make it
disappear from the creation, that they can only then enjoy immortality
and heaven, when their task upon earth shall have been
accomplished. <span id="fr_706"></span>[46](#fn_706.md) "Think what
advantage you will have when, in the world, I shall permit you to stay
in bodies. Fight and make the children of Ahriman disappear. In the end
I shall rehabilitate you in your first estate and you

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

will be happy. In the end I shall set you again in the world, and you
will be immortal, ever young and faultless." (Zend Av., vol. II, p.
350). Another feature that reminds us of the Kabbalistic ideas, is that
the nations have their ferouers just as the individuals, and thus the
Zend Avesta often invokes the ferouer of Iran where the law of Zoroaster
was recognized first. However, this belief, which we meet also in the
prophecies of Daniel, (Ch. X, 10 ff.) was probably long since widely
spread among the Chaldeans before their political and religious fusion
with the Persians.

5\. If the psychology of the [Kabbalists](errata.htm#33.md) has some
resemblance with that of Plato, it has greater resemblance with that of
the Parsecs, as represented in a collection of very old traditions which
have been, for the most part, reproduced by Auquetil-Duperron in the
"Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions." (Vol. 38, p. 646-648.) Let us
first recall that according to the Kabbalistic theories there are in the
human soul three powers, perfectly distinct one from another, which are
united only during earthly life. On the highest level is the spirit
proper (‏נשמה‎--N’shamah), the pure emanation of the Divine
Intelligence, destined to return to its source, and unaffected by
earthly contaminations; on the lowest level, immediately above matter,
is the principle of motion and sensation, the vital spirit
(‏נפש‎--Nefesh) whose task ends at the brink of the grave. Between these
two extremes, finally, is the seat of good and of evil, the free and
responsible principle, the moral person (‏רוח‎--Roo-ah). <span
id="fr_707"></span>[47](#fn_707.md)

We must add that several Kabbalists and some philosophers of great
authority in Judaism have added to these three principal elements two
others, one of which is the vital principle (‏הוח‎--He-hoh), the
intermediary power between the soul and the body, apart from the
principle of sensation; the other is the type, or, we may say, the idea
which expresses the articular form of the individual (‏יחידה‎--Y’hidah,
‏צלם‎--Tselem, ‏דוגמא‎--Dougma).

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This form descends
from heaven into the womb of the woman at the time of conception and
leaves thirty days before death. During this period (of thirty days) it
is replaced by a shapeless shadow.

The theologic traditions of the Parsees set up precisely the same
distinctions in the human soul. We easily. recognize the individual type
in the ferouer which, having existed in heaven in a pure and isolated
state, is compelled, as we have seen above, to unite with the body. In
no less evident manner do we find again the vital principle in the Dian,
whose part it is, as the author our guide says, to conserve the forces
of the body and to maintain the harmony in all its parts. Like the
"He-yah" of the Hebrews, it takes no part in the evil of which man is
guilty; it is but a light vapor that comes from the heart, and which
must mix with the earth after death. The Akko, on the contrary, is the
highest principle. It is above evil, as the preceding principle is below
it. It is a kind of light that comes from heaven, and which must return
thither when our body is returned to the dust. It is the pure
intelligence of Plato and of the Kabbalists, but restricted to the
knowledge of our duties, to the prevision of future life and to
resurrection, in short, to moral consciousness. We finally come to the
soul proper or the moral person, which is one, notwithstanding the
diversity of its faculties, and which alone is responsible to divine
judgment for our actions <span id="fr_708"></span>[48](#fn_708.md) Another
distinction, though much less philosophical but equally admitted by the
Zend books, is the one which makes man the image of the world and which
recognizes in his consciousness two opposite principles, two Kedras,
one, coming from heaven, leads us to good, while the other, created by
Ahriman, tempts us to do evil. <span id="fr_709"></span>[49](#fn_709.md)
These two principles which, nevertheless, do not exclude liberty

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

of action, play quite a prominent role in the Talmud where they become
the good and the evil desire (‏יצר טוב‎--Yetzer Tov,‏יצר הרה‎--Yetzer
Ha-rah); possibly also the good and the evil angel.

6\. Even the conception of Ahriman, notwithstanding its purely
mythological character, was preserved in the doctrines of the Kabbalah;
for darkness and evil are personified in Samael, just as the divine
light is represented in all its splendor by the heavenly man. As to the
metaphysical interpretation of this symbol, namely that the evil
principle is matter, or, as the Kabbalists say, the "shell," the last
degree of existence, it is found, without straining the subject, in the
sect of the Zerdustians who established between the divine light and the
kingdom of darkness the same relation as between the body and its
shadow. <span id="fr_710"></span>[50](#fn_710.md)

But another fact, more worthy of our attention, because not to be found
elsewhere, is that we find in the oldest parts of. the religious codes
of the Parsees the Kabbalistic view that the prince of darkness,
Sama-el, by losing half of his name, becomes at the end of days, an
angel of light, and, together with all that was cursed, returns to
divine grace. A passage in the Yacna reads: "This unjust, this impure,
this gloomy king who knows but evil, will say Avesta at the
resurrection, and, fulfilling the law, he will establish it even in the
dwelling of the damned (the derwands). (Zend Av., vol. II, p. 169.) The
Bundehesh adds that at the same time Ormuzd and the seven first genii on
one side, and Ahriman with an equal number of evil spirits on the other
side, will be seen together offering a sacrifice to the Eternal, Zervane
Akerene. (Zend Av., vol. III, p. 415). We shall add, finally, to all
these metaphysical and religious ideas a very peculiar geographical
system which is found with some slight variations in the Zohar and in
the sacred books of the Parsees. According to the Zend Avesta (Vol. II,
p. 70) and the Bundehesh (Zend Av., vol. III, p. 363) the earth is
divided into seven parts (keshvars), which are watered by just as many
great rivers, and separated

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

from one another by the "water spilled in the beginning." Each of these
parts form a world in itself and supports inhabitants of different
nature; some are black, some are white; these have their bodies covered
with hair, like animals, the others differentiate themselves by some
other more or less fantastic formation. Finally, only one of these great
parts of the earth received the law of Zoroaster.

Let us now have the view of the Kabbalists on the same subject. In
quoting it, we shall confine ourselves to the role of a translator only.
"When God created the world, he stretched above us seven heavens, and
formed beneath our feet as many lands. He made also seven rivers, and
set up the week of seven days. Now, as each of these heavens has its
separate constellation and angels of a particular nature, so also have
the lands here below. Placed one above the other, they are all
inhabited, but by beings of different nature, as it was said of the
heavens. Among the beings, some have two faces, some four, and others
but one. They differ just as well in their color; some are red, some
black and some white. These have clothes, the others are naked like
worms. If the objection be raised that all the inhabitants of the world
descend from Adam, we ask if it is possible that Adam travelled in all
these regions for the purpose of populating them with his children? How
many wives did he have? But Adam lived only in that part of the earth
which is the most elevated and which is enveloped by the higher
heaven." <span id="fr_711"></span>[51](#fn_711.md) The only difference that
separates this opinion from that of the Parsees is that instead of
considering the seven parts of the earth as natural divisions of the
same surface, they represent them as enveloped one in another, like the
layers of an onion ‏אלין על אלין כנלדי בשלים‎, as the text says.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

These are, in their full simplicity and without any systematical
arrangement, the elements that constitute the common foundation of the
Kabbalah and the religious ideas brought forth under the influence of
the Zend Avesta. No matter how numerous and how important they may be,
we would still retreat before the deduction that follows from this
parallel if we had not found also in the sacred books of the Parsecs all
the heavenly and infernal mythology, part of the liturgy and even some
of the most essential dogmas of Judaism. Nevertheless, God forbid that
we accuse the Kabbalists of having been but servile imitators, of having
adopted strange ideas and beliefs without examination or, at least,
without modification, and of having confined themselves to clothing them
with the authority of the sacred books.

As a general rule there is no instance of a nation, no matter how
strongly the influence of another nation may act upon it, giving up its
true existence--the exercise of its inner faculties--and being content
with a borrowed life, and if I may also say, with a borrowed soul. We
can not possibly consider the Kabbalah as an isolated fact, as
accidental in Judaism; on the contrary, it is its heart and life. <span
id="fr_712"></span>[52](#fn_712.md) For, while the Talmud took possession
of all that relates to the outward practice and the material execution
of the Law, the Kabbalah reserved for itself exclusively the domain of
speculation and the most formidable problems of the natural and revealed
theology. It was able, besides, to arouse the veneration of the people
by showing inviolate respect for their gross beliefs, and in giving them
to understand that their entire faith and cult rested upon a sublime
mystery. By carrying the principle of the allegorical method to its last
consequences, the Kabbalah had no need of trickery to accomplish this.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

We have also seen to what rank it has been raised by the Talmud, and
what influence it exerted upon popular imagination. The sentiments it
once instilled have remained to the days nearest to us; for it was by
depending upon the Kabbalistic ideas that the modern Bar Kochba,
Sabbathai Zebi, had disturbed for a while all the Jews of the
world. <span id="fr_714"></span>[53](#fn_714.md) The ideas also caused the
liveliest agitation among the Jews of Hungary and Poland towards the
close of the eighteenth century by giving birth to the sect of the
Zoharites and Neo-Hassidim, and by leading thousands of Israelites into
the bosom of Christianity. When we now consider the Kabbalah, per se, we
can not help seeing therein an immense advance upon the theology of the
Zend Avesta. Here, indeed, dualism is the cornerstone of the structure,
although not as absolute as commonly thought, and although born as a
principle in a religion which acknowledges one Supreme Being. Ormuzd and
Ahriman alone exist in reality, with a divine character and with real
power; while the Eternal, that limitless time from which both of them
sprang, is, as we said, a pure abstraction. With the desire to relieve
Him (the Eternal) of the responsibility for evil, the management of the
world was taken from Him, and consequently all participation in good;
nothing but a name with a shadow of existence was left to Him. But this
is not all. All ideas relating to the invisible world, all the great
principles of the human mind in the Zend Avesta, and in the later
traditions connected with it, are still wrapped in a mythological veil
through which they appear as visible realities and as distinct persons
made in the image of man.

The doctrine of the Kabbalists presents quite a different character.
Here monotheism is the foundation, the basis and the principle of all;
dualism and all other distinctions of whatever nature exist only
formally. God alone, God, One and Supreme, is at once the cause, the
substance and the intelligible essence,

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

the ideal form of all that is. Only between Being and Not-being, between
the highest form and the lowest degree of existence is there an
opposition, a dualism. That one is light, this one is darkness.
Darkness, therefore, is but a negation, and light, as we have shown
several times, is the spiritual principle, the eternal wisdom, the
infinite intelligence which creates all that it conceives, and conceives
or thinks by its very existence. But if this be so, if it be true that
at a certain height the being and the thought blend, then the great
conceptions of the intelligence can not exist in mind alone, then they
do not represent mere forms from which abstractions are made at will; on
the contrary, they have a substantial and an absolute value, that is to
say, they are inseparable from the eternal substance. This is precisely
the character of the Sefiroth, of the Heavenly Man, of the Great and
Small Face, in short, of all the Kabbalistic personifications which, as
we see, differ greatly from the individual and mythological realizations
of the Zend Avesta.

The frame, the outline of the Zend Avesta, still remained the same, but
the background completely changed its nature, and the Kabbalah offers,
by its very birth, the peculiar spectacle of a mythology passing into
the state of metaphysics under the very influence of religious
sentiment. However, the system which was the fruit of that movement,
does not belong as yet, notwithstanding such volume and depth, among the
works where human reason makes free use of its rights and powers.
Mysticism, per se, does not show itself there in the most elevated form,
for it still remains chained to an external power--the revealed word. No
doubt that this power is more apparent than real; undoubtedly also that
allegory soon made of the sacred letter a compliant sign which expresses
whatever one wishes, a docile instrument at the service of the mind and
its most liberal inspirations. But it can not be denied that such a
procedure--whether due to deliberation or to sincere illusion--this art
of shielding new ideas under some venerable text, is the sanctioning of
fatal prejudice against true philosophy. Thus it is that the Kabbalah
has a religious and

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

a national character, although born under the influence of a strange
civilization, and notwithstanding the pantheism that underlies all its
doctrines.

By taking refuge, first under the authority of the Bible and then under
the oral law, it retained all the appearances of a theological system,
and especially of a Jewish theology. Before admitting it, therefore,
into the history of philosophy and humanity, those appearances had to be
wiped out and the Kabbalah had to be shown in its true light, that is to
say as a natural product of the human mind. This course was
accomplished, as we already said, slowly but surely, in the capital of
the Ptolomeans. There, for the first time, the Hebrew traditions stepped
over the threshold of the sanctuary, and mingling with many new ideas,
but losing none of their own substance, they spread into the world.
Desiring to recover a property which they considered their own, the
guardians of these traditions welcomed ardently the most noble results
of the Greek philosophy and mingled them more and more with their own
beliefs. The pretended heirs to the Greek civilization, on the other
hand, became gradually accustomed to this mingling, and thought only of
bringing it into an organized system where Reason and Intuition,
Philosophy and Theology would be equally represented. Thus it was that
the Alexandrian school developed that brilliant and profound summary of
all the philosophical and religious ideas of antiquity. Thus is
explained the resemblance, yes, I dare say, the identity we have found
in all the essential points or Neoplatonism and of the Kabbalah. But the
Kabbalah having entered by this path the common ground of the human
mind, was nevertheless transmitted among the Jews of Palestine in a
small circle of the elite and was considered the secret of Israel. In
this manner it was introduced into Europe, and in this manner it was
taught until the publication of the Zohar. Here begins a new order of
research, viz.: What influence did the Kabbalah exert upon the hermetic
and mystic philosophy which attracted such attention from the beginning
of the fifteenth to the end of the seventeenth

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

century, of which Raymond Lullus may be considered the first, and
Francis Mercurius van Helmont the last representative. This may be the
subject of a second work that will be considered perhaps as a complement
to the present work. We believe, though, we have attained the aim we
have set with reference to the Kabbalistic system proper, and we have
only to point out in a quick recapitulation the results which we believe
we have attained.

1\. The Kabbalah is not an imitation of the Platonic philosophy; for
Plato was unknown in Palestine where the Kabbalistic system was founded.
Furthermore, notwithstanding the several resembling traits which strike
us at first glance, the two doctrines differ totally in the most
important points.

2\. The Kabbalah is not an imitation of the Alexandrian school. First,
because it antedates the Alexandrian school, and secondly because
Judaism has always shown a profound aversion to and an ignorance of
Greek civilization even when it raised the Kabbalah to the rank of
divine revelation.

3\. The Kabbalah can not be regarded as the work of Philo, although the
doctrines of the philosophical theologian contain a great number of
Kabbalistic ideas. Philo could not transmit these ideas to his
Palestinian compatriots without at the same time initiating them into
the Greek philosophy. Because of the nature of his mind, Philo was not
capable of founding a new doctrine. What is more, it is impossible to
find in the monuments of Judaism the least trace of his influence.
Finally, Philo's writings are of more recent date than the Kabbalistic
principles, the application as well as the substance of which we find in
the Septuagint, in the Proverbs of Ben Sirach and in the Book of Wisdom.

4\. The Kabbalah has not been borrowed from Christianity, for all the
great principles upon which it stands antedate the coming of Christ.

5\. The striking resemblances which we have found between this doctrine
and the religious beliefs of the several sects of Persia, the numerous
and odd relations which it presents to us

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

with the Zend Avesta, the traces that the religion of Zoroaster has left
in all parts of Judaism, and the outward relations which existed between
the Hebrews and their old teachers since the Babylonian captivity, force
us to the conclusion that the materials of the Kabbalah were drawn from
the theology of the ancient Persians. But we believe we have
demonstrated at the same time that this loan did not destroy the
originality of the Kabbalah; for the Kabbalah substituted the absolute
unity of cause and substance for the dualism in God and in nature.
Instead of explaining the formation of beings as an arbitrary act of two
inimical forces, it presents them as divine forms, as successive and
providential manifestations of the Infinite Intelligence. The ideas,
finally, take in its bosom the place of realized personifications, and
the mythology is supplanted by metaphysics. This seems to us to be the
general law of the human mind. No absolute originality, but also no
servile imitation from one nation and from one century to another.
Whatever we may do to gain unlimited independence in the domain of moral
science, the chain of tradition will always show itself in our boldest
discoveries; and no matter how motionless we sometimes appear to be
under the sway of tradition and authority, our intelligence paves the
way, our ideas change with the very power that weighs them down, and a
revolution is about to break loose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_656"></span>[282:1](rph22.htm#fr_656.md) I should also have
said "astrological;" for the influence of the stars played at that time
quite an important role in the religious ideas of the Jewish people. The
Talmud distinguishes auspicious and inauspicious <span id="page_283">p.
283</span> days; and even to-day the Jews wish one another a lucky
influence of the stars (‏מזל טוב‎--Mazol Tov) at any important event in
their life when they wish to show mutual interest. <span
id="fr_657"></span>[\*](#fn_657.md)

<span id="fn_657"></span>[282:\*](rph22.htm#fr_657.md) Although this fact
is correct, yet it does not prove what the author has in mind. For, just
as little as the German thinks of the astrological origin of the word
"Unstern," or the French of "desastre," or the Italian of "disastro," so
little does the Jew think of the influence of the stars when wishing
‏מזל טוב‎.‏מזל‎ (Mazol) in the Jewish idiom has a meaning identical with
"luck." <span id="fr_658"></span>[a](#fn_658.md)--Jellinek

<span id="fn_658"></span>[282:a](rph22.htm#fr_658.md) The author probably
meant the ‏מזלות ככבים‎ (Mazoleth K’chovim)--astral fates--; by which
the Jews designate the Zodiacal signs.--Transl.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[283:2](rph22.htm#fr_659.md) Compare Zunz,
"Religious Sermons of the Jews," p. 158.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_660"></span>[284:3](rph22.htm#fr_660.md) Scaliger, Emendatio
tempor., p. 576. Alph. Desvignoles, Chronology, vol. II, p. 582.
Bossuet, General History, vol. II. Seder Olam Raba, ch. XXIX, p. 86.
David Ganz, liv. I., year 3392, and liv. II, 3390. Zunz, the twenty-four
books of the Holy Scriptures, chronological table reproduced in Vol.
XVIII of Cahn's Bible. To convince ourselves of the harmony between the
Jewish and the Christian chronologists we need only note that the Jews
fixed the advent of Christ on the conventional date of 3760 after the
creation.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[284:4](rph22.htm#fr_661.md) Zend Avesta, vol. II,
Life of Zoroaster.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[284:5](rph22.htm#fr_662.md) Zend Avesta, vol. II,
Life of Zoroaster.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[285:6](rph22.htm#fr_663.md) Daniel, I, 1, Ezra,
I, 2; II, 1. Josephus, Antiquities, Book XI, ch. IV, V.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[285:7](rph22.htm#fr_664.md) Yost, General History
of the Israelites, Book X, ch. XI and XII,--Same author, History of the
Israelites since the Maccabees, vol. XIV, the entire XIVth book.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[286:8](rph22.htm#fr_665.md) The word Gahanbars
denotes the six creative epochs as well as the six festivals established
as reminders for the faithful (M. Burnouf, Commentary to the Yacna, p.
309). In the first epoch Ormuzd created <span id="page_287">p.
287</span> the heavens; during the second he made the waters; in the
third, the earth; in the fourth, the vegetations; in the fifth, the
animals; and, finally, in the sixth, man was born. (Auquetil-Duperron,
Zend Avesta, vol. I, part 2, p. 84; Kleuker, vol. II, No. XXVIII.) This
system of creation was taught already before Zoroaster by another Median
or Chaldean prophet, called Djemshid.--Auquetil-Duperron, Life of
Zoroaster, p. 67; Kleuker, vol. III, p. 59.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[287:9](rph22.htm#fr_666.md) Ormuzd himself tells
his servant Zoroaster that he, Ormuzd, has given (or created) a place of
delight and of abundance, called Eeriene Veedjo. This place, more
beautiful than the entire world, resembled the Behesht (the celestial
paradise). Ahriman then created in the river that watered this place the
Great Adder, mother of winter (Zend Avesta Vendidad, vol. II, p. 264).
At another place Ahriman himself descends from heaven to earth in the
shape of an adder. It is also Ahriman who seduces the first man,
Meshiah, and the first woman, Meshiane. "He crept over their thoughts,
he overthrew their minds, and said to them: It was Ahriman who gave the
water, the earth, the trees and the animals. Thus Ahriman fooled them at
the very beginning, and until the end this cruel one endeavored to
seduce them."--Zend Avesta, vol. III, p. 351 and 378.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[287:10](rph22.htm#fr_667.md) "Devi, whose speech
is all lie (Ahriman), becoming still bolder, came a second time and
brought them (to the first couple) fruit of which they ate, and thus
only the advantage of all the advantages was left to them." (Ib.,
supr.). Our first parents, seduced for the third time, then drank milk.
At the fourth time, they went hunting, ate the meat of the animals and
made for themselves garments from the skins, just as the Lord made coats
from leaves for Adam and Eve. They then discovered iron, made an axe,
felled trees and made tents for themselves; they finally united carnally
and their children inherited their misery. (Ib. supr.)

<span id="fn_668"></span>[287:11](rph22.htm#fr_668.md) On the day of
resurrection the soul will appear first; it will know its body and all
men will recognize one another. They will be divided into two classes,
the righteous and the darwands (the wicked). The righteous will go to
the Gotatman (the paradise); the darwants will again be precipitated
into the Duzakh (the inferno). For three days the first ones will taste,
bodily and spiritually, the joys of paradise; the others will in the
some manner suffer the tortures of hell. The dead will then be purified,
and there will he no more wicked ones: "All men will be united into the
same work. At that time Ormuzd will have <span id="page_288">p.
288</span> completed all creations and will do nothing more. The
resurrected dead will enjoy the same rest. This could be called the
seventh epoch of the creation, or the Sabbath of the Parsees.--Zend
Avesta, vol. II, p. 414.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[288:12](rph22.htm#fr_669.md) According to the
Zend Avesta, the Bundehesh is the oldest religious book of the
Parsees.--Zend Avesta, vol. III, p. 337.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[288:13](rph22.htm#fr_670.md) All, except the last
two. Although resurrection has been put down by Maimonides as one of the
"Thirteen Articles of Faith."--Transl.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[289:14](rph22.htm#fr_671.md) Zend Avesta, vol.
II, p. 235; vol. III, p. 158.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[289:15](rph22.htm#fr_672.md) Vendidad Sade, vol.
II, of the Zend Avesta, p. 325.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[289:16](rph22.htm#fr_673.md) This scholar was
generally influenced by many Persian views. Compare Sanhedrin, fol.
07.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_674"></span>[289:17](rph22.htm#fr_674.md) Tract. Berakoth,
fol. 6a. Another doctor even accuses the demons of wearing out the
clothes of the rabbis by rubbing against them, <span
id="fr_675"></span>[\*](#fn_675.md) ‏הני מאני דרבנן דבלן מחיפיה
דידהו.‎--Ib.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[289:\*](rph22.htm#fr_675.md) ‏דידהו‎ is the
possessive pronoun, talmudic for ‏דידהין‎. The author who translates
with "par le frottement de leur mains" found the noun ‏די‎ "hand" in
‏דידהו‎.--Jellinek.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[290:18](rph22.htm#fr_676.md) This passage was
translated into Latin by Buxtorf in his "Lexicon Talmudicus," p.
2339. <span id="fr_681"></span>[\*](#fn_677.md)

<span id="fn_677"></span>[290:\*](rph22.htm#fr_681.md) It is found in
Tractat Haggigah, fol. 16a. I have already corrected the original French
text where the author omits the words "and die." For corroboration I
quote literally from the Talmud:

‏ששה דברים נאמרן בשדים. שלשה כקלאבי השרת ושלשה כבני אדמ. שלשה כמלאכי
השרת, יש להם בנפים במלאבי השרת, ומסין מסוף העולם ועד סופו כסלאבי השרת,
ויודעין את שעתיד להיות במלאכי השרת; ושלשה כבני אדם, אוכלים ושותים כבני
אדם, ומתים כבני אדם.‎

The phrase ‏תנן רבון‎ (our rabbis taught) and the expression ‏נאמרו‎ (it
was said) may testify to the old age of this translation.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_678"></span>[290:19](rph22.htm#fr_677.md) Ib. supr. <span
id="fr_682"></span>[\*\*](#fn_679.md)

<span id="fn_679"></span>[290:\*\*](rph22.htm#fr_682.md) Compare also
Tract. Erubin, fol. 18h. ‏בל אותן שנים שהיה אדם הראשון בנדוי הוליד רוחין
ושדין ולילין‎--Jellinek

<span id="fn_680"></span>[290:20](rph22.htm#fr_678.md) See in the ‏קיצור
שני לוחות הברית‎, (p. 108a of the Amsterdam ed.) quite a curious extract
from Rabbi Menahem, the Babylonian.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[290:21](rph22.htm#fr_679.md) Zend Avesta, vol.
II, p. 408. Kitzur, in the edition quoted in the previous note, p. 92b,
45a.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[290:22](rph22.htm#fr_680.md) Zend Avesta, vol.
II, p. 114, 151. Ib., vol. III, p. 205, 206, 211-222.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[291:23](rph22.htm#fr_683.md) Zohar, part III,
sect. (blank--JBH) p. 126b, Amsterdam ed. While taking the foundation of
this scene from the Zohar we have added a few details from the Kitzur,
p. 20, 21.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[291:24](rph22.htm#fr_684.md) According to the
Kabbalists there are seven ordeals: 1, the separation of body and soul;
2, the recapitulation of the deeds of our life; 3, the time of burial;
4, the ordeal or judgment of the grave; 5, the time when the dead, still
animated by the vital spirit ‏נפש‎.--Nefesh), feels the biting of the
worms; 6, the punishment of hell; 7 the metempsychosis.--Zohar, ib.
supr.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[291:25](rph22.htm#fr_685.md) According to the
Zohar text there are three angels. ‏תלתא בי דינא ממנן על דינא דקברא ותלת
שרביטא דאשא בידייהו.‎--Jellinek

<span id="fn_686"></span>[291:26](rph22.htm#fr_686.md) The same passage of
the Zohar and of the Kitzur.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[292:27](rph22.htm#fr_687.md) Zend Avesta, vol.
II, p. 409, Vendidad Sade.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[292:28](rph22.htm#fr_688.md) Thomas Hyde, Religio
veterum Persarum, p. 465, 477.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[292:29](rph22.htm#fr_689.md) Orach Haim,
directions for the washing of the hands (‏הלכית נטילת ידים‎), p. 54. The
same is recommended by the Kabbalists. According to the latter, the
higher soul leaves us during sleep, and we thus remain only with the
vital soul which is incapable of defending the body against impure
spirits and deadly emanations.--Zohar, part I, sect. ‏וישב‎. See also
the Talmud, Tract. Sabbath, ch. VIII.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[292:30](rph22.htm#fr_690.md) This grouping of the
Talmudists with the followers of the Zoroastrian doctrine is incorrect.
The Parsee praises the moon as an "Umshaspand that has light in it,"
while the Jew praises God Who "renewed the moon." To the Parsee the moon
is in itself an object worthy of devotion; the Jew, on the other hand,
says: "Praised be He Who formed thee, praised be He Who made thee,
praised be He Who owns thee, praised be He Who created thee." It is true
that we must refer the origin of the benediction of the moon (‏ברכית
לבנה‎) to Parseeism, but only in so far as the Rabbis were compelled to
consider the influence of Parseeism upon the people.--Jellinek

<span id="fn_691"></span>[292:31](rph22.htm#fr_691.md) Zend Avesta, vol.
III, p. 313. This custom is still extant to-day under the name of
"Sanctification of the moon" (‏קידוש לבנה‎).

<span id="fn_692"></span>[292:32](rph22.htm#fr_692.md) As soon as a Parsee
woman has been delivered of a child, a burning lamp or a fire is
maintained in her room for three days and three nights. Zend Av., vol.
III, p. 565. Th. Hyde, I. c. p. 445. The Jews observe the same custom at
the death of a person. The ceremony of keeping away the demon Lillith
from the newborn is still more complicated. But the reason for and the
description of it are given in the book of Raziel.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[293:33](rph22.htm#fr_693.md) In the litany
collection called "Yeshts Sades" we find prescribed prayers which the
Parsee must say when cutting his nails, before and after attending to
the call of nature, and before attending to conjugal duty.--Zend Av.,
vol. III, p. 117 120, 121, 123, 124. Similar prayers for the same
circumstances are prescribed for the Jews. See Joseph Karo, Schulchan
Aruch, p. 2, ‏הנהנות בית הכסא‎, and Kitzur, p. 32 ‏עניני זיננב‎

<span id="fn_694"></span>[293:34](rph22.htm#fr_694.md) I want to emphasize
a few points where the influence of Parseeism upon Judaism appears very
plainly. Three steps backward are to be taken after finishing the
"eighteen benedictions" (‏שמונה עשרה‎) Compare Tract. Yoma 53b; Orach
Hayim, CXXIII, par. 1. This custom is often mentioned in the Zend
Avesta. The Parsee does not speak during a meal (Kleuker, Zend Av., III,
235); this was also the custom among the Talmudists. Compare Tract.
Taanit, fol. 56: .‏אמר ׳ר יוחנן אין מסיתין בסעודה‎ R. Yohanan said:
"Speaking during a meal is not customary." Compare also Orach Hayim,
CLXX, part Q. But we must hold on here to the viewpoint I established in
my foregoing note. Because of the long sojourn in the Babylonian empire
and because of the constant intercourse with it, the Jews adopted the
Persian superstition and disbelief. The [superstition](errata.htm#31.md)
rooted deep in the people, while the strange source whence it came was
forgotten and vanished from memory. The talmudical teachers, therefore,
could do no better than instigate religious feeling and reverence to God
by utilizing, with some modifications, the popular superstition.
Jellinek

<span id="fn_695"></span>[294:35](rph22.htm#fr_695.md) Auquetil-Duperron,
in the "Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions," vol. XXXVII, p. 584.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[294:36](rph22.htm#fr_696.md) Vol. II of the Zend
Av., Vendidad. Ib., vol. III, Bundehesh. Ormuzd and Ahriman are called
in this book a single people of limitless time.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[294:37](rph22.htm#fr_697.md) Sharistani, ap.
Thomas Hyde, de Veter. Pers, relig., p. 297. "Altera magorum secta sunt
Zervanitae qui asserunt lucem produxisse personas ex luce, quae omnes
erant spirituales, luminosae, dominales. Sed quod harum maxima persona,
cui nomen Zervan, dubitavit de re aliqua, ex ista dubitatione emersit
Satanas."

<span id="fn_698"></span>[295:38](rph22.htm#fr_698.md) Memoires de
l’Academie des Inscriptions, vol. XXXVII, p. 620.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[295:39](rph22.htm#fr_699.md) Ib. supr. Here are
the words of the author: "The Honover combines, according to Zoroaster,
the source and the model of all the perfection of the beings, the power
to produce, and it manifests itself only by a kind of prolation of
infinite time and of Ormuzd."

<span id="fn_700"></span>[296:40](rph22.htm#fr_700.md) See Eugene Burnouf,
Commentaire sur le Yacna, ch. I, to p. 146.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[296:41](rph22.htm#fr_701.md) This is the sect of
the Zerdustians. The following is their view as given by Sharistani in
the Latin translation of Thomas Hyde (de Vet., Pers. rel., p. 928): "et
postquam effluxissent 3000 anni, transmisisse voluntatem suam in forma
lucis fulgentis in figuram humanam."

<span id="fn_702"></span>[296:42](rph22.htm#fr_702.md) They say that Ormuzd
and Ahriman were *given* by Zervan, the eternal time. That Ormuzd has
*given* the heavens and all its products. But the sense of this
important word is nowhere determined clearly.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[296:43](rph22.htm#fr_703.md) It is nevertheless
important to note that in the Zend Avesta (Vol. II, p. 180) Ormuzd is
called the "body of the bodies." Is it not, perhaps, the "substance of
the substances," the "basis" (‏יסוד‎--Y’sod) of the Kabbalists? Burnouf
mentions also a very old Phelvic commentary, where we find, as in the
Sefer Yetzirah and in the Zohar, both worlds represented by the symbol
of a burning coal; the higher world is the flame, and the visible nature
is the burning matter.--Comment. sur le Yacna, p. 172.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[297:44](rph22.htm#fr_704.md) Comment. sur le
Yacna, p. 270.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[297:45](rph22.htm#fr_705.md) See "Explanatory
compendium of the Theological system of Zoroaster," Zend Av., vol. III,
O. 595, and the Memoires de l’Academie des Inscript., vol. XXXVII, p.
623.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[297:46](rph22.htm#fr_706.md) Mem. de l’Acad. des
Inscript., vol. XXXVII, p. 640.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[298:47](rph22.htm#fr_707.md) See Part II, ch.
III.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[299:48](rph22.htm#fr_708.md) The soul proper or
the moral person, is itself composed of three faculties; 1, the
principle of sensation; 2, the Roe or intelligence proper; 3, the Rouan,
which holds the centre between the power of judgment and imagination.
These three faculties are inseparable and make up the one soul.
Otherwise, I admit that this part of the psychology of the Parsees is
not very clear to me.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[299:49](rph22.htm#fr_709.md) Mem. de l’Acad. des
Inscript., passage quoted.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[300:50](rph22.htm#fr_710.md) Thomas Hyde, work
cited, p. 296, 298, ch. XXII.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[301:51](rph22.htm#fr_711.md) Zohar, part III, p.
9b, 10a, sect. ‏ויקרא‎, Amsterdam ed. We consider it our duty to note
here that the ideas do not follow one after the other in the text. We
were obliged to omit many repetitions and digressions which were not
only useless, but extremely wearisome and entirely too long.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[302:52](rph22.htm#fr_712.md) The author should
have added: "Judaism after the return from the Babylonian exile until
the conclusion of the Talmud." For the present-day Judaism the Kabbalah
is an entirely strange element <span
id="fr_713"></span>[a](#fn_713.md)--Jellinek

<span id="fn_713"></span>[302:a](rph22.htm#fr_713.md) A rather unfortunate
remark by the German translator. Can any one deny the preponderant
influence of the Kabbalah upon Judaism during the Middle Ages, and even
now through its direct descendant--Hassidism?--Transl.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[303:53](rph22.htm#fr_714.md) See Lacroix,
Memoires de l’empire Ottoman, p. 259 ff--Peter Beer, work cited, vol.
II, p. 260 ff. Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, Book IX, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](rph23.md)
