[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XSSI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Folk Tales From the Russian*, by Verra Xenophontovna Kalamatiano de
Blumenthal, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### FATHER FROST

<span id="img_image031"></span>

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| ![](img/image031.jpg) |

IN a far-away country, somewhere in Russia, there lived a stepmother who
had a stepdaughter and also a daughter of her own. Her own daughter was
dear to her, and always whatever she did the mother was the first to
praise her, to pet her; but there was but little praise for the
stepdaughter; although good and kind, she had no other reward than
reproach. What on earth could have been done? The wind blows, but stops
blowing at times; the wicked woman never knows how to stop her
wickedness. One bright cold day the stepmother said to her husband:

"Now, old man, I want thee to take thy daughter away from my eyes, away
from my ears. Thou shalt not take her to thy people into a warm izba.
Thou shalt take her into the wide, wide fields to the crackling frost."

The old father grew sad, began even to weep, but nevertheless helped the
young

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

girl into the sleigh. He wished to cover her with a sheepskin in order
to protect her from the cold; however, he did not do it. He was afraid;
his wife was watching them out of the window. And so he went with his
lovely daughter into the wide, wide fields; drove her nearly to the
woods, left her there alone, and speedily drove away—he was a good man
and did not care to see his daughter's death.

Alone, quite alone, remained the sweet girl. Broken-hearted and
terror-stricken she repeated fervently all the prayers she knew.

Father Frost, the almighty sovereign at that place, clad in furs, with a
long, long, white beard and a shining crown on his white head,
approached nearer and nearer, looked at this beautiful guest of his and
asked:

"Dost thou know me?—me, the red-nosed Frost?"

"Be welcome, Father Frost," answered gently the young girl. "I hope our
heavenly Lord sent thee for my sinful soul."

"Art thou comfortable, sweet child?" again asked the Frost. He was
exceedingly

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

pleased with her looks and mild manners.

"Indeed I am," answered the girl, almost out of breath from cold.

And the Frost, cheerful and bright, kept crackling in the branches until
the air became icy, but the good-natured girl kept repeating:

"I am very comfortable, dear Father Frost."

But the Frost, however, knew all about the weakness of human beings; he
knew very well that few of them are really good and kind; but he knew no
one of them even could struggle too long against the power of Frost, the
king of winter. The kindness of the gentle girl charmed old Frost so
much that he made the decision to treat her differently from others, and
gave her a large heavy trunk filled with many beautiful, beautiful
things. He gave her a rich "schouba" lined with precious furs; he gave
her silk quilts— light like feathers and warm as a mother's lap. What a
rich girl she became and how many magnificent garments she received! And
besides all, old Frost gave

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span id="img_image032"></span> ![](img/image032.jpg)

*"Old Frost gave the gentle girl many beautiful, beautiful things"*

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

her a blue "sarafan" ornamented with silver and pearls.

When the young girl put it on she became such a beautiful maiden that
even the sun smiled at her.

The stepmother was in the kitchen busy baking pancakes for the meal
which it is the custom to give to the priests and friends after the
usual service for the dead.

"Now, old man," said the wife to the husband, '' go down to the wide
fields and bring the body of thy daughter; we will bury her."

The old man went off. And the little dog in the corner wagged his tail
and said:

"Bow-wow! bow-wow! the old man's daughter is on her way home, beautiful
and happy as never before, and the old woman's daughter is wicked as
ever before."

"Keep still, stupid beast!" shouted the stepmother, and struck the
little dog.

"Here, take this pancake, eat it and say, 'The old woman's daughter will
be married soon and the old man's daughter shall be buried soon.'"

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

The dog ate the pancake and began anew:

"Bow-wow! bow-wow! the old man's daughter is coming home wealthy and
happy as never before, and the old woman's daughter is somewhere around
as homely and wicked as ever before."

The old woman was furious at the dog, but in spite of pancakes and
whipping, the dog repeated the same words over and over again.

Somebody opened the gate, voices were heard laughing and talking
outside. The old woman looked out and sat down in amazement. The
stepdaughter was there like a princess, bright and happy in the most
beautiful garments, and behind her the old father had hardly strength
enough to carry the heavy, heavy trunk with the rich outfit.

"Old man!" called the stepmother, impatiently; "hitch our best horses to
our best sleigh, and drive *my* daughter to the very same place in the
wide, wide fields."

The old man obeyed as usual and took his stepdaughter to the same place
and left her alone.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

Old Frost was there; he looked at his new guest.

"Art thou comfortable, fair maiden?" asked the red-nosed sovereign.

"Let me alone," harshly answered the girl; "canst thou not see that my
feet and my hands are about stiff from the cold?"

The Frost kept crackling and asking questions for quite a while, but
obtaining no polite answer became angry and froze the girl to death.

"Old man, go for my daughter; take the best horses; be careful; do not
upset the sleigh; do not lose the trunk."

And the little dog in the corner said:

"Bow-wow! bow-wow! the old man's daughter will marry soon; the old
woman's daughter shall be buried soon."

"Do not lie. Here is a cake; eat it and say, 'The old woman's daughter
is clad in silver and gold.'"

The gate opened, the old woman ran out and kissed the stiff frozen lips
of her daughter. She wept and wept, but there was no help, and she
understood at last that through her own wickedness and envy her child
had perished.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span id="img_image033"></span> ![](img/image033.jpg)

 

 
