[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap03)  [Next](chap05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XSSI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Folk Tales From the Russian*, by Verra Xenophontovna Kalamatiano de
Blumenthal, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

### IVANOUSHKA THE SIMPLETON

<span id="img_image019"></span>

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| ![](img/image019.jpg) |

IN a kingdom far away from our country, there was a town over which
ruled the Tsar Pea with his Tsaritza Carrot. He had many wise statesmen,
wealthy princes, strong, powerful warriors, and also simple soldiers, a
hundred thousand, less one man. In that town lived all kinds of people:
honest, bearded merchants, keen and open-handed rascals, German
tradesmen, lovely maidens, Russian drunkards; and in the suburbs all
around, the peasants tilled the soil, sowed the wheat, ground the flour,
traded in the markets, and spent the money in drink. In one of the
suburbs there was a poor hut where an old man lived with his three sons,
Thomas, Pakhom, and Ivan. The old man was not only clever, he was wise.
He had happened once to have a chat with the devil. They talked

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

together while the old man treated him to a tumbler of wine and got out
of the devil many great secrets. Soon after this the peasant began to
perform such marvelous acts that the neighbors called him a sorcerer, a
magician, and even supposed that the devil was his kin.

Yes, it is true that the old man performed great marvels. Were you
longing for love, go to him, bow to the old man, and he would give you
some strange root, and the sweetheart would be yours. If there is a
theft, again to him with the tale. The old man conjures over some water,
takes an officer along straight to the thief, and your lost is found;
only take care that the officer steals it not.

Indeed the old man was very wise; but his children were not his equals.
Two of them were almost as clever. They were married and had children,
but Ivan, the youngest, was single. No one cared much for him because he
was rather a fool, could not count one, two, three, and only drank, or
ate, or slept, or lay around. Why care for such a person? Every one
knows life for some is brighter than

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

for others. But Ivan was good-hearted and quiet. Ask of him a belt, he
will give a kaftan also; take his mittens, he certainly would want to
have you take his cap with them. And that is why all liked Ivan, and
usually called him Ivanoushka the Simpleton; though the name means fool,
at the same time it carries the idea of a kind heart.

Our old man lived on with his sons until finally his hour came to die.
He called his three sons and said to them:

"Dear children of mine, my dying hour is at hand and ye must fulfill my
will. Every one of you come to my grave and spend one night with me;
thou, Tom, the first night; thou, Pakhom, the second night; and thou,
Ivanoushka the Simpleton, the third."

Two of the brothers, as clever people, promised their father to do
according to his bidding, but the Simpleton did not even promise; he
only scratched his head.

The old man died and was buried. During the celebration the family and
guests had plenty of pancakes to eat and plenty of whisky to wash them
down.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Now you remember that on the first night Thomas was to go to the grave;
but he was too lazy, or possibly afraid, so he said to the Simpleton:

"I must be up very early to-morrow morning; I have to thresh; go thou
for me to our father's grave."

"All right," answered Ivanoushka the Simpleton. He took a slice of black
rye bread, went to the grave, stretched himself out, and soon began to
snore.

The church clock struck midnight; the wind roared, the owl cried in the
trees, the grave opened and the old man came out and asked:

"Who is there?"

"I," answered Ivanoushka.

"Well, my dear son, I will reward thee for thine obedience," said the
father.

Lo! the cocks crowed and the old man dropped into the grave. The
Simpleton arrived home and went to the warm stove.

"What happened?" asked the brothers.

"Nothing," he answered. "I slept the whole night and am hungry now."

The second night it was Pakhom's turn

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

to go to his father's grave. He thought it over and said to the
Simpleton:

"To-morrow is a busy day with me. Go in my place to our father's grave."

"All right," answered Ivanoushka. He took along with him a piece of fish
pie, went to the grave and slept. Midnight approached, the wind roared,
crows came flying, the grave opened and the old man came out.

"Who is there?" he asked.

"I," answered his son the Simpleton.

"Well, my beloved son, I will not forget thine obedience," said the old
man.

The cocks crowed and the old man dropped into his grave. Ivanoushka the
Simpleton came home, went to sleep on the warm stove, and in the morning
his brothers asked:

"What happened?"

"Nothing," answered Ivanoushka.

On the third night the brothers said to Ivan the Simpleton:

"It is thy turn to go to the grave of our father. The father's will
should be done."

"All right," answered Ivanoushka. He

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

took some cookies, put on his sheepskin, and arrived at the grave.

At midnight his father came out. "Who is there?" he asked. "I," answered
Ivanoushka. "Well," said the old father, "my obedient son, thou shalt be
rewarded;" and the old man shouted with a mighty voice:

"Arise, bay horse—thou wind-swift steed, Appear before me in my need;
Stand tip as in the storm the weed!"

And lo!—Ivanoushka the Simpleton beheld a horse running, the earth
trembling under his hoofs, his eyes like stars, and out of his mouth and
ears smoke coming in a cloud. The horse approached and stood before the
old man.

"What is thy wish?" he asked with a man's voice.

The old man crawled into his left ear, washed and adorned himself, and
jumped out of his right ear as a young, brave fellow never seen before.

"Now listen attentively," he said. "To thee, my son, I give this horse.
And thou, my faithful horse and friend, serve my son as thou hast served
me."

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Hardly had the old man pronounced these words when the first cock crew
and the sorcerer dropped into his grave. Our Simpleton went quietly back
home, stretched himself under the icons, and his snoring was heard far
around.

"What happened?" the brothers again asked.

But the Simpleton did not even answer; he only waved his hand.

The three brothers continued to live their usual life, the two with
cleverness and the younger with foolishness. They lived a day in and an
equal day out. But one morning there came quite a different day from all
others. They learned that big men were going all over the country with
trumpets and players; that those men announced everywhere the will of
the Tsar, and the Tsar's will was this: The Tsar Pea and the Tsaritza
Carrot had an only daughter, the Tsarevna Baktriana, heiress to the
throne. She was such a beautiful maiden that the sun blushed when she
looked at it, and the moon, altogether too bashful, covered itself from
her eyes. Tsar and Tsaritza

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

had a hard time to decide to whom they should give their daughter for a
wife. It must be a man who could be a proper ruler over the country, a
brave warrior on the battlefield, a wise judge in the council, an
adviser to the Tsar, and a suitable heir after his death. They also
wanted a bridegroom who was young, brave, and handsome, and they wanted
him to be in love with their Tsarevna. That would have been easy enough,
but the trouble was that the beautiful Tsarevna loved no one. Sometimes
the Tsar mentioned to her this or that one. Always the same answer, "I
do not love him." The Tsaritza tried, too, with no better result; "I do
not like him."

A day came when the Tsar Pea and his Tsaritza Carrot seriously addressed
their daughter on the subject of marriage and said:

"Our beloved child, our very beautiful Tsarevna Baktriana, it is time
for thee to choose a bridegroom. Envoys of all descriptions, from kings
and tzars and princes, have worn our threshold, drunk dry all the
cellars, and thou hast not yet

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

found any one according to thy heart's wish."

The Tsarevna answered: ''Sovereign, and thou, Tsaritza, my dear mother,
I feel sorry for you, and my wish is to obey your desire. So let fate
decide who is destined to become my husband. I ask you to build a hall,
a high hall with thirty-two circles, and above those circles a window. I
will sit at that window and do you order all kinds of people, tsars,
kings, tsarovitchi, korolevitchi, brave warriors, and handsome fellows,
to come. The one who will jump through the thirty-two circles, reach my
window and exchange with me golden rings, he it will be who is destined
to become my husband, son and heir to you."

The Tsar and Tsaritza listened attentively to the words of their bright
Tsarevna, and finally they said: "According to thy wish shall it be
done."

In no time the hall was ready, a very high hall adorned with Venetian
velvets, with pearls for tassels, with golden designs, and thirty-two
circles on both sides of the window high above. Envoys went

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to the different kings and sovereigns, pigeons flew with orders to the
subjects to gather the proud and the humble into the town of the Tsar
Pea and his Tsaritza Carrot. It was announced everywhere that the one
who could jump through the circles, reach the window and exchange golden
rings with the Tsarevna Baktri-ana, that man would be the lucky one,
notwithstanding his rank—tsar or free kosack, king or warrior,
tsarevitch, koro-levitch, or fellow without any kinfolk or country.

The great day arrived. Crowds pressed to the field where stood the newly
built hall, brilliant as a star. Up high at the window the tsarevna was
sitting, adorned with precious stones, clad in velvet and pearls. The
people below were roaring like an ocean. The Tzar with his Tzaritza was
sitting upon a throne. Around them were boyars, warriors, and
counselors.

The suitors on horseback, proud, handsome, and brave, whistle and ride
round about, but looking at the high window their hearts drop. There
were already several fellows who had tried. Each

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

would take a long start, balance himself, spring, and fall back like a
stone, a laughing stock for the witnesses.

The brothers of Ivanoushka the Simpleton were preparing themselves to go
to the field also.

The Simpleton said to them: "Take me along with you."

"Thou fool," laughed the brothers; "stay at home and watch the
chickens."

"All right," he answered, went to the chicken yard and lay down. But as
soon as the brothers were away, our Ivanoushka the Simpleton walked to
the wide fields and shouted with a mighty voice:

"Arise, bay horse—them wind-swift steed, Appear before me in my need;
Stand up as in the storm the weed!"

The glorious horse came running. Flames shone out of his eyes; out of
his nostrils smoke came in clouds, and the horse asked with a man's
voice:

"What is thy wish?"

Ivanoushka the Simpleton crawled into the horse's left ear, transformed
himself and reappeared at the right ear, such a handsome fellow that in
no book

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

is there written any description of him; no one has ever seen such a
fellow. He jumped onto the horse and touched his iron sides with a silk
whip. The horse became impatient, lifted himself above the ground,
higher and higher above the dark woods below the traveling clouds. He
swam over the large rivers, jumped over the small ones, as well as over
hills and mountains. Ivanoushka the Simpleton arrived at the hall of the
Tsarevna Baktriana, flew up like a hawk, passed through thirty circles,
could not reach the last two, and went away like a whirlwind.

The people were shouting: "Take hold of him! take hold of him!" The Tsar
jumped to his feet, the Tsaritza screamed. Every one was roaring in
amazement.

The brothers of Ivanoushka came home and there was but one subject of
conversation—what a splendid fellow they had seen! What a wonderful
start to pass through the thirty circles!

"Brothers, that fellow was I," said Ivanoushka the Simpleton, who had
long since arrived.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

"Keep still and do not fool us," answered the brothers.

The next day the two brothers were going again to the tsarski show and
Ivanoushka the Simpleton said again: "Take me along with you."

"For thee, fool, this is thy place. Be quiet at home and scare sparrows
from the pea field instead of the scarecrow."

"All right," answered the Simpleton, and he went to the field and began
to scare the sparrows. But as soon as the brothers left home, Ivanoushka
started to the wide field and shouted out loud with a mighty voice:

"Arise, bay horse—thou wind-swift steed, Appear before me in my need;
Stand up as in the storm the weed!"

—and here came the horse, the earth trembling under his hoofs, the
sparks flying around, his eyes like flames, and out of his nostrils
smoke curling up. "For what dost thou wish me?" Ivanoushka the Simpleton
crawled into the left ear of the horse, and when he appeared out of the
right ear, oh, my! what a fellow he was! Even in fairy

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

tales there are never such handsome fellows, to say nothing of everyday
life.

Ivanoushka lifted himself on the iron back of his horse and touched him
with a strong whip. The noble horse grew angry, made a jump, and went
higher than the dark woods, a little below the traveling clouds. One
jump, one mile is behind; a second jump, a river is behind; and a third
jump and they were at the hall. Then the horse, with Ivanoushka on his
back, flew like an eagle, high up into the air, passed the thirty-first
circle, failed to reach the last one, and swept away like the wind.

The people shouted: "Take hold of him! take hold of him!" The Tsar
jumped to his feet, the Tsaritza screamed, the princes and boyars opened
their mouths.

The brothers of Ivanoushka the Simpleton came home. They were wondering
at the fellow. Yes, an amazing fellow indeed! one circle only was
unreached.

"Brothers, that fellow over there was I," said Ivanoushka to them.

"Keep still in thy own place, thou fool," was their sneering answer.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

The third day the brothers were going again to the strange entertainment
of the Tsar, and again Ivanoushka the Simpleton said to them: "Take me
along with you."

"Fool," they laughed, "there is food to be given to the hogs; better go
to them."

"All right," the younger brother answered, and quietly went to the back
yard and gave food to the hogs. But as soon as his brothers had left
home our Ivanoushka the Simpleton hurried to the wide field and shouted
out loud:

"Arise, bay horse—thou wind-swift steed, Appear before me in my need;
Stand up as in the storm the weed!"

At once the horse came running, the earth trembled; where he stepped
there appeared ponds, where his hoofs touched there were lakes, out of
his eyes shone flames, out of his ears smoke came like a cloud.

"For what dost thou wish me?" the horse asked with a man's voice.

Ivanoushka the Simpleton crawled into his right ear and jumped out of
his

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

left one, and a handsome fellow he was. A young girl could not even
imagine such a one.

Ivanoushka struck his horse, pulled the bridle tight, and lo! he flew
high up in the air. The wind was left behind and even the swallow, the
sweet, winged passenger, must not aspire to do the same. Our hero flew
like a cloud high up into the sky, his silver-chained mail rattling, his
fair carls floating in the wind. He arrived at the Tsarevna's high hall,
struck his horse once more, and oh! how the wild horse did jump!

Look there! the fellow reaches all the circles; he is near the window;
he presses the beautiful Tsarevna with his strong arms, kisses her on
the sugar lips, exchanges golden rings, and like a storm sweeps through
the fields. There, there, he is crushing every one on his way! And the
Tsarevna? Well, she did not object. She even adorned his forehead with a
diamond star.

The people roared: "Take hold of him!" But the fellow had already
disappeared and no traces were left behind.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

The Tsar Pea lost his royal dignity. The Tsaritza Carrot screamed louder
than ever and the wise counselors only shook their wise heads and
remained silent.

The brothers came home talking and discussing the wonderful matter.

"Indeed," they shook their heads; "only think of it! The fellow
succeeded and our Tsarevna has a bridegroom. But who is he? Where is
he?"

"Brothers, the fellow is I," said Ivanoushka the Simpleton, smiling.

"Keep still, I and I—," and the brothers almost slapped him.

The matter proved to be quite serious this time, and the Tsar and
Tsaritza issued an order to surround the town with armed men whose duty
it was to let every one enter, but not a soul go out. Every one had to
appear at the royal palace and show his forehead. From early in the
morning the crowds were gathering around the palace. Each forehead was
inspected, but there was no star on any. Dinner time was approaching and
in the palace they even forgot to cover the oak tables with white
spreads. The brothers

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

of Ivanoushka had also to show their foreheads and the Simpleton said to
them: "Take me along with you."

"Thy place is right here," they answered, jokingly. "But say, what is
the matter with thy head that thou hast covered it with cloths? Did
somebody strike thee?"

"No, nobody struck me. I, myself, struck the door with my forehead. The
door remained all right, but on my forehead there is a knob."

The brothers laughed and went. Soon after them Ivanoushka left home and
went straight to the window of the Tsarevna, where she sat leaning on
the window sill and looking for her betrothed.

"There is our man," shouted the guards, when the Simpleton appeared
among them. "Show thy forehead. Hast thou the star?" and they laughed.

Ivanoushka the Simpleton gave no heed to their bidding, but refused. The
guards were shouting at him and the Tsarevna heard the noise and ordered
the fellow to her presence. There was nothing to be done but to take off
the cloths.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

Behold! the star was shining in the middle of his forehead. The Tsarevna
took Ivanoushka by the hand, brought him before Tsar Pea, and said:

"He it is, my Tsar and father, who is destined to become my groom, thy
son-in-law and heir."

It was too late to object. The Tsar ordered preparations for the bridal
festivities, and our Ivanoushka the Simpleton was wedded to the Tsarevna
Baktriana. The Tsar, the Tsaritza, the young bride and groom, and their
guests, feasted three days. There was fine eating and generous drinking.
There were all kinds of amusements also. The brothers of Ivanoushka were
created governors and each one received a village and a house.

The story is told in no time, but to live a life requires time and
patience. The brothers of Ivanoushka the Simpleton were clever men, we
know, and as soon as they became rich every one understood it at once,
and they themselves became quite sure about it and began to pride
themselves, to boast, and to brag. The humble ones did not dare look
toward

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

their homes, and even the boyars had to take off their fur caps on their
porches.

Once several boyars came to Tsar Pea and said: "Great Tsar, the brothers
of thy son-in-law are bragging around that they know the place where
grows an apple tree with silver leaves and golden apples, and they want
to bring this apple tree to thee."

The Tsar immediately called the brothers before him and bade them bring
at once the wonderful tree, the apple tree with silver leaves and golden
apples. The brothers had ever so many excuses, but the Tsar would have
his way. They were given fine horses out of the royal stables and went
on their errand. Our friend, Ivanoushka the Simpleton, found somewhere a
lame old horse, jumped on his back facing the tail, and also went. He
went to the wide field, grasped the lame horse by the tail, threw him
off roughly, and shouted:

"You crows and magpies, come, come! There is lunch prepared for you."

This done he ordered his horse, his spirited courser, to appear, and as
usual

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

he crawled into one ear, jumped out the other ear and they went—where?
Toward the east where grew the wonderful apple tree with silver leaves
and golden apples. It grew near silver waters upon golden sand. When
Ivanoushka reached the place he uprooted the tree and turned toward
home. His ride was long and he felt tired. Before he arrived at his town
Ivanoushka pitched his tent and lay down for a rest. Along the same road
came his brothers. The two were proud no more, but rather depressed, not
knowing what answer to give the Tsar. They perceived the tent with
silver top and near by the wonderful apple tree. They came nearer
and—"There is our Simpleton!" exclaimed the brothers. Then they awakened
Ivanoushka and wanted to buy the apple tree. They were rich and offered
three carts filled with silver.

"Well, brothers, this tree, this wonderful apple tree, is not for sale,"
answered Ivanoushka, "but if you wish to obtain it you may. The price
will not be too high, a toe from each right foot."

The brothers thought the matter over

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and finally decided to give the desired price. Ivanoushka cut the toes
off, gave them the apple tree, and the happy brothers brought it to the
Tsar and there was no end to their bragging.

"Here, all-powerful Tsar," they said. "We went far, and had many a
trouble on our way, but thy wish is fulfilled."

The Tsar Pea seemed pleased, ordered a feast, commanded tunes to be
played and drums beaten, rewarded the two brothers of Ivanoushka the
Simpleton, each one with a town, and praised them.

The boyars and warriors became furious.

"Why," they said to the Tsar, "there is nothing wonderful in such an
apple tree with golden apples and silver leaves. The brothers of thy
son-in-law are bragging around that they will get thee a pig with golden
bristles and silver tusks, and not alone the pig, but also her twelve
little ones!"

The Tsar called the brothers before him and ordered them to bring the
very pig with her golden bristles and silver tusks and her twelve little
ones. The

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

brothers' excuses were not listened to and so they went. Once more the
brothers were traveling on a difficult errand, looking for a
golden-bristled pig with silver tusks and twelve little pigs.

At that time Ivanoushka the Simpleton made up his mind to take a trip
somewhere. He put a saddle on a cow, jumped up on her back facing the
tail, and left the town. He came 'to a field, grasped the cow by the
horns, threw her far on the prairie and shouted:

"Come, come, you gray wolves and red foxes! there is a dinner for you!"

Then he ordered his faithful horse, crawled into one ear, and jumped out
of the other. Master and courser went on an errand, this time toward the
south. One, two, three, and they were in dark woods. In these woods the
wished-for pig was walking around, a golden-bristled pig with silver
tusks. She was eating roots, and after her followed twelve little pigs.

Ivanoushka the Simpleton threw over the pig a silk rope with a running
noose, gathered the little pigs into a basket and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

went home, but before he reached the town of the Tsar Pea he pitched a
tent with a golden top and lay down for a rest. On the same road the
brothers came along with gloomy faces, not knowing what to say to the
Tsar. They saw the tent, and near by the very pig they were searching
for, with golden bristles and silver tusks, was fastened with a silk
rope; and in a basket were the twelve little pigs. The brothers looked
into the tent. Ivanoushka again! They awakened him and wanted to trade
for the pig; they were ready to give in exchange three carts loaded with
precious stones.

"Brothers, "my pig is not for trade," said Ivanoushka, ''but if you want
her so much, well, one finger from each right hand will pay for her."

The brothers thought over the case for a long while; they reasoned thus:
"People live happily without brains, why not without fingers?''

So they allowed Ivanoushka to cut off their fingers, then took the pig
to the Tsar, and their bragging had no end.

"Tsar Sovereign," they said, "we went

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

everywhere, beyond the blue sea, beyond the dark woods; we passed
through deep sands, we suffered hunger and thirst; but thy wish is
accomplished."

The Tsar was glad to have such faithful servants. He gave a feast great
among feasts, rewarded the brothers of Ivanoushka the Simpleton, created
them big boyars and praised them.

The other boyars and different court people said to the Tsar:

"There is nothing wonderful in such a pig. Golden bristles, silver
tusks,—yes, it is fine. But a pig remains a pig forever. The brothers of
thy son-in-law are bragging now that they will steal for thee out of the
stables of the fiery dragon a mare with golden mane and diamond hoofs."

The Tsar at once called the brothers of Ivanoushka the Simpleton, and
ordered the golden-maned mare with the diamond hoofs. The brothers swore
that they never said such words, but the Tsar did not listen to their
protests.

"Take as much gold as you want, take warriors as many as you wish, but
bring me the beautiful mare with golden mane

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and diamond hoofs. If you do it my reward will be great; if not, your
fate is to become peasants as before."

The brothers went, two sad heroes. Their march was slow; where to go
they did not know. Ivanoushka also jumped upon a stick and went leaping
toward the field. Once in the wide, open field, he ordered his horse,
crawled into one ear, came out of the other, and both started for a
far-away country, for an island, a big island. On that island in an iron
stable the fiery dragon was watchfully guarding his glory—the
golden-maned mare with diamond hoofs, which was locked under seven locks
behind seven heavy doors.

Our Ivanoushka journeyed and journeyed, how long we do not know, until
at last he arrived at that island, struggled three days with the dragon
and killed him on the fourth day. Then he began to tear down the locks.
That took three days more. When he had done this he brought out the
wonderful mare by the golden mane and turned homeward.

The road was long, and before he

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

reached his town Ivanoushka, according to his habit, pitched his tent
with a diamond top, and laid him down for rest. The brothers came
along—gloomy they were, fearing the Tsar's anger. Lo! they heard
neighing; the earth trembled—it was the golden-maned mare! Though in the
dusk of evening the brothers saw her golden mane shining like fire. They
stopped, awakened Ivanoushka the Simpleton, and wanted to trade for the
wonderful mare. They were willing to give him a bushel of precious
stones each and promised even more.

Ivanoushka said: "Though my mare is not for trade, yet if you want her
I'll give her to you. And you, do you each give me your right ears."

The brothers did not even argue, but let Ivanoushka cut off their ears,
took hold of the bridle and went directly to the Tsar. They presented to
him the golden-maned mare with diamond hoofs, and there was no end of
bragging.

"We went beyond seas, beyond mountains," the brothers said to the Tsar;
"we fought the fiery dragon who bit off our

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

ears and fingers; we had no fear, but one desire to serve thee
faithfully; we shed our blood and lost our wealth."

The Tsar Pea poured gold over them, created them the very highest men
after himself, and planned such a feast that the royal cooks were tired
out with cooking to feed all the people, and the cellars were fairly
emptied.

The Tsar Pea was sitting on his throne, one brother on his right hand,
the other brother on his left hand. The feast was going on; all seemed
jolly, all were drinking, all were noisy as bees in a beehive. In the
midst of it a young, brave fellow, Ivanoushka the Simpleton, entered the
hall—the very fellow who had passed the thirty-two circles and reached
the window of the beautiful Tsarevna Baktriana.

When the brothers noticed him, one almost choked himself with wine, the
other was suffocating over a piece of swan. They looked at him, opened
wide their eyes, and remained silent.

Ivanoushka the Simpleton bowed to his father-in-law and told the story
as the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="img_image020"></span> ![](img/image020.jpg)

*"One brother was sent to watch the turkeys"*

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

story was. He told about the apple tree, the wonderful apple tree with
silver leaves and golden apples; he told about the pig, the
golden-bristled pig with silver tusks and her twelve little ones; and
finally he told about the marvelous mare with a golden mane and diamond
hoofs. He finished and laid out ears, fingers, and

toes.

"It is the exchange I got," said Ivanoushka.

Tsar Pea became furious, stamped his feet, ordered the two brothers to
be driven away with brooms. One was sent to feed the pigs, another to
watch the turkeys. The Tsar seated Ivanoushka beside himself, creating
him the highest among the very high.

The feast lasted a very long time until all were tired of feasting.

Ivanoushka took control of the tsarstvo, ruling wisely and severely.
After his father-in-law's death he occupied his place. His subjects
liked him; he had many children, and his beautiful Tsaritza Baktriana
remained beautiful forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Woe Bogotir](chap05.md)
