[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kog03)  [Next](kog05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# 1

# THE TWELVE MONTHS

ONCE upon a time there lived a mother who had two daughters. One was her
own child, the other her stepdaughter. She was very fond of her own
daughter, but she would not so much as look at her step-daughter. The
only reason was that Maruša, the stepdaughter, was prettier than her own
daughter, Holena. The gentle-hearted Maruša did not know how beautiful
she was, and so she could never make out why her mother was so cross
with her whenever she looked at her. She had to do all the housework,
tidying up the cottage, cooking, washing, and sewing, and then she had
to take the hay to the cow and look after her. She did all this work
alone, while Holena spent the time adorning herself and lazing about.
But Maruša liked work, for she was a patient girl, and when her mother
scolded and rated her, she bore it like a lamb. It was no

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

good, however, for they grew crueller and crueller every day, only
because Maruša was growing prettier and Holena uglier every day.

At last the mother thought: "Why should I keep a pretty stepdaughter in
my house? When the lads come courting here, they will fall in love with
Maruša and they won't look at Holena."

From that moment the stepmother and her daughter were constantly
scheming how to get rid of poor Maruša. They starved her and they beat
her. But she bore it all, and in spite of all she kept on growing
prettier every day. They invented torments that the cruellest of men
would never have thought of. One day--it was in the middle of
January--Holena felt a longing for the scent of violets. "Go, Maruša,
and get me some violets from the forest; I want to wear them at my waist
and to smell them," she said to her sister.

"Great heavens! sister. What a strange notion! Who ever heard of violets
growing under the snow?" said poor Maruša.

"You wretched tatterdemalion! how dare you argue when I tell you to do
something? Off you go at once, and if you don't bring

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

me violets from the forest I'll kill you!" said Holena threateningly.

The stepmother caught hold of Maruša, turned her out of the door, and
slammed it to after her. She went into the forest weeping bitterly. The
snow lay deep, and there wasn't a human footprint to be seen. Maruša
wandered about for a long time, tortured by hunger and trembling with
cold. She begged God to take her from the world.

At last she saw a light in the distance. She went towards the glow, and
came at last to the top of a mountain. A big fire was burning there, and
round the fire were twelve stones with twelve men sitting on them. Three
of them had snow-white beards, three were not so old, and three were
still younger. The three youngest were the handsomest of them all. They
were not speaking, but all sitting silent. These twelve men were the
twelve months. Great January sat highest of all; his hair and beard were
as white as snow, and in his hand he held a club.

Maruša was frightened. She stood still for a time in terror, but,
growing bolder, she went up to them and said: "Please, kind

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

sirs, let me warm my hands at your fire. I am trembling with the cold."

Great January nodded, and asked her: "Why have you come here, my dear
little girl? What are you looking for?"

"I am looking for violets," answered Maruša.

"This is no time to be looking for violets, for everything is covered
with snow," answered Great January.

"Yes, I know; but my sister Holena and my stepmother said that I must
bring them some violets from the forest. If I don't bring them, they'll
kill me. Tell me, fathers, please tell me where I can find them."

Great January stood up and went to one of the younger months--it was
March--and, giving him the club, he said: "Brother, take the high seat."

March took the high seat upon the stone and waved the club over the
fire. The fire blazed up, the snow began to melt, the trees began to
bud, and the ground under the young beech-trees was at once covered with
grass and the crimson daisy buds began to peep through the grass. It was
springtime. Under the bushes the violets were blooming

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

among their little leaves, and before Maruša had time to think, so many
of them had sprung up that they looked like a blue cloth spread out on
the ground.

"Pick them quickly, Maruša!" commanded March.

Maruša picked them joyfully till she had a big bunch. Then she thanked
the months with all her heart and scampered merrily home.

Holena and the stepmother wondered when they saw Maruša bringing the
violets. They opened the door to her, and the scent of violets filled
all the cottage.

"Where did you get them?" asked Holena sulkily.

"They are growing under the bushes in a forest on the high mountains."

Holena put them in her waistband. She let her mother smell them, but she
did not say to her sister: "Smell them."

Another day she was lolling near the stove, and now she longed for some
strawberries. So she called to her sister and said: "Go, Maruša, and get
me some strawberries from the forest."

"Alas! dear sister, where could I find any

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

strawberries? Who ever heard of strawberries growing under the snow?"
said Maruša.

"You wretched little tatterdemalion, how dare you argue when I tell you
to do a thing? Go at once and get me the strawberries, or I'll kill
you!"

The stepmother caught hold of Maruša and pushed her out of the door and
shut it after her. Maruša went to the forest weeping bitterly. The snow
was lying deep, and there wasn't a human footprint to be seen anywhere.
She wandered about for a long time, tortured by hunger and trembling
with cold. At last she saw the light she had seen the other day.
Overjoyed, she went towards it. She came to the great fire with the
twelve months sitting round it.

"Please, kind sirs, let me warm my hands at the fire. I am trembling
with cold."

Great January nodded, and asked her: "Why have you come again, and what
are you looking for here?"

"I am looking for strawberries."

"But it is winter now, and strawberries don't grow on the snow," said
January.

"Yes, I know," said Maruša sadly; "but my sister Holena and my
stepmother bade

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

me bring them some strawberries, and if I don't bring them, they will
kill me. Tell me, fathers, tell me, please, where I can find them."

Great January arose. He went over to the month sitting opposite to
him--it was June--and handed the club to him, saying: "Brother, take the
high seat."

June took the high seat upon the stone and swung the club over the fire.
The fire shot up, and its heat melted the snow in a moment. The ground
was all green, the trees were covered with leaves, the birds began to
sing, and the forest was filled with all kinds of flowers. It was
summer. The ground under the bushes was covered with white starlets, the
starry blossoms were turning into strawberries every minute. They
ripened at once, and before Maruša had time to think, there were so many
of them that it looked as though blood had been sprinkled on the ground.

"Pick them at once, Maruša!" commanded

June. Maruša picked them joyfully till she had filled her apron full.
Then she thanked the months with all her heart and scampered

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

merrily home. Holena and the stepmother wondered when they saw Maruša
bringing the strawberries. Her apron was full of them. They ran to open
the door for her, and the scent of the strawberries filled the whole
cottage.

"Where did you pick them?" asked Holena sulkily.

"There are plenty of them growing under the young beech-trees in the
forest on the high mountains."

Holena took the strawberries, and went on eating them till she could eat
no more. So did the stepmother too, but they didn't say to Maruša: "Here
is one for you."

When Holena had enjoyed the strawberries, she grew greedy for other
dainties, and so on the third day she longed for some red apples.

"Maruša, go into the forest and get me some red apples," she said to her
sister.

"Alas! sister dear, how am I to get apples for you in winter?" protested
Maruša.

"You wretched little tatterdemalion, how dare you argue when I tell you
to do a thing? Go to the forest at once, and if you don't bring me the
apples I will kill you!" threatened Holena.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The stepmother caught hold of Maruša and pushed her out of the door and
shut it after her. Maruša went to the forest weeping bitterly. The snow
was lying deep; there wasn't a human footprint to be seen anywhere. But
she didn't wander about this time. She ran straight to the top of the
mountain where the big fire was burning. The twelve months were sitting
round the fire; yes, there they certainly were, and Great January was
sitting on the high seat.

"Please, kind sirs, let me warm my hands at the fire. I am trembling
with cold."

Great January nodded, and asked her: "Why have you come here, and what
are you looking for?"

"I am looking for red apples."

"It is winter now, and red apples don't grow in winter," answered
January.

"Yes, I know," said Maruša sadly; "but my sister and my stepmother, too,
bade me bring them some red apples from the forest. If I don't bring
them, they will kill me. Tell me, father, tell me, please, where I could
find them."

Great January rose up. He went over to

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

one of the older months--it was September. He handed the club to him and
said: "Brother, take the high seat."

Month September took the high seat upon the stone and swung the club
over the fire. The fire began to burn with a red flame, the snow began
to melt. But the trees were not covered with leaves; the leaves were
wavering down one after the other, and the cold wind was driving them to
and fro over the yellowing ground. This time Maruša did not see so many
flowers. Only red pinks were blooming on the hillside, and meadow
saffrons were flowering in the valley. High fern and thick ivy were
growing under the young beech-trees. But Maruša was only looking for red
apples, and at last she saw an apple-tree with red apples hanging high
among its branches.

"Shake the tree at once, Maruša!" commanded the month.

Right gladly Maruša shook the tree, and one apple fell down. She shook
it a second time, and another apple fell down.

"Now, Maruša, run home quickly!" shouted the month.

Maruša obeyed at once. She picked up

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the apples, thanked the months with all her heart, and ran merrily home.

Holena and the stepmother wondered when they saw Maruša bringing the
apples. They ran to open the door for her, and she gave them two apples.

"Where did you get them?" asked Holena. "There are plenty of them in the
forest on the high mountain."

"And why didn't you bring more? Or did you eat them on the way home?"
said Holena harshly.

"Alas! sister dear, I didn't eat a single one. But when I had shaken the
tree once, one apple fell down, and when I shook it a second time,
another apple fell down, and they wouldn't let me shake it again. They
shouted to me to go straight home," protested Maruša.

Holena began to curse her: "May you be struck to death by lightning!"
and she was going to beat her.

Maruša began to cry bitterly, and she prayed to God to take her to
Himself, or she would be killed by her wicked sister and her stepmother.
She ran away into the kitchen.

Greedy Holena stopped cursing and began

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

to eat the apple. It tasted so delicious that she told her mother she
had never tasted anything so nice in all her life. The step-mother liked
it too. When they had finished, they wanted some more.

"Mother, give me my fur coat. I'll go to the forest myself. That ragged
little wretch would eat them all up again on her way home. I'll find the
place all right, and I'll shake them all down, however they shout at
me."

Her mother tried to dissuade her, but it was no good. She took her fur
coat, wrapped a cloth round her head, and off she went to the forest.
Her mother stood on the threshold, watching to see how Holena would
manage to walk in the wintry weather.

The snow lay deep, and there wasn't a human footprint to be seen
anywhere. Holena wandered about for a long time, but the desire of the
sweet apple kept driving her on. At last she saw a light in the
distance. She went towards it, and climbed to the top of the mountain
where the big fire was burning, and round the fire on twelve stones the
twelve months were sitting. She was terrified at first, but she soon
recovered. She

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

stepped up to the fire and stretched out her hands to warm them, but she
didn't say as much as "By your leave" to the twelve months; no, she
didn't say a single word to them.

"Why have you come here, and what are you looking for?" asked Great
January crossly.

"Why do you want to know, you old fool? It's no business of yours,"
replied Holena angrily, and she turned away from the fire and went into
the forest.

Great January frowned and swung the club over his head. The sky grew
dark in a moment, the fire burned low, the snow began to fall as thick
as if the feathers had been shaken out of a down quilt, and an icy wind
began to blow through the forest. Holena couldn't see one step in front
of her; she lost her way altogether, and several times she fell into
snowdrifts. Then her limbs grew weak and began slowly to stiffen. The
snow kept on falling and the icy wind blew more icily than ever. Holena
began to curse Maruša and the Lord God. Her limbs began to freeze,
despite her fur coat.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Her mother was waiting for Holena; she kept on looking out for her,
first at the window, then outside the door, but all in vain.

"Does she like the apples so much that she can't leave them, or what is
the matter? I must see for myself where she is," decided the stepmother
at last. So she put on her fur coat, she wrapped a shawl round her head,
and went out to look for Holena. The snow was lying deep; there wasn't a
human footprint to be seen; the snow fell fast, and the icy wind was
blowing through the forest.

Maruša had cooked the dinner, she had seen to the cow, and yet Holena
and her mother did not come back. "Where are they staying so long?"
thought Maruša, as she sat down to work at the distaff. The spindle was
full already and it was quite dark in the room, and yet Holena and the
stepmother had not come back.

"Alas, Lord! what has come to them?" cried Maruša, peering anxiously
through the window. The sky was bright and the earth was all glittering,
but there wasn't a human soul to be seen. . . . Sadly she shut the

window; she crossed herself, and prayed for her sister and her mother. .
. . In the morning she waited with breakfast, she waited with dinner;
but however much she waited, it was no good. Neither her mother nor her
sister ever came back. Both of them were frozen to death in the forest.

So good Maruša inherited the cottage, a piece of ploughland and the cow.
She married a kind husband, and they both lived happily ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Víťazko](kog05)
