[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rft05)  [Next](rft07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKI4I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Roumanian Fairy Tales and Legends*, by E.B. Mawr, \[1881\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# THE DAUGHTER OF THE ROSE.

IN clays gone by, there dwelt a King and a Queen in Jassy, who, to keep
their only son at home with them, were always making him fine promises,
which they never fulfilled.

One day this young Prince, Marin by name, went to his mother's
apartments, and announced to her, that if she did not speedily bring to
him the beautiful Princess from foreign parts which she had promised him
to wife, he should set off in search of her himself. After waiting some
weeks, finding that this promise was not likely to be fulfilled, he
called for his horse and his retainers, and set off on his travels. He
rode along until he came to a vast prairie, studded with the most
beautiful flowers, through which meandered a silvery rivulet of pure
water.

By the side of this rivulet grew a large rose tree with spreading
branches, under which Marin stretched himself, and was trying to seek
repose when he heard issuing from the tree these words:

I pray thee sweet and loved rose tree,  
Open thy bark and let me free,  
To seek the brook's refreshing wave,  
To cool my face, my limbs to bathe,  
To cull sweet flowers to deck my brow,  
Then know'st my soul is pure as snow."

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

The rose tree unfolded, and from its centre came a fair golden-haired
maiden, so dazzling, that to see her was brighter than sunlight. When
the Prince Marin cast his eyes upon her, he was petrified at the sight
of her beauty; but recovering his confidence he approached her and said,
"lovely maiden, if you will give me a flower from your girdle, I will
give you a nest in my palace; if you will give me a flower from your
lips to kiss, I will dig up your rose tree and transplant it in the
garden of my palace; if you will give me your love, I will make you
Princess." The maiden, like most other young maidens, believed this
flattery, and gave to Marin all that he asked and desired.

Sitting hand in hand talking of love, they fell asleep. Marin waking
before the maiden, mounted his horse, and went on his way with his
followers, leaving only a bunch of flowers in the lap of the sleeping
girl. Journeying on, the young Prince arrived at length at a golden
palace studded with topazes. He enquired of the first man whom he met,
whether in that palace there dwelt a young Princess? It so happened that
it was the owner of the palace to whom he had addressed himself, and who
could boast of possessing a most charming daughter. He had heard of the
good looks, and of

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the riches of this Prince of Jassy, and readily came to the conclusion
that this could be no other but the young Marin, so he replied
willingly, "Yes, here dwells the Princess Lexandra, and I am her
father." Marin heard this with joy, and requested to be introduced into
the Palace, with the view of soliciting the hand of the young Lexandra.

The invitation was given, and after some days' sojourn, and finding that
the Princess was as lovely as she was good, and that he had found favour
in her eyes, he set off with his future father-in-law, and intended
bride, in a chariot to present her to his parents at Jassy.

\*     \*     \*      \*      \*

The rose maiden on awaking, finding herself alone, and with but a bunch
of flowers for her only companions, sighed and said, "dear little
flowers, why have you made me sleep so long, and why have you separated
me from my beloved?" Rising from the ground, she went up to the rose
tree, and striking it, said:

I pray thee, sweet and loved rose tree,  
Open thy bark, make place for me."

but the rose tree would not unfold itself, and only answered, "Go away,
my pretty maiden, for you have sinned and can no more enter here."

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Weeping, she turned aside, and seeing that she could no more be received
in the bosom of the rose tree, seizing a staff she set off on the same
road as that which the young Marin had taken. After going some distance
she met with a Monk, and entreated him to exchange with her his rough
frock and cowl, in return for her rich dress. He accepted willingly; the
maiden wrapped herself in his garment and went on her way. On the
confines of a wood, being very weary, she seated herself under the shade
of a large elm, in order to take a little rest; shortly after, she saw
in the distance a chariot drawn by eight horses approaching, and as it
drew near, she recognised her faithless lover.

"Good day, young Monk," said Marin. "I thank thee, Highness," said the
Monk, approaching the carriage. "From whence come you?" said Marin.
"From the valley," said the Monk. "What did you see there?" asked the
Prince. "Nothing, very extraordinary," said the Monk, "only near to a
large rose tree, there was a beautiful girl weeping, and on my enquiring
the cause of her grief, she told me her history." "Repeat it to us,"
said Marin, visibly moved. "This was what she told me," said the Monk,
"that her home had been in a rose tree, where she was loved and
nurtured; that coming out

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

one day in search of flowers, she met with a young Prince, who begged a
flower from her waist, which she gave him." Now the Monk looked fixedly
at the Prince, but the latter bade him go on with the story. "Then he
asked a flower from her mouth to kiss, and then for her love, and she
gave even that also." "Go on," said the Prince. "Sitting hand in hand
amongst the flowers, sleep overtook them; but when the maiden awoke she
found herself deserted, and only a bunch of flowers on her lap. Going to
the rose tree, she repeated the rhyme which would open its bark to admit
her into its body; but the rose tree remained solid and firm, because
she was no longer worthy to enter within, and for this the young girl
was weeping alone, and in misery." "Is that all?" said the Prince. "So
far as I know, for I left her crying in the field." "To what town are
you going, my good Monk?" asked the Prince. "To the same as your
Highness, to Jassy," said he. "Jump into our carriage, then," said the
Prince, opening the door and making place for him. The Monk accepted
readily, and during the whole of their journey, the Prince questioned
him for further news of the young maiden.

Arrived in the Capital, and at the home of Marin, he invited the Monk to
be his guest, and gave him a

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

room next to his own in the palace. Yet in three days this marriage with
the Princess Lexandra was to take place, and still Marin could not
forget the rose maiden, and each evening on passing the door of the
Monk, he would stay to talk about her.

At length the wedding day approached, and the Monk disappeared.

One evening, the Prince stopped as usual at the Monk's door, hoping to
hear more of the deserted maiden; but for answer he only heard a muffled
sigh! Breaking open the door, he saw the poor Monk suspended by a cord
to a large book on the wall; cutting him down, and taking off the Monk's
frock, underneath it the golden hair and the pale face of the rose
maiden met his view. Then he called the King and Queen-his parents, and
exclaimed, "Look! this is *my* Princess, do what you will with the
other."

So the Princess Lexandra was sent back home with her father, and with
great riches, enough for her dower, and the rose maiden was married to
the Prince Marin, and they had many children and lived very happily ever
after.

<span id="img_04700"></span> ![](img/04700.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twelve-Headed Griffin](rft07.md)
