[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rft11)  [Next](rft13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKI4I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Roumanian Fairy Tales and Legends*, by E.B. Mawr, \[1881\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

# THE FORTRESS OF POINARII.

### I.

CONSTANTINOPLE had fallen into the hands of the Turks, and disorder
reigned in the Roumanian Principalities, mainly occasioned by the
pretenders to the thrones.

In Moldavia, Stephen, who was afterwards surnamed the *Great*, made war
against Aron, the murderer of his father, Bogdan, and putting to flight
Berendei, who disputed his power, remained sole master of the crown,
which he was destined to wear so gloriously for more than 40 years.

In Wallachia, Vlad the 5th, son of Vlad the Devil, cut his way to the
throne, sabre in hand, and maintained it by the greatest terrorism and
tyranny.

He formed a numerous army, cut off the heads of more than 500 Boyards,
who would not join his party, caused to be massacred on one pretext or
another, more than 20,000 men; and burned alive, in a barn, 400
Hungarians, whom he ordered to be shut up there, and who were living in
his country.

These exploits accomplished, he crossed the Carpathians, and went into
Transylvania, set fire to the four corners of the town of Brasov
(Cronstadt), and seizing a number of the inhabitants, caused them to be
empaled in front of the St. Jacob Church.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

He then returned to his Principality, feared even more than death itself
by the people, and having acquired the stigma to his name--Vlad the
Empaler!

### II.

Had this tyrant contented himself with empaling Hamzi, the Pasha of
Widdin, in the midst of the Turks, whom with Hamzi he had made
prisoners; if his brutal rage, and his thirst for blood, had been
exercised against the enemies of his country, that might have passed;
there would have been some excuse--some extenuation for his senseless
cruelty.

Vlad the Empaler, was an exception--monstrous, even in those barbaric
times, which God in his malediction, does sometimes send as a curse to
his people.

Vlad was created for the part he played; he hated foreigners! he bated
the Boyards! he hated the people! He massacred, empaled, killed, without
distinction for his own pleasure and security.

### III.

Vlad waged a war of extermination against the Turks augmented his army,
and raised many fortresses his coffers were empty, and he laid heavy

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

taxes upon his people. Poor and rich alike Must all contribute to give
him money. But the people revolted, all--great and small--refused the
heavy impositions which he wished to force upon them. Vlad drew back an
instant, full of rage, and swearing to himself to be terribly revenged,
when the suitable moment presented itself.

It was not long in coming!

In Tergoviste, all is joy! It is 1470, and Easter Day! Every one is out
in holiday attire, wending their way towards the church, or walking
about the streets; the bells are ringing, and everything seems joyous
under this bright blue sky. Vlad, alone, is sombre and silent. He has
not forgotten that once he was obliged to bend to the will of his
subjects, and dreams continually of vengeance.

### IV.

All at once he rises, and calls around him his Captains, and gives his
instructions to them in a low voice.

Soon, armed soldiers are assembled in the Castle Court; they leave by
detachments, in silence, spread themselves along the streets of
Tergoviste, close in the public places, and surround the churches. All

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

who were outside, laughing, or inside, at the foot of the altar,--those
who smiled, and those who prayed, all found themselves in a circle of
iron, seized, thrown pell mell into the enclosure of the palace. Men,
women, children, without distinction of age, sex, or condition were
there-mute and terror-stricken, awaiting some great and inevitable
calamity. Vlad regarded them with a mocking laugh; his eye, as it
glanced over them, was that of a wild beast which has its prey in its
power, and rejoicing at the nameless horror which he saw depicted on all
their faces; he decided to make them acquainted with his will.

### V.

The Empaler had been one day hunting along the banks of the river Argis,
and had remarked on Mount Albina, a position which he considered
admirable. It was an immense rock, on the top of which was a capacious
platform, but so high that it seemed to touch the clouds.

Vultures, and birds of prey, alone, inhabited it, and the tumultuous
waves of the Argis, beat continually at its base.

Vlad conceived the design, there to build a fortress, which would be
impregnable; but for that, he

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

needed money, and his people had refused it to him! Then he came to
another resolution, and with this he now made his prisoners acquainted.

"You would not give me the money I needed," he said, "well, keep it! I
will not have you killed to chastise you for your revolt, but I condemn
you all, just as you are, to build with your own hands a Fortress on the
top of Mount Albina. I wish it to be the largest, the best built, and
the most impregnable of all which I possess. You will not leave the
mountain until all is finished. My soldiers, have the right of life and
death over you, to force you to carry out my instructions."

### VI.

No sooner said than done, and these unfortunate creatures, young and
old, huddled together in gala dress, without saying good-bye to those
who were happy enough to have remained at home, were conducted, like
criminals, to the bank of the river, at the foot of the mountain. Then,
after making footpaths, almost perpendicular in the mountain, they
gained the platform, and were surrounded by their stern guardians,
exposed to every change in the atmosphere, and to nameless tortures.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Masons, stonecutters, carpenters, blacksmiths, all those who knew any
trade, set to work. Those who hitherto had been brought up in luxury,
mixed mortar, women chipped stones, young girls carried water, and even
children were set to work suitable for their age. One might see at the
top and the sides of the mountain, a human ant-hill, always in motion,
occupied in this atrocious labour.

Sun, rain, and wind, blackened their faces; their clothes hung in
shreds; their features haggard and careworn, some eyes burning with
rage, others with the submission of despair. These are no longer human
beings, but machines, stupified by sorrow, and no longer able oven to
implore God above, to send down his maledictions on the tyrant. Still
their work progressed, and soon this *citta dolente*, was completed.

Vlad arrives, and after looking at it with the minutest attention,
seeing that it equalled his expectations, in his clemency, sent back to
their dwellings all that remained of these miserable workpeople.

On the banks of the Argis, not far from Stoieneste, may still be seen
the ruins of what is called in the country, *the cursed ruins of the
Fortress of Poinarii*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gentle Shepherd](rft13.md)
