[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pifs23)  [Next](pifs25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# XXI

### THE DROWNING OF PECOS

TWENTY-FIVE miles southeast of Santa Fé, New Mexico, lie the deserted
ruins of the ancient Pueblo town of Pecos. The village was finally
abandoned by the Indians in 1840; and their neat houses of adobe bricks
and stone, and their quaint adobe church, have sadly fallen to decay.
The history of the abandonment of Pecos is by no means startling; but
the Indian tradition--for they have already added this to their
countless myths--is decidedly so. The story is related by two aged Pecos
Indians who still live in the pueblo of Jemez.

"Now, this is a true story," said my informant, an Isleteño, who had
often heard it from them.

Once Pecos was a large village, and had many people. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) But it came that nearly all of them had
the evil road, and in the whole town were but five True Believers (in
the Indian religion). These were an old woman, her two sons, and two
other young men. Agostin, her elder son, was a famous

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

hunter, and very often went to the mountains with a friend of his who
had an evil spirit--though Agostin was not aware of that.

One day the friend invited Agostin to go hunting, and next day they went
to the mountains. just at the foot they found a herd. of deer, one of
which Agostin wounded. The deer fled up the mountain, and the two
friends followed by the drops of blood. Half-way to the top they came to
a second herd, which ran off to the right of the trail they were
following, and the evil-spirited friend went in pursuit of them, while
Agostin kept on after the one he had wounded.

He came at last to the very top of the mountain, and there of a sudden
the trail ceased. Agostin hunted all about, but in vain, and at last
started down the other side of the mountain.

As he came to a deep cañon he heard singing, and, peering cautiously
through the bushes, he saw a lot of witch-men sitting around a fallen
pine and singing, while their chief was trying to raise the tree.

Agostin recognized them all, for they were of Pecos, and he was much
grieved when he saw his friend among them. Then he knew that the deer
had. all been witches, and that they had led him off on a false trail.

Greatly alarmed, he crept back to a safe distance, and then hurried home
and told his aged mother all that had happened, asking her if he should
report it to the Cacique.

"No," said she, with a sigh, "it is of no use; for he, too, has the evil
road. There are but few \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

True Believers left, and the bad ones are trying to use us up."

Among the five good people was one of the Cum-pah-whit-lah-wen (guards
of the medicine-men); and to him Agostin told his story. But he also
said: "It is of no use. We are too few to do anything."

At last the bad people falsely accused the old woman, saying that her
power was more than that of all the medicine-men put together (which is
a very serious charge, even to-day, among the Indians); and challenged
her to come before all the people in the medicine-house and perform
miracles with them, well knowing that she could not. The challenge was
for life or death; whichever side won was to kill the others without
being resisted.

The poor old woman told her sons, with tears, saying: "Already we are
killed. We know nothing of these things, and we may make ready to die."

"Nay, Nana," said Agostin. <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) "Despair
not yet, but prepare lunch for Pedro <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76)
and me, that we go to other villages for advice. Perhaps there the
medicine-men will tell us something."

So the mother, still weeping, made some tortillas, and, strapping these
to their belts, the young men set out.

Pedro, the younger, went east, and Agostin took the road to the north.
Whatever person they met, or to whatever village they came, they were to
seek advice.

When Agostin came to the foot of the mountains, he was very thirsty, but
there was no water. As he

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

entered a gorge he saw Hyo-kwáh-kwah-báy-deh, a little bird which builds
its nest with pebbles and clay in the crannies of the cliffs, and is of
exactly the same color as the sandstones. He thought, "Ah, little bird,
if you could speak I would ask you where there is water, for I am
fainting with thirst, and dare not eat, for that would make it worse!"

But the little bird, knowing his thought, said:

"Friend Agostin, I see that you are one of the True Believers, and I
will show you where there is water; or wait, I will go and bring you
some, for it is very far." And off he flew.

Agostin waited, and presently the little bird came back, bringing an
acorn-cup full of water. Then Agostin's heart sank, and he thought:
"Alas! what good will that drop do me?"

But the little bird replied: "Do not think that way, friend. Here is
enough, and even more; for when you drink all you wish, there will still
be some left."

And so it was. Agostin drank and drank, then ate some tortillas and
drank again; and when he was satisfied, the acorn-cup was still nearly
full.

Then the little bird said: "Now come, and I will lead you. But when we
come to the top of the mountain, and I say, 'We are at the top,' you
must say, 'No, we are down in the mountain--at the bottom of it.' Do not
forget."

Agostin promised, and the little bird flew in front of him. At last they
were at the top, and the little bird said:

"Here we are, friend, at the top."

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

"No," answered Agostin, "we are down in the mountain--at the bottom of
it."

Three times the little bird repeated his words, and three times Agostin
made the same answer.

At the third reply they found themselves in a room in the mountain.
There was a door in front of them, and beside it stood a
Cum-pah-whit-lah-wíd-deh (guard), who said to Agostin--for the little
bird had disappeared:

"Son, how came you here, where none ever think of coming? Do you think
you are a man?"

Agostin told the whole story of the witches' challenge, and of how he
had gone out to seek advice, and of how the little bird had brought him
here, and the guard said:

"You are coming with the thought of a man; so now come in," and he
opened the door.

But when Agostin entered the inner room, which was so large that no end
could be seen, he found himself in the presence of the Trues in human
shape.

There sat the divinities of the East, who are white; and of the North,
who are blue; and beyond them were the sacred animals--the mountain
lion, the eagle, bear, buffalo, badger, hawk, rabbit, rattlesnake, and
all the others that are of the Trues. Agostin was very much afraid, but
the guard said to him:

"Do not fear, son, but take the heart of a man, and pray to all sides."
So he faced to the six sides, praying. When he had finished, one of the
Trues spoke to him, and said:

"What can it be that brought you here? Take the heart of a man and tell
us."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Then Agostin told his whole story; after which the Trues said to him:

it Do not be worried, son. We will help you out of that."

The principal True of the East said:

"Son, I will give you the clothes you must wear when you are in the
medicine-house for the contest of power"; and he gave Agostin four
dark-blue breech-clouts and some moccasins for himself and the three
other good young men, and a black *manta*, (robe) and pair of moccasins
for his mother.

"Now," said the True, "the evil-spirited ones will have this
medicine-making contest in the *estufa*, <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77)--and when you enter, you five, you must
all be dressed in these clothes. The people will all be there, old and
young, and there will hardly be room for you to stand; and they will all
sneer at you and spit upon you. But do not be sorry. And take this cane
to hold between you. Let your mother take it with one hand at the
bottom, then the Whit-lah-wíd-deh's hand, then her other hand, and then
his other hand; and last your brother's hand, your hand, then his other
hand, and your other hand at the top of all. And when you say, 'We are
at the top of the mountain,' he must answer, 'No, we are down in the
mountain--at the bottom of it.' This you must keep saying. Now go, son,
with the heart of a man."

Then the Whit-lah-wíd-deh led Agostin out, and the little bird showed
him the way down the mountain.

When he reached home it was the afternoon of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the appointed day, and in the evening the medicine-making contest for
life or death was to come. In a little while the younger brother
arrived, with his new clothes and moccasins torn to shreds; for he had
traveled far in a rough country, without meeting a soul from whom to ask
advice.

Agostin called together the four other True Believers, and told them all
that had happened and what they must do, giving them the sacred
clothing.

In the evening they went to the *estufa*, which was crowded with the
witch-people, so that they had barely room to stand.

Then the evil-spirited ones began to make medicine, and turned
themselves into bears, coyotes, crows, owls, and other animals. When
they were done, they said to the old woman:

"Now it is your turn. We will see what you can do."

"I know nothing about these things," she said, "but I will do what I
can, and the Trues will help me."

Then she and the four young men took hold of the sacred cane as the
Trues had showed Agostin.

"We are on the top of the mountain," said he.

"No," answered his brother, "we are down in the mountain--at the bottom
of it."

This they said three times. At the third saying the people heard on all
sides the *guajes* of the Trues. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_78) At
the same moment the ladder <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_79) was
jerked violently up out of the room, so that no one could get out.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Then the two brothers repeated their words again, and at the third
saying the thunder began to roar outside, and all could hear plainly the
singing and the *guajes* of the Trues. It began to rain violently, and
the water poured down through the roof-door, and the lightning stuck its
tongue in. The brothers kept repeating their words, and soon the water
was knee-deep. But where the five True Believers stood, holding the
cane, the floor was dusty. Soon the flood came to the waists of the
witch-people, and then to their necks, and the children were drowning.
Then they cried out to the old woman:

"Truly, mother, your power is greater than ours. We submit."

But she paid no attention to them, and her sons continued their words,
and the water kept pouring in until it touched the very ceiling. But all
around the five it stood back like a wall, and they were on dry ground.

At last all the evil-spirited ones were drowned. Then the rain ceased
and the water departed as fast as it had come. The ladder came down
through the roof-door again, and the five True Believers climbed out and
went to their homes.

But it was very desolate, for they were the only survivors. Their
nearest relatives and dearest friends had perished with the other
witch-people. At last they could no longer bear to live in the lonely
valley, and they decided to live elsewhere. On the way the old mother
and one of the men died. Agostin went to the pueblo of Cochití, and
Pedro and the Whit-lah-wíd-deh settled in the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

pueblo of Jemez, where they are still living (or were in the spring of
1891).

Such is the Indian version of the abandonment of the great pueblo which
Coronado--that wonderful Spanish explorer--found in 1540. As a matter of
fact, the Hyó-qua-hoon, or people of Pecos, had dwindled away by war,
epidemics, and the like, until only five were left; and in 1840 these
lonely survivors moved to other pueblos, and abandoned their ruined town
forever. But the story is very valuable, not only for the glimpse it
affords of some of their most secret beliefs, but also as showing how
folk-stories of the most aboriginal stamp are still coined.

Witchcraft is still a serious trouble in all the pueblos, despite the
efforts of the medicine-men, whose special duty it is to keep down the
witches. One little pueblo called Sandia is dying out--as many others
have done before it--because the medicine-men are quietly killing those
whom they suspect of being witches. In 1888 a very estimable Indian
woman of that town was slain by them in the customary way,--shot through
from side to side with an arrow,--and this form of execution is still
practised.

In Isleta they fear the Americans too much to indulge in witch-killing,
for Albuquerque is only a few miles away. But it is only a little while
ago that a young Isletan who was accused spent three months in the
neck-stocks in our aboriginal prison, and much of the time had to, "ride
the horse," sitting with his legs crossed upon the adobe floor and the
heavy weight of the stocks pressing him down,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

a torture worthy of the Inquisition. The case was kept out of the
American courts only by the payment of a large sum to his parents by his
accusers.

One whose eyes or lids look red is always regarded with suspicion here,
for witch-people are supposed not to sleep at night, but to change
themselves into animals and roam over the world. Eccentric actions also
lay one open to accusation; and when I first came here I was dangerously
near being classed with the witches because, to amuse my dusky little
neighbors, I imitated various animal cries to their great edification,
but to the very serious doubt of their elders. The fact that they doubt
whether Americans know enough to be first-class witches was largely
instrumental in saving me from serious danger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[137:1](pifs24.htm#fr_75) It was, indeed, the
largest pueblo in New Mexico, having at one time a population of about
2000.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[139:1](pifs24.htm#fr_77) Pronounced
Ah-gohs-téen and Páy-droh.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[142:1](pifs24.htm#fr_78) where it is
sacrilegious to make medicine.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[143:1](pifs24.htm#fr_79) The thunder is said by
the Tée-wahn to be the sacred dance-rattle of their gods.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[143:2](pifs24.htm#fr_80) The only entrance to
any *estufa* is by a ladder let down through a door in the roof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. The Ants that Pushed on the Sky](pifs25)
