[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pifs31)  [Next](pifs33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

# XXIX

### THE HERO TWINS

THAT the heroes of "The Magic Hide-and-Seek" were really the Pueblo
Castor and Pollux, the twin offspring of the Sun-Father and the
Moon-Mother, is more than probable. For some reason which I do not know,
these demigods do not figure as clearly in the Tée-wahn myths as among
the other Pueblos, the Navajos and the Apaches; but that they are
believed in, even in Isleta, there can be no doubt. They were the ones
who led mankind forth from its first home in the dark center of the
earth. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_98) The rainbow is their bow, the
lightnings are their arrows. Among the other Pueblos there are countless
folk-stories about these Hero Twins; and the following example myth will
quickly remind you of the boys who played hide-and-seek. It is told in
Isleta, though I have never heard it from the Tée-wahn people there.
Ever since the great drouth of a generation ago, about one hundred and
fifty Quères, starved out from the pueblos Of Acoma and Laguna, have
dwelt in Isleta, and they are now a

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

permanent part of the village, recognized by representation in the civil
and religious government, though speaking an altogether different
language. Tée-wahn and Quères cannot understand each other in their own
tongues, so they have to communicate in Spanish.

Máw-Sahv and Oó-yah-wee, as the Hero Twins are named in Quères, had the
Sun for a father. Their mother died when they were born, and lay
lifeless upon the hot plain. But the two wonderful boys, as soon as they
were a minute old, were big and strong, and began playing.

There chanced to be in a cliff to the southward a nest of white crows;
and presently the young crows said: "*Nana*, what is that over there?
Isn't it two babies?"

"Yes," replied the Mother-Crow, when she had taken a look. "Wait and I
will bring them." So she brought the boys safely, and then their dead
mother; and, rubbing a magic herb on the body of the latter, soon
brought her to life.

By this time Máw-Sahv and Oó-yah-wee were sizable boys, and the mother
started homeward with them.

"Now," said she when they reached the edge of the valley and could look
across to that wondrous rock whereon stands Acoma, "go to yonder town,
my sons, for that is Ah-ko, where live your grandfather and grandmother,
my parents; and I will wait here. Go ye in at the west end of the town
and stand at the south end of the council-grounds until some one speaks
to you; and ask them to take you to the Cacique, for he is your
grandfather. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

You will know his house, for the ladder to it has three uprights instead
of two. When you go in and tell your story, he will ask you a question
to see if you are really his grandchildren, and will give you four
chances to answer what he has in a bag in the corner. No one has ever
been able to guess what is in it, but there are birds."

The Twins did as they were bidden, and presently came to Acoma and found
the house of the old Cacique. When they entered and told their story, he
said: "Now I will try you. What is in yonder bag?"

"A rattlesnake," said the boys.

"No," said the Cacique, "it is not a rattlesnake. Try again."

"Birds," said the boys.

"Yes, they are birds. Now I know that you are truly my grandchildren,
for no one else could ever guess." And he welcomed them gladly, and sent
them back with new dresses and jewelry to bring their mother.

When she was about to arrive, the Twins ran ahead to the house and told
her father, mother, and sister to leave the house until she should
enter; but not knowing what was to come, they would not go out. When she
had climbed the big ladder to the roof and started down through the
trap-door by the room-ladder, her sister cried out with joy at seeing
her, and she was so startled that she fell from the ladder and broke her
neck, and never could be brought to life again.

Máw-Sahv and Oó-yah-wee grew up to astounding adventures and
achievements. While still

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

very young in years, they did very remarkable things; for they had a
miraculously rapid growth, and at an age when other boys were toddling
about home, these Hero Twins had already become very famous hunters and
warriors. They were very fond of stories of adventure, like less
precocious lads; and after the death of their mother they kept their
grandmother busy telling them strange tales. She had a great many
anecdotes of a certain ogre-giantess who lived in the dark gorges of the
mountains to the South, and so much did Máw-Sahv and Oó-yah-wee hear of
this wonderful personage--who was the terror of all that country--that
their boyish ambition was fired.

One day when their grandmother was busy they stole away from home with
their bows and arrows, and walked miles and miles, till they came to a
great forest at the foot of the mountain. In the edge of it sat the old
Giant-woman, dozing in the sun, with a huge basket beside her. She was
so enormous and looked so fierce that the boys' hearts stood still, and
they would have hidden, but just then she caught sight of them, and
called: "Come, little boys, and get into this basket of mine, and I will
take you to my house."

"Very well," said Máw-Sahv, bravely hiding his alarm. "If you will take
us through this big forest, which we would like to see, we will go with
you."

The Giant-woman promised, and the lads clambered into her basket, which
she took upon her back and started off. As she passed through the woods,
the boys grabbed lumps of pitch from the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

tall pines and smeared it all over her head and back so softly that she
did not notice it. Once she sat down to rest, and the boys slyly put a
lot of big stones in the basket, set fire to her pitched hair, and
hurriedly climbed a tall pine.

Presently the Giant-woman got up and started on toward home; but in a
minute or two her head and *manta* were all of a blaze. With a howl that
shook the earth, she dropped the basket and rolled on the ground,
grinding her great head into the sand until she at last got the fire
extinguished. But she was badly scorched and very angry, and still
angrier when she looked in the basket and found only a lot of stones.
She retraced her steps until she found the boys hidden in the pine-tree,
and said to them: "Come down, children, and get into my basket, that I
may take you to my house, for now we are almost there."

The boys, knowing that she could easily break down the tree if they
refused, came down. They got into the basket, and soon she brought them
to her home in the mountain. She set them down upon the ground and said:
"Now, boys, go and bring me a lot of wood, that I may make a fire in the
oven and bake you some sweet cakes."

The boys gathered a big pile of wood, with which she built a roaring
fire in the adobe oven outside the house. Then she took them and washed
them very carefully, and taking them by the necks, thrust them into the
glowing oven and sealed the door with a great, flat rock, and left them
there to be roasted.

But the Trues were friends of the Hero Twins,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and did not let the heat harm them at all. When the old Giant-woman had
gone into the house, Máw-Sahv and Oó-yah-wee broke the smaller stone
that closed the smoke-hole of the oven, and crawled out from their fiery
prison unsinged. They ran around and caught snakes and toads and
gathered up dirt and dropped them down into the oven through the
smoke-hole; and then, watching when the Giant-woman's back was turned,
they sneaked into the house and hid in a huge *olla* on the shelf.

Very early in the morning the Giant-woman's baby began to cry for some
boy-meat. "Wait till it is well cooked," said the mother; and hushed the
child till the sun was well up. Then she went out and unsealed the oven,
and brought in the sad mess the boys had put there. "They have cooked
away to almost nothing," she said; and she and the Giant-baby sat down
to eat. "Isn't this nice?" said the baby; and Máw-Sahv could not help
saying, "You nasty things, to like that!"

"Eh? Who is that?" cried the Giant-woman, looking around till she found
the boys hidden in the *olla*. So she told them to come down, and gave
them some sweet cakes, and then sent them out to bring her some more
wood.

It was evening when they returned with a big load of wood, which
Máw-Sahv had taken pains to get green. He had also picked up in the
mountains a long, sharp splinter of quartz. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_99) The evening was cool, and they built a
big fire in the fireplace. But immediately, as the boys had planned,

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the green wood began to smoke at a dreadful rate, and soon the room was
so dense with it that they all began to cough and strangle. The
Giant-woman got up and opened the window and put her head out for a
breath of fresh air; and Máw-Sahv, pulling out the white-hot splinter of
quartz from the fire, stabbed her in the back so that she died. Then
they killed the Giant-baby, and at last felt that they were safe.

Now the Giant-woman's house was a very large one, and ran far back into
the very heart of the mountain. Having got rid of their enemies, the
Hero Twins decided to explore the house; and, taking their bows and
arrows, started boldly down into the deep, dark rooms. After traveling a
long way in the dark, they came to a huge room in which corn and melons
and pumpkins were growing abundantly. On and on they went, till at last
they heard the growl of distant thunder. Following the sound, they came
presently to a room in the solid rock, wherein the lightning was stored.
Going in, they took the lightning and played with it awhile, throwing it
from one to the other, and at last started home, carrying their strange
toy with them.

When they reached Acoma and told their grand, mother of their wonderful
adventures, she held up her withered old hands in amazement. And she was
nearly scared to death when they began to play with the lightning,
throwing it around the house as though it had been a harmless ball,
while the thunder rumbled till it shook the great rock of Acoma. They
had the blue lightning which belongs in the West; and the yellow
lightning of the \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

North; and the red lightning of the East; and the white lightning of the
South; and with all these they played merrily.

But it was not very long till Shée-wo-nah, the Storm-King, had occasion
to use the lightning; and when he looked in the room where he was wont
to keep it, and found it gone, his wrath knew no bounds. He started out
to find who had stolen it; and passing by Acoma he heard the thunder as
the Hero Twins were playing ball with the lightning. He pounded on the
door and ordered them to give him his lightning, but the boys refused.
Then he summoned the storm, and it began to rain and blow fearfully
outside; while within the boys rattled their thunder in loud defiance,
regardless of their grandmother's entreaties to give the Storm-King his
lightning.

It kept raining violently, however, and the water came pouring down the
chimney until the room was nearly full, and they were in great danger of
drowning. But luckily for them, the Trues were still mindful of them;
and just in the nick of time sent their servant, Tee-oh-pee, the Badger,
who is the best of diggers, to dig a hole up through the floor; all the
water ran out, and they were saved. And so the Hero Twins outwitted the
Storm-King.

 

South of Acoma, in the pine-clad gorges and mesas, the world was full of
Bears. There was one old She-Bear in particular, so huge and fierce that
all men feared her; and not even the boldest hunter dared go to the
south--for there she had her home with her two sons.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

Máw-sahv and Oó-yah-wee were famous hunters, and always wished to go
south; but their grandmother always forbade them. One day, however, they
stole away from the house, and got into the cañon. At last they came to
the She-Bear's house; and there was old Quée-ah asleep in front of the
door. Máw-sahv crept up very carefully and threw in her face a lot of
ground *chile*, <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_100) and ran. At that
the She-Bear began to sneeze, *ah-hútch! ah-hútch!* She could not stop,
and kept making *ah-hútch* until she sneezed herself to death.

Then the Twins took their thunder-knives and skinned her. They stuffed
the great hide with grass, so that it looked like a Bear again, and tied
a buckskin rope around its neck.

"Now," said Máw-sahv, "We will give our grandma a trick!"

So, taking hold of the rope, they ran toward Acoma, and the Bear came
behind them as if leaping. Their grandmother was going for water; and
from the top of the cliff she saw them running so in the valley, and the
Bear jumping behind them. She ran to her house and painted one side of
her face black with charcoal, and the other side red with the blood of
an animal; <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_101) and, taking a bag of
ashes, ran down the cliff and out at the Bear, to make it leave the boys
and come after her.

But when she saw the trick, she reproved the boys for their
rashness--but in her heart she was very proud of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[206:1](pifs32.htm#fr_99) They are represented
in the sacred dances by the Káh-pee-óo-nin, "the Dying-of-Cold" (because
they are always naked except for the breech-clout).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[211:1](pifs32.htm#fr_100) A thunder-knife.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[214:1](pifs32.htm#fr_101) The fiery red-pepper
of the Southwest.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[214:2](pifs32.htm#fr_102) Ancient tokens of
mourning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. The Hungry Grandfathers](pifs33)
