[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coz00)  [Next](coz02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419179896/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# THE CHALDÆAN ORACLES

# ATTRIBUTED TO

# ZOROASTER.

### PREFACE

### By SAPERE AUDE.

THESE Oracles are considered to embody many of the principal features of
Chaldæan philosophy. They have come down to us through Greek
translations and were held in the greatest esteem throughout antiquity,
a sentiment which was shared alike by the early Christian Fathers and
the later Platonists. The doctrines contained therein are attributed to
Zoroaster, though to which particular Zoroaster is not known; historians
give notices of as many as six different individuals all bearing that
name, which was probably the title of the Prince of the Magi, and a
generic term. The word Zoroaster is by various authorities differently
derived: Kircher furnishes one of the most interesting derivations when
he seeks to show that it comes from TzURA = a figure, and TzIUR= to
fashion, ASH = fire, and STR = hidden; from these he gets the words
Zairaster = fashioning images of hidden fire;--or Tzuraster=the image of
secret things. Others derive it from Chaldee and Greek words meaning " a
contemplator of the Stars."

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

It is not, of course, pretended that this collection as it stands is
other than disjointed and fragmentary, and it is more than probable that
the true sense of many passages has been obscured, and even in some
cases hopelessly obliterated, by inadequate translation.

Where it has been possible to do so, an attempt has been made to
elucidate doubtful or ambiguous expressions, either by modifying the
existing translation from the Greek, where deemed permissible, or by
appending annotations.

It has been suggested by some that these Oracles are of Greek invention,
but it has already been pointed out by Stanley that Picus de Mirandula
assured Ficinus that *he* had the Chaldee Original in his possession,
"in which those things which are faulty and defective in the Greek are
read perfect and entire," and Ficinus indeed states that he found this
MS. upon the death of Mirandula. In addition to this, it should be noted
that here and there in the original Greek version, words occur which are
not of Greek extraction at all, but are Hellenised Chaldee.

Berosus is said to be the first who introduced the writings of the
Chaldæans concerning Astronomy and Philosophy among the Greeks, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) and it is certain that the traditions of
Chaldea very largely influenced Greek thought. Taylor considers that
some of these mystical utterances are the sources whence the sublime
conceptions of Plato were formed, and large commentaries were written
upon them by Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proclus, Pletho and Psellus. That men
of such great learning and sagacity should have thought so highly of
these Oracles, is a fact which in itself should commend them to our
attention.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

The term "Oracles" was probably bestowed upon these epigrammatic
utterances in order to enforce the idea of their profound and deeply
mysterious nature. The Chaldæans, however, had an Oracle, which they
venerated as highly as the Greeks did that at Delphi. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)

We are indebted to both Psellus and Pletho, for comments at some length
upon the Chaldæan Oracles, and the collection adduced by these writers
has been considerably enlarged by Franciscus Patricius, who made many
additions from Proclus, Hermias, Simplicius, Damascius, Synesius,
Olympiodorus, Nicephorus and Arnobius; his collection, which comprised
some 324 oracles under general heads, was published in Latin in 1593,
and constitutes the groundwork of the later classification arrived at by
Taylor and Cory; all of these editions have been utilised in producing
the present revise.

A certain portion of these Oracles collected by Psellus, appear to be
correctly attributed to a Chaldæan Zoroaster of very early date, and are
marked "Z," following the method indicated by Taylor, with one or two
exceptions. Another portion is attributed to a sect of philosophers
named Theurgists, who flourished during the reign of Marcus Antoninus,
upon the authority of Proclus, <span id="fr_2"></span>[†](#fn_2) and
these are marked "T." Oracles additional to these two series and of less
definite source are marked "Z or T." Other oracular passages from
miscellaneous authors are indicated by their names.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

The printed copies of the Oracles to be found in England are the
following:--

1\. *Oracula Magica*, Ludovicus Tiletanus, Paris, 1563.

2\. *Zoroaster et ejus 320 oracula Chaldaica;* by Franciscus Patricius.
. . . 1593.

3\. Fred. Morellus; *Zoroastris oracula*, 1597. Supplies about a hundred
verses.

4\. Otto Heurnius; *Barbaricæ Philosophiæ antiquitatum libri duo*, 1600.

5\. Johannes Opsopoeus; *Oracula Magica Zoroastris* 1599. This includes
the *Commentaries of Pletho and of Psellus in Latin*.

6\. Servatus Gallœus; *Sibulliakoi Chresmoi*, 1688. Contains a version
of the Oracles.

Thomas Stanley. *The History of the Chaldaic Philosophy*, 1701. This
treatise contains the Latin of Patricius, and the Commentaries of Pletho
and Psellus in English.

Johannes Alb. Fabricius, *Bibliotheca Græca*, 1705-7. *Quotes the
Oracles*.

Jacobus Marthanus, 1689. This version contains the Commentary of
Gemistus Pletho.

Thomas Taylor, *The Chaldæan Oracles*, in the *Monthly Magazine*, and
published independently, 1806.

*Bibliotheca Classica Latina;* A. Lemaire, volume 124, Paris, 1823.

Isaac Preston Cory, *Ancient Fragments*, London, 1828. (A third edition
of this work has been published, omitting the Oracles.)

*Phœnix*, New York, 1835. A collection of curious old tracts, among
which are the Oracles of Zoroaster, copied from Thomas Taylor and I. P.
Cory; with an essay by Edward Gibbon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:\*](coz01.htm#fr_0) Josephus, *contra Apion.
I*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:\*](coz01.htm#fr_1) Stephanus, *De Urbibus*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:†](coz01.htm#fr_2) *Vide* his Scholia on the
*Cratylus* of Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](coz02)
