[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chap02)  [Next](chap04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p.44">p.44</span>

<span id="p.45">p.45</span>

## III

## MOSES

<span id="p.46">p.46</span>

> *A Great Man--His Meekness--Life in Egypt--His Failure as a Public
> Speaker--The Ten Plagues--The Events in the Wilderness--Laws and
> Law-Courts-- Jethro--The Ten Commandments--The Calf of Gold* --*Death
> of Moses.*

<span id="p.47">p.47</span>

## III

## MOSES

Just as in the American Revolution and again in the Civil War there
appeared a Leader of genius, without whose wisdom, patience and
unselfishness the result might in each case have been quite other than
fortunate, so in the critical period of early Israelitish history--the
residence in Egypt and the wanderings in the wilderness--there rose from
the ranks a leader, law-giver and stateman--Moses. He must be called a
great man. His public acts and private character are alike admirable. In
addition to the books written about him by theologians and Bible
students, he has been the subject of secular examination. Forty years
ago I heard a lecture delivered by Henry George on "Moses, the Great
Hebrew Statesman," and in 1920 a book was published by a scientific man,
called "Moses the Physician," praising his learning, his foresight, and
especially his belief in cleanliness and segregation of disease.

A famous parenthesis in the twelfth chapter of Numbers tells something
definite about his character : "Now the man Moses was very meek, above

<span id="p.48">p.48</span>

all the men which were upon the face of the earth." This passage has
damaged the prestige of Moses with modern readers; Moses, "the meekest
man," has seemed a milksop. For although many persons are in reality
mild and timid, they like to be thought of as bold, aggressive, and
fierce. The difficulty here is in the word "meek," which in 1611 had a
nobler connotation than in later times. It then meant gentle in manner,
modest, and above all self-controlled, the crown of courage and
strength. Meekness was the finest attribute of warriors and kings. When
Chaucer made his picture of the Knight, a first-class fighting man, the
hero of many wars, he added this touch:

> And though that he were worthy, he was wys,  
> And of his port as meek as is a mayde.  
> He nevere yet no vileinye ne sayde  
> In al his lyf, unto no maner wight.  
> He was a verray parfit gentil knight.

Both in the Psalms and in the Gospels we are told that the meek shall
inherit the earth. It has been said cynically that this is indeed the
only way by which the meek could get it. Yes, but how about the violent
and predatory? What success have they had? Consider Alexander, Napoleon,
and the German Emperor Wilhelm II. They were rather the opposite of
meek. They tried to control the earth, with what result is history.
There is in reality no strength like the strength of meekness.

<span id="p.49">p.49</span>

That Moses was the meekest man in ancient history is the best thing said
about him.

"I am meek and lowly in heart," is a portion of the autobiography of the
only Person who ever overcame the world.

Like many great statesmen, Moses was not a fine public speaker. We are
apt to believe that oratory is the main qualification for public life;
whereas wisdom, foresight, and courage are superior to rhetorical gifts.
Daniel Webster was a supreme illustration of the combination of mental
and oral powers; but much of the most important work in statesmanship is
done in committees, and by men who cannot make an impressive public
address. I suppose Benjamin Franklin was the greatest committee man in
history; one of the ablest American constructive statesman of our time,
Herbert Hoover, is not an effective orator. President Hayes gave the
United States one of the best administrations we have had; he also was
no speech-maker. On his feet Grover Cleveland was dull, but he had the
wit to know it.

At the outset of his career, Moses said unto the Lord: "O my Lord, I am
not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy
servant; but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." ("I am so bad
an orator that I cannot talk effectively even when divinely inspired.")
That which is the very breath of life to many politicians, public
speaking, was always a terror to Moses; there was noth-

<span id="p.50">p.50</span>

ing he hated more. Like almost all men, Moses failed as an after-dinner
speaker, as we learn from his lack of success immediately after the fall
of manna.

Aaron, the Levite, was selected to do the talking; he was inferior to
Moses, both in intelligence and in character; "he shall be to thee
instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God." Moses was
to tell Aaron what to say, and Aaron was to say it with emphasis and
elegance. This worked well; but when Aaron, in the absence of Moses,
relied on his own ideas, the result was disaster.

Perhaps Moses would have produced a more speedy effect on the hard heart
of King Pharaoh, if he had had the gift of public speaking. It was all
Pharaoh could do to listen to him, and the royal personage was not
impressed. But Moses held the trumps, as his adversary eventually
discovered.

Labour troubles began in Egypt, as they have begun in some other
countries, by oppression. The good king, Joseph's friend, was dead; and
one of his successors on the throne took a familiar and natural, though
erroneous, policy toward the numerous and powerful aliens in the land.
He looked about him and saw that the Israelites were many in number and
successful in business; that is, they were adding to the wealth and
prosperity of the country. (Most natives have never been able to endure
this.) Had the king dealt kindly with the Jews, there is no saying what
might have been the greatness of

<span id="p.51">p.51</span>

Egypt and the glory of the ruler; but human nature cannot be expected to
show the wisdom of gentleness and the conquering power of good will.
Pharaoh said to his courtiers, "Come on, let us deal wisely with them."
(Now the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.) "Therefore they
did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens."

The service increased in rigour and cruelty, and the workers grew ever
more numerous and strong; so the policy of extermination was decided
upon; instead of changing the medicine, he increased the dose. But it is
difficult to subdue human beings by severity, and the Irsaelites found a
way to escape extinction. Then a man and wife, both of the house of
Levi, had a handsome boy; his mother hid him in the reeds by the river.
When Pharaoh's daughter looked into the basket, the baby began to cry;
about the only time in his life when his eloquence had an immediate
effect; it should be remembered that his audience was composed of women.
By a neat device, his own mother was hired as nurse; the child grew up
under her care, and under the protection of the Princess. Pharaoh's
daughter not only saved him, but gave him his name Moses, which means
*Drawer Out;* and she said, "Because I drew him out of the water." She
named him better than she knew; for he drew the children of Israel out
of slavery. She was a good girl, and I wish we knew more about her.

<span id="p.52">p.52</span>

We are ignorant of the facts of Moses's childhood and adolescence. His
first recorded act as a man was harshly resolute, and prophetic of his
future powers of deliverance. He saw an Egyptian beating up a Hebrew,
and he killed the tormentor. But the next day he saw two of his own
people fighting; and endeavouring to restrain them, he spoke to the
aggressor, who insulted him by asking him if he meant to murder, as he
had murdered the Egyptian. This was the first of a long succession of
insults that Moses was to receive from his countrymen.

Moses fled, entered the land of Midian, and there married one of the
seven daughters of Jethro. This man Jethro, being grateful for "meek"
Moses's services in standing up alone for his daughters against a whole
pack of roughs, treated him kindly. It is interesting to notice that
Moses unconsciously prepared himself for the position of leader of the
nation by living the quiet, reflective life of a shepherd, which was
later David's occupation before becoming a king.

It was while Moses was keeping the flocks of his father-in-law, that he
experienced the first of many divine revelations, and knew that he had
been selected as the inspired leader. He saw a flame of fire in the
midst of a bush, and yet the bush was not consumed. Moses turned to look
at it out of curiosity; but when he heard the voice calling to him from
the flame, and answered, "Here!" like a boy at school, he was told to
come no nearer. Then

<span id="p.53">p.53</span>

he hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God. After receiving his
commission, he rather boldly enquired, What name shall I use in speaking
of the Divine Voice?

To this question he received a reply that shows how profoundly spiritual
the religion of the Israelites was, and how superior to all their
contemporaries they were in their conception not only of One God, but of
that. God as Pure Spirit. Compare this not only with the paganism and
polytheism so common in the world, but with such a familiar and childish
notion as *le bon Dieu;* where half the people use the expression
naively, and the other half with condescending contempt. Moses was told
to say unto the children of Israel that I AM had sent him. No modern
philosophy has been able to define the Supreme Reality with more
accuracy, brevity and dignity. With God it is always the present tense;
man is quickly in the past.

Moses, like most of his race, was not easily convinced even by God; and
he knew that the people would be sceptical of his story unless he could
prove it. So he was allowed to perform a variety of miracles; his rod
turned into a snake, his hand became leprous and whole again, and
greater works were promised.

Pharaoh, like other kings, did one good thing; he died. It is extremely
fortunate for the good of the world that kings have shared this
peculiarity with their subjects; it is probable that Death has

<span id="p.54">p.54</span>

done much toward making the world safe for democracy. To be sure, a new
Pharaoh appeared, who was no improvement; but that particular one could
torment the world no longer.

Moses and Aaron went in to interview the king, but it is plain that he
regarded them as dangerous radicals, labour-agitators; so far from
listening to them, he tried the method subsequently adopted by Rehoboam
and by many rulers in more recent times. He attempted to crush their
spirit by increased severity, a plan which has many ardent advocates in
all epochs, though history seems to prove its inadequacy. "Let there
more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let
them not regard vain words." ("I'll show them!")

Thus the brilliant scheme was adopted of having the Israelites make
bricks without straw, which brought about so acute a crisis in the
labour situation that it will never be forgotten. I remember being a
listener to a debate in the House of Commons in 1900, when a
Conservative, who was conspicuously lacking in talent, attempted to make
a speech amidst the heckling of the turbulent Irish members; he was
describing work on some public building, and he proceeded as far as the
unfortunate word "bricks"; instantly the Irishmen roared out as though
the chorus had been carefully rehearsed: "Bricks without straw!" and the
speech was buried in derisive laughter.

If Abraham was the father of the children of

<span id="p.55">p.55</span>

Israel, Pharaoh was the father of the Bourbons. He learned nothing and
forgot nothing. He called in his magicians and had them attempt to rival
the enchantments of Moses and Aaron; this is the first time the
competitive method appears, which later was to be used with such success
by the prophet Elijah. The spectacle interested the royal observer, but
it hardened his heart against Moses. It now became necessary to make a
demonstration that should affect the whole Egyptian people; and we have
the dramatic series called the Ten Plagues-- a tragedy in ten acts,
ending with a climax. The horrible events came in this order:

|             |                            |
|-------------|----------------------------|
| I. Blood.   | VI\. Boils and Blains.     |
| II\. Frogs. | VII\. Thunder and Hail.    |
| III\. Lice. | VIII\. Locusts.            |
| IV\. Flies. | IX\. Darkness.             |
| V. Murrain. | X. Death of the Firstborn. |

 Aaron stretched out his rod: the water in the Nile turned into blood,
as well as every pond, pool, and creek; even the waters in the kitchen
pans became blood, and an intolerable stench arose from dead fish. This
lasted seven days; and the magicians, trying their technique, found that
they could turn water into blood just as easily as their rivals. Their
real prowess would have been better proved if they had reversed the
process; as it was, they merely added to the general discomfort. Pharaoh
was no more affected by the blood than if he had been

<span id="p.56">p.56</span>

Louis XV. Kings have seldom been afraid of blood; and nothing on earth
is more stubborn than your true reactionary. Then came millions of
frogs; the Egyptian magicians, apparently pleased with this miracle,
tried their enchantments and found that they could increase the
population of frogs, though there seem to have been plenty without their
assistance. But the king did not like frogs, and he sent for Moses and
Aaron. It appears to me that the stupidity of this monarch reached its
climax in the answer he made to the question put by Moses; the Hebrew
asked: "When shall I make supplication that the frogs return to the
river?" The king answered: "Tomorrow." If he had had rudimentary common
sense, he would have said, *Today; this minute.*

Next day the frogs died just where they were; and for a time they were
more potent dead than alive. But no more came; and Pharaoh refused to
let the Hebrews go. Then came lice, billions of them; they covered every
man and beast in Egypt. Pharaoh paid no attention to them; he may have
noticed nothing unusual.

The magicians, who had been conspicuously successful with the frogs,
tried to create lice; but here they failed and were then convinced that
Moses and Aaron were inspired. Their professional admiration for their
competitors, in whom they now recognised masters in their own art, was
so great that it exceeded their fear of the king; they told him what

<span id="p.57">p.57</span>

they thought about the situation, but Pharaoh would not listen.

Then came the flies; it was unendurable; Pharaoh spoke to Moses, who
abolished the plague; immediately the king was himself again. Then came
murrain, a pestilence which destroyed all the cattle; Pharaoh was
interested sufficiently to make enquiries as to the extent of the
disease; but he remained firm. Then came boils, which later were to try
the patience of Job, but the king would not relent. Then there was a
frightful storm, thunder and lightning and hail, which wrought untold
damage to man, beast, and crops. Pharaoh could not endure it, and he
said quaintly: "I have sinned this time." The storm ceased, carrying
Pharaoh's repentance with it. There came a fresh east wind, bringing
numberless locusts, which ate up everything that the hail had spared, so
that the farms looked as if recently visited by the army worm. Pharaoh
had another attack of remorse; the west wind came and blew the accursed
locusts into the Red Sea, so that there was not one left in the whole
country.

A friend writes me: "I wonder do you know of the locust plague in
Jerusalem, during the war? The locusts came 'out of the clear sky,'
suddenly. They ate every vegetable thing except wood, stripping a tree
to its bare twigs and branches within an hour. The government ordered
everyone to bring in his peck or so of dead insects each day. The poor
earned their living, collecting the daily

<span id="p.58">p.58</span>

quota for others. Tin is the best offensive. The American colony's
special technique was to 'shoo' the insects along converging, low,
tin-walled canals into sunken gasolene tins. But this seemed like trying
to empty the ocean with a medicine dropper. Finally, when no green thing
is left, the plague passes on, abruptly. And no one knows whither the
locusts go, as no one knew whence they came."

The plague of locusts was followed by Egyptian darkness, thick darkness
for three days, so that no man could see and no man dared move. Pharaoh
sent for Moses, and when the darkness was lifted and the pleasant light
returned, he said bitterly to the man of God:

Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that
day thou seest my face thou shalt die.

And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no
more.

Then came the last terrible plague, the killing of the firstborn in the
night, and the first passover, when the Lord passed over the favoured
people; an event that is still annually and solemnly celebrated by
millions.

There arose a great cry in Egypt; both the king and the people besought
the aliens to depart. In the midst of this turmoil, there is one touch
of humour. The children of Israel "borrowed" of the Egyptians jewels of
silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.

<span id="p.59">p.59</span>

They had been in Egypt four hundred and thirty years when the great
exodus began; and then they were not allowed to take the short way to
the Promised Land through the country of the Philistines, but were led
south-east to the Red Sea. In front was the Pillar of Cloud by day and
the Pillar of Fire by night.

Pharaoh ought to have been glad to see the last of them; but either he
regretted his defeat or the loss of the borrowed jewels; he pursued them
with chariots and horsemen; so the Israelites, who preferred life to
honour and slavery to death, bitterly attacked Moses and for the first
time raised a protest that was to be heard more than once: "We were
better off in Egypt."

But the Red Sea opened; the timid and querulous multitude passed through
in safety. Then in the darkest hour before the dawn the waters returned
and swallowed up the Egyptian host, soldiers, chariots, and horsemen.
And in the morning light the children of Israel saw the pleasantest
sight their eyes had ever beheld.

"Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore."

I remember hearing Phillips Brooks preach a notable sermon on that text.
We may have sorrows in the future; we may have enemies tomorrow; but
there are difficulties, there are evils that we survive. They can never
annoy us again. "Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore."

<span id="p.60">p.60</span>

The immediate troubles of the Hebrews were over; the troubles of Moses
began. He had more vexations with his own people than he had had with
his avowed enemies. Human nature asserted itself in the wilderness. In
spite of their great deliverance and the mighty evidence of God's favour
and of the inspiration of Moses, the people were constantly
discontented; they were always on the point of rebellion. The genius for
complaining, which is inherently human, found almost daily expression;
until the patience of Moses was exhausted.

The shortest distance from Egypt to the Promised Land is considerably
less than the distance from Philadelphia to New York; so far as miles
were concerned, Canaan could have been reached in a week. But Israel was
not fit to occupy Canaan or indeed any other country, as the behaviour
in the wilderness abundantly proved. The famous Elizabethan "atheist,"
Marlowe, said that Moses was a miserable leader, because it took him
forty years to lead his people a short distance; he could have done much
better himself. These forty years in the wilderness, however, were
necessary; and never did a leader and statesman show finer capacity for
meeting both chronic and acute difficulties.

Furthermore, during these wanderings a complete system of laws, both
moral and technical, became established; the health of the people was
cared for by a definite set of hygienic regulations; the ritual for
worship was proclaimed. The Israelites reached

<span id="p.61">p.61</span>

Canaan when, and not before, they were mentally and physically fit to
settle there.

It was perhaps natural that in comparison with the privations and
hardships of the wilderness, Egypt looked good; they saw it only in
retrospect and, as is frequently the case, the difficulties of the past
faded out of the picture, and they remembered only their homes and their
regular meals, as indeed a free man will sometimes during a vacation
spent in voluntary camping. They complained of the lack of food, so
manna rained down from heaven. It covered the ground like a frost, was
white to the eye and sweet to the taste. When the people complained of
thirst and nearly mobbed Moses, he was divinely ordered to strike a
rock, and pure water gushed out. These are some of the chief events that
were recorded during the journey.

One day, Jethro, Moses's father-in-law, appeared on the scene, bringing
the wife of Moses and their two sons. On the next day, Moses took his
regular place as a judge, and began to hear complaints and cases of all
kinds, both little and big. The petitioners had to stand in line for
hours, and justice was almost as slow as it is now. Jethro watched the
proceedings awhile, and then told Moses that all this would wear both
him and the nation out; he advised that Moses select a number of able
and upright judges, who could settle relatively unimportant cases, while
Moses should be the Supreme Court. This admirable counsel was followed;
and

<span id="p.62">p.62</span>

so the children of Israel not only had a set of laws and ordinances, but
a court system to administer them. Then the good Jethro departed into
his own land, and we see his face no more. So far as I know, there is no
further allusion to him in the Bible. But he ought not to be forgotten.

The laws established by Moses were fair and reasonable, and in all that
concerned man's dealing with man were adapted to the times and the
people. They often went beyond mere scrupulosity, and enjoined kindness
to strangers, gentleness to widows and orphans, and consideration for
animals. The nineteenth chapter of Leviticus contains rules that ought
to be remembered to the eternal honour of their maker. People were
forbidden to reap the *corners* of their farms; gleanings must be left
for the poor and the stranger. Labourers must be paid at the end of the
day's work; "the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee
all night until the morning." Cruel practical jokes were forbidden; no
doubt some boys thought such things were funny. "Thou shalt not curse
the deaf" (I have heard American boys do this) "nor put a
stumbling-block before the blind." Rich and poor were to be treated
exactly alike in court. "Thou shalt not go up and down as a
tale-bearer." Courtesy and etiquette were taught by law. "Thou shalt
rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man." They
must see to it that they have just balances and just weights.

<span id="p.63">p.63</span>

Those who maintain that the Mosaic Law was harsh and cruel should
remember that the following verses are in Leviticus, though many seem to
have forgotten the fact:

> Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart.  
> Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy
> people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

When Our Lord gave the eleventh and twelfth commandments, he was quoting
from Moses, as He was when He said: "I will give you rest."

The presence of laws forbidding many strange sins and crimes seems to
indicate that so-called unnatural evils were known to exist there and
then, as they have in all nations since.

There was the same fondness for superstition and the same eagerness to
be gulled as there is today. "Regard not them that have familiar
spirits, neither seek after wizards."

The Ten Commandments, which have had such a prodigious influence in
human history, are all prohibitions except one. The chief sins are
forbidden in the Tables of the Law, and it would be difficult indeed to
have arranged at that time a list of regulations that would have covered
a wider area of human conduct with fewer words.

Clouds and darkness surrounded Mount Sinai at the giving of the
Fundamental Law.

> There were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon

<span id="p.64">p.64</span>

> the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all
> the people that was in the camp trembled.  
> And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God;
> and they stood at the nether part of the mount.  
> And Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon
> it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace,
> and the whole mount quaked greatly.  
> And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and
> louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

Although many in the audience forgot to keep these commandments, it is
certain that no one forgot the day and the manner of their announcing.

I. *Thou shall have no other gods before me.*

In the ancient world, man was polytheistic; here was the promulgation of
one Divine Principle. Literally translated, it reads: "You shall have no
gods except me." More and more, this commandment is seen to be the
expression of philosophical truth. Later, the children of Israel ran
after other gods with tragic consequences; and in the twentieth century,
the German Empire broke the first commandment, worshipping the gods of
iron and steel as revealed to man in huge armaments. This is now a
common form of paganism, perhaps the most popular religion in the world,
numbering more adherents than all other systems; yet it is an illusion,
for there is only one God.

And just as nations have madly worshipped other gods, so individuals
have constantly substituted

<span id="p.65">p.65</span>

other gods for the Ideal; the gods of money, of influence, of pleasure,
of social position, of fame; most common of all and most tragically
absurd is the substitution for the Eternal Spirit of Truth and
Right--One's Own Self.

II\. *Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image . . . for I, the
Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate
me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.*

This and the Fourth are the longest of the commandments, containing
respectively ninety-one and ninety-four words. It was necessary to
forbid idol-worship, to which the Israelites continually surrendered,
copying, as so many nations do, only the evil features of their rivals;
remember how Rachel, Jacob's wife, stole the images out of her father's
house, and how bitterly ironical was the language of the prophet Isaiah
in dealing with this form of superstition. The awful words, "I am a
jealous God," give offence to many people today, but they are a
statement of simple fact. Religion is the most jealous thing in the
world, more jealous than any woman. There is only one place in the human
heart for religion--the first place. It must have that or nothing. It
must either dominate a man's life, be

<span id="p.66">p.66</span>

the supreme, controlling factor, or it becomes as ornamental as a graven
image, and as powerless. Those who use religion as a decoration, or as a
last resort in fear and sickness, betray their real paganism in brushing
it aside when their personal, selfish interests are concerned. Religion
is never content with a weekly contribution, or a large occasional
present, or a tribute of courtesy; religion demands the heart, the
inmost citadel; and unless it has that, it wants nothing. Either
religion is the most vital of all truths, or else it stands for silly
superstition, and should not be allowed to annoy and harass conduct, any
more than Napoleon permitted it to interfere with his purposes. He went
as far as anyone has gone without religion, and he is perhaps more to be
admired than those who wish to have it both ways, like a man who gives
presents to his wife, and his heart to some one else.

The last part of this commandment, which speaks of the remote
consequences of evil-doing (and also, be it remembered, of virtue)
particularly enrages the enemies of religion. Thomas Hardy sneered at it
in *Tess of the D'Urbervilles,* saying it might be good enough for
Divinity, but was scorned by average human nature. Precisely so; it is
scorned by average human nature, which is one reason why there are so
many unfit children born into the world. Their lifelong weakness and
suffering come from the selfishness of their ancestors, who scorned this
commandment, just as they scorned the established

<span id="p.67">p.67</span>

truths of science, of which this is a powerful affirmation. The second
commandment will be supported by every family physician, and by students
of society like Henrik Ibsen.

III\. *Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.*

Never was this commandment more needed than in the twentieth century.
Swearing is instinctive in human nature; all men are naturally cursers,
but that does not make them admirable. There has been an enormous
increase in swearing within recent years. Of all habits, it is the most
difficult to break.

IV\. *Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.*

Six days shall thou labour, and do all thy work.

An old divine wisely pointed out the fact that there was more
profanation of the second sentence than of the first. "Six days shalt
thou labour." If this commandment were universally followed, there would
be enough food, fuel and clothing for everyone in the world. Every lazy,
idle, and useless person breaks the fourth commandment six times oftener
than other men. The first clause means: "Remember the day of rest and
keep it inviolate." Take one day in seven off, provided you have earned
it; don't let anything interfere. It is curious that so many persons
have thought it more wicked to have recreation on Sunday than to work.
Sunday was

<span id="p.68">p.68</span>

never meant to be a day of gloom; it ought to be the happiest day in the
week, for God blessed it. The ideal use of that holiday is to devote it
to religion and recreation; forget business and the regular round of
toil. Experience seems to show that people need one day in seven; the
French Revolutionists tried to make it one day in ten, but the
experiment was not successful. An excellent way to spend the day is to
go to church and thank God in the morning, and enjoy some outdoor sport
in the afternoon. The Sabbath was established for man's health and
happiness, as our Lord pointed out.

V. *Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
land which the Lord thy God glveth thee.*

It is often called "the only commandment with promise," but those who
say so forget the Second. That length of days should be associated with
filial affection seems curious; for some cruel sons have lived long.
But, more closely examined, it is not longevity, but continued residence
on the family property that the statement emphasises. Affection and care
for one's parents keep up the estate; neglect of them means wandering,
and the invasion of strangers. It is unfortunate that parents love their
children so much more intensely than children love their parents; but
the whirligig of time brings in his revenges. There is no commandment
that parents must love their children, for the command-

<span id="p.69">p.69</span>

ments were in every instance directed at common sins.

VI\. *Thou shalt not kill.*

Do no murder. Some extremists have held that this means one should not
kill a quail or a woodcock. Nonsense; but it is true that as we grow
older, we more and more appreciate the gift of life and hate to take it
away. Few young people think shooting is wrong; but there are plenty of
conscientious objectors among adults, Thomas Hardy, for example, and
Emerson, who said: "Hast thou named all the birds without a gun?" A
little common sense is useful here, as elsewhere; the wanton destruction
of animals is no doubt wicked; but if it be wrong to go out and shoot an
occasional partridge, then it is even more wrong to kill chickens. For
you feed chickens and pretend that you are interested in their welfare,
when in reality you are a traitor. The wickedness in shooting enormous
bags of game, raised for the purpose, consists in the fact that many
wounded ones escape, and while you are eating your dinner and talking
merrily of a "good day's sport," these wretched creatures are in agony.

VII\. *Thou shalt not commit adultery.*

Every adulterer is also a liar and usually a sneak. It is interesting to
observe that many men who would not lie to others in business, will
break their word given in the church before many witnesses. The

<span id="p.70">p.70</span>

reason is largely a matter of cowardice. If a man breaks his word to
another man, penalties follow, whereas a man can break his word to a
woman with impunity. But adultery is founded on falsehood and dishonour
fully as much as corrupt dealing in trade. In the fifth chapter of
Numbers, there is a strange but impressive method of dealing with
jealousy and adultery.

VIII\. *Thou shall not steal.*

Which ought to apply as much to embezzlement and crooked manipulations
as to house-breaking or borrowing apples.

IX\. *Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbour.*

Which refers, I suppose, not merely to perjury, but to slander and
malicious gossip.

X. *Thou shall not covet.*

Observe that all of these commandments are meant to preserve from harm
those who accept them, not merely those who might be victims. It is not
pleasant to have a thief steal from you, but it is much better for you
than to steal something yourself; it is unfortunate to be killed, but it
is better than to go out and kill somebody. That is, the commandments
were not only necessary for the welfare of society, but fidelity to them
is necessary for individual happiness. The tenth is wholly devoted to
this purpose; it does not hurt your neigh-

<span id="p.71">p.71</span>

bour if you covet his house; some persons are so constituted that this
adds to their delight; but it hurts *you* horribly and poisons your
peace of mind. I suppose covetousness of one's neighbour's possessions
drives more people into financial difficulties than any other vice.

The twentieth chapter of Exodus, containing the Ten Commandments, which
might be called the Moral Constitution, is immediately followed by a
succession of chapters, which might be called the By-laws, because they
give specific regulations. Then follow detailed directions for the
ritual of worship; very tedious reading this is today, but doubtless
important then, in order that the people might have ever before them the
thought of Divine Leadership.

Human nature lost little time in asserting itself; despite the wonders
they had seen, despite the terrible majesty of the promulgation of the
Law, what do we hear of the people's behaviour? Well, they did exactly
what millions are doing today; they forsook the worship of God for the
worship of the Golden Calf. Moses could not trust the people out of his
sight; they behaved like bad boys in the absence of the teacher. Moses
was away in the mount; and the children of Israel said to Aaron: "Up,
make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man
that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become
of him." To the eternal discredit of Aaron, he sur-

<span id="p.72">p.72</span>

rendered to mob sentiment at just the moment when a strong voice was
most necessary. Apparently the women had much jewelry, perhaps the
finery they had "borrowed" from the Egyptians; Aaron fashioned the whole
collection into the form of a golden calf and worshipped it with song
and dance.

Imagine the feelings of Moses coming down the mountain with the two
tables of the Law, his mind still in the solemn obsession of the Divine
Presence. That honest young lieutenant, Joshua, hearing the racket
below, said to Moses: "There is a noise of war in the camp." Moses
replied crisply: "It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome; but the
noise of them that sing do I hear."

He made up his mind that they would shortly sing another tune. When he
saw the calf and the idiotic dancing around it, ungovernable rage
possessed him; he smashed the tables he was holding. When a man is in a
state of terrific rage, he simply has to smash something or burst; it is
an immense relief to take it out of the furniture.

The rest of this narrative is downright funny. Moses took the golden
calf, burnt it, powdered the ashes, made a soup of it, and forced the
whole congregation to drink it! If you want your calf, down with it.
Then Aaron behaved even worse than Adam in Eden; in response to the
sharp questions of Moses, he said: "You know these people; they are
always bent on mischief." Then he declared

<span id="p.73">p.73</span>

that he had taken their golden contribution. "So they gave it to me;
then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf." Was there
ever a more ridiculous, a more childish lie? Can't you see the liar's
face?

Observe that meek Moses was not rebuked by God for smashing the tables;
he was given new ones in their place. He was punished for only one thing
--because he had momentarily lost confidence in God at the waters of
Meribah, when he was more afraid of popular clamour than of God Himself.
For this reason he was not permitted to enter the Promised Land.

Moses lived to be one hundred and twenty years old, in sound bodily and
mental health. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. His
farewell charge to the people is filled with poetry and splendid
imagery, containing many promises and many warnings. Like all persons,
they needed advice, received it, and forgot it. Human nature is revealed
in their shortness of memory; for nothing is more frequently heard than
good advice, and there is nothing so quickly forgotten. The first
alluring picture is enough to drive it out of the mind.

One passage in this farewell speech retains its flavour: "Thou shalt
lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow."

Moses stood on Pisgah Heights, on Mount Nebo, and looked with what
emotion we can only imagine

<span id="p.74">p.74</span>

on the fair panorama of Canaan. He could not enter it any more than
Abraham Lincoln could live to see the growth of the mighty nation he had
saved. But Moses, though he had little confidence in the people, knew
that their immediate future was assured; that the results of his wisdom
and foresight would last long; he saw the travail of his soul and was
satisfied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Famous Fighters in Canaan](chap04)
