[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chap04)  [Next](chap06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p.98">p.98</span>

<span id="p.99">p.99</span>

## V

## RUTH, ELI, SAMUEL, JONATHAN, AND KING SAUL

<span id="p.100">p.100</span>

*A Beautiful Short Story*--*A Hebrew Pastoral*--*Character of
Ruth*--*Her Steady Loyalty*--*Sorrows of Naomi*--*Mothers and
Daughters*--*The Mature and Prosperous Boaz*--*His Relations With His
Farmhands*--*His Kindness to Ruth*--*Her Subtle Flattery*-- *Her Choice
of a Husband*--*Land-contracts*--*Ruth the Great-grandmother of
David*--*Eli and His Sons*--*The Training of Children*--*The Younger
Generation*-- *Death of Eli--The Ark of God--Ichabod--Boyhood of
Samuel*--*His Character*--*Saul the Cowboy*--*His Appearance*--*The
First King*--*His Love of Music*-- *His Prophesying*--*Degeneration of
Saul*--*Fighting the Philistines*--*Character and Exploits of
Jonathan*--*Saul a Constitutional Monarch*--*Display of Public
Sentiment*--*The Death of Agag*--*Incorruptibility of Judge
Samuel*--*The Ghost, the Medium, the Prophecy*-- *Suicide of
Saul*--*Reflections on His Character and That of Kings in General.*

<span id="p.101">p.101</span>

## V

## RUTH, ELI, SAMUEL, JONATHAN, AND KING SAUL

Ruth is a pretty name: in Hebrew it means *friendship* and in English
*pity.* She lived up to her name in both languages; she was both loyal
and sympathetic. She is one of the most attractive girls in the Bible;
her gentle, affectionate nature seems all the fairer in contrast with
two terrible women of the Old Testament, Delilah and Jezebel. A charming
oasis is her story--one of the best short stories in literature--coming
as it does between two long books of crime and slaughter.

There is nothing sentimental and nothing insipid in this idyl; it is a
suburban pastoral, illustrating the grace of loyalty. We have learned in
the twentieth century not to minimise the virtue of loyalty; this fine
flower of human nature has its roots deep in the human heart. The beauty
of loyalty consists in giving rather than receiving; giving all if need
be, and asking nothing before or after. Selfish and calculating persons
are conspicuously without it; and it is not fully understood by men of
pure intellect. But there is always something splendid, something

<span id="p.102">p.102</span>

refreshing, about people who have it. You remember in Shakespeare, when
the various nobles were disputing as to whether the king had a legal
claim or not, the strong voice of Clifford is like a breath of fresh
air:

> King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,  
> Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence.

One of the reasons why the character of D'Artagnan is so irresistibly
attractive is because Loyalty was his religion; the whole man rings
true, said Stevenson, like a good sovereign.

Naomi had reached the darkest hour of her life; driven from her country
by famine, she migrated with her husband and her two sons. In the alien
land of Moab, her husband and then both her sons died, leaving her a
solitary Israelite, bereft of kin and fortune. She started to return
home, and advised her two Moabite daughters-in-law not to accompany her;
they were both young, and could marry again among their own people.
Orpah kissed her, but Ruth clave unto her, and spoke out those words
that have brought down the ages their eternal fragrance, as fresh and
sweet to-day as when first uttered:

> Whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge;
> thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:  
> Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do
> so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.

<span id="p.103">p.103</span>

There are women who, like Lady Macbeth, are meant to bring forth
men-children only, but they are perhaps not the most fortunate. The
relation of mother and daughter is peculiarly beautiful; each needs the
other so keenly, and they understand each other, because they are both
women. A woman may be proud of her son, but she can never be so close to
him as to her daughter. The neighbours were right when they said to
Naomi, Ruth "is better to thee than seven sons."

Boaz was like a prosperous American farmer, head of a vast estate. He
was a sound, hearty, healthy man, broad-minded and generous, whose
relations with his hired reapers were cordial. He came out of the city
to the fields, greeted the farmhands affectionately, and they responded
in like manner. Then he noticed the slender girl, bending over the
sheaves of grain, and upon enquiry found it was that very same foreigner
of whose devotion to Naomi he had heard. One can easily imagine how his
first agreeable impression of her appearance was strengthened by his
knowledge of her amiable and affectionate character. He spoke to her
kindly, and then he said something to the young men that wins our
hearts:

> And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave
> them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.

Boaz had reached the age when he was flattered by her evident liking for
him, for he had supposed

<span id="p.104">p.104</span>

that he must henceforth be and remain Boaz-sit-by-the-fire.

> Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: for thou hast shewed more
> kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou
> followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

The common opinion is that men select their wives. While this
undoubtedly happens here and there, it is equally true that women select
their husbands. Boaz was marked down from the start by both mother and
daughter, and he literally had no chance of escape. Fortunately for him,
he fell into good hands; for a damsel that had shown such single-hearted
devotion to Naomi would be faithful and loyal to the man of her choice.
That very expression which we use so often, "the man of her choice," is
significant.

We have a pleasant glimpse here of business dealings and the manner in
which land contracts were secured. The historian narrates as though the
custom in his own time had become obsolete.

> Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning redeeming
> and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off
> his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in
> Israel.  
> Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew off
> his shoe.

Ruth married an upright and successful business man; and Naomi went wild
with delight at having a grandson. She "laid it in her bosom, and became

<span id="p.105">p.105</span>

nurse unto it." Her troubles were over. The boy was named Obed, and
became the grandfather of a mighty king. The last word in the book of
Ruth is *David.* "And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David."

After this bright episode, the familiar story of war and of apostasy
returns; the clouds gather again. Old Eli is a pathetic figure. He
judged Israel forty years, was sincere and upright, submissive to the
will of God. But like many religious men, he was not successful in
bringing up his sons; perhaps his tacit acceptance of things as they
are-- for he was a religious fatalist--made it difficult for him to
impose his will on his two bad boys. He remonstrated with them, when
what they needed was something more drastic. They were altogether too
much for him, and their depravity bewildered as much as it shocked the
old man. There was no point of contact, no mutual understanding between
Eli and his children. He was as incomprehensible to them as they to him.
This is a tragic but unfortunately a familiar spectacle in family life.
Judging by the frequency with which the topic comes up in social
conversation, in magazine articles, and on the stage, it is regarded as
a particularly difficult problem in the year of grace 1922. Some
children shock their parents, and some parents bore their children.
There has always been a quarrel between the older and the younger
generation, but since the World War the quarrel has passed into an acute
stage. If

<span id="p.106">p.106</span>

it were not for the fact that the younger generation are dependent on
their parents for a source of supplies, it seems that often they could
get on very well alone. The advice of father to son is often the last
word in futility; the advice of son to father is to the effect that he
had better not meddle with what he does not understand.

It is only where piety in the parents is accompanied with tact,
sympathy, and understanding, where the intelligence of the father and
mother is respected by son and daughter, where the boy would really like
to resemble his father and the girl her mother, that one sees an
admirable family life; fortunately such examples are not extinct. Eli
was dense. He could not make religion seem real to his sons. He went to
church, and they went to the devil. At the very gates of the house of
the Lord, they indulged in sensuality and crooked dealing. The Sabbath
school was to them a means of flirtation and the offertory a means of
support.

Eli was too placid, too good-natured, to have keen perception; his mind
decayed with his eyes. He thought Hannah was drunk when she was praying;
and in the charming scene when the Voice came to little Samuel in the
night, old Eli was neither excited nor jealous at the divine preference.
But his reverence for the ark of God was high and sincere; he was like
some Church priest to whom the ritual of the Church and everything
connected with formal worship are more holy than a broken and a contrite

<span id="p.107">p.107</span>

heart. When the fateful messenger came from the field of battle and his
appalling tidings proceeded from general to particular--as is so often
the tragic unfolding of news--the army is defeated, your sons are
killed, the ark of God is taken, then Eli "fell from off the seat
backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died; for
he was an old man, and heavy."

His son Phineas left a wife with child, near her time. Some idiot told
her the news of the defeat and dishonour of Israel, and of the death of
her husband and father-in-law. She travailed and died; and just before
her death the women spoke to her cheerily, and said, "Fear not: for thou
hast born a son." They spoke to deaf ears: "she answered not, neither
did she regard it." But she had named the child Ichabod, which means
*Where is the honour?* her last words being, "The glory is departed from
Israel."

I wish we knew something about Ichabod; he is never mentioned again in
the Bible except in the fourteenth chapter of I Samuel, where Ahitub is
called Ichabod's brother. But although the Bible is silent about him, he
has been borrowed many times in literature and in history for his
symbolical name. Whittier applied the word to Daniel Webster in 1850,
not realising that the speech for which that statesman was condemned was
the finest and most patriotic utterance of his life.

The boy Samuel was dedicated by his mother

<span id="p.108">p.108</span>

Hannah to Jehovah's service; he became a great religious leader, never
deviating from the path of sanctity and rectitude. Yet to me he is not a
sympathetic figure; he had more holiness than charm. There is something
unlovely about the man, something rigid and puritanical. I suppose it
was natural, brought up as he was, that he should be a prig in youth and
a statue of severity in old age. He had no more luck with his sons than
Eli; they were bad, as perhaps might be expected, and did not find the
piety of their father alluring. Just as some humanitarians are kind to
everyone except members of their own family, so I suppose some religious
leaders have more zeal for God's house than affection for their own.
Samuel's sons, like those of Eli, were a public scandal.

Samuel's stern integrity made him a powerful Judge, respected and feared
by the people, whose wanderings after strange gods he did not hesitate
to condemn. He went on circuit through various cities, holding court.
The Philistines were in terror of him, for so long as his decisions were
regarded, the Israelites prospered in battle; the power of the enemy
receded, not to become triumphant again until after his death. He made
his sons judges; they were corrupt, taking bribes freely, and the old
man was shamed in the courts of law. The Israelites may perhaps be
pardoned for their wish to have a king; they knew Samuel could not last
much longer and they regarded with natural apprehension the

<span id="p.109">p.109</span>

coming rule of his sons. They spoke to him with cruel frankness:

> Behold, them art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a
> king to judge us like all the nations.

Samuel was angry, not for the first or the last time in his life; and he
warned the people that their king would be a tyrant. But they, fearing
his decrepitude and his sons' depravity, wanted a personable figure of a
king, who should go before them, lead them into battle, and incarnate
the power of the whole nation. Their request was granted; the first king
of Israel was the biggest and handsomest man in the country, every inch
a king.

The tallest man came out of the smallest tribe, the tribe of Benjamin.
Kish was a mighty man, a rich cattle-dealer, and

> he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly:
> and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than
> he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the
> people.

I suppose he stood about six feet nine in his sandals.

Saul was a cowboy; and he had gone out to seek his father's strayed
cattle when he met Samuel, the Seer, the man of God. The venerable
prophet gave him the astounding tidings that he was to be king. Saul was
modest and unassuming; he reminded Samuel that he belonged to the
smallest of the twelve tribes, and that his family were socially
unimportant; but Samuel took the embarrassed

<span id="p.110">p.110</span>

young man into the parlour, and gave him the place of honour at a state
dinner of thirty guests. That night a bed was made for Saul on the roof
of the house--perhaps he was too big for the indoor furniture--and the
next morning Samuel anointed him as the first King of Israel. A peaceful
but permanent change took place in the government of the nation.

Samuel made a curious prediction which came to pass that day. As young
Saul drew near to a hill, he met a company of prophets descending; they
were following musicians who were playing on the psaltery, tabret, pipe
and harp, while mystic speech filled the air; Saul was particularly
affected by music; his spirit was caught up in a strange exaltation, and
he too shouted in ecstasy and prophesied with the rest. When his former
friends saw this, they marvelled. They were as much astonished as
college students would be to see their champion athlete suddenly break
out in poetry. Saul's utterances sounded like tall talk for a young
cattle-man, and they wondered what was the matter with him. They
expressed their quite natural amazement in words that have become a
proverb:

> What is this that has come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among
> the prophets?

Saul became his natural self after this experience, for when Samuel was
on the point of introducing him to the people, and like a convention
speaker

<span id="p.111">p.111</span>

was just about to mention the name of the candidate, Saul could not be
found; his shyness had got the better of him, and he had hid himself.
But when he was found and presented to the congregation, they were
delighted with his magnificent appearance, and they shouted together:

*GOD SAVE THE KING!*

Samuel wrote out a constitution, placed it in a book of records, and
dismissed the people.

It is always easy to adjust one's self to an advance in the scale of
living; luxuries soon become a matter of course. The big country lad, so
shy and modest at first, quickly became used to the pleasures of
authority. It was a bad thing for Israel to have a king, but it was even
worse for the king. We see the old, familiar, melancholy story of pride,
egotism, and an abuse of power leading to degeneration and ruin. The
personal history of Saul is one of the most tragic in the Bible. Like
Macbeth, he was a good fellow ruined by promotion. When we first meet
Saul, we see a kindly, modest, country boy of superb physique, contented
with his work, and happy in his exuberant health and strength; as soon
as he became king, he exchanged comfort for splendour, cheerfulness for
majesty, outdoor life for councils of state, peace of mind for chronic
anxiety.

Furthermore, his moral nature had never been tried, and it failed to
meet the tests of kingship. As his royal power increased, the
wholesomeness of

<span id="p.112">p.112</span>

his character diminished. Men are not made for unchecked dominion, and
almost invariably deteriorate with supreme power in their hands. The
instance of Napoleon is simply a revelation of human nature; one sees
the degeneration of the man steadily and insidiously accompanying the
increase in authority. There are not many characters in history like
Abraham Lincoln; whereas Napoleon, minus genius, is such a familiar
example, so true to form, that Emerson took him as the representative of
the common man.

It is depressing to contemplate the wretched figure of King Saul talking
with the ghost of Samuel, and to compare that colloquy with their first
conversation. On this last fateful interview, the same thing had really
happened to both men; Samuel was an actual ghost, but in reality no more
so than Saul, for he was only the ghost of his former self.

The deterioration of any man or woman is a shocking spectacle; but how
much more so when the individual has been entrusted with enormous power
and unbounded opportunities, only to make a wreck, involving his final
ruin in the general downfall. Saul's youth was like a sunny spring
morning, that changes into the darkness of clouds and tempest. His fate
hurts us, because there is something about him that we love.

The Philistines were not unlike later conquerors; after they had beaten
Israel, they hoped to make their enemies permanently helpless, as so
many vic-

<span id="p.113">p.113</span>

torious nations have vainly hoped. There was not a single blacksmith
left among the Hebrews:

> For the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords and
> spears:  
> But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every
> man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock......  
> So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword
> nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul
> and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.

Like Frederick II, King of Prussia, Saul was fond of tall soldiers, and
chose a special company of them to be the royal bodyguard. He searched
the whole nation for individual athletes; "and when Saul saw any strong
man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him." This company of picked
men-at-arms, every one splendid in figure and famous for deeds of
prowess, must have made an imposing appearance as they followed the
mighty king, majestic in stature, head and shoulders above them all.
These were the good days of Saul's reign, when he wore golden opinions
in their newest gloss.

One of the most splendid and lovable young men in the Bible is the crown
prince Jonathan; he was mighty and valiant, bold as a lion, fearless in
danger, a good son and good patriot, and so loyal to his friend David
that he was willing to lose his own rights rather than have David
suffer. He was a

<span id="p.114">p.114</span>

natural-born soldier, who fought with wisdom and courage, and who died
on the field of battle.

The Philistines had left a garrison at Geba, and, as frequently happens,
the alien soldiers had corrupted the natives. Young Jonathan went forth
to war, and smote this garrison, revealing at the same time the apostasy
and abominable practices of the Israelites there dwelling. The
Philistine host came out from their country hot for revenge, and the
Hebrews hid "in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high
places, and in pits." While the unarmed population were in this state of
terror and apprehension, Jonathan, without telling his father, took his
armour-bearer, who seems to have been a youth after his own heart,
loving adventure more than life, and the two, climbing up the face of
the rock with their hands and feet, rushed upon the army, like a pair of
hounds into a herd. They slew man after man.

Afar off, the watchmen of Saul observed the confusion in the enemy's
ranks and reported it; Saul gave the word, the Israelites advanced, and
all the people came out of their hiding-places and fell upon the
Philistines, while the natives rose against the garrison; there was a
terrific slaughter. But a curious thing happened, which is of deep
significance, for it proved to Saul that he was a constitutional
monarch, when he had fondly believed himself to be absolute and
irresponsible. He had forbidden every man to eat until night came and
their revenge should

<span id="p.115">p.115</span>

be complete. Naturally, Jonathan had not heard the king's command, and
being almost faint with the heat of his exertions, and seeing honey in a
wood, he ate of it; the relief he felt could not have been better
expressed than by the Bible phrase: "His eyes were enlightened." Then
the people, in horror, told him of his father's words, but the sensible
Jonathan declared his father to be in error, and that it would have been
better for all the people to eat, and so be more efficient in the fight.
On that night, Saul, seeing that something was wrong, had lots drawn,
and Jonathan was taken. Then came the first clash between the prince and
his father, Jonathan saying ironically, "I did but taste a little honey
.....and lo, I must die." The wilful king replied, "Thou shalt surely
die, Jonathan."

Saul immediately discovered that there was such a thing as public
sentiment, and that it was stronger than the royal power. Many kings
after his day were to ascertain the same fact--what a pity that there
were not more instances! We do not know who the spokesman was on this
occasion; perhaps angry resentment found many voices. The people said
that not one hair of Jonathan's head should fall to the ground--and the
king found it advisable not to press the matter. This is one of the
first cases in history when public sentiment manifested itself
successfully against the ruling authority, and, as such, deserves this
especial mention.

Saul was an able military leader, and the Israel-

<span id="p.116">p.116</span>

ites were frequently victorious under his leadership. When he defeated
the Amalekites, he did not fulfill to the letter the stern directions of
the voice of the Lord, who through Samuel told him to kill the women,
the babies, the sucklings in their mothers' arms, and all the valuable
cattle. (Wicked Amalekite babies!)

Unfortunately, Saul was not moved by any pity, for the children were
slaughtered; King Agag was spared out of royal courtesy, and the best of
the cattle were saved, ostensibly to offer up to Jehovah, but probably
for more practical purposes. Saul was always afraid of Samuel; he had
the attitude of a bad boy toward a severe private tutor; but the reason
he gave Samuel for sparing the cattle is significant, coming so soon
after the public demonstration about Jonathan: "I feared the people, and
obeyed their voice." Saul could not bear to see Samuel leaving him, and
with his powerful hand he clutched the robe of the prophet, which tore
in his grasp, Samuel using the rent as an allegory of the rending of
Saul's kingdom.

Samuel relented at Saul's despairing plea, but it was an unfortunate
decision for Agag. It is a vivid scene, when the king of the Amalekites,
who now believed in his reprieve, came toward Samuel, walking
delicately, with self-conscious, embarrassed and mincing steps, saying,
"Surely the bitterness of death is past." They were his last words, for
Samuel immediately dissected him.

<span id="p.117">p.117</span>

Samuel was an incorruptible Judge; and the fact that he took pride in
what we regard to-day as a matter of course would seem to indicate that
high officials in Israel were not always what they should be, probably
on the whole decidedly inferior to court officials in the twentieth
century. Samuel said to the people, "I am old and gray-headed.....and I
have walked before you from my childhood unto this day."

> Behold, here I am:.....whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed?
> or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
> therewith? and I will restore it you.

After a number of chapters dealing with the adventures of Saul and of
David, one forgets Samuel, and it is with a shock that the twenty-fifth
chapter opens with the words, "And Samuel died." One feels that a pillar
of the house is fallen, and that calamity will visit Israel in his
absence.

Samuel is the only authentic ghost in the Bible; the only spirit who
rose from the grave in palpable form, spoke definite words, and returned
to his slumber. King Saul's visit to the medium has a strangely modern
air. It was the last night of his life; he had well-founded fears that
on the morrow he would be defeated by the Philistines. He missed sadly
the counsel of his old tutor; and he enquired of God by dreams, by
casting lots, and by prophets; all in vain. As a last resort, he visited
a medium, the witch of Endor; once more his story reminds us of Macbeth.

<span id="p.118">p.118</span>

The mediums were strictly forbidden by law; it was a capital offence to
practice the art. But the desire of human nature to communicate with
spirits was then and is now so strong that no legal measures or no power
of reasoning can stop the traffic. Saul went in the darkness of the
night, and in disguise, and when the woman asked him with whom he would
like to speak, he said in a voice of authority (which betrayed his
identity), "Bring me up Samuel." To the amazement of the old witch, who
had hitherto relied on hocus-pocus, Samuel actually appeared. She cried
out, "An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle." Death had
not changed the character of the old prophet; he that was holy was holy
still. He asked sternly why Saul had broken into his quiet sleep; Saul
replied pathetically (and our hearts go out to him) : "I am sore
distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed
from me." Samuel informed him that everything had happened as he had
predicted (I told you so), and then added grimly, "Tomorrow shalt thou
and thy sons be with me."

Saul fainted. The next day the battle went sore against him. The loyal
Jonathan fell, fighting for his father's kingdom. Saul himself was
cruelly wounded by the Philistine archers, and asked his armour-bearer
to put an end to his sufferings; the boy was afraid, so Saul, like an
old Roman, fell on his own sword.

The character of the First King is not impeccable,

<span id="p.119">p.119</span>

but he was very human, and had the faults that mark the natural man. The
happiest years of his life came in his careless youth, riding over the
hills after the herds; there was nothing kingly about him except his
appearance. His jealousy of David is quite natural; the girls sang, Saul
has killed his thousands, and David his ten thousands. He could hardly
be expected to hear that song with enthusiasm. I suppose there are some
ministers of the gospel who, if they should hear a song proclaiming that
they had saved a thousand souls, while their successors in the pastorate
had saved ten thousand, might, in their glad rejoicing over the addition
to the elect, feel some tincture of pique. Saul's jealousy of young
David was further inflamed by the fact that his own children were mad
about his rival; Jonathan loved him to distraction, and Saul's daughter
Michal fell in love with him. Saul was no more vain and no more jealous
than the average American.

He had no genius for government; he was more captain than statesman. He
was rash and impulsive, given to outbursts of passion, followed by
hearty repentance. He was subject to terrible fits of depression,
nervous melancholia so severe and so prolonged that he lay as if in a
stupour. The only thing that could help him then was music, of which he
was inordinately fond. We have seen how, when he heard the orchestra
playing with the prophets, he went into an ecstasy; so when this cloud
of

<span id="p.120">p.120</span>

despondency darkened his mind, David came and played music--perhaps the
old cowboy tunes--and he was refreshed and took up his work again. No
one has ever understood this peculiar melancholy either then or now; the
Bible diagnoses it as possession by an evil spirit, which well describes
its effects; this evil spirit could be banished only by music, the
method so familiar to-day in the treatment of nervous diseases. Browning
has poetically recreated the effect on Saul of David's music.

Looking back on Saul's life and career, it does not appear that he was
either sensual or vindictive, the two most common vices of monarchs;
indeed, he was rather like a big, grown-up boy, incapable of dealing
with problems of state. In comparison with the average character of
kings, both in ancient and in modern history, Saul meets the test rather
well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. King David](chap06.md)
