[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kis02)  [Next](kis04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

III

<span id="img_05"></span> ![](img/05.jpg)

They came, they flew down, and when they touched the ground they
transformed themselves into three maidens and went to bathe in the lake.
The one who carried the green scarf left her swanskin under a bush. The
King's Son took it and hid it in a hollow tree.

Two of the maidens soon came out of the water, put on their swanskins
and flew away as swans. The younger maiden stayed for a while in the
lake. Then she came out and began to search for her swanskin. She
searched and searched, and at last the King's Son heard her say, "I
would do anything in the world for the creature who would find my
swanskin for me." Then he came from where he was hiding and gave her the
swanskin. "I am the Son of the King of Ireland," he said, "and I want
you to show me the way to your father's dominion."

"I would prefer to do anything else for you," said the maiden. "I do not
want anything else," said the King of Ireland's Son.

"If I show you how to get there will you be content?"

"I shall be content."

"You must never let my father know that I showed you the way. And he
must not know when you come that you are the King of Ireland's Son."

"I will not tell him you showed me the way and I will not let him know
who I am."

Now that she had the swanskin she was able to transform herself. She
whistled and a blue falcon came down and perched on a tree. "That falcon
is my own bird," said she. "Follow where it flies and you will come to
my father's house. And now good-by to you. You will be in danger, but I
will try to help you. Fedelma is my name." She rose up as a swan and
flew away.

The blue falcon went flying from bush to bush and from rock to rock. The
night came, but in the morning the blue falcon was seen again. The
King's Son followed, and at last he saw a house before him. He went in,
and there, seated on a chair of gold was the man who seemed so tall when
he threw down the cards upon the heap of stones. The Enchanter did not
recognize the King's Son without his hawk and his hound and the fine
clothes he used to wear. He asked who he was and the King's Son said he
was a youth who had just finished an apprenticeship to a wizard. "And,"
said he, "I have heard that you have three fair daughters, and I came to
strive to gain one of them for a wife."

"In that case," said the Enchanter of the Black Back-Lands, "you will
have to do three tasks for me. If you are able to do them I will give
you one of my three daughters in marriage. If you fail to do any one of
them you will lose your head. Are you willing to make the trial?"

"I am willing," said the King of Ireland's Son.

"Then I shall give you your first task to-morrow. It is unlucky that you
came to-day. In this country we eat a meal only once a week, and we have
had our meal this morning."

"It is all the same to me," said the King's Son, "I can do without food
or drink for a month without any hardship."

"I suppose you can do without sleep too?" said the Enchanter of the
Black Back-Lands.

"Easily," said the King of Ireland's Son.

"That is good. Come outside now, and I'll show you your bed." He took
the King's Son outside and showed him a dry narrow water-tank at the
gable end of the house. "There is where you are to sleep" said the
Enchanter. "Tuck yourself into it now and be ready for your first task
at the rising of the sun."

The King of Ireland's Son went into the little tank. He was
uncomfortable there you may be sure. But in the middle of the night
Fedelma came and brought him into a fine room where he ate and then
slept until the sun was about to rise in the morning. She called him and
he went outside and laid himself down in the water-tank.

As soon as the sun rose the Enchanter of the Black Back-Lands came out
of the house and stood beside the water-tank. "Come now," said he, "and
I will show you the first task you have to perform." He took him to
where a herd of goats was grazing. Away from the goats was a fawn with
white feet and little bright horns. The fawn saw them, bounded into the
air, and raced away to the wood as quickly as any arrow that a man ever
shot from a bow.

"That is Whitefoot the Fawn," said the Enchanter of the Black
Back-Lands. "She grazes with my goats but none of my gillies can bring
her into my goat-house. Here is your first task--run down Whitefoot the
Fawn and bring her with my goats into the goat-shelter this evening."
When he said that the Enchanter of the Black Back-Lands went away
laughing to himself.

"Good-by, my life," said the King of Ireland's Son, "I might as well try
to catch an eagle on the wing as to run down the deer that has gone out
of sight already." He sat down on the ground and his despair was great.
Then his name was called and he saw Fedelma coming towards him. She
looked at him as though she were in dread, and said, "What task has my
father set you?" He told her and then she smiled. "I was in dread it
would be a more terrible task," she said. "This one is easy. I can help
you to catch Whitefoot the Fawn. But first eat what I have brought you."

 

She put down bread and meat and wine, and they sat down and he ate and
drank. "I thought he might set you this task," she said, "and so I
brought you something from my father's store of enchanted things. Here
are the Shoes of Swiftness. With these on your feet you can run down
Whitefoot the Fawn. But you must catch her before she has gone very far
away. Remember that she must be brought in when the goats are going into
their shelter at sunset. You will have to walk back for all the time you
must keep hold of her silver horns. Hasten now. Run her down with the
Shoes of Swiftness and then lay hold of her horns. Above all things
Whitefoot dreads the loss of her silver horns."

He thanked Fedelma. He put on the Shoes of Swiftness and went into the
wood. Now he could go as the eagle flies. He found Whitefoot the Fawn
drinking at the Raven's pool.

When she saw him she went from thicket to thicket. The Shoes of
Swiftness were hardly any use to him in these shut-in places. At last he
beat her from the last thicket. It was the hour of noon-tide then. There
was a clear plain before them and with the Shoes of Swiftness he ran her
down. There were tears in the Fawn's eyes and he knew she was troubled
with the dread of losing her silver horns.

He kept his hands on the horns and they went back over miles of plain
and pasture, bog and wood. The hours were going quicker than they were
going. When 'he came within the domain of the Enchanter of the Black
Back-Lands he saw the goats going quickly before him. They were hurrying
from their pastures to the goat-shelter, one stopping, maybe, to bite
the top of a hedge and another giving this one a blow with her horns to
hurry her on. "By your silver horns, we must go faster," said the King
of Ireland's Son to the Fawn. They went more quickly then.

He saw the Enchanter of the Black Back-Lands waiting at the goat-house,
now counting the goats that came along and now looking at the sun. When
he saw the King of Ireland's Son coming with his capture he was so angry
that he struck an old full-bearded goat that had stopped to rub itself.
The goat reared up and struck him with his horns. "Well," said the
Enchanter of the Black Back-Lands, "you have performed your first task,
I see. You are a greater enchanter than I thought you were. Whitefoot
the Fawn can go in with my goats. Go back now to your own
sleeping-place. To-morrow I'll come to you early and give you your
second task."

The King of Ireland's Son went back and into the dry water-tank. He was
tired with his day's journey after Whitefoot the Fawn. It was his hope
that Fedelma would come to him and give him shelter for that night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](kis04)
