[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kis30)  [Next](kis32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

X

The evening after when Rory the Fox was taking his nap he heard one of
his youngsters give a sharp cry. They were playing outside the burrow,
he looked out and he saw that his three youngsters were afraid of
something that was between them and the burrow. He looked again and saw
the Weasel.

"Ahem," said Rory the Fox, "and how are we this morning?"

The Weasel had marked one of Rory's youngsters for attack. Although Rory
spoke, he never took his eyes off the youngster he had marked.

"My dear friend," said the Fox, "I was just going to say--if you are
looking for anything, perhaps I could tell you where it might be found."

"Crystal Egg," said the Weasel without ever taking away his
blood-thirsty gaze from Rory's youngster.

"Oh, the Crystal Egg," said Rory the Fox. "Yes, to be sure. I could
bring you at once to the place where the Crystal Egg is." He came out of
the burrow and saw Gilly standing on the bank behind.

"I think it is time for my children to go back to their burrow," said
Rory the Fox. "Please excuse them, my friends." The Weasel took his eyes
off the youngster he had marked and the three little foxes scampered
into the burrow.

"This way, friends," said the Fox, and he started off towards the
Spae-Woman's house with the light and easy trot of a fox. Gilly and the
Weasel went behind him. They crossed a field of flax, a field of hemp
and a field of barley. They came to the broken fence before the
Spae-Woman's house, and in front of the house they saw the Spae-Woman
herself and she was crying and crying.

The Fox hid behind the fence, the Weasel climbed up on the ditch and
Gilly himself went to the woman.

"What ails you at all?" said Gilly to her.

"My goose--the only fowl left to me has been taken by robbers."

"Ask her where the clutch of eggs is that the goose was hatching," said
Rory the Fox anxiously, putting his head over the fence.

"And where is the clutch of eggs, ma'am, that your goose was hatching?"

"The robbers took the nest with the goose and the eggs with the nest,"
said the Spae-Woman.

"And the Crystal Egg was with the other eggs," said the Fox to Gilly. He
said no more. He made a quick turn and got clear away before the Weasel
could spring on him. He ran back to his burrow. He told the little foxes
they must change houses again. That night they lay in a wood and at the
first light they crossed water and went to live on an island where the
Weasel never came.

"Where did the robbers go with the goose, the nest, and the eggs?" said
Gilly of the Goatskin.

"They went to the river," said the Spae-Woman. "I followed them every
inch of the way. They got into a boat and they hoisted their sails. They
rowed and they rowed, so that the hard gravel of the bottom was brought
to the top, and the froth of the top was driven down to the bottom of
the river. And wherever they are," said the Spae-Woman, "they are far
from us now."

"Will you come with me?" said Gilly to the Weasel, "we will track them
down and take back the Crystal Egg."

"I engaged myself to be with you for a quarter of a year," said the
Weasel, "and the three months are up now, Gilly. Winter is coming on and
I must see to my own affairs."

"Then good-by, Weasel," said Gilly. "I will search for the Crystal Egg
myself. But first I must ask the woman to let me rest in the house and
to give me some provision for my journey." The Weasel looked up into
Gilly's face and said good-by to him. Then Gilly followed the Spae-Woman
into her house. "Ocone," she was saying to herself, "my dream told me I
was to lose my poor goose, and still I never did anything to make it
hard for the robbers to take her from me."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part XI](kis32)
