[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom06)  [Next](eom08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

## CHAPTER V

### PARENTHOOD.

The desire for fatherhood and motherhood, is found and expressed in the
sexual instinct which in turn evinces and is the sign of creative power.
Its origin is in life itself. It is the God power, and when it comes
throbbing and pulsating in every nerve, in every thought and feeling, it
should be recognized as such and appropriated in a God-like manner.

The power to perpetuate the life principle is from the spiritual side of
life. It is a manifestation of spirit in the flesh. Body alone cannot
reproduce itself, the physical man cannot perpetuate himself, the
physical woman cannot perpetuate herself. Reproduction is from and

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

through spiritual life. It is creative energy manifested in flesh. Its
fulfillment is in parenthood.

Parenthood being an expression of creative principle, and being born of
the spirit, need not necessarily have its sole manifestation in the
procreation of children in the flesh. It can be devoted to, and
expressed in, all the great interests of the world.

The inventing, creating, organizing and systematizing qualities of the
male; the patience, the carefulness, tenderness and attention to
details, indeed, the brooding care of the female - all these are greatly
needed in our government, in our religious and educational institutions,
in all the affairs of life.

The human craving of either father or mother for offspring, may find
expression in the larger, greater and all-inclusive power of Divine
love,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

in its devotion to some great philanthropy, or in its concentration upon
some altruistic work.

Parenthood, recognized as a manifestation of the Divine in man, as the
highest and noblest expression of manhood and womanhood, gives a choice
of appropriation either to spiritual or physical procreation. In Karezza
this choice is under certain and wise control.

The desire for offspring is innate in the human heart; it is the natural
expression of the creative principle; it is seed-bearing on the physical
plane.

In my professional experience more women have consulted me to ascertain
and overcome causes of barrenness, than have sought to prevent
motherhood. Those denied the privileges and blessings of maternity
usually have been borne down with great sorrow. Very few have yet
learned that this maternal desire may be gratified

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

on a higher plane through the procreation of thought and ideas, and thus
give satisfaction to a natural instinct.

Physiology and pathology alike often fail to reveal the causes of
barrenness, while the physician's resources and the surgeon's knife
alike afford no relief. Very frequently the cause lies deeper than can
be discovered by chemistry and the microscope, or remedied by probe and
scalpel. The cause may lie in the occult forces, in the lack of soul or
spiritual adjustment, or it may have its origin in physical excesses.

Conservation is the great secret of power. It is possible that the
heart's desire for offspring may be gratified through Karezza, through
wise and temperate control of the sexual impulses, a storage of life
that begets life.

In Karezza men and women attain such development and fine spiritual
perception

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

that they know when a soul can be begotten, and with the great power
resulting from continence quickly respond.

Many cases of sterility have been overcome even by an occasional and
unsystematic temperance in the physical relation. A fruitful union
frequently follows long separation of husband and wife, even though they
have never had children. One may expect more certain results if the
relation conforms to scientific principles. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[55:1](eom07.htm#fr_0) Since penning the above a
lady called, aged 39, who had been married thirteen years, without
children. At last, however, her mother heart throbbed with happy
anticipations. In conversation the fact was developed that conception
had taken place immediately after a lengthy separation from her husband.
Seed waste was prevented and propagation was the result. Through Karezza
this seed waste can be prevented without separation, and thus the
heart's longing for children be gratified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 6: Control of Procreative Powers](eom08)
