[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom03)  [Next](eom05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

### KAREZZA.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue and
if there be any praise, think on these things.

Karezza signifies "to express affection in both words and actions," and
while it fittingly denotes the union that is the outcome of deepest
human affection, love's consummation, it is used technically throughout
this work to designate a controlled sexual relation.

Intelligent married people, possessing lofty aims in life and desiring
spiritual growth and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

development, have it in their power so to accord their marital relations
as to give an untold impetus to all their faculties. This is given
through the act of copulation when it is the outgrowth of the
expressions of love, and is at the same time completely under the
control of the will.

The ordinary hasty spasmodic method of cohabitation, for which there has
been no previous preparation, and in which the wife is passive is alike
unsatisfactory to husband and wife. It is deleterious both physically
and spiritually. It has in it no consistency as a demonstration of
affection, and is frequently a cause of estrangement and separation.

Karezza so consummates marriage that through the power of will, and
loving thoughts, the crisis is not reached, but a complete control by
both husband and wife is maintained throughout

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the entire relation.

The law of Karezza dictates thoughtful preparation, even for several
days previous to the union. Lover-like attentions and kindly acts
prophesy love's appointed consummation. These bind heart to heart and
soul to soul. There should be a course of training to exalt the
spiritual and subordinate the physical. This is accomplished through
reading and meditation. The reading should lead to exaltation of spirit,
and to the knowledge of the power and source of life. The authors chosen
should be illuminated souls, such as Browning, Emerson, Carpenter. It is
not easy to advise for individual cases. W.F. Evans, Henry Wood, and
R.W. Trine have revealed the law of spirit and given practical helps in
life's adjustment.

The meditation should be an act of giving up

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of one's will, one's intellectual concepts, to allow free usurpation of
kosmic intelligence. In obedience to law, common or finite consciousness
listens to kosmic consciousness. Daily, hourly, the listening soul
awakens to new ideals.

At the appointed time, without fatigue of body or unrest of mind,
accompany general bodily contact with expressions of endearment and
affection, followed by the complete but quiet union of the sexual
organs. During a lengthy period of perfect control, the whole being of
each is merged into the other, and an exquisite exaltation experienced.
This may be accompanied by a quiet motion, entirely under subordination
of the will, so that the thrill of passion for either may not go beyond
a pleasurable exchange. Unless procreation is desired, let the final
propagative orgasm be entirely avoided.

With abundant time and mutual reciprocity

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the interchange becomes satisfactory and complete without emission or
crisis. In the course of an hour the physical tension subsides, the
spiritual exaltation increases, and not uncommonly visions of a
transcendent life are seen and consciousness of new powers experienced.

Before and during the time there may be some devotional exercises or
there may be a formula of consecration of an uplifting character in
which both unite. This aids in concentration and in removing the
thoughts from merely physical sensations. The following has been helpful
to many: "We are living spiritual beings; our bodies symbolize soul
union, and in closest contact each receives strength to be more to the
other and more to all the world."

This method of consummating the marriage relation is erroneously called
in TOKOLOGY, Sedular Absorption. Many scientists now believe

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

there is no seed fluid secreted except through the demand of the final
act of ejection. If this be true, in Karezza there is no seed to be
absorbed, as, under the direct control of the will, the act ceases short
of the seed secreting period.

One writer called it Male Continence, but it is no more male than female
continence; to secure the greatest good, the husband and wife equally
conserve their forces under a wise control; besides, Continence has long
been erroneously accepted as the term for abstinence of the physical
relation except for procreation.

Karezza is a symbol of the perfect union of two souls in marriage, it is
the highest expression of mutual affection, and gives to those
practicing it revelations of strength and power. It must be experienced
upon a higher plane than the merely physical, and may always be made a
means of spiritual unfoldment. This should,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

indeed, be called a spiritual rather than a physical companionship. With
a due reverence for the deeper meanings of the association, union and
soul development are sought rather than fleeting passional
gratification.

Karezza gives to the sexual relation an office entirely distinct from
the propagative act, a high office in individual development and
formation of character. It is both a union on the affectional plane and
a preparation for best possible conditions for procreation.

Karezza should always be the outcome, the emblem of the deeper emotions;
both husband and wife should hope and expect that the union will
contribute to their spiritual growth and development. The marriage bond
has given the sex functions a special consecration. In each union under
spiritual law this consecration is renewed. There is no defilement or
debasement

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

in the natural and controlled expression of sexual love.

Karezza does not lead to asceticism or repression, but rather to
appropriation and expression. In acknowledging the life source and
conscientiously devoting the creative principle to achievement, to the
activities and purposes of life, one is put in possession of new powers
and possibilities.

The time and frequency Karezza can be governed by no certain law.
Experience, however, has proven that it is far more satisfactory to have
at least an interval of two to four weeks, and many find that even three
or four months afford greater impetus to power and growth as well as
more personal satisfaction; during the interval the thousand and one
lover-like attentions give reciprocal delight, and are an anticipating
prophecy of the ultimate union. According

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

to the law of Karezza, the demand for physical expression is less
frequent, for there is a deep soul union that is replete with
satisfaction and is lasting. As a symbol it embodies all the
manifestations of conjugal love. In all departments of life symbols
become less necessary as one develops spiritually. So in this relation
one may possibly outgrow the symbol. But both growth and satisfaction
are attained through altruistic desires, and through the mutual
recognition and response by husband and wife to the innermost nature of
each - the higher self.

Be patient and determined; the reward will come in happy united lives,
in the finding of the kingdom of heaven in your own hearts through
obedience to law.

Spencer truly said: "When any law works to the advantage of the human
race, then human nature infallibly submits to it, since obedience

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to it becomes a pleasure to man." Yes, the pleasure is in obedience, for
all our sufferings come from ignorance of the law of being, and failure
of adjustment to that law.

Men and women should be as willing to learn the law of sex expression as
they are to study any other science of life, or any law of nature. It
should not only be an intellectual study, but should be a study of
experience and adjustment. In Karezza this expression and adjustment are
so largely personal that special rules cannot be given, but those
seeking the highest development will soon establish suitable conditions.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 3: Attainment possible](eom05.md)
