[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom02)  [Next](eom04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# KAREZZA,

## ETHICS OF MARRIAGE.

### \_\_\_\_\_\_

## CHAPTER I

### CREATIVE ENERGY.

Let there be light.

Man is a trinity of spirit, soul and body. Spirit is the source or
God-life of man from which all proceeds. Soul is spirit in action, and
embraces all that is recognized as individual, personal existence. Soul
includes the intellect, the emotions and the sensations. It is the
thinking, loving, living realm of man. From the Spirit through conscious
training one is capable of developing unlimited forces and
possibilities. Soul looks within, to the All, for life, knowledge

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

and power which it expresses without, through the physical. As thought
precedes action, so nothing can appear or manifest itself in the body
that has not been conceived or thought of in the soul. Soul may
recognize spirit as a governing principle, or it may look out through
the senses for material manifestations, depending only upon symbols for
its concept of life.

Voluntarily and consciously man may choose between these two roads, -
the spiritual or material. In his philosophy, he may recognize that all
power and all life are from and of the Spirit; or, he may attribute all
development, all growth, all evolution to matter.

In the spiritual view, recognizing the divine principle as an ever
present, active energy, as life and intelligence operating through the
soul upon matter, one comes to conclusions that make all of life's
problems less difficult.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Creative energy, expressing through the sexual nature an instinct to
perpetuate life, has its origin in, and is coexistent with life itself.
It is the power back of all purposes and plans. It is the self-impelling
force that gives the ability to do and perform. It is the origin of all
activities of child life. It is the inventive genius and impelling
factor of all man's handiwork - the thought force of mechanics and
machinery.

Both the macrocosms and microcosms of the universe are expressions of
the law of life, instinctively put forth by creative energy. This force
operates in the multiplication of atoms, in the drawing the pollen upon
the stigma; in the attraction of sperm to germ cells. It is the
segregation and aggregation of all molecules of matter, founded on the
duality of sex.

The processes of growth and fulfillment of functions are propelled by
this omnipresent energy

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of spirit, which is inherent in, and operative through, all nature. It
is back of the physical life of man and other animals, and expresses
itself through them. Only when it comes with the strong voice of life
demanding perpetuation, is it especially a manifestation of the sex
nature - a fulfillment of the law of growth, development and of
increase. Atoms, cells and plants, are unconscious of this life force,
and animals conscious only in a small degree.

Man not only has consciousness of this energy, but through his
intelligence is capable of developing greater consciousness of its
operation and the law governing it. He knows that he knows, and in this
knowledge lies his superiority over the brutes.

This recognition and knowledge makes it possible for man to train this
creative potency in all life's purposes and uses. From the inception

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

of the bud of life to its fructifying stage, man may be the master and
maker of conditions. There is no karma for him that is not within his
own power to mold and make; no passion to usurp authority, no desire
that he may not guide and direct. The perfectness of his nature is
evolved through the recognition, direction and appropriation of the
creative energy, the occult forces of life.

Sexual science based upon this theory teaches that there are deeper
purposes and meanings to the reproductive faculties and functions, than
are generally understood and taught.

In the physical union of male and female there may be a soul communion
giving not only supreme happiness, but in turn conducing to soul growth
and development. There may, also, be a purpose and power in this
communion, when rightly understood, not less significant than the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

begetting of children. Creative energy in man is manifold in its
manifestations, and can be trained into channels of usefulness.
Consciously it may be utilized in every activity, devising, inventing,
constructing. It may be directed to building bodily tissue and
permeating every cell with health and vigor. ,ex in nature is universal,
progressing from lower to higher manifestations of life. it is more
distinctive as male and female.

Sexual instinct or passion is a sure sign of seed germination; it is an
indication that life may be perpetuated, and that the entire man or
woman is in preparation for the culmination of being. It is not an
instinct or power either to be ignored or destroyed. Its perversion
means physical and spiritual degeneracy.

Seed production is the goal or highest function of tree or plant, and
procreation is the complete

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

or ultimate manifestation of man's life. Reproduction is the fulfillment
of divine law.

In the plant and in the tree the life principle fulfills the law of its
being in bearing seed. Its manifestation in man is procreation,
reproducing another of its kind. Passion is the instinct for the
preservation of one's kind, the voice and the sign of creative power.
The highest mission in the rose-life is to produce seeds, but on its way
it gives beautiful blossoms and fragrant perfume. It may not always be
able to fulfill its highest mission, but it can express creative power
on its way to fulfillment - to the production of seeds. Man, too,
expresses creative life in many ways besides that of parenthood. He
preaches a sermon, writes a book, invents a machine. Woman writes a
Battle Hymn of the Republic, or makes a loaf of nutritious bread. In
both the least and greatest

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

things of life man gives expression to inherent creative principle.

An artist is a creator. Emerson gives the keynote when he says: "Work
your passion up into poetry." So with all things, the life principle
demanding fulfillment is the power on its way to accomplishment. When
the signs of this creative power come throbbing and pulsating into every
fibre, it only shows that one has greater ability to create than ever
before. There are varied and definite appropriations for this energy.

Knowledge of the law of the spirit, gives the ability to control this
power and all its signs. One becomes its master as truly as is the
engineer of his engine, or the electrician of the most potent force
known to man. The physical sign appearing as passion is of the spirit
and not of the flesh. Treat it as the voice of power impelling

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

one to do, to work. Say quickly, "What new work is before me? I am a
creator. What shall I create?" The sign is a proof of strength and
ability to do greater things than yet accomplished. Demand of the
spiritual self to know what that work may be. Listen, listen to the
voice; the intuition or Higher Self in the silence of the soul will give
answer. Then think, plan and work for fulfillment.

Religion and philosophy are required in consecrating passion. One
inspires a faith in the source of all power, the other defines man's
relation to that power. Already, perhaps, the heart-life is devoted to
some great work, some mission to humanity, but now include directly and
specifically in this consecration creative energy, the inherent
impelling, burgeoning force of life. This inherent force is so prominent
in its demands, so ever-present in action and intrinsically

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

so allied to kosmic force, that it deserves and requires a special
consecration. It must be known as good and not evil, as a friend and not
an enemy, as a quickening, generating power. Consciously, thoughtfully
and specifically command its service. In no way does man's dominion
yield him a richer return than in control, mastery and consecration of
sex energy. It is a means to achievement in any definite direction. The
marvel is that as consciousness of internal strength and power develops,
the physical sign disappears. The peace that follows is the peace of
power.

Understanding the law, that all naturally and inherently is good, no
base or ignoble thoughts of the reproductive functions can ever enter
the mind. The growth, development and ripening of the human seed,
becomes a sweet and sacred mystery, and may be studied as a science with

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the same pleasure, the same purity of thought, with which one studies
plant life and all its revelations.

One finds that nature has no secrets that ever need be withheld. A
striking analogy is seen in the seed cradled in the pod, the birdling in
its nest, and the incipient human life lovingly protected in the
mother's organism. By this pure ideal a profound reverence for all of
nature's mysteries and unfathomable secrets is developed; a conservation
of energies is accomplished; while through the baptizing consecration of
thought, the generative organs are redeemed from the desecration of the
past, and their powers and functions justly and wisely appropriated.

This conservation of power is both possible and effective for the
unmarried. Through love, training and self-control, however, the married
may not only attain the same conservation and appropriation

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

but also by the union of the spiritual forces of their two souls,
greatly augment them.

Love is the fulfillment of the law. Sexual love is its highest
expression on the earth-plane, and sexual union is symbolical of this
love. It stands as evidence of creative energy in action. Love is the
impelling power, and as through affinity and attraction, a chemical
union takes place between two substances producing another substance, so
in a union of the sexes on the spiritual plane accomplishes results
greater than could be accomplished separately. The artist has visions of
new creations, the author has inspirations for new works, the inventor
has new plans and models for machinery and devices. There is no limit to
the power of a true soul union. It specifically increases the gift of
healing and may be purposely directed to free a friend from pain and
suffering.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

The sexual union which is planned and controlled, becomes glorified
through conscious appropriation, while new meanings and new powers are
given to conjugal love. This conservation, furthermore, is a precursor
and preparation for parenthood; for the conception of welcome and
desired offspring that shall in turn have the inheritance of loving
intention and premeditated wisdom.

As the creative potency of man becomes understood, and as this knowledge
is applied, men and women will grow in virtue, in love, in power, and
will gladly and naturally devote this power to the world's interests and
development.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 2: Karezza](eom04.md)
