[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom08)  [Next](eom10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

## CHAPTER VII

### FREE MOTHERHOOD.

A partnership with God is motherhood.*  
What strength, what purity, what self-control,  
What love, what wisdom belongs to her  
Who helps God fashion an immortal soul.  
-Mary Wood Allen*

When in India I visited the Naiars, a peculiar people, found on the
Malabar Coast, and claiming to be of Brahmin descent. They have a native
government, are intelligent and educated, have good schools and their
houses average better than those in other parts of India. Except two
sisters who conducted a mission industrial school for girls, there were
no English in this

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

province. The great peculiarity of the Naiars is that the women are the
lords of creation. In wide contrast to the condition of other women of
that country so full of inconsistencies, they are called the free women
of India.

They seek their husbands, control business interests, and through them
only is the descent of property.

The family and the whole fabric of society is founded upon the mother.
She is the key-stone of the arch, for she chooses who shall be the
father of her child and bestows her worldly goods according to her
desires and discretion.

She marries the man of her choice. If for any reason, however, she deems
him unfit to be a husband or a father of her child, it requires no
ceremony of church or state to free her from him. Her wish and word are
law.

Karezza gives a free motherhood, whether in a

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

government controlled by men or women. Karezza is a mutual relation and
it removes all vestiges of the old idea of man's dominion over woman.
All the pleasure and benefits to be derived are hers as much as his.

The institution of marriage becomes ideal when the desire and pleasure
of the wife calls forth the desire and pleasure of the husband - when a
single code of ethics governs their relation. When offspring is desired,
then surely it is for woman to command and man to obey.

Henry C. Wright, a noble defender of the rights of women and children,
said: "Man, in begetting a child without regard to the wishes and
condition of his wife, heedless of the physical and spiritual well being
of his offspring, commits the greatest outrage any human being can
perpetrate on another. Motherhood should be a privilege and an
opportunity, not a penalty or misfortune."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

When all people concede the importance and dignity of the maternal
function, then they will honor and respect woman as does Drummond in his
Ascent of Man. He maintains that "Mothers are the chief end of creation.
In plants the mother species heads the list. Beyond the mother with her
milky breast the Creator does not go; that is His goal. In as real a
sense as a factory is meant to turn out locomotives or locks, the
machinery of nature in its last resort is meant to turn out mothers."

In these and various eloquent paragraphs this man of science honors
motherhood. He exclaims that love is the supreme factor in the evolution
of the world, and teaches that the mother in giving birth to children,
in caring for them and educating them, gives us the highest
manifestation of Divine love.

We reverence the high ideals of this philosopher,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

and esteem him for his fearlessness. Those, however, who have studied
deeply into spiritual truth, do not recognize great mental and spiritual
differences between men and women on account of sex. Circumstances and
environments have made seeming differences. The best development and the
purest lives come from a full understanding and recognition of the
purely spiritual or divine in man. The knowledge of the living,
spiritual truth that man has no separate existence from God, is the most
potent factor in breaking down all supposed inequalities between the
sexes. This gives us a new language. There is no more talk of male or
female minds, male or female qualities, for all minds are from one
source. Each individual includes in his characteristics both male and
female principles, both the fatherhood and motherhood of God.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

When men come to know that the larger experience is in the spiritual
life, neither man nor woman will patter around in Chinese shoes of
conventionalism, or have their conduct governed by conditions as binding
as Hindu Caste.

This gives to woman freedom with its basic principles in spiritual law.
She realizes that the source of love, wisdom and knowledge is infinite,
that life in its fullness is hers; that the possibilities of conquest
are as great as the world, and the path is as free and wide as the
universe.

She finds her true self in every situation. She loses even a suspicion
that any one wishes or has the power to curtail her privileges, while
her daily external life becomes a manifestation of her internal growth
and exaltation.

The mother-nature demanding the divinest helps, in the existence of the
demand feels the assurance of the supply. In the desire and fulfillment

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

of the office of maternity, her choice as to time and circumstances
becomes law.

Women have demanded and received recognition in every profession and
vocation; they have eloquently appealed for the duties and privileges of
citizenship. In many states they have been allowed through the ballot, a
voice in adjusting disputed policies of city and country; they have been
given positions of responsibility and emolument; but alas, how seldom
are they accorded the freedom of choice for the fulfillment of the
inherent and natural function of child-bearing.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton, after thirty years devotion to the
enfranchisement of woman, said that if the ballot were granted fully and
freely to women, she would have entered only the vestibule to her
emancipation; and that with the conditions that love and freedom would
give to her sexual life she could raise a race of gods.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Women in every station of life, from the reigning queen of the greatest
nation of the earth to the humblest toiler in the hamlet; wives of men
expounding the higher law from the pulpit and wives of men in slums,
ignorant of all law and justice, have all alike been subjected to all
the inconvenience, suffering and debasement of chance maternity. Thus
the hearts of intelligent and pure-minded people have been dulled by
tradition to the injustice and wrong thus perpetrated upon both mother
and child.

Women whose intuitions have been trained to lofty purposes and aims will
seek and expect the best conditions for procreation. The child in its
glorified life, will bless her thoughtfulness and fidelity. In freedom
the behests of love are fulfilled. Ideal parentage gives ideal children.

It belongs to institutions of learning to remove from sexual science the
stigma of secrecy and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

prudery, and it is the privilege of enlightened womanhood to apply
scientific knowledge to the conception and bearing of children; to apply
the accumulated wisdom of the ages to the most responsible office of
maternity. To do this she must be free to exalt her sexual life to the
fulfillment of its highest mission. In this enlightenment and
exaltation, the devoted husband will naturally and freely accord his
conduct to her wishes. Love's commands are always founded on justice;
love's obedience is willing obedience.

Happy he*  
with such a mother! Faith in womankind  
Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high  
comes easy to him.* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. 8: Married and Mated](eom10.md)
