[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eom11)  [Next](eom13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417939699/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Karezza, Ethics of Marriage*, by Alice B. Stockham, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

## CHAPTER X

### SPIRITUAL GROWTH.

I well perceive how in thine intellect already shines the eternal light,
which once seen, always kindles love. - Dante

Souls really united progress unitedly. This is the strongest and
greatest argument of this altruistic union. The highest aim in life
should be spiritual development and attainment of power and strength in
this direction. Habits and conditions that contribute to this should be
sought.

Miller says: "With Zugassent's Discovery (Karezza) comes also the one,
supreme truth, that its greatest crown of honor consists in its

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

conducing to the highest and noblest spiritual development."

What is spiritual development? It is coming into recognition of the
supremacy of the spiritual over the physical; it is conscious mastery in
one sense, and in another it is a knowledge of the God-like in man that
takes possession of him, leading and guiding him in all the walks of
life.

It is true that in Karezza one experiences growth in the spiritual
nature. This is obtained through the habit of self-control and mastery,
and through the desire of each for the best good of the other, and to
the high aspirations accompanying the relation. Once having experience
in Karezza, one will never return to the ordinary habits in which
sensuality and selfishness so often predominate.

All spiritual experience is growth in the knowledge

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of man's divinity, of his inseparable union with the omnipresent
principle of life. He may come to a sudden awakening of this great truth
of his being which results in an instantaneous conversion, like Saul of
Tarsus, or it may more slowly dawn upon his perception as in the case of
Saul of old as he listened to the divine harmonies of David's harp.

Whenever and however man perceives this truth, it is borne upon his
inner consciousness that the real enduring things of life belong to the
spirit, while the evanescent, fleeting, unstable things of life are of
the material. He comes to rule his life according to this knowledge, and
although he lives in the world, he is not of it, and all things present
new meanings to him.

In no part of life's domain are these new meanings more clearly
perceived than in the reproductive powers. In the loving companionship

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of husband and wife, in the conception and birth of spiritual and
physical offspring - in all their innermost relations, their lives are
attuned to nature's harmonies, their very existence vibrates with the
divine unity of the universe.

Both men and women can train this creative energy into power. The word
is the sword of the spirit. It is a well proven law that the reiteration
of a thought brings about a condition which makes manifest what the
thought expresses. Therefore, let one repeat again and again, "I am a
creator, not merely of human children, but creator of thoughts, of ideas
and of resources. I devote my great heart-love to the interests of the
world. There is no task too onerous for my devotion, no service too
difficult for my undertaking. All children are mine, all interests are
mine, gladly and cheerfully I answer the call to serve those who need
me. I am both

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

father and mother. In joy and gladness do I consecrate myself to the
world."

In this prayer of faith and fulfillment one recognizes the power of the
omnipotent creative life principle, and in beneficence and freedom
experiences a vivifying stimulus to works of love.

Here is given a glimpse of the greatest spiritual law yet discovered. It
is a key to self-training for power and mastery. It is power itself.
This theory is not based upon denials, and the asceticisms of all
religious teachings of the past. Oriental philosophers and western
theologians have usually united in counseling people to kill out desire
and passion. The Nirvana of existence and the sanctification of saints
is alike to be beyond ambition and desire. On the contrary, the
philosophy of today expounds a law of affirmation in which one attains
development

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

of the self in power, together with a systematic consecration of all
aspirations and faculties. We are living spiritual beings. Claiming
this, we enter consciously into our possessions, understanding that we
have creative powers born of the spirit. By wise appropriation of them
we become superior to bodily conditions, until they wheel into line and
serve us. We become greater than anything with which we have to deal. We
enthrone the ego, which is spirit, and utilize something of the divine
potency which has been hidden by human limitations and erroneous
thinking. Man has been bound by ignorance, but he comes through
development and spiritual consciousness to know his power.

As God, life and law become synonymous in the student's mind, physical
and spiritual science join hands in demonstrating the problems of
existence.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

No wider field of exploration is presented to the discoverer of nature's
secrets than that of marital ethics. Groveling in the darkness of
ignorance and superstition, man has hitherto closed to himself the doors
of investigation in this province, labeling them unclean. Henceforth
purity guards the entrance, and wisdom demands that youth shall not be
deprived of the benefits of the experience of those who have knowledge
to give. Instead of associating creative life and energy with things
base and unclean, man will set all his thoughts to words as bright and
enduring as the stars, and they will be the light, love and intelligence
that guide his feet.

If we can perceive beauty in everything of God's doings we may argue
that we have reached the true perception of universal law. Ruskin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. Corroboration:](eom13.md)
