[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wyw00)  [Next](wyw02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Your Word is Your Wand*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YOUR WORD

### IS

### YOUR WAND

Man's word is his wand filled with magic and power!

Jesus Christ emphasized the power of the word; "By thy words thou shalt
be justified and by thy words thou shalt be condemned," and "death and
life are in power of the tongue."

So man has power to change an unhappy condition by waving over it the
wand of his word.

In the place of sorrow appears joy, in the place of sickness appears
health, in the place of lack appears plenty.

For example: A woman came for a treatment for prosperity. She possessed
just two dollars in the world.

I said: "We bless the two dollars and know that you have the magic purse
of the Spirit; it can never be depleted; as money goes out, immediately
money comes in, under grace in perfect ways.

I see it always crammed, jammed with money: yellow bills, green bills,
pink checks, blue checks, white checks, gold, silver and currency. I see
it bulging with abundance!"

She replied: "I feel my bag heavy with money," and was so filled with
faith that she gave me one of her dollars as a love offering. I did not
dare refuse it and see lack for her, as it was important that I hold the
picture of plenty.

Shortly afterwards she was made a gift of six thousand dollars. Fearless
faith and the spoken word brought it to pass.

The affirmation of the magic purse is very powerful, as it brings a
vivid picture to the mind. It is impossible not to see your purse or
wallet filled with money when using the words, "crammed, jammed."

The imaging faculty is the creative faculty and it is important to
choose words which bring a flash of the fulfillment of the demand.

Never force a picture by visualizing; let the Divine Idea flash into
your conscious mind; then the student is working according to the Divine
Design.

(See *The Game of Life and How to Play It*)

Jesus Christ said: "Ye shall know the Truth and the Truth shall make you
free."

This means that man must know the Truth of every situation which
confronts him.

There is no Truth in lack or limitation. *He waves over it the wand of
His Word and the wilderness rejoices and blossoms as the rose*.

Fear, doubt, anxiety, anger, resentment pull down the cells of the body,
shock the nervous system and are the causes of disease and disaster.

Happiness and health must be earned by absolute control of the emotional
nature.

Power moves but is never moved. When man stands calm and serene, has a
good appetite, feels contented and happy when appearances are against
him, he has reached mastery. Then he has power to "rebuke the winds and
the waves," to control conditions.

His word is his wand and he transmutes apparent failure into success.

He knows his universal supply is endless and immediate and all his needs
manifest instantly on the external.

For example, a woman at sea awoke in the morning hearing the fog-horns
blowing. A dense fog had settled on the ocean with no apparent signs of
clearing. She immediately spoke the word: "There are no fogs in Divine
Mind, so let the fog be lifted! I give thanks for the sun!"

Soon the sun came out, for man has dominion over "the elements—over all
created things."

Every man has power to lift the fog in his life. It may be a fog of lack
of money, love, happiness or health.

Give thanks for the sun!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Success](wyw02)
