[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wyw03)  [Next](wyw05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Your Word is Your Wand*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HAPPINESS

In that wonderful moving picture, "The Thief of Bagdad," we were told in
letters of light that *happiness must be earned!* 

It is earned through perfect control of the emotional nature.

There can be no happiness where there is fear, apprehension or dread.
With *perfect faith in God* comes a feeling of *security* and
*happiness*.

When man *knows* that there is an invincible power that protects him and
all that he loves, and brings to him every righteous desire of the
heart, he relaxes all nervous tension and is happy and satisfied.

He is undisturbed by adverse appearances, knowing that *Infinite
Intelligence* is protecting his interests and utilizing every situation
to bring his good to pass.

"I will make a way in the wilderness and rivers in a desert."

Uneasy lies the head that wears a frown. Anger, resentment, ill-will,
jealousy and revenge rob man of his happiness and bring sickness,
failure and poverty in their wake.

Resentment has ruined more homes than drink and killed more people than
war.

For example: There was a woman who was healthy and happy and married to
a man she loved.

The man died and left part of his estate to a relative. The woman was
filled with resentment. She lost weight, was unable to do her work,
developed gall-stones and became very ill.

A metaphysician called upon her one day. He said: "Woman, see what hate
and resentment have done to you; they have caused hard stones to form in
your body and only forgiveness and good-will can cure you."

The woman saw the Truth of the statement. She became harmonious and
forgiving and regained her splendid health.

#### AFFIRMATIONS

I am now deluged with the happiness that was planned for me in the
Beginning.

My barns are full, my cup flows over with joy.

———

My endless good now comes to me in endless ways.

———

I have a wonderful joy in a wonderful way, and my wonderful joy has come
to stay.

———

Happy surprises come to me each day. "I look with wonder at that which
is before me."

———

I walk boldly up to the lion on my pathway and find it is a friendly
airedale.

———

I am harmonious, happy, radiant; detached from the tyranny of fear.

———

My happiness is built upon a rock. It is mine now and for all eternity.

———

My good now flows to me in a steady unbroken, ever-increasing stream of
happiness.

———

My happiness is God's affair, therefore, no one can interfere.

———

As I am one with God I am now one with my heart's desire.

———

I give thanks for my permanent happiness, my permanent health, my
permanent wealth, my permanent love.

———

I am harmonious, happy and Divinely magnetic, and now draw to me my
ships over a calm sea.

———

God's ideas for me are perfect and permanent.

———

My heart's desire is a perfect idea in Divine Mind, incorruptible and
indestructible, and now comes to pass, under grace in a magical way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Love](wyw05)
