[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw28)  [Next](sahw30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### APPENDIX III.

### CAULAUCAU.

At the last moment before publication I have been fortunate enough to
make a "find" which I hope will interest my readers, both in Japan and
elsewhere. It bears out what I have said previously in a note about
Abraxas, and forms another important link in the chain which connects
the Mahāyāna with the Gnostic heresies of the New Testament times.

S. Irenaeus, in Book I chap. 24, speaking of the Gnostic Basilides,
tells us that, besides Abraxas, he and his followers used a word
*Caulaucau*, to denote, apparently, either God or the Universe—the two
ideas were about the same to the Gnostic mind. Caulaucau is also
mentioned by Epiphanius, Theodret, John of Damascus, and other Greek
Fathers (for the exact references I will send my reader to the volume of
Irenaeus in Migne's Patrologia), as a term connected not only with the
heresy of Basilides but also with that of Nicolas of Antioch, who,
having been one of the Seven Deacons, became the founder of a Gnostic
sect. The word is explained as meaning "the World," "the Saviour," "a
Prince." Epiphanius and others imply that it has no meaning in
particular, that it was taken from the Hebrew text of Isaiah xxvii. 10,
("precept upon precept, line upon line") as being an imposing word to
pronounce, and likely to impress ignorant converts to Gnosticism. Now,
at a Japanese funeral (in the Jōdo sect, certainly: I think, in *all*) a
flat wooden post,

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

known as a *sotoba*, is carried to the grave and erected there after the
ceremony, remaining until the grave stone is ready to be put up. It
bears the following inscriptions: on the one side, *Om*, written in
debased Sanskrit: on the other, also in Sanskrit, the letters *kha la ka
va a*. The letters are sometimes transposed: but appear generally in
this order. They mean, I am told, (i) the five skandhas which constitute
the mind, (ii) the five elements which constitute the Universe, (iii)
mind itself, and, (iv) the Universe itself. The word is also said to be
a variant form of Abarakakia, which is Abraxas.

I venture to think that *kha la ka va a* is the Gnostic Caulaucau, being
identical with it in meaning and also in sound. (The Greek text gives
the word with variants, as though the letters composing it were
sometimes transposed, as in Japanese; thus Abraxas sometimes appears as
Abrasax.)

Thus I think that I have now four links in the chain connecting the
Japanese Mahāyāna with New Testament times and heresies. 1. Abraxas, 2.
Caulaucau, 3. the evident resemblance between the thirteen Buddhas,
guardians of the dead according to the Shingon and other sects, and the
thirteen realms of the dead through which the soul is made to journey in
the Gnostic book, *Pistis Sophia*, 4. the great similarity, amounting
almost to identity of conception, between the Buddhist conception of
Amida and the Christian conception of Christ, as explained in these
pages, together with the fact that the two teachings make their public
appearance in the world almost simultaneously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Japanese Terms and Sentences](sahw30.md)
