[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw09)  [Next](sahw11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter VIII.</span>

### *Amida Nyorai*.

(§§, 37–41).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  Momotose mo  
Inoru kokoro no  
  Hakanasa yo,  
Namu Amida Bu no  
  Muryōjū naru ni.

</div>

"What a vain prayer it is, to ask for a hundred years of life, when
Amida is yours, whose Life is Everlasting!"

It is said of one of the Chinese Patriarchs of the School of Faith that,
before his eyes were opened, he went every where seeking for the Elixir
of Life. The celebrated Bodhiruci met him. " You are seeking," he said
to him, "for a medicine that shall ensure you a hundred years of life. I
can point you to something better than that." And he preached to him
Faith in the Buddha of Life Eternal. It must have been this incident
that inspired the little poem which I have put at the head of this
chapter.

In a little Handbook of Doctrine lately published by teachers of the
Jōdo Sect <span id="fr_72"></span>[\*](#fn_72) and therefore identical
in teaching with what the Shinshu hold, there is a

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

*catena* of passages from Sutras, as well as from later theological
treatises, which bear upon Amida.

He is there described as a Being whose Length of Life is Immeasurable in
Past, Present, and Future. He never had a beginning. He will never have
an end, His life at this present moment fills everything. If we picture
Him to ourselves, His form is such as the Japanese artists delight to
paint,—colossal in stature, <span id="fr_73"></span>[\*](#fn_73) with a
face "as the sun shining in his strength,"—*enkō no kebutsu*, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[†](#fn_74) the personified Buddha of Perfect Light.
His Light is as immeasurable as His Life: it has had no beginning, it
will have no end, it is as boundless in space as it is in time. It
illuminates the Ten Quarters (*jippō*), which is the Buddhist equivalent
for the Universe, and there is no place which it is does not reach.
Wherever He is, He is king, and the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of
[the](errata.htm#6) Ten Quarters are "the Angels of His that do Him
service," there is none that rendereth Him not homage.

Yet, though the Universe is not large enough to contain Him, he has
a-local habitation where He may be seen by the eye of faith. He is
*gokuraku no aruji*, "The Lord of the Paradise," and it is in Paradise
that He is especially able to display His

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Attribute of
Mercy. Other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas may abandon a sinner in sheer
despair of procuring for him a saving conversion; but Amida never
despairs. A dying thief, a lower and more miserable creature, if such
there be,—would be welcome in Paradise, in the place where the deadly
sins (*go shū no aku*) can find no entrance, where the eightfold work of
salvation (*hachi-gedatsu*) bears its perfect fruit, and where the
threefold light (*san-myō*) of Wisdom, Compassion, and Might, is
constantly shining.

It would take many long ages of constant speaking, day and night, to
exhaust even one half of the attributes of Amida. We may never come to
know them all; but of His great Compassion we are quite sure, for did He
not become Incarnate for us in the person of a certain Hōzō Biku? That
Incarnation was the visible embodiment of His Compassion: it was
undertaken "for us men and for our salvation," and it is this that gives
to the Believer in Salvation by Faith the assurance that Amida is no
mere name, but that in Him Essence and Name are one and
indivisible. <span id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_75) Compassion is the
Heart of Buddha.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Notes to Chapter VIII.</span>

I

*Amida and God*.

I venture to suggest that, in estimating the Buddhist conception of God,
as shown in the Jōdo doctrine of Amitabha, special consideration should
be given to certain statements of St. Paul. In Eph. iv. 5, he speaks of
the Father as being ἐπί παντων (Transcendental), διά πάντων (Immanent),
ἐν παϑιν (Indwelling). In 1. Cor. vii. 6 he speaks of Him as the Divine
Substance (ἐξ ου τά πάντα), out of whom are all things, of the Son as
the Divine Agent through whom (δἰ ου) all things are made, and again of
the Father as the Ultimate Object (ἡμεις είς αὐτὸν) to whom we all tend.
I believe that the working out of these passages would lead the
Shinshuist to results which, while thoroughly in harmony with the Faith
of the Church, would also be agreeable to what he believes respecting
Amida.

II

*Amida in the Shingon Sect*.

Circumstances have recently led me to the study of Japanese Funeral
customs. I have found a special interest in the rites of the *Shingon*,
a sect which I believe to have in it very considerable elements of
Gnosticism and Manichaeism. (See my *Wheat among the Tares* and Papers
on the *Formative Elements of Japanese Buddhism* in the *Transactions of
the Asiatic Society of Japan*). Shingon is very largely a symbolic
religion, and the funeral service employed consists mainly of symbolical

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

manual acts (*mudra*), and the recitation of certain quasi-sacramental
Sanskrit formulae (*mantra*).

When, prior to its removal to the Temple, the corpse has been placed
before the temporary altar in the house on which stand the thirteen
Buddhas whom the Shingon reverence, the priest commences the service
with lustration, and meditation on the Three Secrets, the Three Actions,
and the Three Classes of Buddhas. Then, accompanying his actions with
symbolical gestures, he recites (i) a formula significant of his desire
for Enlightenment, and (ii) one of meditation on the teachings of Fugen
(Samantabhadra), the meaning of which I have not been able to discover,
except so far that Fugen is said to have been especially concerned with
teaching the Unity of the Buddha.

Next follows (iii) an invocation of *Abraxas* (*A-ba-ra-ka-kia*), the
god of the Alexandrian Gnostics of the first century A.D., who is thus
still worshipped in Japan. Abraxas is treated as the sum-total of the
Universe, composed of atoms or particles of Earth, Water, Fire, Wind,
Void, (see the interesting chapter on *God* or *Atoms* in Mr. Glover's
masterly work on the Development of Religious Thought in the Roman
Empire during the First Century A.D.). Next follows (iv) the invocation
of Five Abstract Buddhas—*Amogha*, *Vairocana*, *Mahāmudra*,
*Manipadma*, *Jālapravarta*. These names, with the exception of the
second, are practically unknown, but the same personages appear later on
as the five Dhyāni Buddhas (*Gochi Nyorai*) of Japan. *Mahāvairocana*,
*Akshobya*, *Ratnasambhava*, Amitabha and *Sakyamuni*. (It is well known
that Manes held that God was unknowable, except through his Five
Manifestations or Spirits, to whom corresponded the great religious
teachers of Antiquity Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, Manes himself, and
Moses.) This second list shows that Amitābha is one of the Five—shall we
call them?—Manifestations of Abraxas, the Gnostic God. That he
corresponds to God in Christ may be inferred from the analogy of
Manichaeism.

Having thus invoked God, as the Shingon know him—the invisible Sum-total
of the Atoms, manifested to men through his five personified
attributes,—the celebrant goes on to invoke (v) Amitabha in particular,
as the god that brings Immortality (The Sanskrit form in the Mantra is
said to be *amrita* immortal), and (vi) Amitābha with his companions,
Kwannon and Seishi, to come and meet the soul in its passage from this
world to the next. But it is mainly Amitābha the 'conductor of souls'
that is the object of worship, for the celebrant next invokes Jizō

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

and Fudō, (*Kshitigarbha* and *Acaravijyāraja*), the conductor of souls
and the champion of the righteous, and it is not until these have been
summoned to the aid of the worshippers that the celebrant at last raises
his heart to the invocation of Vairocana the Great Buddha, who stands to
the Shingon very much in the same position as that held by Amida in the
Shinshu. I believe that we have in the Shingon and the Shinshu two
distinct strains of Gnostic teaching, the one representing Alexandria
and the schools of Basilides and Valentinus, the other, the heresy of
the Elchesaites, and that the latter has, through Nestorian and other
influences, gradually drawn nearer to Christian ideals of Faith. Other
analogies will be found in the thirteen Buddhas whom the Shingon look
upon as the guardians of the spirits of the dead, and the thirteen
realms of the dead in Gnostic books (e.g. *Pistis Sophia*). Also between
the baptism of the corpse as practised in Shingon, and the 'Sacrament of
the Ineffable' of the Gnostics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[71:\*](sahw10.htm#fr_72) Jōdo Seikun.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[72:\*](sahw10.htm#fr_73) I think we should
remember that there are certain passages in the Old Testament which also
give "anthropomorphic" descriptions of God which must evidently be taken
in a figurative sense. It is interesting to compare Hippolytus,
Philosophumena, Bk. ix. 462–3 (Ed. Migne), and to remember that the sect
there described had its origin at the time at which, and in the locality
from which, the mission started which brought the Amida Books to China.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[72:†](sahw10.htm#fr_74) Cf. Col. i. 16. εἰκὼν
του θεου του ἀορατου.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[73:\*](sahw10.htm#fr_75) These last phrases are
ascribed to the Chinese Patriarch *Zendō*. If any of my readers will
take the trouble to verify my statements by comparing them with the
Japanese handbook from which I have summarized them, he will, I think,
acknowledge that I have not exaggerated the similarity between the
Shinshu conception of Amida and our notions of God. Dr. Haas, of
Heidelberg, has pointed out to me in a recent letter that *Zendō*,
whilst highly honoured by the Amidaists in China and Japan, never
secured for any of his writings the distinction, accorded to many
Chinese scholars of inferior merit, of a place <span id="page_74">p.
74</span> in the Tripitaka Canon. He thinks it is possibly due to a
suspicion in the minds of the compilers that *Zendō's* teaching
contained in it elements that were not genuinely Buddhist. There is a
phrase *fushi sōgō*, "the turning of the hearts of father's and sons to
each other." It is the title of a well-known Japanese treatise: but it
is found in Zendō's Commentary on the Sukhāvati Vyūha. Zendō was
contemporary with the arrival of the Nestorian Mission to China. He
flourished about A.D. 620.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Hōzō Biku.](sahw11)
