[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw07)  [Next](sahw09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter VI.</span>

### *Objects of Worship*.

§§ 28, 29, 30.

The Shinshu has as its principal object of Veneration the Tathāgata
Amitābha, "that is to say Namu-Amida-Butsu." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64.md) In the house-hold shrines of the laity
there is no other object of worship but this: in temples and places of
public worship, worship is offered also to Shinran Shōnin (now
officially known as Kenshin-Daishi), to the *zenchishiki* "righteous and
holy men," (a term which includes the founders and patron saints of the
various *honzan*, or cathedrals of the sub-sects or dioceses mentioned
in a previous chapter), to the Seven *Kō-Sō*, or Patriarchs honoured by
Shinran in the Shōshinge, as responsible for the transmission of
doctrine, and finally to *Shōtoku Taishi*, as the introducer of Buddhism
into Japan, and as a great favourer of the Nembutsu practices and faith.
These, together with Amida, form what are called the *Go-hon-zama*, or
five classes of venerable Beings.

It is never, however, maintained that the worship given to Shinran, to
the "righteous and holy men,"

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to the Patriarchs, or to Shōtoku Taishi, stands on a par with that
offered to Amida Himself. This may be seen by the fact that, in
household worship, no notice is taken of any one of them, also that Mr.
Nishimoto, in his Catechism, having just mentioned their names, never
reverts to them again, and never attempts to build any doctrines on the
worship offered to them. They are clearly of no doctrinal importance
whatever, and the worship (*matsuri*) offered to them is clearly of that
lower type which Christian theologians sometimes call *latreia*, to
distinguish it from the perfected and whole-hearted *douleia* (or
"slavery") which is due to God alone. Plato made the same distinction,
so do the Hindoos. A Vaishnavite in India is practically a monotheist.
He believes in One God with all his heart. Yet he will give a lesser
worship to twenty minor deities, without feeling that he thereby takes
aught from the worship due to Vishnu the Preserver. In the Shinshu, this
lesser worship, or latreia, is reduced to very small limits, and may
indeed be said to be almost non-existent. The Shinshu believer can no
more be said to worship e.g. *Shōtoku Taishi*, in the ordinary sense of
the term, than the Anglican can be said to worship St. Paul or St. John,
because of the few Saint's Days in his Calendar.

But, however small may be the worship given by the Shinshu Buddhist to
the unnamed Zenchishiki, or the somewhat obscure Patriarchs, of whom the
average lay believer scarce knows the names, it is more than that which
is given, either in households or Temples, to S’akyamuni himself. The
Founder of Buddhism has absolutely no place

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

in the worship of this influential and powerful body of religious
persons, who nevertheless call themselves Buddhists. I won't say that he
has been wholly excluded from the Life of the Sect. His teachings are
still much revered and studied, the Shinshu preacher still draws from
the Sūtras the inspiration of his sermons, and Shinshu scholars have
done as much as most for the elucidation of S’akyamuni's teachings.
S’akyamuni is the Moses of Buddhism, but he has been extruded from the
Shinshu Sanctuary; and we can well understand the indignation of
Shinran's great opponent, Nichiren, when he found some children playing
in the road with a broken image of S’akyamuni, which had been discarded
from the Temple, as useless lumber, since the villagers had given ear to
the exhortations of Shinran's itinerant preachers. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65.md) It is as hard to imagine a "Buddhism
without Buddha," as it is to recognize a "Christianity without Christ."

Naturally, the Shinshu theologian has arguments to advance in defence of
his position. It is said by some that, as the greater includes the less,
so Amida includes S’akyamuni, the latter being only a partial
manifestation or incarnation of the former. (This is the view known as
*ni son it-chi* \# "two Blessed Ones with One Object," as though the
unity of purpose had resulted in the Unity of Person).

The other view is known as *ni son bettai* (\#) "'two Blessed Ones with
separate personalities." Those who hold this view maintain that
S’akyamuni

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

was a distinct personage from Amida, and that he was and remains the
Lord of the World that now .whereas Amida is Lord of the World to come.
Shinshu is altogether a religion of the other world. It teaches men to
put their whole trust in the Paradise prepared for them after death. It
has therefore no need to teach fasting, celibacy, or the other religious
practices which S’akyamuni was at such great pains to teach and
institute.

Still, it must be confessed that the reasons thus given, though they
would have been, perhaps, sound enough in the beginnings of Buddhism, as
grounds for the total exclusion of S’akyamuni from the worship of the
Buddhist communities, must have appeared in a very different light, when
they were urged as grounds for the exclusion of S’akyamuni from the
altars on which he had been venerated for fifteen centuries. A more
radical revolution in religion can hardly be imagined.

Scarcely less strange is the absence, from nearly all the most modern
authorities on Shinshu doctrine of all mention of the supposed Jōdo and
Shinshu doctrine of the Trinity. Neither the *Shinshu Hyakuwa*, nor the
*Shinshu Seikun*, as far as I have read it, nor Mr. Tada's works, as far
as I am acquainted with them, allude to it. And yet in a Life of
Shinran, published apparently as late as 1904 there is abundant evidence
of it. In vol. i of that book, Amida is constantly spoken of as *ikkō
sanzon no Butsu* (\#) "the Buddha of three Persons and One Light," or as
*san son itchi* (\#) "the three Blessed Ones with one object." In this
Trinity, Amitābha,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the Unoriginated, the Supreme, is the Father: by Him stands the Son, the
Embodiment of Amitābha's Compassion,—in Sanskrit Avalokites’vara, "the
Lord that looks down," in Japanese *Kwanzeon*, or *Kwannon;* and
another, the Embodiment of his Wisdom,—in Sanskrit *Mahāsthāmaprāpta*,
"He that hath obtained great strength," in Japanese, *Seishi*. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_66.md)

The three are One, and the Father, Amida, is the Centre and the Heart of
the Trinity, the source of Compassion and Wisdom. When the Compassion of
the Most High is to be manifested to men, Kwannon, the Embodiment of the
Compassion which is in the Godhead, becomes Incarnate: when the Wisdom
of the Father, or his Might, is set forth, Seishi, the Embodiment of
Divine Wisdom, manifests himself in and through some human personality.

So far the picture corresponds to our own ideas of the Trinity of God.
But as the Gnostics of the Apostolic times, and especially those who
sprang from the same regions and came into existence about the same time
as the Buddhist Mahāyāna, held that the Divine Son had often become
incarnate, (one of those incarnations being that one which took place at
Bethlehem in the days of Herod), and as both Manes and Mahomet claimed
to be the Paraclete, the Incarnation of God's Wisdom, so the Shinshu
(and not the Shinshu alone) has believed in many incarnations and
manifestations of Kwannon and,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Seishi,
respectively the second and third persons of the Buddhist Trinity. It
comes to one as a shock, after having been told that the Shinshu are the
Unitarians of Buddhism, to learn, on the authority of a popular book,
written for the edification of ignorant but pious persons, that Shōtoku
Taishi was an Incarnation of Kwannon, that Hōnen Shōnin, the teacher of
Shinran, was Seishi in the flesh, that *Tamahi-no-miya*, Shinran's wife,
was an incarnation of Kwannon, and that Amida himself condescended to
take flesh as Shinran. <span id="fr_67"></span>[\*](#fn_67.md) The tendency
of the present-day Shinshu is to drop these fabled incarnations, and we
can only rejoice that it should be so. We lose our reverence for an
Incarnate God when Iris Incarnations are constantly taking place in
varied forms and shapes. But it is interesting to find ourselves thus
brought face to face, once more, with one of the earliest problems of
Christian History, and to be under the necessity, as Christians, of
proving once more that there has been but one Incarnation of the
Godhead—that of God in Christ. It is a significant point in our favour
that the official Shinshu teaching also recognizes but one Incarnation
properly so called,—that of Amida in Hōzo Biku. Our Catechism of the
Shinshu mentions no other. The rest are apparitions rather than
Incarnations. <span id="fr_68"></span>[†](#fn_68.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[57:\*](sahw08.htm#fr_64.md) I believe that a
distinction is sometimes made between *Amida Nyorai*, and
*Namu-amide-Butsu*. The former is used to denote Him, as he was and ever
will be, the Absolute. The latter term (which is also the invocation of
praise) is Amida, after his Incarnation as Hōzō Biku, when he had
attained his glory and received the "Name above every Name."

<span id="fn_65"></span>[59:\*](sahw08.htm#fr_65.md) This incident was one
of \`the turning points in Nichiren's life.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[61:\*](sahw08.htm#fr_66.md) I often think in
connection with this grouping of Buddhistic deities, of Zechariah's
Vision of the two witnesses the priestly and the royal—that stood before
the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[62:\*](sahw08.htm#fr_67.md) *Shinran Shōnin Go
ichidai Kōwa* vol. i, p. 71, 73.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[62:†](sahw08.htm#fr_68.md) The Shinshuist gets his
teaching of the incarnations of Kwannon from the *Fumonbon*, a chapter
of the Hokkekyō. But the Hokkekyō is not officially recognized as one of
the fundamental documents of the Shinshu. It is indeed the strongest
weapon the Nichiren sect possesses for combating what it considers to be
the Shinshu heresies concerning Buddha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Shintai and Zokutai.](sahw09.md)
