[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw22)  [Next](sahw24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter XXI.</span>

### *Morning and Evening Prayers*.

There are in Shinshuism two kinds of places of worship, *ji-in* and
*zaike*. The first is a large temple served by numerous priests, and
exhibiting as it were a model of contiguous worship for the sect. The
second is the house in which a priest and his family dwell, together
with a small semi-private chapel attached to it. To take an example from
Tokyo: we have here two Hongwanji Temples. (*ji-in*), the one at
Asakusa, the other at Tsukiji. These two big Temples are served by a
large number of resident clergy, who take their turns in the
ministration, and live in a sort of 'cathedral close' near by the large
Temple. Each of these houses has its own private sanctuary, which it is
the occupant's duty to serve, whenever his duty does not call him to
take his turn at the *ji-in*. These Canons’ residences are *zaike*, so
are also many (or most) of the Shinshu parsonages which are to be found
scattered about the country.

The worship of a *ji-in* is necessarily varied and elaborate,
approximating more or less to what we might call a cathedral pattern.
There is, however, a simple form of morning and evening prayer which is
common to both *ji-in* and *zaike*. It consists of a recitation of the
*Shōshinge*, together with six (sometimes only three) verses of a
*wasan* hymn, and a certain number of Nembutsu ejaculations interspersed
between each verse. To these may be added other

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

hymns in honour of the Buddha, as also the reading of the Amida-Sutras
and of Rennyo Shōnin's Ofumi. It would be impossible to tabulate these
daily services of which there are many minor local variations.

The Shinshu Hyakuwa mentions only the morning and evening service in
temples and parsonages. But there are (and, in the days of faith now
gone, there were many more) laymen's houses in which the Shoshinge and
Wasan hymns are repeated morning and evening. This is very much more the
case in the country, where life goes slowly and uneventfully along, than
in the busy towns, and in the centres of the now fully awakened
intellectual life of the country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Fasts and Festivals.](sahw24.md)
