[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw18)  [Next](sahw20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter XVII</span>

### *Keijin*.

### (\#)

(§ 86–87)

The paragraph in the Catechism, on which this chapter is based,
discusses the attitude of the Shinshu believer towards other forms of
faith, and especially of Buddhist faith. The word *Keijin* does not
occur in *Shinshu Hyakuwa*, but is a term employed in other Shinshu
books to denote that reverence or respect which we should show towards
all things connected with any religion, even though it be one of which
we ourselves do not approve. It is a common feeling among Japanese that
the Westerner is lacking in *Keijin*, and on one or two occasions, when
I have received permission to attend and watch a service in a Buddhist
Temple, I have been warned beforehand of the duty of behaving with
outward respect during the solemnities and in the Temple.

The author of *Shinshu Hyakuwa* does, however, treat of *Keijin*. He
says that for the Shinshu believer there is no need to offer worship to
any other Being besides Amida. The other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, whom
the other sects of Buddhism worship, nay, even the gods of Japan and
India, outside of Buddhism, must only be considered as so many partial
and fragmentwise manifestations of Amida Himself, and the worship,
therefore, which the Shinshu offers to Amida, must be considered as

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

including that which is supposed to be due to every other Being that is
set up as claiming the worship of man. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_103.md)

But when a Shinshuist goes to places of worship belonging to other sects
and religions, he must treat the worship he finds there with respect and
reverence, and he must not think that, by bowing before the image of
Kwannon, or Fudō, or Benten, he is taking away from the honour due to
Amida alone. <span id="fr_104"></span>[†](#fn_104.md)

In *Shinshu Seikun*, *Keijin* forms a portion of the chapter on human
life.

Human life may be viewed from four aspects.

I. The relations between Religion (*Buppō* \#) and the State Law
(*Se-Hō* \#), sometimes also called *O Hō* (the Law of the King \#). The
two are compared to the two wheels of a cart, or the two wings of a
bird. Progress is impossible without the equal use of both. The King's
Law is to be received with respect, like the present from a

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

superior, which the recipient takes in both hands, and reverentially
lifts to his forehead. The Religious Law is to be taken within, and
received into the secret palace, where the monarch sits enthroned. (*Ohō
wa hitai ni ate yo, Buppō wa naishin ni fukaku takuwae*). The Religious
Law is compared to the house-master (*Aruji*), who sits at home and
manages his own house: the King's Law is the honoured guest
(*Kyakaijin*), who seeks admission to the mansion, and is treated with
consideration. The visitors are not always alike in appearance and
character (some birds have long legs and some short); but the
householder receives them all alike. The Religious Law is always the
same. It is based on the *gokai*, <span id="fr_105"></span>[\*](#fn_105.md)
the five commandments of Buddhism, which correspond to the well-known
five principles of Confucianism *jin*, *gi*, *rei*, *chi*, *shin* <span
id="fr_106"></span>[†](#fn_106.md). It adapts itself to the various
circumstances of human life. Its presence in a man may be known by his
observance of the King's Law.

II\. The second part concerns itself with the care we should have whilst
in the world. (*Shose no yōjin*) <span id="fr_107"></span>[‡](#fn_107.md).
We live in the world, of human beings, we must have sympathy and
long-suffering; else human intercourse becomes impossible. But sympathy
and long-suffering are not the only essentials of human life. Man, it is
known, differs from the animals in the faculties he possesses of
preparing comforts for himself. He cooks his food, he fashions his
clothes

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

he builds himself shelters. These faculties give him many advantages,
but they also expose him to the temptation of covetousness, the desire
of having, the pride of life. The pride of life leads to envy, jealousy,
sorrow, and, above all, to the loss of inward peace. If we would
preserve our inward peace, and maintain the harmony of social life, we
must practice *yōjin*, circumspection, and self-denial. We must be ready
to sacrifice our own will to that of others.

III\. This will best be done by the practice of the way of man (*hito no
michi*). This way has been clearly expounded in the Sutras on which the
Shinshu base their doctrines. It has also been treated of, with more
telling effect, by the great *Rennyo Shōnin*, in his work entitled *Jiki
shinshu* (\#) which is recommended to Shinshu believers for their
devotional reading. It tells the reader how he can serve his master, how
he can be dutiful to his parents, how he should associate with his
friends, and how he should cultivate peace of mind.

IV\. In this way we are brought to *Keijin*. We should not despise, or
treat with irreverence, the Worship of any gods, Buddhas, or Spirits.
Nor. should we consider that respect paid to them in any way interferes
with the sole devotion which we give to Amida.

For (a) it must be the wish of all other Buddhas that worship should be
given to Amida alone. These Buddhas may, therefore, be considered as
themselves transferring to Amida the worship which ignorant worshippers
offer to them. But no instructed Shinshuist, knowing that he can have
direct access to

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Amida, would feel
it his duty to offer a round-about worship to other, subordinate,
Buddhas.

And (b) we may consider that many of the gods whom various nations
worship are themselves but temporary or partial manifestations of Amida
(*bunshin* \#). In such a case, the same rule will serve to guide us as
in the case of the worship offered to the Buddhas.

But (c) many of the so-called gods are evil spirits whom men seek to
propitiate by the offering of worship. The Shinshuist need have no fear
of them; he is under the protection of Amida, and is therefore safe.

The chapter then goes on to consider the prayers that men will offer to
gods and Buddhas when misfortunes befall them. Such prayers must be
considered as contrary to *Keijin*, for they are, in a sense,
dishonouring to the gods to whom they are addressed. For misfortunes
come to us as warnings with remedial intent, and the true believer will
use; them as such. Instead of asking to be delivered, he will probe his
own heart to its depth, find the root of bitterness and eradicate it.
Then the misfortune will disappear of itself.

Another way in which true *Keijin* may be shown is in the choice of our
associates. "By imitating a thief, and playing at thieving, a man
becomes a thief …… by imitating a righteous man, a man will learn to be
righteous." There can be no greater contumely offered to Amida than the
wilful exposing of ourselves to the danger of breaking his laws.

Again, *Keijin* prompts us to be modest. *Haji wo shiranu wa chikushō ni
onaji*. "He who knows

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

not modesty differs not from a beast." The believer will always be
properly clothed: if he is a monk., he will be careful to wear his
*kesa* (stole) properly. Layman or cleric, he will be respectful in a
place of worship, and will no more dream of irreverence in the presence
of *San-kai mu-ni-no Nyorai*, "the Nyorai besides whom there is none
other in the Three Worlds," than he would think of treating with
disrespect some great earthly magnate. This respect and reverence he
will also show towards idols, flowers, incense-burners, and all other
accessories of worship. For though these things are nothing in
themselves (*mokuzō moto no ki no hashi, ezō wa kore moto no hakushi*,
"the idol was originally only a piece of wood, the picture nothing but a
sheet of white paper"), yet they are symbols of worship, and the man
that has in him no capacity for worship is ho better than the brute
beast. The power of worship is one of the distinguishing faculties of
man.

But *Keijin* will especially show itself in our behaviour under sorrow
and bereavement. The separation from those we love is the most painful
ordeal we have to face. If we have *Keijin*, we shall not affront the
deity by vain regrets and idle reproaches. We shall turn our eye to the
Paradise of Bliss, and show our respect for the Higher Powers by a
resignation of ourselves to their decrees.

I may add that most of the contents of this chapter of Shinshu Seikun
are taken from the writings of Rennyo Shonin, and date, therefore, from
a period anterior to the advent of Christian missionaries in Japan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[124:\*](sahw19.htm#fr_103.md) This is true as a
general rule. I have noticed one exception in Shinshu practice. At a
Shinshu funeral, of which I shall give an account later on, there is an
invocation of "all the Buddhas," an invocation which, according to the
strict interpretation of the Shinshu doctrine, must be unnecessary.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[124:†](sahw19.htm#fr_104.md) It was doubtless
*Keijin* that prompted a Buddhist priest to offer hospitality to the
newly landed Jesuit missionaries in the sixteenth century, with
permission to use his temple for the preaching of Christianity. When the
Jesuits later on developed iconoclastic tendencies, and encouraged their
converts to tear down Buddhist temples, it was a painful breach of the
law of *Keijin*. It must be said, however, in justification of the
Jesuits, that the destruction of Buddhist temples was not their work but
that of their *daimyō* converts, and that Hideyoshi and other
non-Christian Japanese were very ruthless iconoclasts when it suited
their purpose. There is reason to believe that, in the 7th and 8th
centuries, Christianity was looked upon merely as a variant form of
Buddhism.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[125:\*](sahw19.htm#fr_105.md) \#.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[125:†](sahw19.htm#fr_106.md) \#.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[125:‡](sahw19.htm#fr_107.md) \#.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Shinshu on Faith-healing.](sahw20.md)
