[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw12)  [Next](sahw14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter XI.</span>

#### *The Salvation of Sentient Beings*.

(§§ 52–59.)

"Amida," "says the Shinshuist, saves us by the exercise of His two great
attributes of Mercy and Wisdom" (*hi-chi* no ni-toku wo motte warera wo
sukuu § 52). <span id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_88.md) He saves the world by
Wisdom, when He allows a part of himself to become incarnate in one of
the *Nirmanakaya* or *Keshin* forms, to become the spiritual teachers of
suffering humanity. In this way many of the Buddhas and Saints in the
past have laboured with Him, or rather He has laboured in them, and in
none more conspicuously than in Sakyamuni, who is the Teacher *par
excellence* of the Buddhist world. He saves by Mercy by virtue of His
Incarnation as Hōzō Biku, His sufferings, His exaltation, His
enthronement in Paradise after He had reconquered, as man, all that He
had voluntarily surrendered, as the Supreme Buddha.

Whichever way he chooses, His object is still the same,—to save from sin
and its attendant miseries His poor children who are fast "bound in
misery and iron," so fast that they cannot get out of their prison-house
without some one to help them.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhism believes
in birth-sin, the guilt of which it does not become less awful to
contemplate when it is accepted as the inevitable consequence of
previous sins, a guilt contracted from many sources, in the course of a
long series of previous lives. It is from this guilt, this Karma, that
Amida would save us. If we listen to His voice, and trust in His
mercies, we pass from death to life, death loses its hold on us, there
is no returning to this vale of sin and misery. If we refuse, there is
no vengeance, no unending misery of hell awaiting us. There is rebirth,
there may be rebirths, and some of these rebirths may be in Hell. But
Hell is not a place of endless sojourn. There is death in Hell, as there
is on Earth, as there is in every place but the Heaven where the
invisible Dharmakaya sits enthroned. And everywhere may be heard the
voice of Amida: and they that hear shall live.

And what is the Voice?

To the Shinshuist it is summed up in the six Chinese characters *Namu
Amida Butsu* (\#). This *Myōgō*, or Sacred Name, as it is called, is to
the Shinshuist all that the Crucifix is to the Catholic, or the Sacred
Monogram I.H.S. It is the Symbolical Embodiment of all that Amida, in
fulfilment of His Great Vow, has done for man. Indeed, it is more. It is
what the Passover was to the Jews, what the Holy Sacrifice is to the
Christian. It is itself the answer to the question, "What mean ye by
this Sacrifice?" (§§ 52, 53). Wherever the *Myōgō* is seen written or
carved, or wherever (for the *Myōgō* has this advantage

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

over the Christian monograph that it appeals to the ear as well as to
the eye, and can be heard as well as seen)—wherever the Nembutsu is
recited, it bears witness to that which Amida has done. They who hear it
for the first time enquire about the reason, and they to whom the sound
is a familiar one pause to remember its meaning with gladdened hearts.
There is said to be in the *Myōgō* all the Strength of the Great Vow.

When a man thus hears the recital of the *Myōgō*, he places himself by
faith in a position of entire and absolute trust in the Mercies of Him
whom he believes to have done such great things for him. By this act, a
vital union (if I may so call it) is effected between the believer, who
is sinful, and Amida, who is sinless, a union which cannot be effected
without the cutting of sin and evil. From the moment that the believer
puts his whole trust and confidence in Amida, the roots of his sins are
cut, the past Karma destroyed, and if he does not enter Paradise at
once, yet he is placed in safe keeping in the Sacred Heart of Amida.
(*Dai-jihi, dai-chie no Busshin ni ireru koto ni narimasu*.) <span
id="fr_89"></span>[†](#fn_89.md)

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

It is after this initial step has been taken, after the believer, by an
act (Ketsujō) of Faith, has taken advantage of that which the Mercy of
Heaven has provided for Him that the Wisdom of Buddha comes into play.
For the Faith which has been placed as a seedling in our hearts must be
watered and refreshed by teaching and doctrine, and that teaching the
Shinshu Buddhist finds, or thinks he finds, in the Scriptures which
contain the undoubted teachings of Sakyamuni, the man that came,
according to Shinran, to testify in India to Amida and Hōzō Biku.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89:\*](sahw13.htm#fr_88.md) We may perhaps see
traces of the same thought in the juxtaposition in our Creed of the Holy
Catholic Church and the Communion of Saints. The Church is the Body
through which is [declared](errata.htm#9.md) unto angels and men the
"manifold wisdom of God": the Saints are the special recipients of his
love.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[91:†](sahw13.htm#fr_89.md) Shinshu Hyakuwa § 54
quotes the authority of the Chinese Patriarch *Zendō*, (who is also
mentioned in the *Shōshinge*). It is also remarkable that Zendō speaks
of the *Myōgō*, or the Call of Amida to the Soul, as a "sharp sword," a
term which becomes more significant when taken in conjunction with the
phrase "cutting between flesh and bone," which I have found elsewhere
(in *Anshinketsugoshokōwa*) seen applied to the effects of the Myōgō.
These quasi-echoes of Scriptural phrases are constantly surprising the
student in his study of Shinshu books. In the chapter on *Buddha no
mi-na* in *Shinshu Seikun* p. 362–373 it is said the Name is more highly
to be valued than either <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> pictures or
idols, for it is indeed the Foundation of Salvation, the hearing of it
constituting *Ojō* (\#) i e. "birth into Paradise while still living,"
or the new Birth of Buddhism. The *Myōgō* summarizes all wisdom, is the
fulfilment of all virtues, the crown of all religious rites. It renders
unnecessary all other worship, for the Name of the One Buddha is the
*pleroma* of all that is worshipped as God. (*Ichibutsu no na sunawachi
shobutsu no Na*). I have often thought that the Cult of the Sacred Heart
may prove to be one of the instruments in God's hand of the turning of
Buddhism to Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Of Faith in General, (i).](sahw14.md)
