[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw05)  [Next](sahw07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">CHAPTER IV</span>.

### *The Shinshu after Shinran's death*.

(§§ 21–24).

Shinran's remains were cremated at the Enninji temple, and his ashes
buried at Ōtani on the outskirts of Kyoto. He left behind him several
children, mostly sons, with at least one daughter. Of the eldest,
Inshin, nothing seems to be known. The second, Zenran, had a son,
Nyoshin, who was appointed to succeed his grandfather in the headship of
the sect, and is therefore reckoned as the second Patriarch. With him
Zenran's line seems to have died out. But Shinran had also a
[daughter](errata.htm#2), Kakushin-ni, who had devotedly attended on her
father during his last illness, and through whom the succession of
Shinran's line was continued. Her grandson, Kakunyo, was the third head
of the Shinshu, and the succession then passed to Kakunyo's son Zennyo
and to his grandson Shakunyo. Eleven years after Shinran's death,
Kakushin-ni and Nyoshin built a Temple at Ōtani, to which the Emperor
Kameyama granted the name of *Kuonjitsujō-Amida-Hongwanji*, together
with the status of an Imperial Chapel. The Temple was popularly known as
the *Hongwanji*, and it may therefore in a sense be looked upon as the
parent temple of the still united Shinshu body.

It was not long before the Shinshu showed signs of division, and at the
present day there are ten

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

sub-divisions of the religion. These sub-divisions have no doctrinal
importance; some arose, doubtless, from that pride which in all ages and
times is a fruitful mother of schisms, but in some, the divisions must
be attributed to a jealous affection for the revered memory of the
Founder, and a desire to exalt the dignity of some particular Temple in
which Shinran himself had laboured. I purpose giving a short account of
these sub-sects, which are occasionally interesting for the light they
throw on the subsequent experiences of the sect. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30)

I.—The *Bukkōji* ("temple of Buddha's Light") originally called Kōshōji
(temple of the restoration of the right"—possibly in reference to
Shinran's recal from exile and pardon), was found by Shinran himself, in
1212, the year in which he commenced the active propagation of his
system. It was situated in the village of Yamashina in Yamashiro, in the
suburbs of Kyoto, and was Shinran's home for fifteen years. In 1227 he
transferred it to the care of his younger brother Shimbutsu, and the
Temple long remained in the hands of Shimbutsu's successors. In 1320 it
was removed to Shibudani on Higashiyama, Ryōgen being then Abbot.

It was in the reign of the unfortunate Godaigo, (1319–1338) when the
troubles were brewing which culminated in the setting-up of a rival line
of Emperors. In the confusion of the time, men, making a cloke of
religion for nefarious purposes, brought the Shinshu into disrepute by
their misuse of the doctrine of Salvation by Faith. There arose a clique

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

known as *akunin shōki* ("evil livers whose faith was right"), and
Ryōgen set himself to work with pen and word to put a stop to their
malicious abuse of a good doctrine. He died a martyr to the cause he had
taken in hand. In 1336, in the forty-second year of his life, and the
twenty-first of his Abbot-ship, he was waylaid and killed by a party of
*akunin-shōki*, dying with words on his lips of pious exhortation.

II.—*The Senshūji* ("temple of the exclusive devotion," i.e. to Amida)
was founded by Shinran himself, at Takata, in Shimotsuke, in A.D. 1225,
and entrusted by him to the care of one of his disciples. The group of
believers attached to this subsect is called the Takata-ha. The most
celebrated of its Abbots, Shinge, transferred his See from Takata to
Isshinden, near Tsu, in Ise, and there built a temple, in 1465, which is
now the head-temple of the Takata or Senshūji-ha. Shin-ye was much
troubled by the activity of a heresy named *Mugekō-ha* "the sect of the
unimpeded light,"—a sect of enthusiastic "perfectionists" who have had
their counterparts in the history of European sectarianism.

III.—The Kinshokuji Temple, at Kibe in Omi is the head temple of the
Kibe-ha. It was founded in 1235 by Shinran, and remained constantly
under his jurisdiction and that of his successors Zenran and Kakunyo. On
Kakunyo's death it became the head of an independent administration, in
the hands of Kōgen and his descendants, who are now represented by the
Kibe (Baron) family, the hereditary heads of this sub-sect. I believe
that the coming

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

into existence of this sect illustrates the policy of the early Shinshu
leaders and their Imperialist (and Imperial) patrons. It seems to have
been their idea to counterbalance the power of the great temporal lords,
as also of the great monasteries, by the creation of a kind of spiritual
peers, whose secular position and spiritual influence would, it was
hoped, have great and beneficial weight in the State at large. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31)

IV\. V.—We have already spoken about the Hongwanji, the headship of
which remained in the direct line of Shinran's descendants. The
Hongwanji at Kyoto was always looked upon throughout Japan as the truest
representative of the Shinshu, and the believers who adhered to it far
outnumbered those of the other divisions of the Shinshu household. After
Shinran, by far the most influential of the Hongwanji Abbots was Rennyo
Shōnin, otherwise known as Yeto-Daishi (1415–1499) whose merits are so
well recognized by the Shinshuists that they speak of him as the "Second
Founder" of their Faith. Writer, preacher, organizer, poet, in the midst
of a very troublesome world, Rennyo left behind him a great reputation,
the memory of which still continues.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Not long after Rennyo's death, even if not before that event, the
troubles of the times drove the Hongwanji priests from Kyoto, and the
Headquarters of the Sect were for many years moving about from place to
place in Central Japan. At last, in 1591, Kennyo Shōnin, a notorious
fighter, and a turbulent Churchman if ever there was one, returned to
Kyoto, and rebuilt the Hongwanji at Horikawa in the city. The reigning
Abbot for many years, Kōsa, the eleventh of the line, died in 1592 and
was succeeded in the Headship of the Hongwanji by his two sons Kōju and
Kōshō. Ten years later, in 1602, Tokugawa Iyeyasu took Kōsa's third son,
also named Kōsa, and appointed him to the headship of a new Hongwanji
Temple, erected at Karasumaru in Kyoto. Thus Japan gained a new
"hereditary Bishopric," but, as a result of its establishment, the
mighty Hongwanji, the most powerful ecclesiastical institution Japan has
ever seen, was divided into two rival, if not conflicting, sections.
Iyeyasu understood quite well the principle of *divide et impera*.

VI\. VII.—Neither the *Kōshōji-ha*, nor the *Izumoji-ha*, call for any
special notice.

VIII\. IX.—The [*Seishōji-ha*](errata.htm#3) has its influence mainly in
the province of Echizen. It originated during the period of Shinran's
exile to Echigo. On his road to his place of exile, he stopped one
evening at a small farm-house in the village of Uyeno. After supper he
preached to the people, and out of that sermon grew a great religious
movement which spread far and wide in that remote country. After
Shinran's return from exile, his fifth son, Dōshō,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

took up his work, and the result is to be seen in the Seishōji sub-sect
of the Shinshu.

Nearly the same account may be given of the *Shōseiji-ha*. It also
originated in the province of Echizen during the period of Shinran's
exile. Only, in this case, it was Shinran's eldest surviving son Zenran
who took up the work, and the headquarters of the subsect were at a
later period (1475) removed to Yamamoto in the same province.

X.—The *Senshōji-ha*, whose chief seat is at Fukui, in Echizen, seems to
be the only one of the Shinshu sub-sects which cannot trace its origin
absolutely to Shinran himself. The date given for its foundation is
1290.

These three last-mentioned bodies seem always to have worked amicably
together in Echizen, without any overlapping of jurisdiction, or
clashing of interests. They are known as the *San-monto-ha* "the three
Monto or Shinshu sub-sects," the Senshōji at Fukui being considered the
most important and central Temple for all three bodies.

It will be thus seen that the ten divisions of the Shinshu do not
represent so many schisms or fractions. They are rather ten Dioceses of
the same Communion ruled by hereditary Bishops with coordinate
jurisdiction in certain localities. They present no doctrinal
divergencies. In the quieter sub-sects there was probably more of
spiritual life than in monster institutions like the Hongwanjis.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Notes to Chapter IV</span>.

I.

It would be a very valuable piece of work if some scholar would
undertake, say for one of our Asiatic Societies or for the *Mélanges*, a
study of the Life of Fujiwara Kanezane, from the voluminous and valuable
Diaries that he has left behind him.

According to the Shinshu authorities whom I have followed in the text of
my chapter, it was at Kanezane's suggestion that Shinran instituted his
reforms in Buddhism. This statement is not accepted as absolutely true
by all sects of Buddhists. What seems certain is that Kanezane was much
interested in the introduction of the Zen sects, from China, and that he
was also known at times to recite the Nembutsu, as a prayer for temporal
benefits, and not, as Hōnen taught, merely as an act of thanksgiving for
spiritual blessings. In other words, he used prayer in the Christian
sense of the term, and he had connection with China.

It is interesting to note that Kanezane was the contemporary of
*Temujin* (better known by his later title of Ginghis khan). Temujin
became, in 1195, the ally of Wan-Khan (the Prester John of mediæval
romance), the Christian King of a Christian Nation, the Keraites, who
were converted to Nestorianism about A.D. 1010; and the allied princes
joined in expeditions for the conquest of China, (which accounts perhaps
for the Exodus of Chinese Zen priests to Japan). After Wang-Khan's
murder, Temujin had his skull set in silver for use as a drinking cup. I
think that we have here the key that will unlock many of the undoubted
points of resemblance between Shinshu and Nestorianism. A monograph
elucidating the problems of Kanezane's life is much to be desired.

II\.

§§ 25, 26, 27, of the *Shinshu Hyakuwa* relate (i) to the transmission
of the Shinshu Faith from Nāgārjūna to Hōnen, and so to Shinran, (ii) to
the lives and writings of the seven Patriarchs, as they are called,
through whom the Faith was transmitted, and (iii) to the three Sutras on
which the whole teaching of Amida is said to be based. These three
Sutras have already been translated into English, and may be consulted

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

by the student in Volume XLIX of the Sacred Books of the East. I have
referred to the transmission of the Shinshu Doctrines in my lectures on
the Japanese Mahayana delivered last winter, and need not repeat my
statements. For some of the Patriarchs there already exist valuable
monographs, e.g. on *Vasubandhu*, by Dr. Takakusu in the Trans. of the
Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain, on *Genkū* (or *Hōnen*) by Dr.
Anezaki in the Transactions of the Congress of the History of Religious,
Oxford, 1908, and one on *Asvaghosha*, (who is, however, not one of the
seven) in a recent number of the Journal Asiatique. The best thing I can
do for my readers is to furnish them with a translation of Shinran's own
poem, the *Shōshinge*, which will be found in the next chapter. This
will give Shinran an opportunity of speaking for himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[28:\*](sahw06.htm#fr_30) § 24. I have also
consulted *Bukkyōkakushe Kōyō*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[30:\*](sahw06.htm#fr_31) These hereditary
Bishoprics (in the case of the Hongwanji it might almost be called a
hereditary Papacy) have not always been ideal, the bad intermingling
curiously with the good. It is interesting to note that the Shinshu
shares the institution of "hereditary Bishops," with the Nestorians of
today, possibly therefore also with the mediæval Nestorians of China.
Haas notices (in 1215) the grant by the Emperor of a purple or violet
cassock to a "Bishop" (*daisō-jō*) of the Zen sect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Shōshinge](sahw07)
