[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw13)  [Next](sahw15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter XII.</span>

### *Of Faith in General*, (*i*).

(Extracts from ancient writers.)

I have judged it best in this chapter, instead of following the order of
the questions and answers in *Shinshu Hyakuwa* (of which a short
analysis will be found in the next chapter) to give from another book,
the *Shinshu Seikun*, already cited, a catena of passages taken, mainly,
from Japanese writers of the Middle Ages. If the Christian reader,
bearing in mind what I have said of the wonderful parallels between the
story of Amida, incarnate for man's salvation in Hōzō Biku, and that of
Christ, will read these passages in a Christian sense, he will, I think,
find theta to be not devoid of edification. He will also, I believe,
acknowledge that the devout worshipper of Amida, even though he may
never actually have heard the name of Christ, may yet be far nearer to
the Kingdom of God than many a man who calls himself a Christian, but
shuts his eyes to the pure light of the Christian Faith. I shall take
the liberty of interspersing among the extracts comments and criticisms
of my own, but I shall do so in such a way as to make what is my own
clearly distinguishable from what I have derived from ancient Japanese
sources.

127. <span id="fr_90"></span>[\*](#fn_90) "They who travel along the Way
make Faith their starting point."

Genshin 942–1017.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

127\. "It is said in the Nirvana Sutra that the Believing Heart is the
Cause of Supreme Perfect Enlightenment. There are in truth innumerable
causes of Enlightenment, but if you understand what a Believing Heart is
you embrace them all."

Anon. <span id="fr_91"></span>[\*](#fn_91)

127\. "In the House of Life and Death we stay for a while with doubt and
fear: into the City of Nirvana we make our entrance through Faith."

Genkū 1133–1212.

"Among the Shōnin's followers (i.e. Shinran's), the Believing Heart
means Trust, and Trust is the same thing as Peace of Mind."

Rennyo 1415–1499.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[In this sentence, the word for "trust" is *tanomu*. *Tanomu* is used
as a verb meaning to "entrust somebody with something" or to "commit
some particular duty to some one's care." The believer in Amida entrusts
his salvation to Amida's care, and after that he has peace of mind
(*anshin*). The word tanomu is really the παρατίθεναι in 1. St. Pet. iv.
19. cf. also 2. Tim. i. 12.\]

</div>

128\. "That which is called Faith (the Believing Heart) is Faith in the
Imputation (to us) of the Virtue of the Great Vow."

(Rennyo.)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[I have here given "imputation" as the equivalent for the word *ekō*
\#. The word, which is used commonly for Masses

</div>

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

for the dead, means "to divert from one person towards another." So the
Virtue of the Great Vow is diverted or transferred from Amida to the
believer. Cf. Romans iv. 18–25.\]

</div>

128\. "Faith is the implicit and absolute Belief in a man's words. For
instance, if a man, whom we know and hold in confidence, should tell us
of what he has seen,—here were mountains and yonder was a river,—we
should believe what he tells us, even though we had not seen the country
ourselves. Nay, though others should come and tell us a different story,
if we had confidence in the first narrator, we should still believe his
story, whatever the rest might say. Thus is it with our Faith. We
believe in Mida's Holy Vow, because it is S’akyamuni that has told us of
it, and we can have no two minds about it."

Shinran 1168–1257.

130\. " The New Birth (*ōjō*) of all Sentient Creatures has been
perfected by Amida: but Sentient Creatures remain in doubt and
disbelief, and are consequently still entangled in the wheel of
existence (*ruten* \#). The Sun shineth to every quarter under Heaven,
but the blind see it not, and are not enlightened, because their eyes
are holden. Thus also, though our New Birth (*ōjō*) is all settled so
far as Amida's Enlightenment of us is concerned, our want of belief
causes us, poor sinful creatures, to remain in the wheel of Life and
Death."

Rennyo.

131\. "In order that we may discern things, we want more than eyes, we
must have the light of

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the Sun. Our New Birth is not the work of our own mind, it comes from
the Mind of the Tathāgata. But here, as it is a question that regards
His own words, we need not ask whether we have light on them or not,
whether the darkness has been dispelled or not, whether the Tathāgata
vouchsafes to us His enlightenment or not. "If I cannot procure
Salvation for all Beings I will not accept the Buddhahood for myself,"
said the Tathāgata, when, as Hōzō Biku, He had reached the Stage of
Perfectionment. The Sun has risen, shall we doubt whether Night still
lingers? If the Sun has risen, the Night has gone, and the Sunlight
alone is shed abroad. It is therefore of the utmost importance for us
clearly to discern the enlightenment gained for us by the Tathāgata.
For, if the Tathāgata, in the Person of Hōzō Biku, did not gain
salvation (*shōgaku*) for us, our New Birth is a matter of uncertainty.
But inasmuch as Hōzō Biku, who made the Vow, that he would not accept
Buddhahood unless the New Birth were made possible for all Sentient
Creatures, is really identical with Amida the Tathāgata, why should we
have any doubt?"

Shinran.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[I would suggest, as a parallel passage to this, 1. Cor. xv. 12–18. I
feel sure that the reader cannot fail to be struck by the constant, and,
to my mind, significant echoes of Pauline doctrine that insist on making
themselves heard.\]

</div>

135\. "There are three words that are practically

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

identical, to entrust (*tanomu*), to believe (*shinzuru*), and Salvation
(*on-tasuke*). For it is the Mystery of the *tariki* Faith that there is
no room in it for doubt,—only for thankfulness."

Shinran.

135\. "Just as a Son receives his father's goods (as a present earnest
of future inheritance), even so do we receive, in the present life, the
Merits of Amida's labours for us (i.e. *ōjō*). All Amida's prolonged
labours were undertaken for the Salvation (*on-tasuke*) of each single
individual amongst us, so that they are a matter for individual and
personal gratitude, whenever the layman hears the recital of Amida's Vow
made for his sake."

Shinran.

137\. "Even though the Mind of Faith (*kimyō no kokoro*) should rise up
within us, that is none of our doing. It is the Mercy and Compassion of
Amida that is shining in our hearts."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[Cf. Eph. ii. 8; and especially 2 Cor. iv. 6. "God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus."
The parallelism is all the more striking because of the use of the word
φωτισμός by St. Paul.\]

</div>

137\. "The word *shinjin*, "believing heart," may also be read as
"straight heart." It is found in the believer, and is therefore supposed
to come from the believer. But this a mistake. It comes from the Heart
of the Tathāgata. For, if faith came from the crooked heart of

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

man, it could not be 'straight.' It is only because it is the gift of
Amida that Faith can be described as 'straight.'"

Anon.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[The character for *shin* in *shinjin* is \#, and means both 'belief,'
or 'faith,' and 'straightness,' and 'honesty.' Shinjin therefore means
both a 'believing heart,' and also an 'honest heart.' The quotation is
from an anonymous book, *Shinshūkyō yōshū*. It is described in *Shinshu
Seikun* p. 563.\]

</div>

245\. "The word *Is-shin* (One Heart) signifies the Union of Hearts,
that is, the Union of our heart with that of Amida. The *Jūgiron* of the
Tendai sect says truly that in the world there is always a lover and a
beloved, and that love is perfected when lover and beloved meet. Amida
is the lover, we are the beloved, and when we turn with our whole heart
to Amida and surrender ourselves to Him, our hearts become one with His,
and *i-sshin* is realized. But a heart which is distracted over many
things cannot realize this Union—that privilege is reserved for those
hearts that are devoted to the thankful remembrance of Amida's Mercies
(the Nembutsu)."

Genkū.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[Cf. St. Luke x. 40–42\]

</div>

146\. "In the Gate of Holy Path (*Shōdōmon*, see above chap. ii, [p.
12](sahw04.htm#page_12)) men work out Wisdom, and thus escape from life
and death: by the Gate of the Pure Land, men return to foolishness, and
thereby enter into Life (*ō-jō*). They put no trust in Wisdom, they
profess themselves

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

to be merely helpless, and unwise persons. But they put their whole
trust in the Great Vow, and thus enter into Life.

Genkū.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[1. Cor. i. 17–25. When the rich young man came to Christ, the Master
told him that if he would enter into life he must keep the commandments.
That was the *Shōdōmon*. When He told him to abandon all the riches
wherein he trusted, and "come follow me,"—that was the *Jōdomon*—"thou
shalt have treasure in Heaven." S. Matth. xix. 16–22\]

</div>

147\. "When a man hears the preaching of the Pure Land, and, believing
in it, feels a thrill of pleasure run through his frame, it shows that
in some past life he has already heard something of that of which he now
receives the full message. And now that he believes, he receives the New
Birth. But if he hears as though he heard not, and gives no credence, he
is one that has. but newly come up to the sphere of humanity from one of
the three paths of evil. The impediments of sin have not yet been
removed, and there is as yet no turning of Faith in his heart. Inasmuch
as he does not yet believe he cannot yet escape from the bonds of life
and death.

Genkū.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\[There are in Buddhism six grades of Sentient Existence. 1. Heaven
(where dwell gods and angels), 2. Man, 3. the Animals. All these have
virtues and good qualities of their own. But below these come (4),
Monsters of Greediness (*gaki*), and (5)

</div>

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Monsters of Lust
and Violence (*shūra*), and these may be in human form, though devoid of
the qualities of Humanity. Below all (6), are the demons that inhabit
the Hells (*jigoku*). These last three are known as the *san-akudō*, or
'three bad spheres of existence.' It is the privilege of Man that to him
the Gospel can be preached, for Man, though "lower than the Angels," has
the hope of being "crowned with glory and honour." It is for this reason
that we so often find the expression *ukegataki jinshin wo ukeru*, "to
receive a human body which it is so hard to receive." This extract also
illustrates another doctrine which I have frequently cone across in
Shinshu writings, to wit, that the call contained in the recital of the
Holy Name must in the end prove effectual. We may hear it once and
again, and turn away, but it will have found a lodgment in the mind and
ultimately (it may be a long time later), when the call comes, it will
have a familiar and a welcome sound. (Rom. viii. 29. 30).\]

</div>

166\. " There are two ways of embarking on (the ship of) the Great Vow,
and two ways of not embarking. To take the latter first, we do not
embark on the Great Vow, when (i) we commit sin. For, in that case, we
feel that our Salvation (*ōjō*) will not be secure, even though we
repeat the Nembutsu. So we hesitate to take the decisive step. But (ii),
we also refrain from

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

embarking, when the religious mind (*dōshin*, lit. the heart of the Way,
the virtuous mind) is aroused in us. For then we feel that, inasmuch as
we are so very religious, we shall obtain Salvation for our own virtue
and without any need of reciting the Nembutsu. We place our own Virtue
first, and the Great Vow second, and so we neglect the Act of Faith.

Next, as to the two ways of embarking. (i). We embark, when we have
committed as in. For then we feel that the commission of sin settles our
fate and determines our condemnation to Hell. At that moment we hear the
recital of the Sacred Name, and the thought, "Oh the joy of the
assurance of Salvation!" comes to our mind, and we take the step of
Faith, and embark. And (ii) the step is taken when we have the religious
mind. For then we say, 'this virtuous feeling will not cause my
salvation. This feeling has existed from a remote past, and yet I have
not been freed from the bonds of life and death. I will not therefore
ask myself whether I have religious sentiments or not, I will not
revolve in my mind the weight or otherwise of the sins I have committed.
I will only turn my thoughts to the Salvation which can be obtained by
the Invocation of the Holy Name.' When a man thinks thus he embarks on
the ship *Tariki Hongwan* (Faith in Another's Power—the Power of the
Great Vow)."

Genkū.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[93:\*](sahw14.htm#fr_90) The numbers refer to
the pages in *Shinshu Seikun*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[94:\*](sahw14.htm#fr_91) When I put "Anon"
after a quotation I mean that I have not been able to find the author's
name. In the *Shinshu Seikun* only the names of the books are given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of Faith in General, (ii).](sahw15)
