[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw14)  [Next](sahw16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter XIII.</span>

### *Of Faith in General*, (*ii*).

<span class="small">Summary of the Questions and Answers in *Shinshu
Hyakuwa*.</span>

(§§ 52–70).

§ 52. Amida, it is said, has two qualities (*toku*) whereby He saves
us—Mercy and Wisdom. We, sentient Beings, travail in pain (*kumon shite
orimasu*), being fast bound in a kind of slavery to sin and evil, and
from this we cannot free ourselves, because the fetters have been
fastened on us by the Karma of an immemorial past. And Karma has
relations not only with the past. It affects our present condition, it
brings with it an endless chain of re-birth, life, and death, which
stretches away into the boundless future. From this bondage Amida
delivers us. He looses the bonds of sin and evil by the Might accruing
to Him from His Great Vow, with His Light He illuminates our minds,
giving us supernatural and glorious Wisdom, of His Mercy he places us in
a position equal to His own, practically giving us power to become 'sons
of God.' For the above reasons the Shinshuist speaks of his Salvation as
the Salvation of Amida.

§ 53. Of the "Might accruing to Amida from His Great Vow" we have
already spoken when dealing with the Story of Hōzō Biku. That

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Might is enshrined
in the Sacred Name, handed down to us by the living voice (*Koe*) of a
great company of devout believers, inciting us to a Mind of Belief and
Trust, and filling us with supernatural grace in consequence of the
efficacy of the prayers which we ourselves recite after we have laid
hold of salvation.

§ 54. Sin is an abstract thing (*mukei*), in the sense that it has so
many forms and shapes that it is impossible to lay hands on any one
thing and say that this is the Original Form of Sin. Its effect is, as
stated above, to enchain us with fetters of habits, easily formed but
almost impossible of rupture, and involving us in much pain and distress
of mind. But the moment we put our trust in Amida, the fetters are
snapped, peace of mind ensues, we are at peace, because we have entered
into the Heart of Buddha, and being at peace, our actions become quiet
and peaceable, and the liability to consequent misery is removed.

§ 55. The process by which this result is attained is the putting into
operation of Amida's Mercy and Wisdom, and is embodied in the Name
[and](errata.htm#10) Person of Namu Amida Butsu. We must suppose that in
the Mind of the Everlasting Buddha there must have been from everlasting
a plan of Salvation for men, originating in his Everlasting Compassion.
But Salvation is not complete unless the Faith of those saved be
subsequently nourished and illuminated by the Divine Truth and Life.
This is given to us

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

by the manifest and manifold operation of the Boundless Wisdom of the
Nyorai.

§ 56. Is devoted to the exposition of the meaning of the *Myōgō*, or
Sacred Name of *Namu-Amida-Butsu*.

§ 57. Both Shinran and Rennyo insisted on the supreme importance of
Faith. "If a man," says the latter, "does not know the importance of
Faith, treat him as an outsider. Whoever knows what Faith is, and
understands it (from practical experience) treat him as belonging to the
Shinshu."

§ 58. Faith comes by hearing. Whenever a man hears the Gospel (*iware*)
of Amida, the knowledge will come to him that he is deeply involved in
sin and evil, and that it is impossible for hire, try as he will, to
save himself from the sin in and around him. That is one side of the
'Gospel message'. Simultaneously, however, with this 'conviction of sin'
comes the firm conviction that Amida does save us, and that His Vow
remains sure. Then, in a moment, doubt disappears and we find ourselves
rejoicing in the Merciful Heart of Amida.

§ 59. What feelings are ours when we have thus learned to believe (*Mida
Butsu wo shinzuru Kokoromochi)*? Before conversion, our lives have been
spent in the midst of evil, and our minds have been dragged down to the
low level of our surroundings. The Voice of the Preacher, telling us of
Amida Butsu, acts as a *Sursum Corda*. It tells of our Father, of his
gracious invitation, of the arrival of the lifeboat.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then our heart
utters the Nembutsu, but not as a prayer. It is an act of Thanksgiving
for the spiritual mercies we have received. We are filled with *shinjin
kwanki*, "joy in believing."

§ 60. The object with which we put our trust in the Power of Amida's
Saving Vow is that we may be turned from darkness to light, and receive
the fruits of Saving Knowledge (*bukkwa*). It is our only chance.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  Nishi ye yuku  
Michi yori hoka wa  
  Ima no yo ni  
Ukiyo wo idzuru  
  Kado ya nakaran.

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                 "In this poor life at last,  
I see no other gate, by which to flee  
From sin and pain that wreathe this Transient-World,  
But that which leads West to the Paradise  
Of Amitābha.

</div>

§ 61. Faith is given to us: it is not of ourselves. It is the believer's
own mind that believes; but that which fixes the mind in belief is the
having understood (*tettei suru*) the Great Merciful Heart wherewith
Amida saves us. The faith which turns with repentance (*kijun sure*) to
the commands of Amida is not faith in one's self (*jiriki*). It is
distinctly faith in Another (*tariki*).

§ 62. It is true that the word *shinjin*, may be translated as
"believing heart," and also as "straight heart." But the *tariki* Faith
must

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

not be understood to teach that a man is to turn even with an honest and
true heart to Amida and ask to be delivered or rescued from this or that
evil. To wrestle in prayer of this kind (*neji-kakarite*) is a *jiriki*
form of devotion. It may bring deliverance from the particular evil or
misfortune, but it does not bring that feeling of rest and peace
(*dai-kwairaku-shin*) which is known as *anshin* or *ando*. The *tariki*
believer knows that Amida saves him, that He invites him, that He will
provide, and knowing this, he comes in perfect trust, and leaves
everything in Amida's hands.

§ 63. It may be asked, Is not this 'coming in perfect trust' a form of
jiriki? Not so. (It is a case of 'turn thou us, O Lord, and so shall we
be turned.') Amida turns us to Himself, fills, us with His grace, and
bestows faith upon us.

§ 69. Where then does Karma operate? "It is a case of *ta-in-ji-kwa*,
'others have laboured and ye have entered into their labours,' which is
not the law of Karma." This objection is sometimes heard.

It is true that Faith is a gift which comes from Amida, given without
our efforts. But it is our work to *receive* and *accept* it (just as it
is the "work of God to believe on Him whom He hath sent"). *Karma* has
three constituent parts, known as *in*—the primary cause—e.g. the seed,
*en*—the secondary cause; e.g. the Sun and rain, and *gwa* the fruit.
Amida's gift is *in*, our acceptance is *en*, our Salvation is *gwa*.

§ 65. The faith which we thus receive and accept

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

comprises all the spiritual Power which was acquired and stored up by
Hōzō Biku in the performance of the labours necessary for the fulfilment
of the Great Vow which He undertook for man. Among the Powers thus
acquired by Hōzō we must include the power to smite sin and evil, and
the power to draw men to Himself into the paths of righteousness.

§ 66. Of this power we are assured by Faith, the Symbol of the Sacred
Name being the quasi-sacramental pledge to assure us thereof. Faith is
the stamping of Amida Himself upon the heart of the believer.

§ 67. Some may think that it is necessary first to cleanse the heart
from all defilement, and then to receive the inestimable gift. that is
not so. The depraved heart (*mōshin*) of the sinner cannot cleanse
itself by its own efforts. If it were possible for it to do so, there
would be no room for the exercise of Mercy. It is a comforting fact that
Saving Faith can be received by the sinner whilst yet in his sin. This
fact throws the greatness of Amida's compassion into more striking
prominence.

§ 68. But, when a sinful man turns to the light, one of the first
results must be the filling of his mind with abhorrence of his own sins.
Can a man, whose mind is troubled about these things, enter that Heart
of Buddha to which access is gained by the *tariki* faith? Certainly
not. Mere contrition or troubling about the soul, or constant
introspection cannot save. All that is required is Conversion, the
turning

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of the heart to Amida, (*kijun suru*). The rest will come in due and
natural course.

§ 69. We must beware lest we presume to say of any living man that,
because he has received this lively Faith, therefore he has attained to
the perfection of Buddhahood. All we can [say](errata.htm#11) is, that
the perfect seed has been planted, that the sowing is complete. 'His
seed remaineth in him,' but it needs the sun and rain to bring its fruit
to perfection.

§ 70. And, similarly, we must be on our guard against those titles of
honour which men give at times to those who are supposed to have made
progress in holiness. These titles, intended as honours, should serve
for our humiliation. For what have we that we have not received? All the
Virtues implied by these honorific titles have been bestowed on us by
Him, who is the Divine Mercy. Still, as Genkū, says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  Mi wa koko ni  
Mada ari nagara  
  Gokuraku no  
Shōjū no kazu ni  
  Iru zo ureshiki.

</div>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                       "The happiness!  
To know that whilst our bodies still are here,  
In this poor world, our selves are numbered  
Amongst the Holy Ones of Paradise."

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="small">I have the less hesitation about offering this
somewhat sketchy analysis to my readers since I have learned that a more
careful translation of the whole Catechism is being prepared by a
missionary friend in Tokyo.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. After Justification.](sahw16)
