[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ljc00)  [Next](ljc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087785176X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Last Judgment Continued*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1892\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Last Judgment Continued

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

I. THE LAST JUDGMENT HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED. In the former small work on
The Last Judgment, the following subjects were treated of: The day of
the Last Judgment does not mean the destruction of the world (n. 1-5).
The procreations of the human race will never cease (n. 6-13). Heaven
and hell are from the human race (n. 14-22). All who have ever been born
men from the beginning of creation, and are deceased, are either in
heaven or in hell (n. 23-27). The Last Judgment must be where all are
together; therefore in the spiritual world, and not on the earth (n.
28-32). The Last Judgment exists when the end of the church is; and the
end of the church is when there is no faith, because there is no charity
(n. 33-39). All the things which are predicted in the Apocalypse are at
this day fulfilled (n. 40-44). The Last Judgment has been accomplished
(n. 45-52). Babylon and its destruction (n. 53-64). The former heaven
and its abolition (n. 65-72). The state of the world and of the church
hereafter (n. 73-74).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

The subject of the Last Judgment is continued, principally that it may
be known what the state of the world and the church was before the Last
Judgment, and what the state of the world and the church has become
since; also, how the Last Judgment was accomplished upon the Reformed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

It is a common opinion in the Christian world, that the whole heaven we
see, and the whole earth inhabited by men will perish at the day of the
Last Judgment, and that a new heaven and a new earth will exist in their
places; that the souls of men will then receive their bodies, and that
man will thus again be man as before. This opinion has become a matter
of faith, because the Word has not been understood otherwise than
according to the sense of its letter; and it could not be understood
otherwise, until its spiritual sense was disclosed, also, because by
many the belief has been acquired that the soul is only a breath exhaled
by man; and that spirits, as well as angels, are of the substance of
wind. While there was such a deficiency of understanding concerning
souls, and concerning spirits and angels, the Last Judgment could not be
thought of in any other manner. But when it comes to be understood, that
a man is a man after death, just as he was a man in the world, with the
sole difference that then he is clothed with a spiritual body, and not
as before with a natural body; and that the spiritual body appears
before those who are spiritual, even as the natural body appears before
those who are natural, it may then also be understood, that the Last
Judgment will not be in the natural, but in the spiritual world; for all
the men who were ever born and have died, are together there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

When this is understood, then may the paradoxes be dissipated, which man
would otherwise think concerning the state of souls after death, and
their reunion with putrid corpses, and concerning the destruction of the
created universe, thus concerning the Last Judgment. The paradoxes
concerning the state of souls after death that he would think are these:
That man would then be like an exhalation, or like wind, or like ether;
either that he would be floating in the air, or not abiding in any
place, but in a somewhere, which they call Pu; <span
id="fr_0"></span>[4-1](#fn_0) and that he would see nothing, because he
had no eyes; hear nothing, because he had no ears; speak nothing,
because he had no mouth; and would therefore be blind, deaf, and dumb;
and continually in the expectation, which could not but be sad, of
receiving again at the day of the Last Judgment, those functions of the
soul from which all the delight of life proceeds. Also that the souls of
all who have lived since the first creation, must be in a like miserable
state, and that the men who lived fifty or sixty centuries ago, were
likewise still floating in the air, or remaining in Pu, and awaiting
judgment; besides other lamentable things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

I pass over paradoxes, similar to, and equally numerous with these,
which the man who does not know that he is a man after death as before,
must think concerning the destruction of the universe. But when he knows
that a man after death is not an exhalation or a wind, but a spirit, and
if he has lived well, an angel in heaven, and that spirits and angels
are men in a perfect form, can then think from his understanding
concerning the state of man after death, and the Last Judgment, and not
from faith separate from the understanding, from which mere traditions
go forth: and he may also with certainty conclude from his
understanding, that the Last Judgment, which is predicted in the Word,
will not exist in the natural world, but in the spiritual world, where
all are together: and furthermore, that whenever it does exist, it must
be revealed, for the sake of belief in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

Put away from you the idea that the soul is like an exhalation, and then
think of your own state, or of the state of your friends, or of the
state of your infants after death. Will you not think that you will live
a man, and they likewise? And since there is no life which is life
without the senses, you cannot think otherwise than that they also see,
hear, and speak; thus also panegyrists write over the deceased, placing
them in heaven among the angels, in white garments, and in paradises.
But if afterwards you relapse into the idea, that the soul is an
exhalation, and has no sensitive life until after the Last Judgment, can
you help being distracted when you think, What and where shall I be in
the meantime? Shall I float in the air, or remain in Pu? <span
id="fr_1"></span>[6-1](#fn_1) Yet the preacher teaches me that after
death I shall come among the happy, if I have believed well and lived
well. You may believe then, as the truth is, that you are a man after
death as well as before it, with only the difference that there is
between the natural and the spiritual. Thus also all those think who
believe in eternal life, and know nothing of this hypothetical tradition
concerning the soul.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

From what has been said already, it may appear that the Last Judgment
cannot exist in the natural world, but in the spiritual world. That it
also has existed there, may be seen from the things related of it from
sight, in the former small work on The Last Judgment (n. 45-72), and
still further from the particulars about to be related from sight, of
the Last Judgment upon the Reformed. He who attends may also see it from
the new things which are now revealed concerning heaven, the Word, and
the church. What man can draw such things from himself?

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

II\. THE STATE OF THE WORLD AND OF THE CHURCH BEFORE THE LAST JUDGMENT,
AND AFTER IT. That the Last Judgment has been accomplished in the
spiritual world, may appear from what has just been said. Nevertheless,
in order to know anything of the state of the world and the church
before and after it, it is altogether necessary that the following
things should be known: I. What is meant by "the former heaven" and "the
former earth" which passed away (Apoc. 21:1). II. Who, and of what
quality were those who were in the former heaven and in the former
earth. III. Before the Last Judgment was effected upon them much of the
communication between heaven and the world, thus also between the Lord
and the church, was intercepted. IV. After the Last Judgment the
communication was restored. V. Hence it is, that after the Last
Judgment, and not before, revelations were made for the New Church. VI.
The state of the world and of the church before the Last Judgment was
like evening and night, but after it like morning and day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

I. What is meant by "the former heaven" and "the former earth" which
passed away, mentioned in the Apocalypse (21:1) "The former heaven" and
"the former earth" there mentioned, does not mean the heaven visible to
the eyes of men in the world, nor the earth which is inhabited by men;
nor the former heaven, in which all those are who have lived well since
the first creation. But congregations of spirits are meant who had made
seeming heavens between heaven and hell for themselves, and because all
spirits and angels dwell upon lands, as well as men, therefore by "the
former heaven" and "the former earth," these are meant. The passing away
of that heaven and that earth was seen, and it has been described from
sight in the work on The Last Judgment (45-72).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

II\. Who, and of what quality were those who were in "the former
heaven," and "the former earth," was described in the small work on The
Last Judgment; but because the understanding of what follows depends on
the knowledge of who they were and their quality, something shall here
be said concerning them. All those who gathered themselves together
under heaven, and in various places formed seeming heavens for
themselves, and also called them heavens, were conjoined with the angels
of the lowest heaven, but only as to externals, not as to internals. For
the most part they were the goats and those akin to them, who are named
in Matthew (25:41-46); who indeed, in the world had not done evils, for
they had lived well morally; but they had not done goods from a good
origin, for they had separated faith from charity, and hence had not
regarded evils as sins. Because they had lived as Christians in
externals, they were conjoined with the angels of the lowest heaven, who
were like them in externals, but not like them in internals; they being
"the sheep," and in faith, yet in the faith of charity. On account of
this conjunction they were necessarily tolerated; for to separate them,
before the Last Judgment, would have brought injury upon those who were
in the lowest heaven, who would have been drawn into destruction with
them. This is what the Lord foretold in Matthew: Jesus spoke a parable;
the kingdom of the heaven is like unto a man who sowed good seed in his
field; but while men slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares, and went
away; when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also; so the servants of the householder coming, said
unto him, Lord, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? Wilt thou
then that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest, while ye
gather up the tares, ye root up at the same time the wheat with them:
let both grow together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I
will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind
them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn. He who
hath sown the good seed, is the Son of man; the field is the world; the
seed are the sons of the kingdom; the tares are the sons of evil; the
harvest is the consummation of the age; as therefore the tares are
gathered together, and burned, so shall it be in the consummation of the
age (Matt. 13:24-30, 37-40). "The consummation of the age" is the last
time of the church; "the tares" are those who are interiorly evil; "the
wheat" are those who are interiorly good; "the gathering together in
bundles to burn," is the Last Judgment upon them; that harm should not
be done to the good by separation before the Last Judgment, is signified
by "lest in gathering up the tares, ye root up at the same time the
wheat with them: let both grow until the harvest."

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

III\. Before the Last Judgment was effected upon them, much of the
communication between heaven and the world, thus between the Lord and
the church, was intercepted. All enlightenment comes to man from the
Lord through heaven, and it enters by an internal way. So long as there
were congregations of such spirits between heaven and the world, or
between the Lord and the church, man could not be enlightened. It was as
when a sunbeam is cut off by a black interposing cloud, or as when the
sun is eclipsed, and its light arrested, by the interjacent moon.
Wherefore, if anything had been then revealed by the Lord, either it
would not have been understood, or if understood, still it would not
have been received, or if received, still it would afterwards have been
suffocated. Now since all these interposing congregations were
dissipated by the Last Judgment, it is plain, IV. That the communication
between heaven and the world, or between the Lord and the church, has
been restored.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

V. Hence it is, that after the Last Judgment has been accomplished, and
not before, revelations were made for the New Church. For since
communication has been restored by the Last Judgment, man can be
enlightened and reformed; that is, can understand the Divine truth of
the Word, receive it when understood, and retain it when received, for
the interposing obstacles are removed; and therefore John, after the
former heaven and the former earth passed away, said that: He saw a New
Heaven and a New Earth, and then, the holy city Jerusalem, descending
from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride before her Husband; and he
heard the One sitting upon the throne, say, Behold, I make all things
new (Apoc. 21:1, 2, 5). That the church is meant by "Jerusalem" may be
seen in The Doctrine Concerning the Lord (n. 62-64). Concerning its new
things (see n. 65 there).

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

VI\. The state of the world and of the church before the Last Judgment
was like evening and night, but after it, like morning and day. When the
light of truth does not appear, and truth is not received, there is a
state of the church in the world like evening and night; that there was
a state before the Last Judgment, may appear from what is said above (n.
11); but when the light of truth appears, and the truth is received,
there is a state of the church in the world like morning and day. Hence
it is, that these two states of the church are called "evening and
morning" and "night and day," in the Word; as in the following passages:
The Holy One said unto me, Until the evening the morning two thousand
three hundred; then shall the sanctuary be justified (Dan. 8:14). The
vision of the evening and the morning is truth (Dan. 8:26). There shall
be one day, which is known to Jehovah, neither day nor night, for about
the time of evening there shall be light (Zech. 14:7). One crying unto
me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? The watchman said, The
morning cometh, and also the night (Isa. 21:11, 12). Concerning the last
time of the church, Jesus said: Watch, for ye know not when the Lord of
the house will come, whether at evening, at midnight, at cock-crowing,
or in the morning (Mark 13:35). Jesus said, I must work while it is day;
the night cometh, when no one can work (John 9:4); and elsewhere (as in
Isa. 17:14; Jer. 6:4, 5; Ps. 30:6; 65:9; 90:6). Since such things are
meant by "evening and night," therefore the Lord, in order to fulfil the
Word, also was buried in the evening and afterward rose again in the
morning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

III\. THE LAST JUDGMENT UPON THE REFORMED. In the former small work on
The Last Judgment it treated of the judgment upon those who are meant by
Babylon; and something of the judgment upon the Mohammedans and upon the
Gentiles; but not of the judgment upon the Reformed. It was said only,
that the Reformed were in the middle, arranged there according to
countries; the Papists around them; the Mohammedans around the Papists,
and around these the Gentiles and peoples of various religions. The
Reformed constituted the middle, or central region, because the Word is
read by them and the Lord is worshiped, and hence with them there is the
greatest light; and spiritual light, which is from the Lord as a sun,
which in its essence is the Divine love, proceeds and extends itself on
every side, and enlightens even those who are in the extreme
circumferences, and opens the faculty of understanding truths, as far as
from their religion they can receive them. For spiritual light in its
essence is the Divine wisdom, and it enters the understanding in man, as
far as, from knowledges received, he has the faculty of perceiving it;
and it does not pass through spaces, like the light of the world, but
through the affections and perceptions of truth, therefore, in an
instant, to the last limits of the heavens. From these are the
appearances of spaces in that world. Concerning these things more may be
seen in The Doctrine Concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 104-113).

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

The Last Judgment upon the Reformed shall be described in the following
order. I. Upon whom of the Reformed the Last Judgment was effected. II.
The signs and visitations before the Last Judgment. III. How the
universal judgment was effected. IV. The salvation of the sheep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

I. Upon whom among the Reformed the Last Judgment was effected. The Last
Judgment was effected upon those only of the Reformed, who in the world
confessed God, read the Word, heard preaching, partook of the sacrament
of the Supper, and did not neglect the solemnities of the worship of the
church; and yet thought that adulteries, various kinds of theft, lying,
revenge, hatred, and the like, were allowable. These although they
confessed God, still made no account of sins against Him; they read the
Word, and still they made no account of the precepts of life in it; they
heard preachings, and still they paid no attention to them; they went to
the sacrament of the Supper, and still they did not desist from the
evils of their former life; they did not neglect the solemnities of
worship, and still they amended their lives in nothing. Thus they lived
as if from religion, in their externals, yet in their internals they had
nothing of it. These are they who are meant by "the dragon" in the
Apocalypse (chap. 12); for it is there said of the dragon, that it was
seen in heaven, that it fought with Michael in heaven, and that it drew
down the third part of the stars from heaven; which things are said,
because these, by means of the confession of God, by reading the Word,
and by external worship, communicated with heaven. The same are meant by
"the goats" in Matthew, chap. 25; to whom it is not said that they did
evils, but that they omitted to do goods; and all such omit to do goods
which are goods, because they do not shun evils as sins, and although
they do not do them, still they think them allowable, and thus do them
in spirit, and also in body, when permitted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

Upon all these from the Reformed the Last Judgment was effected, but not
upon those who did not believe in God, who contemned the Word, and
rejected from their hearts the holy things of the church; for all these,
when they came from the natural world into the spiritual world, were
cast into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

All who lived like Christians in externals, and made no account of the
Christian life, made one exteriorly with the heavens, but interiorly
with the hells, and since they could not be torn away in a moment from
their conjunction with heaven, they were detained in the world of
spirits, which is midway between heaven and hell, and it was permitted
them to form societies, and to live together as in the world; and there
by arts unknown to the world, to cause splendid appearances, and by this
means to persuade themselves and others, that they were in heaven;
therefore, from that external appearance they called their societies
heavens. The heavens and the earths upon which they dwelt, are meant by
"the former heaven, and the former earth which passed away" (Apoc.
21:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

Meanwhile, so long as they remained there, the interiors of their minds
were closed, and the exteriors were opened; by which means, their evils,
by which they made one with the hells: did not appear. But when the Last
Judgment was at hand, their interiors were disclosed, and they then
appeared before all such as they really were; and since they then acted
in unity with the hells, they were no longer able to simulate the
Christian life, but from delight rushed into evils and crimes of every
kind, and were turned into devils, and, moreover, were seen as such,
some black, some fiery, and some livid like corpses; those who were in
the pride of their own intelligence, appearing black; those who were in
the insane love of ruling over all, appearing fiery; and those who were
in the neglect and contempt of truth, appearing livid like corpses. Thus
were the scenes of those theaters changed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

The Reformed constitute the inmost or middle part of the world of
spirits, which is midway between heaven and hell, and are there arranged
according to countries. In the center of this middle region are the
English; towards the south and the east of it are the Dutch; towards the
north, the Germans; towards the west and the north, the Swedes; and
towards the west, the Danes. But those only who have lived the life of
charity, and its faith, are in that middle region: many societies of
them dwell there. Surrounding them are those of the Reformed, who have
not lived the life of faith and charity: these are they who made as it
were heavens to themselves. But there is a different arrangement of all
in heaven, and also of all in hell. The reason why the Reformed
constitute the middle there is, because with them the Word is read, and
the Lord is also worshiped, from which the greatest light is there; and
thence, as from a center, this light is propagated to all the
circumferences and enlightens. For the light in which spirits and angels
are, proceeds from the Lord as a sun, and this sun, in its essence, is
the Divine love, and the light which proceeds from it in its essence is
the Divine wisdom: all the spiritual of that world is derived from it.
Concerning the Lord as the sun in the spiritual world, and concerning
the light and heat of that sun, see the work on Heaven and Hell (n.
116-140).

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

Every arrangement of the societies in that world, is an arrangement
according to the differences of love; the reason of which is, that love
is the life of man, and the Lord, who is Divine love itself, arranges
them according to its reception; and the differences of loves are
innumerable, which no one knows but the Lord alone. He so conjoins the
societies, that they all lead as it were one life of man; the societies
of the heavens one life of celestial and spiritual love; the societies
of the hells, one life of diabolical and infernal love; He conjoins the
heavens and the hells by oppositions. Because there is such an
arrangement, every man after death goes into the society of his own
love, nor can he go into any other, for his love opposes it. Hence it is
that they who are in spiritual love are in heaven, but they who are in
natural love only, are in hell. Spiritual love is implanted solely by
the life of charity, and natural love remains natural, if the life of
charity is omitted; and natural love, if it is not subjected to
spiritual love, is opposed to it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

From these things it may appear, upon whom of the Reformed the Last
Judgment was effected; that it was not upon those who were in the
center, but upon those who were around it; who from external morality,
as was said, appeared exteriorly like Christians, but interiorly they
were not Christians, because they had no spiritual life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

II\. The signs and visitations before the Last Judgment. There was seen
above those who had formed to themselves seeming heavens as it were a
storm cloud, which appearance was from the presence of the Lord in the
angelic heavens above them, especially from His presence in the lowest
heaven, lest any of them on account of the conjunction should be carried
away and perish with them. The higher heavens moreover were brought down
nearer to them, by which the interiors of those upon whom the judgment
was about to come were disclosed; on which disclosure, they appeared no
longer like moral Christians, as before, but like demons. They were
tumultuous and strove among themselves about God, the Lord, the Word,
faith, and the church; and because their lusts for evils were then also
set free, they rejected all these things with contempt and ridicule, and
rushed into every kind of enormity. Thus the state of those heavenly
inhabitants was changed. Then at the same time all their splendid
appearances, which they had made for themselves by arts unknown in the
world, vanished away; their palaces were turned into vile huts; their
gardens into stagnant pools; their temples into heaps of rubbish; and
the very hills upon which they dwelt, into gravel heaps, and into other
similar things, which corresponded to their wicked minds and lusts. For
all the visible things of the spiritual world are correspondences of the
affections of spirits and angels. These were the signs of the coming
judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

As the disclosure of the interiors increased, so the order among the
inhabitants was changed and inverted. Those who were most powerful in
reasonings against the holy things of the church, rushed into the
middle, and assumed the dominion; and the rest, who were less powerful
in reasonings, receded to the circumferences, and acknowledged those who
were in the middle as their tutor-angels. Thus they collected themselves
together into the form of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

These changes of their state were accompanied by various concussions of
their dwellings and lands; which were followed by earthquakes, mighty
according to their perversions. Here and there, too, chasms were made
towards the hells which were under them, and a communication was thus
opened with them. Exhalations were then seen ascending like smoke
mingled with sparks of fire. These also were signs which preceded, which
are also meant by the Lord's words concerning the consummation of the
age, and then concerning the Last Judgment, in the Evangelists: Nation
shall be stirred up against nation; there shall be great earthquakes in
divers places; signs also from heaven, terrible and great. And there
shall be distress of nations, the sea and the billows roaring (Luke
21:10, 11, 25; Matt. 24:7; Mark 13:8).

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

Visitations also were made by angels; for before any ill conditioned
society perishes, visitation always precedes. The angels exhorted them
to desist, and denounced destruction upon them if they did not. Then
they also sought out and separated any good spirits who were
intermingled with them. But the multitude, excited by their leaders,
reviled the angels, and rushed in upon them, for the purpose of dragging
them into the forum, and treating them in an abominable manner; just as
was done in Sodom. Most of them were in faith separated from charity;
and there were also some who professed charity, and yet lived
shamefully.

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

III\. How the universal judgment was effected. After the visitations and
premonitory signs of the coming judgment could not turn their minds from
criminal acts, and from seditious plottings against those who
acknowledged the Lord as the God of heaven and earth, held the Word
holy, and led a life of charity, the Last Judgment came upon them. It
was thus effected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

The Lord was seen in a bright cloud with angels, and a sound as of
trumpets was heard from it; which was a sign representative of the
protection of the angels of heaven by the Lord, and of the gathering of
the good from every side. For the Lord does not bring destruction upon
anyone, but only protects His own, and draws them away from
communication with the evil; and when they are withdrawn, the evil come
into their own lusts, and from them rush into every kind of abomination.
Then all who were about to perish, were seen together like a great
dragon, with its tail extended in a curve, and elevated towards heaven,
bending itself about on high in various directions, as though it would
destroy heaven, and draw it down. But the effort was vain, for the tail
was cast down, and the dragon, which had also appeared elevated, sank
down. It was granted me to see this representation, that I might know
and make known who are meant by "the dragon" in the Apocalypse; namely,
that "the dragon" means all who read the Word, hear preachings, and
perform the holy things of the church, making no account of the lusts of
evil by which they are enticed, and interiorly they meditate thefts and
frauds, adulteries and obscenities, hatred and revenge, lies and
blasphemies; and who thus live in spirit like devils, and in body like
angels. These constituted the body of the dragon, but the tail was
constituted of those who, when in the world, were in faith separated
from charity, and were like the former as to thoughts and intentions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

Then I saw some of the rocks upon which they were, subsiding even to the
lowest depths; some carried far away; some opening in the middle, and
those who were on them cast down through the chasm; and some inundated
as with a flood. And I saw many collected into companies, as into
bundles, according to the genera and species of evil, and cast hither
and thither into whirlpools, marshes, stagnant pools, and deserts, which
were so many hells. The rest who were not on rocks, but scattered here
and there, and who yet were in similar evils, fled amazed to the
Papists, Mohammedans, and Gentiles, and professed their religions, which
they could do without any disturbance of mind, because they had no
religion; but still lest they should seduce these also, they were driven
away, and thrust down to their companions in the hells. This is a
general description of their destruction; the particulars which I saw,
are more than can be here described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

The salvation of the sheep. After the Last Judgment was accomplished,
there was then joy in heaven, and also light in the world of spirits,
such as was not before. The joy in heaven and its quality, after the
dragon was cast down, is described in the Apocalypse (12:10-12); and
there was light in the world of spirits, because those infernal
societies had been interposed like clouds which darken the earth. A
similar light also then arose with men in the world, from which they had
new enlightenment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

I then saw angelic spirits in great numbers rising from below, and
elevated into heaven, who were the sheep, there reserved and guarded by
the Lord for ages back, lest they should come into the malignant sphere
flowing forth from dragonists, and their charity be suffocated. These
are they, who are meant in the Word, by "those who went forth from the
sepulchers"; also, by "the souls of those slain for the testimony of
Jesus," who were watching; and by those "who are of the first
resurrection."

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE SPIRITUAL WORLD. IV. THE SPIRITUAL WORLD.
The spiritual world has been treated of in a special work on Heaven and
Hell, in which many particulars of that world are described; and since
every man enters that world after death, his state then is also
described there. Who does not know that man will live after death,
because he is born a man, and created in the image of God, and because
the Lord, in His Word, teaches it? But what his future life will be has
hitherto been unknown. It has been believed that he would then be a
soul, of which no other idea was conceived than as of air or ether, in
which some capacity of thought would reside, without such sight as
belongs to the eye, without such hearing as belongs to the ear, and
without speech such as belongs to the mouth. And yet man is equally a
man after death; and such a man that he does not know otherwise than
that he is still in the former world; he sees, hears, and speaks as in
the former world; he walks, runs, and sits as in the former world; he
eats and drinks as in the former world; he sleeps and wakes as in the
former world; he enjoys conjugial delight as in the former world; in a
word he is a man as to each and all things. From which it is plain, that
death is but a continuation of life, and is only transition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

There are many causes why man has not known of this state of his after
death; one of which is, that he could not be enlightened, so little
faith had he in the immortality of the soul; as may appear from many
even of the learned, who believe that they are like beasts, only more
perfect than they, in being able to speak; and therefore in their heart
they deny the life after death, although they profess it with the mouth.
From this thought of theirs they have become so sensual, that they could
not believe that a man is a man after death, because they do not see him
with their eyes, for they say, how can a soul be such a man? It is
otherwise with those who believe they will live after death; these think
interiorly in themselves, that they will come into heaven, enjoy
delights with the angels, see heavenly paradises, and stand before the
Lord in white garments, besides other things. This is their interior
thought; their exterior thought may wander from it, when they think of
the soul from the hypothesis of the learned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

That a man is equally a man after death, although he does not appear
before the eyes, may appear from the angels seen by Abraham, Gideon,
Daniel, and other prophets; from the angels seen in the Lord's
sepulchre, and afterwards, oftentimes, by John in the Apocalypse;
especially from the Lord Himself, who showed His disciples that He was a
Man, by touch, and by eating, and yet became invisible before their
eyes. The reason why they saw Him was, because the eyes of their spirits
were then opened; and when these are opened, the things in the spiritual
world appear as clearly as the things in the natural world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

Because it has pleased the Lord to open for me the eyes of my spirit,
and to keep them open now for nineteen years, it has been given me to
see the things which are in the spiritual world, and also to describe
them. I can affirm that they are not visions, but things seen in all
wakefulness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

The difference between a man in the natural world, and a man in the
spiritual world, is, that the one man is clothed with a spiritual body,
but the other with a natural body; and the spiritual man sees the
spiritual man, as clearly as the natural man sees the natural man; but
the natural man cannot see the spiritual man, and the spiritual man
cannot see the natural man, on account of the difference between the
natural and the spiritual; what kind of difference this is, can be
described, but not in a few words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

From the things seen during so many years, I am enabled to relate the
following: that there are lands in the spiritual world, just as in the
natural world; and that there are hills and mountains, plains and
valleys, and also fountains and rivers, lakes and seas; there are
paradises and gardens, groves and woods, and palaces and houses; also
that there are writings and books, offices and trades; and that there
are precious stones, gold and silver; in a word, there are each and all
things that exist in the natural world, and they are infinitely more
perfect in the heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

But the difference in general is this; that all things in the spiritual
world are from a spiritual origin, and hence, as to their essence, are
spiritual, they are from the sun there which is pure love; and all
things in the natural world are from a natural origin, and hence as to
their essence are natural, for they are from the sun there which is pure
fire. Hence it is, that the spiritual man must be nourished with food
from a spiritual origin, as the natural man is with food from a natural
origin. More may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

V. THE ENGLISH IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD. There are two states of thought
with man, an external and an internal state; man is in the external
state in the natural world, in the internal state in the spiritual
world: these states make one with the good, but not with the evil. What
a man is as to his internal, is rarely manifest in the natural world,
because from his infancy, he has wished to be moral, and has learned to
seem so. But what he is, clearly appears in the spiritual world, for
spiritual light discloses it, and also man is then a spirit, and the
spirit is the internal man. Now, since it has been given me to be in
that light, and from it, to see what the internal is in the men of
various kingdoms, by an interaction of many years with angels and
spirits, it behooves me to manifest it, because of its importance. Here
I will say something of the noble English nation only.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

The more excellent of the English nation are in the center of all
Christians (see above, n. 20). The reason why they are in the center is,
because they have interior intellectual light. This is not apparent to
any one in the natural world, but it is conspicuous in the spiritual
world. This light they derive from the liberty of thinking, and thence
of speaking and of writing, in which they are. With others, who are not
in such liberty, intellectual light is darkened because it has no
outlet. But this light is not active of itself, but is rendered active
by others, especially by men of reputation and authority among them. As
soon as anything is said by these men, or as soon as anything they
approve is read, that light shines forth, and seldom before. On this
account governors are placed over them in the spiritual world, and
priests of great reputation for learning and distinguished ability are
given them, whose commands and monitions, from this their natural
disposition, they cheerfully obey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

They rarely go out of their own society, because they love it as in the
world they love their country. There is also a similarity of minds among
them, from which they contract intimacy with friends of their own
country, and rarely with others. They also mutually aid each other; and
they love sincerity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

There are two great cities similar to London, into which most of the
English come after death; these cities it was given me to see, as well
as to walk through. The middle of the one city answers to that part of
the English London where there is a meeting of merchants, called the
Exchange; there the governors dwell. Above that middle is the east;
below it is the west; on the right side of it is the south; on the left
side of it is the north. They who have led a life of charity more than
the rest, dwell in the eastern quarter, where there are magnificent
palaces. The wise, with whom there are many splendid things, dwell in
the southern quarter. They who more than others love the liberty of
speaking and of writing, dwell in the northern quarter. They who make
profession of faith, dwell in the western quarter; to the right in this
quarter, there is an entrance into the city, and an exit from it; they
who live wickedly are there sent out of it. The presbyters, who are in
the west, and who, as was said, profess faith, dare not enter the city
through the broad streets, but only through the narrower ways, because
they who are in the faith of charity, are the only inhabitants who are
tolerated in the city. I have heard them complaining of the preachers in
the west, that they prepare their discourses with such art and at the
same time eloquence, interweaving justification by faith to them
unknown, that they do not know whether good is to be done or not; they
preach intrinsic good, and separate it from extrinsic good, which they
sometimes call meritorious, and therefore not acceptable to God; yet
still they call it good, because it is useful. But when those who dwell
in the eastern and southern quarters of the city hear such mystical
discourses, they walk out of the temples, and the preachers are
afterwards deprived of the priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

The other great city similar to London, is not in the Christian center
(of which n. 20), but lies beyond it in the north. They who are
interiorly evil come into it after death. In the middle of it there is
an open communication with hell, by which they are swallowed up in turn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

I once heard presbyters from England conversing together concerning
faith alone, and I saw a certain image made by them which represented
faith alone. It appeared in obscure light like a great giant, and in
their eyes like a beautiful man; but when the light of heaven was let
in, the upper part of it appeared like a monster, and the lower like a
serpent, not unlike the description which is given of Dagon, the idol of
the Philistines. When they saw this they left it, and the bystanders
cast it into a stagnant pool.

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

It was perceived from those of the English who are in the spiritual
world, that they have as it were a twofold theology, one from the
doctrine of faith, and the other from the doctrine of life; from the
doctrine of faith for those who are initiated into the priesthood: from
the doctrine of life for those who are not initiated into the
priesthood, and who are commonly called the laity. This doctrine of life
is set forth in the exhortation which is read in the temples on any
Sabbath day, to those who go to the Sacrament of the Supper; in which it
is openly said that if they do not shun evils as sins, they cast
themselves into eternal damnation, and that if they then approach the
holy communion the devil will enter into them, as he entered into Judas.
I have sometimes spoken with the priests concerning this doctrine of
life, that it does not agree with their doctrine of faith. They made no
reply, but thought what they did not dare to utter. You may see that
exhortation in The Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem (n. 5-7).

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

I have often seen a certain Englishman, who became celebrated by a book
he published some years ago, in which he attempted to establish the
conjunction of faith and charity by an influx and interior operation of
the Holy Spirit. He gave out that this influx affected man in an
inexpressible manner, and without his being conscious of it, but did not
touch, much less manifestly move his will or excite his thought to do
anything as of himself, except permissively; the reason being, that
nothing of the man might enter into the Divine Providence as one with
it; also that thus evils might not appear before God. He thus excluded
the external exercises of charity for the sake of any salvation, but
favoring them for the sake of the public good. Since his arguments were
ingenious, and the snake in the grass was not seen, his book was
received as most orthodox. This author retained the same dogma after his
departure from the world, nor could he recede from it, because it was
confirmed in him. The angels spoke with him, and said that this was not
the truth, but mere ingenuity with eloquence; and that the truth is,
that man ought to shun evil and do good as from himself, yet with the
acknowledgment that it is from the Lord, and that there is no faith
before this, still less is that thought which he calls faith. And since
this was opposed to his dogma, it was permitted him of his own sagacity
to inquire further, whether such unknown influx and internal operation
apart from the external operation of man is given. He was then seen to
strain his mind, and to wander about in thought in various ways, always
in the persuasion that man is no otherwise renewed and saved. But as
often as he came to the end of his way, his eyes were opened, and he saw
that he was wandering, and even confessed it to those who were present.
I saw him wandering thus for two years, and in the end of his ways
confessing that no such influx is given, unless evil in the external man
be removed, which is effected by shunning evils as sirs, as if from
himself; and I heard him at length saying, that all who confirm
themselves in that heresy, will be insane from the pride of their own
intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

I have spoken with Melancthon, and then asked him concerning his state;
but he was not willing to reply. Wherefore I was informed of his lot by
others, which is that he is alternately in a fretted stone chamber, and
alternately in hell, and that in his chamber he appears clothed in a
bear's skin on account of the cold, and because of the uncleanness there
he does not admit newcomers from the world, who wish to visit him on
account of the reputation of his name. He still speaks of faith alone,
which in the world he established more than others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

VI\. THE DUTCH IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD. It was said above (n. 20), that
Christians with whom the Word is read and the Lord is worshiped, are in
the middle of the nations and people of the whole spiritual world,
because the greatest spiritual light is with them, and the light is
radiated thence as from a center into all the circumference even to the
last boundary; and it enlightens, according to what is said in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem Concerning the Sacred Scripture (n.
104-113). In this middle, the Reformed Christians have places allotted
to them according to their reception of spiritual light from the Lord;
and since the English have that light stored up in the intellectual
part, therefore they are in the inmost of that middle region; and
because the Dutch keep that light more nearly conjoined to natural
light, and hence there is no such brightness of light apparent among
them, but in its place something not transparent which is receptive of
rationality from spiritual light, and at the same time from spiritual
heat, they, in the Christian middle region, have obtained dwellings in
the east and south; in the east from the faculty of receiving spiritual
heat, which in them is charity, and in the south from the faculty of
receiving spiritual light, which in them is faith. That the quarters in
the spiritual world are not like the quarters in the natural world, and
that dwellings according to quarters, are dwellings according to the
reception of faith and love, and that they who excel in love and
charity, are in the east, and they who excel in intelligence and faith,
are in the south, may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (n.
141-153). Another reason why they are in these quarters of the Christian
middle region is, that trade is their final love, and money is the
mediate subservient love, and that love is spiritual; but where money is
the final love, and trade the mediate subservient love, the love is
natural, and partakes of avarice. In the before-mentioned spiritual
love, which regarded in itself is the common good, in which and from
which is the good of the country, the Dutch excel others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

The Dutch adhere more firmly than others to the principles of their
religion, nor are they drawn away from them; and if they are convinced
that one or another of them is not in agreement, still they do not admit
it, but turn themselves back, and remain unmoved. Thus they remove
themselves from an interior intuition of truth, for they keep their
rational under obedience, in spiritual things. Because they are such,
when they enter the spiritual world after death, they are prepared for
receiving the spiritual of heaven, which is Divine truth, quite
differently from others. They are not taught, because they do not
receive; but what heaven is, is described to them, and afterwards it is
granted them to ascend there, and to see it; and then whatever agrees
with their genius is infused into them, which being done, they are sent
down, and return to their companions with a full desire for heaven. If
then they do not receive this truth, that God is One in Person and in
essence, and that this God is the Lord, and that in Him is the Trinity;
and also this truth, that faith and charity as matters of knowledge and
discourse, are of no avail apart from the life of faith and charity, and
that faith and charity are given by the Lord when evils are shunned as
sins; if when they are taught these truths, they turn themselves away,
and still think of God as existing in three Persons, and of religion,
merely that there is such a thing, they are reduced to misery, and their
trade is taken away, until they are brought to the greatest extremities.
And they are then led to those who have abundance of everything, and a
flourishing trade, and when there, the thought is insinuated into them
from heaven, whence it is that they are such, and at the same time to
reflect on the faith of these persons concerning the Lord, and upon
their life, in that they shun evils as sins. In a little time they make
inquiries, and perceive an agreement with their own thought and
reflection; this is done repeatedly. At length, they think of
themselves, that in order to be relieved from their miseries, they must
believe and do the same. Then, as they receive that faith, and live that
life of charity, opulence and enjoyment of life are given them. In this
manner, those of them who have led anything of a life of charity in the
world, are amended by themselves, and not by others, and are prepared
for heaven. They afterwards became more constant than others, so that
they may be called constancies; and they do not allow themselves to be
led away by any reasoning, fallacy, or obscurity brought on by
sophistries, or by any preposterous view from confirmations alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

The Dutch are easily distinguished from others in the spiritual world,
because they appear in like garments as in the natural world, with the
difference that those are in more shining ones who have received faith
and that spiritual life. They appear in similar garments, because they
remain constant in the principles of their religion; and in the
spiritual world all are clothed according to their religious principles;
whence it is, that they who are in Divine truths, have garments of white
and of fine linen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4-1](ljc01.htm#fr_0) From the Greek pou = where.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[6-1](ljc01.htm#fr_1) From the Greek pou = where.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](ljc02)
