[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf04)  [Next](taf06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

AÇVAGHOSHA, the first expounder of the Mahâyânistic doctrine and one of
the deepest thinkers among the Buddhist patriarchs, is known to most
Western Buddhist scholars simply as the author of the
*Buddha-caritakâvya*, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) the famous poem
on the life of Buddha. The accounts of his life and of the significance
of his philosophy are so few that the important influence exercised by
him upon the development of the Mahâyâna Buddhism has been left almost
entirely unnoticed. That he was one of the most eminent leaders among
earlier Buddhists; that he was in some way or other connected with the
third convocation in Kashmir, probably presided over by the Bhikshu
Parçva; that he had a wonderful poetical genius which rendered great
service in the propagation of Buddhism,--these facts sum up almost all
the knowledge possessed by scholars about Açvaghosha. The reason why he
is not known as he ought to be, is principally that the Sanskrit sources
are extremely meagre,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

while the accounts obtainable from Chinese and Tibetan traditions are
confusing and full of legends.

This fact has led Professor Kern to say that Açvaghosha was not an
historical man, but a personification of Kâla, a form of Çiva. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) But the sources from which the Professor
draws his conclusion are rather too meagre and I fear are not worth
serious consideration. In the following pages we shall see by what
traditions Açvaghosha's life is known to the Buddhists of the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:1](taf05.htm#fr_2) *The Sacred Books of the
East*, Vol. XLIX. Beal's English translation of the Chinese translation
*The Fo sho king tsan king*, S. B. E., Vol. XIX.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:1](taf05.htm#fr_3) Der Buddhismus und seine
Geschichte in Indien, authorised German translation, Leipsic, 1884, Vol.
II., p. 464.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Date](taf06)
