[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf08)  [Next](taf10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CONVERSIONS.

A consensus of traditions both Tibetan and Chinese maintains that
Açvaghosha was in his earlier life a most powerful adherent of
Brahmanism, though we are tempted to discredit it on the ground that
later Buddhist writers may have wished to exaggerate the superiority of
Buddhism to all other Indian philosophical and religious doctrines, by
chronicling the conversion of one of its strongest opponents to their
side. Whatever the origin of the legend may be, how did his conversion
take place? By whom was he converted? About these points the Tibetan and
the Chinese tradition by no means agree, the one standing in a direct
contradiction to the other. While the Tibetan account is full of mystery
and irrationality, the Chinese is natural enough to convince us of its
probable occurrence.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

According to Târanâtha <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) Âryadeva, the
most eminent disciple of Nâgârjuna, defeated and proselyted
Açvaghosha, <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) not by his usual
subtlety in dialectics, but by the superiority of his magical arts.
Açvaghosha made use of every tantric formula he could command, in order
to free himself from the enchantment in which he was held by his enemy,
but all to no purpose whatever. Thus when he was in an utterly desperate
condition, he happened to read the Buddhist Sûtra which was kept in his
place of confinement and in which he found his destiny prophesied by
Buddha, <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45) he was seized with deep
regret for his former hostile attitude toward the Dharma, and
immediately renouncing his tîrthakism, professed the doctrine of
Çâkyamuni.

The Tibetan tradition presents some unmistakable indications of a later
invention: the use of tantric formulæ, the so-called prophecy of the
Tathâgata, and the anachronism of Âryadeva. On the other hand, the
Chinese records are worth crediting, though they are not unanimous as to
how the conversion took place and who was the proselytist.

According to the *Life of Açvaghosha*, Parçva <span
id="fr_46"></span>[4](#fn_46) was

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the man who converted him. They agreed at their first meeting that on
the seventh day thence they should have the king, ministers, çrâmanas,
tîrthakas and all great teachers of the Dharma gathered in the Vihâra
and have their discussion there before all those people. "In the sixth
night the sthavira entered into a samâdhi and meditated on what he had
to do \[in the morning\]. When the seventh day dawned, a great crowd was
gathered like clouds. The Sthavira Parçva arrived first and ascended a
high platform with an unusually pleasant countenance. The tîrthaka
\[i.e., Açvaghosha\] came later and took a seat opposite him. When he
observed the çrâmana with a pleasant countenance and in good spirits,
and when he also observed his whole attitude showing the manner of an
able opponent, he thought: 'May he not be Bhikshu Chin? His mind is calm
and pleasant, and besides he bears the manner of an able antagonist. We
shall indeed have an excellent discussion to-day.'

"They then proposed the question how the defeated one should be
punished. The tîrthaka \[Açvaghosha\] said: 'The defeated one shall have
his tongue cut out.' The sthavira replied: 'No, he shall become a
disciple \[of the winner\] as the acknowledgement of defeat.' The
tîrthaka then replied: 'Let it be so,' and asked, 'Who will begin the
discussion?' The

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sthavira Parçva said: I am more advanced in age;
I came from afar for the purpose \[of challenging you\]; and moreover I
was here this morning earlier than you. So it will be most natural for
me to speak first.' The tîrthaka said: 'Let it be so. Following the
subject of your argument, I shall completely baffle you.'

"The Sthavira Parçva then said: 'What shall we have to do, in order to
keep the kingdom in perfect peace, to have the king live long, to let
the people enjoy abundance and prosperity, all free from evils and
[catastrophes](errata.htm#5)?' The tîrthaka was silent, not knowing what
to reply. As now according to the rule of discussion one who could not
make a response is defeated, Açvaghosha was obliged to bow \[before the
opponent\] as a disciple of his. He had his head shaved, was converted
to a çrâmana, and instructed in the perfection-precepts.

"When he \[Açvaghosha\] was alone in his room, he was absorbed in
gloomy, unpleasant reflexion as to why he, possessing a bright intellect
and far-sighted discretion, and having his reputation widely spread all
over the world, could be defeated with a single question and be made a
disciple of another. Parçva well knew his mind and ordered him to come
to his room where the master manifested himself in several supernatural
transformations. Açvaghosha now fully recognised that his master was not
a man of ordinary type, and thus feeling happy and contented, thought it
his duty to become one of his disciples.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

"The master told him: 'Your intellect is bright enough, hard to find its
equal; but it wants a final touch. If you study the doctrine I have
mastered, attend to my capability and insight into the Bodhi, and if you
become thoroughly versed in the method of discussion and clearly
understand the principle of things, there will be no one who can match
you in the whole world.'

"The master returned to his own country \[North India\]; the disciple
remained in Central India, making an extensive study of the Sûtras,
seeking a clear comprehension of the doctrine, Buddhistic as well as
non-Buddhistic. His oratorical genius swept everything before him, and
he was reverentially honored by the four classes of the people,
including the king of \[Central\] India who treated him as a man of
distinction."

According to the *Transmission of the Dharmapitaka* (*Fu fa tsang
chuan*), however, Açvaghosha was not converted by Parçva, but by his
disciple and patriarchal successor, Puṇyayaças. Though the two works,
*Life of Açvaghosha* and the book just mentioned, differ in some other
points, they are evidently two different versions of the one original
legend. As the book is not as yet accessible to English readers, I here
produce the whole matter translated from the Chinese version. The
comparison will prove interesting.

"Full of a proud and arrogant spirit that speedily grew like a wild
plant, he \[Açvaghosha\] firmly believed

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

in the existence of an ego-entity and cherished the ultra-egotistic
idea. Being informed that Âcarya called Puṇyayaças, who, deep in
knowledge and wide in learning, proclaimed that all things are relative
\[= *çûnya*, lit. empty\], there is no *âtman*, no *pudgala*;
Açvaghosha's arrogant spirit asserted itself, and presenting himself to
Puṇyayaças challenged him saying: "confute all \[false\] opinions and
doctrines in the world, as hailstones strike tender grass. If my
declaration prove false and not true' I will have my own tongue cut out
in acknowledgment of defeat.' Thereupon Puṇyayaças as explained to him
that Buddhism distinguishes two kinds of truth, that while 'Practical
truth' hypothetically admits the existence of an *âtman*, there is
nothing conditional in 'pure \[or absolute\] truth,' all being calm and
tranquil, and that therefore we cannot prove the ego as an absolute
entity.

"Açvaghosha would not yet surrender himself, because being
over-confident of his own intellectual power he considered himself to
have gained the point. Puṇyayaças said: 'Carefully think of yourself;
tell not a lie. We will see which of us has really won.'

"Açvaghosha meanwhile came to think that while 'practical truth' being
only conditional has no reality at all, 'pure truth' is calm and
tranquil in its nature, and that therefore these two forms of truth are
all unobtainable, and that if they have thus no actuality

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[or existence\], how could they be refuted \[as
false\]? So feeling now the superiority of his opponent, he tried to cut
out his tongue in acknowledgement of the defeat. But Puṇyayaças stopped
him, saying: 'We teach a doctrine of love and compassion, and do not
demand that you cut out your tongue. Have your head shaved instead and
be my disciple.' Açvaghosha thus converted was made a çrâmana by
Puṇyayaças. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)

"But Açvaghosha who felt extremely ashamed of his \[former\]
self-assumption was thinking of attempting his own life. Puṇyayaças,
however, attaining arhatship, entered into a samâdhi and divined what
was going on in the mind of Açvaghosha. He ordered him to go and bring
some books out of the library. Açvaghosha said to the Âcarya: The room
is perfectly dark; how can I get in there?' To this Puṇyayaças answered:
'Just go in, and I shall let you have light.' Then the Âcarya through
his supernatural power stretched far into the room his right hand whose
five fingers each radiating with light illuminated everything inside of
the walls. Açvaghosha thought it a mental hallucination, and knowing the
fact that a hallucination as a rule disappears when one is conscious of
it, he was surprised to see the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

light glowing more and more. He tried his magical arts to extinguish it
till he felt utterly exhausted, for the mysterious light suffered no
change whatever. Finally coming to realise that it was the work of no
other person than his teacher, his spirit was filled with remorse, and
he thenceforth applied himself diligently to religious discipline and
never relapsed." <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)

The *Record of Buddha and the Patriarchs* (*Fo tsou lung tsai*) agrees
with the *Transmission of the Dharma-pitaka* (*Fu fa tsang chuan*) in
making Puṇyayaças, instead of Parçva, the master of the conversion. But
the former does not state how Açvaghosha was converted.

Though so far it remains an open question who was the real master of
Açvaghosha, we can be sure of this, that he had intimate spiritual
communication with both Parçva and Puṇyayaças. Parçva, who was an older
contemporary of Puṇyayaças, was probably already advanced in age when
Açvaghosha came to be personally acquainted with him, and so he did not
have time enough to lead the young promising disciple to a consummate
understanding of the doctrine of Buddha. After the demise of this
venerable old patriarch, Açvaghosha therefore had to go to Puṇyayaças
for a further study of his religion, till he was capable of forming his
own original thoughts, which are set forth in his principal work, the
Discourse of

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

the Awakening of Faith (*Çraddhotpâda-çastra*). This assumption is
justified when we notice that Açvaghosha in the *Book of Great Glory*
pays his homage to Parçva as well as to Puṇyayaças.

Now by way of a supplementary note to the above, let us say a word about
Wassiljew's observation, <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) which
states that while Hînayânists or Çrâvakas ascribe the conversion of
Açvaghosha to Parçva, the Mahâyânistic record says that Âryadeva
converted him. This assertion is evidently incorrect, for the *Life of
Açvaghosha* as well as the *Transmission of the Dharmapitaka* (*Fu fa
tsang chuan*) in which the honor of his conversion is given to the
successor of Parçva as aforesaid, do not certainly belong to the work of
the Hînayâna school. It is the Tibetan tradition only, and not the
general Mahâyânist statement, that Âryadeva converted Açvaghosha, and
there is no ground at all for the assertion of Wassiljew, which
practically leads us to take everything Tibetan for Mahâyânistic and
everything Chinese for Hînayânistic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[25:1](taf09.htm#fr_43) *Geschichte des
Buddhismus*, German translation by Schiefner, pp. 94-85.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[25:2](taf09.htm#fr_44) He is mentioned there by
the name of Durdarshakâla.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[25:3](taf09.htm#fr_45) Cf. this with the
accounts of Mâtṛceṭa-Açvaghosha told in I-tsing.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[25:4](taf09.htm#fr_46) The conversion of
Açvaghosha by Parçva as here stated may be considered an addition to the
proof already demonstrated for the contemporaneousness of Açvaghosha and
King Kanishka; for <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> Parçva, according to
the Tibetan as well as the Chinese authority, was a co-operator at
least, if not the president, of the third Buddhist convocation promoted
by the King of Kashmir.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[30:1](taf09.htm#fr_47) The reasoning is
somewhat unintelligible. The passages must be defective, and although I
might venture to supply the necessary words to make them more logical
and intelligible to the general reader who is not acquainted with the
*çûnyatâ* philosophy. I have not tried to do so, thinking that it is
enough here if we see in what the subject of the discussion consisted.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[31:1](taf09.htm#fr_48) *The Transmission of the
Dharmapitaka* (*Fu fa tsang chuan*) *fas*. 5.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[32:1](taf09.htm#fr_49) *Buddhismus*, German
edition, p. 222, and also see Târanâtha, translated by Schiefner, p.
311.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lists of Patriarchs](taf10)
