[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf15)  [Next](taf17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

# DISCOURSE.

FOR the purpose of awakening in all beings a pure faith in the
Mahâyâna, <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) of destroying their doubts
and attachment to false doctrines, and of affording them an
uninterrupted inheritance of Buddha-seeds, I write this Discourse.

There is a principle whereby the root of faith in the Mahâyâna can be
produced, and I shall explain it.

The explanation consists of five parts:

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

I. Introductory.

II\. General Statement of Principles.

III\. The Explanation Itself.

IV\. The Practice of Faith.

V. Benefits \[derived therefrom\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[48:1](taf16.htm#fr_60) The term Mahâyâna here
seems not to have been used as it usually is in contrast to the
Hînayâna. Açvaghosha adopts it simply to denote the greatness of
suchness (*bhûtalathatâ*) as well as to prove its being the safest and
surest means of salvation. It is therefore the name given to the first
principle itself, and not to any philosophical system or religious
dogmatics. But the term used in this wise by Açvaghosha and perhaps in
earlier Mahâyâna texts gradually lost its original sense in the course
of the development of this progressive religious view. It was then
transferred to distinguish the system at large from that of the
so-called Çrâvakas, to which the followers of the former gave in
contrast to their own the rather humiliating name Hînayâna. At the time
of Açvaghosha the controversy between them was probably not as vehement
as it proved later on. And this fact may be seen from the tolerant
spirit shown in the third convocation under the reign of King Kanishka.
By the Mahâyâna followers Açvaghosha is unanimously recognised as the
forerunner of Nâgârjuna by whose marvellous genius the system was
brought to maturity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Introductory](taf17)
