[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf17)  [Next](taf19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. GENERAL STATEMENT.

In what does the general statement consist?

The Mahâyâna can be briefly treated as to two aspects, namely, What it
is, and What it signifies. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

What is the Mahâyâna? It is the soul <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)
of all sentient beings (*sarvasattva*), that constitutes all things in
the world, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal; <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) and through this soul we can disclose what
the Mahâyâna signifies.

Because the soul in itself, involving the quintessence of the Mahâyâna,
is suchness (*bhûtatathatâ*), but it becomes \[in its relative or
transitory aspect, through the law of causation\] birth-and-death
(*samsâra*) in which are revealed the quintessence, the attributes, and
the activity of the Mahâyâna.

The Mahâyâna has a triple significance. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71)

The first is the greatness of quintessence. Because the quintessence of
the Mahâyâna as suchness

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

exists in all things, remains unchanged in the pure as well as in the
defiled, is always one and the same (*samatâ*), neither increases nor
decreases, and is void of distinction.

The second is the greatness of attributes. Here we have the
Tathâgata's <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) womb <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) (*tathâgatagarbha*) which in exuberance
contains immeasurable and innumerable merits (*punya*) as its
characteristics.

The third is the greatness of activity, for it \[i.e., Mahâyâna\]
produces all kinds of good work in the world, phenomenal and
supra-phenomenal. \[Hence the name Mahâyâna (great vehicle).\]

\[Again this Dharma is called the Mahâyâna;\] because it is the
vehicle} <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) (*yâna*) in which all
Buddhas

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

from the beginning have been riding, and Bodhisattvas <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) when riding in it will enter into the
state of Buddhahood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[52:1](taf18.htm#fr_68) "What is" and "What
signifies" are respectively in Chinese *yu fa* <span
id="img_05200"></span> ![](img/05200.jpg) and *fa* <span
id="img_05201"></span> ![](img/05201.jpg), but in the older translation
*fa* <span id="img_05201"></span> ![](img/05201.jpg) and *i* <span
id="img_05202"></span> ![](img/05202.jpg). This is a little puzzling,
but if we bear in mind that in Chinese as well as in Sanskrit *fa* or
*dharma* means both the substance itself and its attribute or
significance, or law that regulates its movements, we will understand
that Paramârtha, the first translator, used *fa* here in the sense of
substance or "what is," while Çikshânanda, the second translator, used
the word in the sense of significance or that by which a thing is
conceived, the ordinary meaning of *i*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[53:1](taf18.htm#fr_69) "Soul '' is not used
here in a dualistic sense, but as Dr. Paul Carus defines it in the last
chapter of *The Soul of Man*. Speaking of the soul of the universe he
defines the term as "the formative principle which gave and still gives
shape to the world" (*loc. cit.*, first edition, p. 437). The literal
translation of the Chinese character <span id="img_05300"></span>
![](img/05300.jpg) *hsin* is kernel, or heart, or essence of all things.
The Chinese *hsin*, however, is rather indiscriminately used in our text
for both Sanskrit terms, *Hrdaya* (kernel or heart) and *Citta* (mind,
the thinking faculty). These terms are more or less synonymous,
especially from Açvaghosha's standpoint, that does not allow the
transcendental existence of a metaphysical soul-entity. In this
translation soul denotes the absolute aspect of suchness, and mind its
relative aspect, wherever this distinction is noticeable.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[53:2](taf18.htm#fr_70) This is a literal
translation of the Chinese *chu shi chien* <span id="img_05301"></span>
![](img/05301.jpg). It signifies anything transcending conditionality or
worldliness.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[53:3](taf18.htm#fr_71) This triad which has a
striking similarity to Spinoza's conception of substance, attributes and
modes, also reminds us of the first principles (*padârtha*) of the
Vaiçeshika philosophy, that is, substance (*dravya*), qualities
(*guna*), and action (*karma*).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[54:1](taf18.htm#fr_72) Tathâgata literally
means one who thus or truly comes. That the omnipresent principle of
suchness could come or go appeared contradictory and seemed to render an
explanation necessary. The Vajracchedikâ-Sûtra, Max Müller's English
translation, Chap. XXIX: "And again, O Subhûti, if anybody were to say
that the Tathâgata goes, or comes, or stands, or sits, or lies down, he,
O Subhûti, does not understand the meaning of my preaching. And why?
Because the word Tathâgata means one who does not go anywhere, and does
not come from anywhere; and therefore he is called the Tathâgata (truly
come), holy and fully enlightened."

<span id="fn_73"></span>[54:2](taf18.htm#fr_73) Cf. the *Bhavadgîtâ*
(*Sacred Books of the East*, Vol. VIII., Chap. XIV., p. 107): "The great
Brahman is a womb for me, in which I cast the seed. From that, O
descendant of Bharata! is the birth of all things. Of the bodies, O son
of Kuntî! which are born from all wombs, the main womb is the great
Brahman, and I am the father, the giver of the seed."

<span id="fn_74"></span>[54:3](taf18.htm#fr_74) Cf. the
*Saddharma-pundarîka*, Chap. II. (*Sacred Books of the East*, Vol. XXI.,
p. 40): "By means of one sole vehicle, to wit, the Buddha-vehicle,
Çâriputra, do I teach creatures the law; there is no second, nor a
third."

<span id="fn_75"></span>[55:1](taf18.htm#fr_75) Literally, one who seeks
perfect enlightenment, or one who is full of wisdom and compassion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Explanation](taf19)
