[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf13)  [Next](taf15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OUTLINES OF THE "DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH."

I cannot help saying a few words here about the importance of
Açvaghosha's main work which is scarcely known in the West, and if so,
wrongly. Even Samuel Beal who is considered one of the best authorities
on Chinese Buddhism, makes a misleading reference to our author in his
*Buddhism in China*. The following quotation from the same apparently
shows that at least when he wrote it, in 1884, he had a very
insufficient knowledge of the subject. He says (page 138):

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

"His (Açvaghosha's) writings still survive in a Chinese form, and when
examined will probably be found to be much tinged by a pseudo-Christian
element. . . . But there is one book, the *K‘i-sin-lun*, or 'Treatise
for Awakening Faith,' which has never yet been properly examined, but,
so far as is known, is based on doctrines foreign to Buddhism and allied
to a perverted form of Christian dogma." The incorrectness of this
statement will readily be seen by the reader when we proceed further on.

Wassiljew, another of the highest Western authorities on the subject,
seems to be entirely ignorant of the existence of the present work. It
is very strange that those who are considered to be quite well
acquainted with the development of the Mahâyânistic thought, do not
place in the right light a prominent, if not the principal, actor, who,
so far as is known to us, practically initiated this great spiritual and
intellectual movement in India. Wassiljew says in his *Buddhismus* (pp.
83-84):

"Zu welcher besonderen Schule Açvaghosha gehörte, wird nicht mit
Bestimmtheit überliefert: aus der Legende, nach welcher er sich bei der
Abfassung der Vibhâshâ betheiligte, dürfen wir jedoch den Schluss
ziehen, dass er zu den Repräsentanten der Vaibhâschika's gerechnet
ward."

It is true that in the *Life of Vasubandhu* Açvaghosha is said to have
taken part in the compilation of the Vibhâshâ, but it is of no account
whatever in the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

face of the present book in which we can clearly trace almost all
elements of the thought fully developed afterwards by Nâgârjuna and
other later Mahâyâna representatives.

I wish here, in order to show the significance of Açvaghosha, to call
the attention of the reader to the three most salient points in his
doctrine which will distinguish him from all Hînayâna schools. The three
points constituting the gist of this Çâstra then are: (1) the conception
of suchness (*Bhûtatathatâ*); (2) the theory of the triple personality;
(3) the salvation by faith or the Sukhâvati doctrine.

The conception of suchness assumes other names, namely, The Womb of the
Tathâgata (*Thatâgatagarbha*), when considered from its embracing all
possible merits, and the All-Conserving Mind (*Âlayavijñâna*), when it
becomes the principle of evolution and is said to have developed from
the teaching of Buddha as expounded in the old canonical sûtras, such as
the *Lankâvatara* and the *Çrîmâlâ*. Whatever the origin of the idea of
suchness might have been, its "absolute aspect" evidently foreshadows
the *Çûnyatâ* philosophy of the Mâdhyamika school. It is very doubtful
whether Nâgârjuna, as told in a Chinese tradition, was a personal
disciple of Açvaghosha, but it is highly probable that he was much
influenced by him in forming his system.

The second thesis, the theory of the triple personality, that is one of
the most distinctive characteristics

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of the Mahâyâna Buddhism, seems to have been first established by
Açvaghosha. The pantheistic idea of suchness (*Bhûtatathatâ*), and the
religious consciousness which always tends to demand something embodied
in infinite love (*karunâ*) and infinite wisdom (*jñâna*), and the
scientific conception of the law of causation regulating our ethical as
well as physical world, or in short the doctrine of karma,--these three
factors working together in the mind of Açvaghosha, culminated in his
theory of the triple personality.

The doctrine of salvation by faith whereon the Japanese Shin Shyû (True
Sect) and Jôdô Shyû (Pure Land Sect) laid down their foundation also,
appears first in the present çâstra. If the quotation in the
*Mahâyânaçraddhotpâda* actually refers to the Sukhhâvatî Sûtras, as we
may fairly assume, there is a great probability in the statement that
during the first four centuries after the Nirvâna there was already a
variety of free interpretations about the teaching of the Master, which,
commingled with the other religio-philosophical thoughts in India,
eventually made a full development under the [general](errata.htm#6)
names of the Mahâyâna and the Hînayâna schools.

A supplementary point to be noticed in Açvaghosha is the abundance of
similar thoughts and passages with those in the *Bhagavadgîta*. The
coincidence between the latter and the *Saddharmapuṇḍarîka* has been
pointed out by Kern in his *Buddhismus und seine Geschichte* (Vol. II.,
p. 500, footnote). While it is an

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

open question which of the two has an earlier date, the Mahâyâna
Buddhism as a whole must be permitted to have some common points with
the canonical book of Çivaism.

In conclusion I wish to state that as this book, the *Awakening of
Faith*, is of paramount importance in its being the first attempt of
systematising the fundamental thoughts of the Mahâyâna Buddhism, as well
as in its forming a main authority of all the Mahâyânistic schools,
those who study the doctrinal history of Buddhism cannot dispense with
it; and that, in spite of its highest importance, no attempt has yet
been made to make it accessible to the reader who is not familiar with
the Chinese language, and so I here offer to the public an English
translation of the entire text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adoration](taf15)
