[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taf28)  [Next](taf30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. BENEFITS.

In what does this part \[treating\] of the benefits consist?

Such as above presented is the spiritual significance of the Mahayana,
and I have finished elucidating it.

Those who, desiring to produce pure and spotless faith in, and knowledge
of, the deepest spiritual condition

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and the greatest Dharma of the Tathâgata, so that they have no
hindrances in entering upon the Mahayana path (*mârga*), will diligently
pursue this brief discourse, contemplate it, discipline themselves in
it, and thus they can surely and unhesitatingly attain to the knowledge
of all forms and manifestations (*sarvâkârajñâna*).

And if they do not awake a feeling of fear in hearing this Doctrine,
they will surely be qualified to inherit the Buddha-seeds and
immediately receive the prophecy (*vijâkarana*) <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_207) from the Buddha. Even if there be a
person who could convert all beings in three thousand great chiliocosms
(*trisâhasramahâsâhasra*), <span id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_208) and
could induce them to observe the ten precepts of morality
(*daçakuçalamârga*), his merits will not be superior

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

to those of the person who will truthfully comprehend this Doctrine even
for a second; because the merits of the latter immeasurably and
infinitely surpass those of the former.

If one practise this doctrine as it is instructed for one whole day and
night, the merits thereby produced will be so immeasurable, infinite,
inconceivable that all Buddhas in the ten quarters could not exhaust
them, even if each of them continued to praise them for innumerable
asamkheyakalpas. <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_209) As the merits of
suchness have no limits, so the merits of the discipline are also
without limit.

Those who slander this doctrine, on the other hand, commit immeasurable
faults and suffer great sufferings for asamkheyakalpas. Accordingly all
beings should cherish a firm faith in the Doctrine and never slander it,
for this will lead to the destruction of oneself as well as others, nay,
even to the destruction of the seeds of the Triple Treasure
(*triratna*).

By practising this Doctrine all Buddhas have attained the most excellent
knowledge (*anuttarajñânâ*). By practising this Doctrine all
Bodhisattvas have obtained an insight into the Dharmakâya of the
Tathâgata.

By practising this Doctrine Bodhisattvas in the past consummated,
Bodhisattvas in the future will consummate, pure and spotless faith
(*çraddhâ*) in the Mahâyâna. Therefore those who desire to practise

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

those excellent virtues that are beneficial at once to themselves and
others should diligently study this Discourse.

I have now finished elucidating  
The deepest and greatest significance \[of the Dharma\].  
May its merit be distributed among all creatures,  
And make them understand the Doctrine of Suchness.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_207"></span>[147:1](taf29.htm#fr_209) This is not a mere
prophecy of one's destiny, but Buddha's assurance for those Bodhisattvas
who, having accumulated sufficient amount of merits, are qualified to
attain in the future the most excellent, perfect knowledge and to
achieve final salvation both for themselves and for all other beings.
See how five hundred disciples received this assurance from Buddha in
the *Saddharmapundarîka Sûtra*, Chap. VIII.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[147:2](taf29.htm#fr_210) Our earth which was
supposed by ancient Indians to be flat, infinitely extending in space,
is not the only region inhabited by sentient beings; but there are
innumerable worlds outside of this *Manushyalokadhâtu*, which exist
above as well as below us. Now according to the *Abhidharmakoça-çâstra*
by Vasubandhu, a small chiliocosm (*sâhasralokadhâtu*) consists of one
thousand of Rûpalokas and of the first Dhyâna heavens, and one thousand
of small chiliocosms make a middling chiliocosm, a thousand of which in
turn making a great chiliocosm. So we may take the great chiliocosm
(*mahâsâhasralokadhâtu*) as including all possible heavenly bodies which
fill up this boundless space.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[148:1](taf29.htm#fr_211) For an explanation
see the footnote to *kalpa*, [p. 87](taf22.htm#page_87).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Glossary](taf30)
