[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toah09)  [Next](toah11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

### HOW THE SPANIARDS CAME TO SHUNG-OPOVI, HOW THEY BUILT A MISSION, AND HOW THE HOPI DESTROYED THE MISSION

IT MAY have taken quite a long time for these villages to be
established. Anyway, every place was pretty well settled down when the
Spanish came. [19](toah24.htm#xref_19.md) The Spanish were first heard of
at Zuni and then at Awatovi. They came on to Shung-opovi, passing Walpi.
At First Mesa, Si-kyatki was the largest village then, and they were
called Si-kyatki, not Walpi. The Walpi people were living below the
present village on the west side. [20](toah24.htm#xref_20.md) When the
Spaniards came, the Hopi thought that they were the ones they were
looking for--their white brother, the Bahana, their savior.

The Spaniards visited Shung-opovi several times before the missions were
established. The people of Mishongovi welcomed them so the priest who
was with the white men built the first Hopi mission at Mishongovi. The
people of Shung-opovi were at first afraid of the priests but later they
decided he was really the Bahana, the savior, and let him build a
mission at Shung-opovi. [21](toah24.htm#xref_21.md)

Well, about this time the Strap Clan were ruling at Shung-opovi and they
were the ones that gave permission to establish the mission. The
Spaniards, whom they called Castilla, told the people that they had much
more power than all their chiefs and a whole lot more power than the
witches. The people were very much afraid of them, particularly if they
had much more power than the witches. They were so scared that they
could do nothing but allow themselves to be made slaves. Whatever they
wanted done must be done. Any man in power that was in this position the
Hopi called *Tota-achi*, which means a grouchy person that will not do
anything himself, like a child. They couldn't refuse, or they would be
slashed to death or punished in some way. There were two *Tota-achi*.

The missionary did not like the ceremonies. He did not like the Kachinas
and he destroyed the altars and the customs. He called it idol worship
and burned up all the ceremonial things in the plaza.

When the Priests started to build the mission, the men were sent away
over near the San Francisco peaks to get the pine or spruce beams. These
beams were cut and put into shape roughly and were then left till the
next year

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

when they had dried out. [22](toah24.htm#xref_22.md) Beams of that size
were hard to carry and the first few times they tried to carry these
beams on their backs, twenty to thirty men walking side by side under
the beam. But this was rather hard in rough places and one end had to
swing around. So finally they figured out a way of carrying the beam in
between them. They lined up two by two with the beam between the lines.
In doing this, some of the Hopis were given authority by the missionary
to look after these men and to see if they all did their duty. If any
man gave out on the way he was simply left to die. There was great
suffering. Some died for lack of food and water, while others developed
scabs and sores on their bodies.

It took a good many years for them to get enough beams to Shung-opovi to
build the mission. When this mission was finally built, all the people
in the village had to come there to worship, and those that did not come
were punished severely. In that way their own religion was altogether
wiped out, because they were not allowed to worship in their own way.
All this trouble was a heavy burden on them and they thought it was on
account of this that they were having a heavy drought at this time. They
thought their gods had given them up because they weren't worshiping the
way they should.

Now during this time the men would go out pretending they were going on
a hunting trip and they would go to some hiding place, to make their
prayer offerings. So today, a good many of these places are still to be
found where they left their little stone bowls in which they ground
their copper ore to paint the prayer sticks. These places are called
*Puwa-kiki*, cave places. If these men were caught they were severely
punished.

Now this man, Tota-achi (the Priest) [23](toah24.htm#xref_23.md) was going
from bad to worse. He was not doing the people any good and he was
always figuring what he could do to harm them. So he thought out how the
water from different springs or rivers would taste and he was always
sending some man to these springs to get water for him to drink, but it
was noticed that he always chose the men who had pretty wives. He tried
to send them far away so that they would be gone two or three days, so
it was not very long until they began to see what he was doing. The men
were even sent to the Little Colorado River to get water for him, or to
Moencopi. Finally, when a man was sent out he'd go out into the rocks
and hide, and when the night came he would come home. Then, the priest,
thinking the man was away, would come to visit his wife, but instead the
man would be

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

there when he came. Many men were punished for this.

All this time the priest, who had great power, wanted all the young
girls to be brought to him when they were about thirteen or fourteen
years old. They had to live with the priest. He told the people they
would become better women if they lived with him for about three years.
Now one of these girls told what the Tota-achi were doing and a brother
of the girl heard of this and he asked his sister about it, and he was
very angry. This brother went to the mission and wanted to kill the
priest that very day, but the priest scared him and he did nothing. So
the Shung-opovi people sent this boy, who was a good runner, to Awatovi
to see if they were doing the same thing over there, which they were. So
that was how they got all the evidence against the priest.

Then the chief at Awatovi sent word by this boy that all the priests
would be killed on the fourth day after the full moon. They had no
calendar and that was the best way they had of setting the date. In
order to make sure that everyone would rise up and do this thing on the
fourth day the boy was given a cotton string with knots in it and each
day he was to untie one of these knots until they were all out and that
would be the day for the attack. [24](toah24.htm#xref_24.md)

Things were getting worse and worse so the chief of Shung-opovi went
over to Mishongnovi and the two chiefs discussed their troubles. "He is
not the savior and it is your duty to kill him," said the chief of
Shung-opovi. The chief of Mishongnovi replied, "If I end his life, my
own life is ended."

Now the priest would not let the people manufacture prayer offerings, so
they had to make them among the rocks in the cliffs out of sight, so
again one day the chief of Shung-opovi went to Mishongnovi with tobacco
and materials to make prayer offerings. He was joined by the chief of
Mishongnovi and the two went a mile north to a cave. For four days they
lived there heartbroken in the cave, making pahos. Then the chief of
Mishongnovi took the prayer offerings and climbed to the top of the Corn
Rock and deposited them in the shrine, for according to the ancient
agreement with the Mishongnovi people it was their duty to do away with
the enemy.

He then, with some of his best men, went to Shung-opovi, but he carried
no weapons. He placed his men at every door of the priest's house. Then
he knocked on the door and walked in. He asked the priest to come out
but the priest was suspicious and would not come out. The chief asked
the priest four times and each time the priest

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

refused. Finally, the priest said, "I think you are up to something."

The chief said, "I have come to kill you." "You can't kill me," cried
the priest, "you have no power to kill me. If you do, I will come to
life and wipe out your whole tribe."

The chief returned, "If you have this power, then blow me out into the
air; my gods have more power than you have. My gods have put a heart
into me to enter your home. I have no weapons. You have your weapons
handy, hanging on the wall. My gods have prevented you from getting your
weapons."

The old priest made a rush and grabbed his sword from the wall. The
chief of Mishongnovi yelled and the doors were broken open. The priest
cut down the chief and fought right and left but was soon overpowered,
and his sword taken from him.

They tied his hands behind his back. Out of the big beams outside they
made a tripod. They hung him on the beams, kindled a fire and burned
him.

<span id="img_04500"></span> ![](img/04500.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Return of the Spaniards to Hopi Country. Shipaulovi
Founded as a Sanctuary](toah11.md)
