[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah06)  [Next](toah08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

# CHAPTER V

### HOW THE HOPI SELECTED SHUNG-OPOVI FOR THEIR HOME

THE Hopis had forgotten about the other tribes by this time and did not
know where they were. They were hoping to see the Eastern Star so that
they could settle down and not travel any more. Well, finally the Bear
Clan did see the Eastern Star and they were ready to settle down, but
they didn't know just where would be a good place for them. They thought
that they would do better cultivating by depending on rain, so they went
out onto the Painted Desert to Shung-opovi (the place by the spring
where the tall weeds grow). Being out here in such a desolate place they
thought that they would be safe from other people, who would not think
that they had anything worth taking.

By that time the other Hopis were down around the vicinity of Sunset
Crater, Canyon Diablo and the Little Colorado River.

After a good many years these other Hopis heard of the Bear Clan being
out at Shung-opovi, so the Strap Clan who were settled along Canyon
Diablo, thought they would go out and join the Bear Clan. So they
started out. When they did start out they stopped along the ridge below
Ma-teuvi, which is now called Big Burro Spring. From there they sent off
a messenger to Shung-opovi to tell the Chief that his brothers, the
Strap Clan, would like to join him. [16](toah24.htm#xref_16)

When the messenger came to the Chief of Shung-opovi and told him what
the Strap Clan leader wished to do, he could not very well answer his
message just then. So he sent word back that he would like to have the
Strap Clan chief come himself. When the Strap Clan leader heard this
word he went up to Shung-opovi with his bag of tobacco and his pipe.

Of course, in those days, they had guards that were always on the
lookout for someone coming, for fear it might. be an enemy. Well, this
man was seen coming and the Chief was notified. He knew who it was, the
man being alone, so he went out to meet him and he met him at the place
called Teuviovi (point that runs out south of Shung-opovi Day School).
When they met there, they greeted one another by smoking their pipes.
After they had smoked

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

their pipes, the Strap Clan leader told the chief of the Bear Clan how
he had followed his trail and that he had taken his clan name from the
same dead bear that he had. So for that reason, he considered himself as
his brother and he would like to join his establishment, because he
thought being of the same clanship the Bear Clan was not any greater
than the Strap Clan was. So the Bear Clan told him he could go back and
bring his people.

Well, the Strap Clan leader went back and told his people this good news
and asked the people to get ready, as they would start for Shung-opovi
in four days. On the fourth day they started out and when they got to
Shung-opovi they were very well received.

When the Strap Clan entered the village they thought they would have the
same rights as the Bear Clan but the Bear Clan did not like the way the
Strap Clan felt about their rights and the way they were acting, so
finally they had to have a council and talk this over. They decided the
Bear Clan would give the Strap Clan a chance to become a royal clan and
to rule the village. Of course, after this the Strap Clan was always
looking forward to this agreement. Now later, the other clans began to
drift in. When they came up to the town they would send word up to the
chief and the chief would usually send for the leader to come to see
him, because it was not his business to go down and meet the people.
They had to come up before the chief. He would always ask the leader
about his religious rites or ceremonies--of how he had been serving his
people in the way of prosperity, if his ceremonies have any effect on
the gods and if his ceremonies would bring rain. And of course this
chief would have to tell what he did to bring rain or how he did it.
Then, if the chief thought he was rather bragging about himself, or
exaggerating his ceremonies, he would tell him to stay away, because if
he could take care of his people that way, he could get along all right
by himself. The chief knew that no human would have such power and that
he had to ask the gods or make prayers for rain to make his crops grow.

Many a time some clan leader had to go up to the chief four times before
he was permitted to enter with his people. Every time when a band or
clan was received, the chief would allot them so much land. The last few
clans to arrive were just the common class of people. They didn't have a
high priest, or ceremonies of any kind, and they were the ones that had
a hard time getting into the village. They were not alloted any
land. [17](toah24.htm#xref_17) They wished to have land also, so they
asked the chief. The chief asked

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

them what they could do--or what right they had to be given that land.
They said that they were willing to have the land on the edges and they
would guard his people and keep away the enemies, so since they told him
all this, they were given all the outside land which was not allotted to
any other clan.

After this was all settled, another clan came along and they were also a
common class, and the chief asked them if they had any ceremonies of any
kind by which they lived, or by which they prayed to the gods to bring
them rain. They said no, they didn't have any and they told him they
didn't have any time for ceremonies, they were nothing but warriors and
had to fight their way up there, for the country was full of other
tribes that were enemies of these people. So the chief said that if they
were warriors and had to fight their way up there, they would be his
braves. This was the Sun Forehead Clan. Then the chief went to the
Parrot Clan (*Gash-wunga*) and asked them if they would give up some of
their land to the Sun Forehead Clan, that they too might take their
place in guarding the chief's rights and those of his people. The Parrot
Clan was very glad to do this, so from then on the Sun Forehead Clan had
to be out first if enemies made an attack.

Then, later on, another clan came along, the Sun Clan. They too were
without a religion and ceremonies. This Sun Clan was given the same
treatment as the clan before them and the Sun Forehead Clan gave up part
of their land that the Sun Clan might guard the rights of the people, so
to this day, their lands are still on the edge of the Hopi lands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. How the Crow Clan Arrived and Settled at
Mishongnovi](toah08)
