[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah21)  [Next](toah23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

### THE LADDER DANCE AT PIVAHONKIAPI <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

Northwest of Oraibi, seven or eight miles, on that broad terrace which
so conspicuously encircles many of the Hopi mesas, about 200 feet below
the rim, lie the ruins of two pueblos. The nearest to Oraibi occupies a
point which projects from the mesa and is called Hukovi, "The Place of
the Winds," or "Windy Point." Two miles farther along the ledge, at the
base of a large rock, the pueblo of Pivahonkiapi covers the shelf.

Potsherds tell us that Hukovi and Pivahonkiapi were occupied in the
twelve hundreds. We, therefore, assume that the two pueblos were
abandoned, like so many others in northern Arizona, because of the great
drought of 1275 to 1299 which shows so well in Dr. A. E. Douglass'
studies of the tree rings.

About these pueblo ruins, Hopi traditions cluster. At Hukovi the girls
were beautiful but bad. At Pivahonkiapi among the gamblers lived a
handsome youth. At Achamoli, halfway between Hukovi and Oraibi, lived
the two little war gods, sons of the Sun, Po-okonghoya and his brother,
Palo-onghoya, with their grandmother, the Spider Woman. What more can
you ask as the basis for a story!

About 100 yards east of [Pivahonkiapi](errata.htm#9) can be observed
eight circular holes, about eight inches in diameter, cut in the rock at
the cliff edge. About one of these holes the rock has cracked. The Hopi
believe that these holes belong to the "ladder dance."--Ed.

A Pivahonkiapi there dwelt a handsome young man. Two miles away on Windy
Point lived two girls in the pueblo of Hukovi. These girls wanted to
marry this handsome youth, but he would not look at either of them. This
made them mad.

They knew that he was to take the part of a Kachina in a "ladder dance"
to be held at Pivahonkiapi in March. The girls thought that this would
be a chance to destroy him.

The dance was announced and the dancers practiced the songs in the kiva
for eight days. Four days before the ceremony, two youths were selected
to go to the San Francisco Peaks which the Hopis call Nuvatekiaovi (The
Place

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

of Snow on the Very Top) to get two fir trees, and one of the youths was
the handsome young man.

On the way to the peaks they followed a trail and because they were
tired they stopped to rest. The handsome youth stepped aside off the
trail. Here he met the Spider Woman. She said, "I am in sympathy with
you because I

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_11600"></span> <img src="img/11600.jpg" /><br />
FIG. 3.</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="img_11601"></span> <img src="img/11601.jpg" /><br />
FIG. 4.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

know what is going to happen to you. Change your pahos (prayer
offerings) as the ones you are carrying are bad. Cast them somewhere and
take mine and put them in the shrine. If you don't do that, the witches
will surely get you. On your way home, stop and see me."

Returning to the trail he joined his companion and went on to the peaks
and placed the pahos in the shrine. There they selected two small fir
trees about two feet high.

On his way back the handsome youth remembered to stop and call on the
Spider Woman. He left his companion by the trail and hunted up the old
woman. The old woman said, "Take the pipe of your father and make smoke
so the clouds will hide our path from the witches." So he lit his pipe
and she brought him to her kiva. He set down his

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

trees and sat on a skin. "My dear grandchild," said the old woman, "do
as I say or your last day will be the day of the ceremony."

She handed him some medicine and said, "The wise men will sing and the
tree will grow too fast. Chew this medicine and spit it out on the tree,
so the tree may be limber but it will not break." Then she gave him a
little light white feather of an eagle and placed it under his heart so
that it would make him lighter.

By this time the sky was covered with clouds and he rejoined his
companion. He did not say much because he was worried. That night they
got home and entered the kiva with their two fir trees. All the men
smoked and when they stopped, asked them what they saw in the way of
prosperity. They said that they saw good flowing water, so the old men
knew that the summer would be good.

While this was going on the old Spider Woman, (she was a great old
woman), sent word to the other Spider Women that lived near Pivahonkiapi
(she sent the message by way of dreams) to send out her two little war
gods, Po-okonghoya and his brother, Palo-onghoya-her grandsons-to look
over the place where the tree was to be planted.

As they were small boys no one would notice them as they played with the
other children of the village. The boys investigated and discovered that
the girls of Hukovi had cracked the rock about the hole in which the
tree was to be planted. They hurried back to their grandmother and
reported.

"If that is the case," said the old Spider Woman, "I will have to go
there and see. I have not got a thing to mend that rock with. One of you
boys run and get an ear of baked sweet corn." When the boy had found it,
she ground it up as fine as she could. Then she mixed the meal into
dough--like the finest clay. When this was ready the day of the ceremony
had arrived.

The Kachinas put on their costumes at the mesa foot as they were
supposed to come from the San Francisco Peaks. Everyone gathered on the
house-tops watching them climb up the mesa. While everyone's attention
was so occupied, the old Spider Woman and the boys tried to mend the
crack in the rock with the dough. When it was mended, she gave some
medicine to the two boys who chewed it up and spat it out on the crack
and blew on the crack.

As soon as they had finished, the Kachinas entered the village and
marched about the two kivas four times.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

In this ceremony, you must know, the leading Kachina, though a man,
takes the part of a Kachin-mana (Maiden). In this dance the leader was a
notorious wizard who was being paid by the girls of Hukovi to do crooked
work.

After making the rounds of the kiva, the Kachinas marched to the place
on the edge of the cliff where the trees were to be planted. The
Kachin-mana carried the two little trees. When the Mana gave the
handsome boy the wrong tree, and the other boy the right tree, he knew
the wizard was trying to get him. Both boys laid the trees down on the
rock. Someone said something and the leader and everyone looked the
other way and the boys exchanged the trees, He knew his tree for it had
a feather fastened to one of the leaves.

The trees were now planted in the holes that had been prepared. The
Kachinas, standing in a row, started to dance and sing. Slowly the trees
began to grow. They grew and grew until they reached 25 to 30 feet high.
The two Kachinas that were to climb, one of them being the handsome boy,
stood by the trees. Finally the Kachin-mana, the wizard, told them to
climb. The young man trusted the old Spider Woman. He chewed the
medicine and spat on the tree and climbed slowly. When he reached the
top the tree swayed back and forth. All the people on the house-tops
thought that the tree would break and he would go over the cliff. He
came down and danced and then went up again. When he came down and
danced he climbed the tree the third time, swinging back and forth. The
girls from Hukovi were on the house-tops with the inhabitants of the
village. They wondered why the rock did not give way. When he climbed
the fourth time the leader told the youth to climb faster and swing back
and forth harder, and swing good and hard with all his might. But still
the tree did not break nor the rock crack. When he had climbed down the
leader told him to go up a fifth time, but someone had counted so the
chief said that was enough as they had gone up the four ceremonial
times.

Later the two young men who had climbed the trees took the prayer
offerings and started back to the San Francisco Mountains to place them
in the shrine. The rest of the Kachinas entered the kiva with the men of
the pueblo and all smoked.

Before the men had entered the kiva, the girls from Hukovi hired a
wizard to cut the beams in the back part of the kiva. They were mad at
the leader of the Kachinas, the Kachin-mana, and the boy. They did not
know that he was already on his way to the peaks.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

While the smoking ceremony was on, the kiva roof caved in. Everyone was
killed but one poor old man far back in one corner who was not a man of
high standing but was a common person who never rushed up in front. This
old man dug his way out.

The village was in trouble. All the men were killed except the two
youths and the old man. Well, of course you know, everyone was sad for
many days. The old man knew that everyone was sad so he thought he would
do something. So the old man went off by himself and practiced a dance
under the cliff. While he was practicing, a girl found him, and he asked
her to join him in the dance. She accepted so the old man went to work
and made a mask so no one would know her. He took some corn, boiled it
well, late one afternoon. He fixed up the girl as well as himself in a
Kachina costume. The old man told her to hold out all the nerve she
could. When they went to the plaza, the people saw them come. All the
people started to cry, but soon got all right. Then the old man and the
girl danced and gave out presents of corn.

That night the handsome youth was outside the pueblo where he went every
night. He heard something and lay still. He listened. He heard a sound
coming closer and closer. It finally came and passed by. It was a ghost
dressed in white. He was scared and fainted. After laying insensible for
a while, he came to himself. He followed the ghost to the village. When
he got to the plaza, the ghost was sitting on the shrine. It was a woman
ghost. He went up and asked her why she was there and where she had come
from.

She said, "I come from the Colorado River. I come because I sympathize
with the people of Pivahonkiapi. I have nothing for you but if you wish
to get even with the girls of Hukovi, I would like to help you. I would
like to have a prayer plume from everyone in the pueblo and I ask you to
have them made this very night. You must keep it a secret why they are
to be made."

So the youth went from house to house and every woman made a prayer
plume (paho). The boy collected them and gave them to the ghost and
said, "We have done what you asked us to do." The ghost took the prayer
offerings and thanked him. She said, "I will do everything that you ask
me to do. Now what do you want me to do? I can drive them eastward or I
can drive them westward. I can even drive them over the cliff." The boy
said, "Drive them westward."

Then the ghost went over to Hukovi and she made a

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

noise as if she were dying. She rolled on the ground and moaned. This
scared the people. Some boys said they were not scared and offered to
kill the old ghost.

The next night the boys lay in wait for her and when she started to moan
they got scared and ran away. Everyone got scared. The ghost came back
six or seven nights. The people could not sleep for her moaning, so they
decided to leave the pueblo.

They packed up their belongings and left the village. The ghost drove
them westward. They camped for the night by the Dinnebito, Wash at
Bang-wu-wi (Mountain Sheep Cliff). The old ghost came again and kept
them awake. But they could not move that night on account of the
children.

The next day they moved to near where the Dinnebito Store is and camped.
The ghost came early and kept them awake till daylight. Again they
started on, and on the third night camped by the Little Colorado River.
The ghost came just after sundown because she was near her home and kept
them awake till dawn.

At daylight they started on again and camped in the Cinder Hills. Still
the ghost came after them. The fifth night they camped by Mormon
Mountain. The ghost followed them. On and on they went, crossing the Big
Colorado into California. They say that their descendants are now the
Mission Indians of California.

<span id="img_12000"></span> ![](img/12000.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[115:1](toah22.htm#fr_3) Reprinted from M. N. A.,
Museum Notes, Vol. 5, No. 2, Aug. 1932, p. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dr. Fewkes and Masauwu](toah23)
