[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt07)  [Next](gbt09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/ar01.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/ar01.jpg)

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

#### I. The Magician. Aries.

The first sign or house in the Zodiac is the first step in the direction
of Manifestation, and Aries is the High Priest as well as Avidya or
Ignorance, standing before, c.q. above cognition. Potency and power are
its attributes, because all and everything is immanent in this stage of
Beginning. Power abstract, undeveloped, simple, but for that reason
mightier than every detail or phenomenon, and the master of Nature. The
ultra-positive, the very superior, and in the lower human sense the
ultra-egotistical. Like the first note of a composition in music, it
determines the tone and gives the key. From the First spring the Four,
and so the symbols of the Four Elements appear on the table of the
Magician, though his action, as far as action goes in this card and
principle, exists in potency only and is indicated consequently in the
wand in his right hand. In his superior abstractness he is eternal in
relation to the phenomenal world, which is indicated by the symbols of
Eternity above his head, the *lemnescate*, and around his waist, the
serpent.

*W*.: "This card signifies the divine motive in man, reflecting God, the
will in the liberation of its union with that which is above."

*M*.: "He symbolises Will."--This is exactly Aries.

*P*.: "The Unity principle, the origin of which is impenetrable to human
conceptions, is placed at the beginning of all things." His upright
attitude indicates "the will that is going to proceed into action."

The First house or Ascendant gives the key-note of the physical self,
reflection of the Higher Self, and thus in the practice of divination
the Magician

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

denotes the consultant, personally. In every figuration of cards it is
further the 'beginning' and initiative.

As far as we may ascribe siderial meanings to the cards of the Greater
Arcana, the Magician should rule the month of Aries, i.e. from the 21
March to 20 April. It appears gravely doubtful, however, if this may be
considered to determinate incidental occurrences in time. It will
certainly relate to properties of the sign Aries in general and in
particular and consequently owned by people born between those dates.
But for the rest definition of time, date or hour must be sought in the
cards of the Lesser Arcana, as far as we know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The High Priestess. Taurus](gbt09.md)
