[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt08)  [Next](gbt10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/ar02.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/ar02.jpg)

#### II. The High Priestess. Taurus.

The second stage in macrocosmic evolution is the polarity of the
omnipotent might of Self, omnipotent possibility of the field of
manifestation, universal passive richness, the *Kamaduk* or Most Beloved
Wish-Cow of the Hindus. This macrocosmic field is the Temple of the
Great Magician or Architect, in potency at least. It is the Bull,
Taurus, of astrology, the house of sound, art, faith and richness. To
speak truly, it is not so much sound as the principle of the soundbox,
sound itself having its origin in the next step. Therefore Papus may
well compare this card with the hieroglyphic meaning of the Hebrew
letter *Beth*, which relates to "the mouth of man as the organ of
speech." But it is *not* "God the Son" as he says elsewhere. It might be
called 'God the Woman,' the Divine Mother, the 'Eternal Feminine.' As
the passive richness of the Universe awaiting him that will be able to
see it and appreciate

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

it, this principle may well be symbolised by the image of the High
Priestess, sitting in an attitude of waiting, between the pillars of the
Temple, *B* and *J*, standing for the *Two*, from which will spring the
worlds of spirit and of matter. Being Supreme Objectivity, it is the
symbol of receiving, of possessing, of cult and adoration. It symbolises
womanhood in general, as the first card symbolised manhood.

Mr. Waite has restored in his images the original picture of Isis,
reposing on the crescent moon, which indeed I should say must be
regarded as the best representative of the goddess of Taurus, in which
sign the moon is 'exalted,' as astrology teaches. But Isis is not so
much to be regarded as representing "Science, Wisdom, Knowledge"
(*M*.)--as the goddess "of Nature, whose veil must not be raised before
the profane." (*P*.) and of supreme consciousness, because
'consciousness' is the faculty committed by Earth.

*W*. calls her "Second Marriage of the Prince" and says, that in
divination she stands for the querent if female. Now I should say, this
cannot be altogether true, as in the horoscope the first house indicates
the personal temperament, etc., for a man as well as for a female
querent. So in cards the Magician must always bear the meaning of the
querent personally, but if a female she will be largely influenced by
the High Priestess, as this is the representative of the feminine in
general and female properties. It may be true, more or less, that for a
man this card represents "the woman who interests the querent" (*W*.),
just as on the other hand the Magician represents the man who interests
the querent if this happens to be a woman.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

The High Priestess symbolises constancy, fidelity, repose, stability,
but also dumbness, laziness, resistance, endurance as well as passive
opposition. It rules everything in connection with art and the artistic
abilities, with wealth and with the masonic lodge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Empress. Gemini](gbt10.md)
