[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt01)  [Next](gbt03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/iinit.jpg.md) |

F ever a book should be written on the Romance of Symbolism, its
hypothesis of interpretation, its traditional and imputed histories, a
considerable space would be allotted assuredly to Tarot-cards; while
seeing that at this day there is more concern in the subject than was
felt even in the past, there would be a call not only to survey that
which lies behind us, a strange field of speculation and reverie, but
the prospect extending in front, since every year brings forth some new
proposition and provides material for future imaginative flights. It is
very curious to contrast those comparatively sober terms in which Court
de Gebelin introduced his discovery of the cards, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) though he sought to prove that their origin
was in Ancient Egypt, with the fantastic declamations of Éliphas Lévi,
who affirmed not only that they were the Alphabet of Enoch, Hermes
Trismegistus and Cadmus but the Gospel of all Gospels, a synthesis of
science and the universal key of the Kabbalah.

De Gebelin was a man of learning at his own period and remained within
the circle of facts, actual or supposed, as he saw and read them. His
successor was a man of extravagant mind, who contemplated past and
future alike through a glass of vision, and so beheld all faërie unfold
its images. The occult happenings of the past became in the process as
much a matter of invention as his own notions. The inventions were
decorative and were even characterised at times by a magian quality of
intuition; but in most cases his record of past events was like his
reading of things to come. His tale of the Knights Templar, his
intimations on the Rosy Cross, his survey of alchemical literature are
in much the same category as his prognostications about a parliament of
nations under an universal monarchy ruled by a King of France. He

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

discovered the religion behind all religions, a fountain-source from
which they issued in their day and into which all return. This was the
Secret Tradition of Israel; but it proves to be a Tradition of his own
making, which falsifies all the literature, and he had not read the
texts from which he claimed to draw. He had glanced there and here at a
few records of the subject and distorted them in the magic crystal of
his seership. He took up the Tarot, and just as a cartomancist shuffles
and deals and lays out its picture-symbols for the reading of things to
come, so did he divine their past. He adopted the speculations of De
Gebelin, and they dilated in his own mind. He dressed up the Trumps
Major in Egyptian vestures and affirmed that he had restored the Tarot
in its primitive hieroglyphical form. By a fortunate chance there had
preceded him in 1857 another fantasiast, J. F. Vaillant, with a gift in
etymologies, more stupefying than anything produced before him. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) Between them there deployed all Babylon and
all its idols. But Egypt loomed behind Babylon and the Kabbalah behind
Egypt. It is post-Talmudic in unadorned fact, but for them it was older
than Moses and older even than Abraham. In fine, behind the Kabbalah
there was, and remains among us, the Book of Thoth, and this was the
Tarot, within which was the light unlimited of its endless range of
meanings that had never passed into writing but dwelt implicitly in
both, above all in Lévi's mind. And a day came when he made his great
discovery which had never entered previously into the heart of scholiast
or commentator. The Tree of Life in Kabbalism has 22 Paths by which the
Sephiroth or Numerations are connected one with another and late
Kabbalism had married these Paths to the 22 Letters of the Hebrew
Alphabet. But the Tarot Trumps Major are also 22, and Éliphas Lévi
proclaimed another marriage, constituting a Trinity in unity of Cards
and Paths and Letters. It has been the joy of all Occult hierophants and
their believing disciples through the decades that followed. On all
these Lévi has exercised a great influence in French circles, and seeing
that Tarot expository literature is French almost exclusively, he calls
for consideration at length when estimating expository values.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

It was not in the least needful but was pleasant, if opportunity
offered, to find that there were others before him who knew and had used
to some purpose the Tarot keys. As a fact, there was St. John on Patmos,
the proof being that he wrote his Book of Revelations in 22 chapters.
The Apocalypse henceforward, for true initiates, became an exposition of
Tarot Trumps. It had not occurred to Lévi or to those who followed him
that the arrangement of scripture texts in divisions called chapters is
unhappily a late device. There was also Louis Claude de Saint-Martin,
who was one of *les vrais initiés*, and he had written a certain
*Tableau*, setting forth the relations between God, Man and the
Universe. He broke it up into numbered parts which reached the same
total, so the *Tableau Naturel* arises out of the Tarot and returns
therein. After what manner the cards and the sections belong to one
another in either case, it was not to be expected perhaps that a French
Magus should unfold, though he held the key of all things, so the
allocation remains a mystery even to this day, while the Lévi successors
in France reproduce their master's dogmas from generation to generation.

Hereof is the Tarot in its literary history, from the pre-French
Revolution *Monde Primitif* of Court de Gebelin to the year 1870, when
it occurred to P. Christian (Paul Pitois), *ancien bibliothecaire* that
the History of Magic might be extended further, with profit, by the
gentle art of invention. The Franco-Prussian war stood on the threshold
of events, Éliphas Lévi had been silent for five years and was forgotten
for the time being, though still in print. It was safe to borrow
something of his motives and manner, as also from the spectacular
findings in his glass of vision; so Christian borrowed accordingly, and
his tale of *La Fatalité à travers les temps et les peuples* is the
*Histoire de la Magie* of Lévi, retold after another manner and with
more liberal and frequent appeal to the repertory of the Father of Lies.
Christian had none of those literary gifts which adorn the pages of
Lévi, but his inventions are highly sensational and often microscopical
in detail. It seems probable even that, like his predecessor, he began
by convincing himself (*a*) that things should have happened in that or
in this way and therefore did, (b) that his divinatory devices foretold
the future, at least now and then. It is precisely this kind of mischief
which begets itself in others, and altogether I am not surprised that
Christian's *L’Homme Rouge des Tuileries*, which followed--I think--his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Histoire de la
Magie*, has become of authority among Grimoires and is sought eagerly,
or that he is still quoted off and on for his Tarot views.

A space of fifteen years elapsed, and *circa* 1885 a group of
neo-Martinists began to be formed in Paris, with Papus--Dr. Gérard
Encausse--at their head. As it happened that notwithstanding the
two-and-twenty sections of his *Tableau Naturel*, Saint-Martin
contributed nothing to Tarot lore, had in all probability never glanced
at the mysterious card-symbols, and abandoned early and definitely all
occult workings, the Martinism of the late XIXth century signified, as a
name only, that its followers had their eyes turned to the esoteric
tradition of the West, rather than that of the East, and in their
preoccupation were thinly Christian rather than theosophical in the
sense of Modern Theosophy, through which some of them had passed and had
come forth unsatisfied. The Master in Chief of Papus was always Éliphas
Lévi, to whom his occult notions are referable in the last resource,
whose Kabbalism is his Kabbalism and whose Tarot is his Tarot. Papus
worked indefatigably at these subjects and extended them on every side,
producing great inventions, with a certain laborious sincerity, as I
shall be disposed always to think. But, like those who preceded and
those who have come after him, Papus was an occultist, not a mystic, and
from my point of view the pictorial symbols of *les imagiers du moyen
âge*, as Oswald Wirth terms them, unfold their meanings in this other
and higher light.

The Martinist School, its connections and derivatives, produced their
Tarots, *sub nomine* Falconnier, *sub nomine* Alta, *sub nomine* Oswald
Wirth, and there were yet other artists and diviners, some borrowing
lights from one another and some kindling an occasional torch or a
casual flash on their own part. The Monographs multiplied, and the
Marquis Stanislas de Guiata produced a sequence of treatises wherein all
occultism unfolded from the Trumps Major. There was no end to the
activities, with the Lévi pageants always in the background and in the
forefront often.

When twenty-five years had elasped in this manner and the Tarot
Bibliography had attained considerable dimensions, the War of 1914
engulfed all the Schools and all their brave imaginings; and when it was
in fine suspended by the figurative peace of Versailles, the Schools
emerged but slowly from the weltering chaos and were shorn of their
chief personalities,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

their adornments and appeal. The names of some of them are with us at
this day, centered in a little group at Lyons.

But French occultism, apart from specific schools and incorporated
pretensions, seems very much alive, and Oswald Wirth produced recently
the most decorative Tarot study, so far as form is concerned, which has
appeared since we first heard of the subject. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md) His attention is directed to the Trumps
Major solely and he has little to say on the divinatory side
[of](errata.htm#0.md) the subject, that so-called practical side which
engrosses most persons who would call themselves Tarot students. It is
none of my own business, but it is clear from my knowledge of the
literature that under this aspect there is room for new treatment. Dr.
Thierens has approached it from an astrological standpoint in the work
which these preliminary pages are designed to introduce. I have been led
to do so because very little has been printed previously on the zodiacal
attributions of the cards and because it happens that I am acquainted
with unpublished divinatory methods making use of these attributions for
many years past in one of the occult circles. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[†](#fn_3.md) There is a literature of the Tarot which has
not emerged so far into the light of day and some of it is excessively
curious. It was said of old in a very different connexion: *Quod tenet
nunc teneat donec de medio fiat;* and I do not know whether certain
subsisting difficulties will be taken ultimately out of the way, so that
the theoretical and practical speculations of such circles may be
compared with those brought forward in public ways during recent and
earlier years. In this manner we should have at least the subject
general of the Tarot expanded fully.

Meanwhile Dr. Thierens has approximated more than anyone else towards a
valid interpretation of Tarot Trump Major No. XII, being the Hanged Man.
From Court de Gebelin to Papus and Stanislas de Guaita, not excluding
Oswald

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wirth himself, all
published exoteric meanings are utterly remote from the true
significance of this most pregnant symbol. In my *Pictorial Key to the
Tarot* and in the Little Key which accompanies Miss Pamela Colman
Smith's complete set of the cards, produced long ago under my own
auspices, there was said concerning it that which was possible at the
time. I will give now one further indication. The human figure of the
symbol is suspended head downward and as such it is comparable to the
Microprosopus or God of Reflections in the so-called Great Symbol or
Double Triangle of Solomon, prefixed by Lévi to this *Dogme et Rituel de
la Haute Magie*, being the frontispiece of the first volume. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md) It follows that the true symbol belonging
to Trump Major No. XII, though it is by no means that of Lévi, is not a
Hanged Man at all; but it will continue to be depicted in this manner
unless and until the Greater Arcana are issued by the authority of
another Secret Circle, which so far has never testified officially
concerning itself in the outer channels of research.

I have said that every year brings forth some new consideration, and Dr.
Thierens promises another work, while the speculation which has just
been adventured speaks of things unattempted and yet conceived in the
mind. There is no intention signified; but I know what emblems would
adorn it. How things will stand with the Tarot in days to come may loom
therefore vaguely; but obviously there are activities to come. There is,
however, one side of the subject on which no horizon opens. As to where
the Trumps Major originated, how and with whom, there is no conclave of
adepts to tell us and no isolated student, holding evidential warrants.
At the moment we can look only for more speculations and more dreams to
come.

ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:\*](gbt02.htm#fr_0.md) *Monde Primitif, analysé
et comparé avec le Monde Moderne*, par M. Court de Gebelin, g vols. The
account and examination of the Tarot will be found in Vol. VIII,
published in 1781.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[8:\*](gbt02.htm#fr_1.md) Les Romes appeared at the
date in question and maintained that the history of the Tarot is lost in
the night of time, but everything justifies the hypothesis that it is of
Indo-Tartarian origin and that it has been transmitted to modern times
by the Romany tribes of his title.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[11:\*](gbt02.htm#fr_2.md) *Le Tarot des Imagiers du
Moyen Age*, 1927, accompanied by a separative portfolio of coloured
plates and with many illustrations in the text.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:†](gbt02.htm#fr_3.md) Oswald Wirth has a short
excursus on Astrology at the end of his work, in which he enumerates the
zodiacal implicities allocated to the four elements, but no Tarot
connection is suggested. It is rather curious that a study of the
*Sepher Zetzirah* in conjunction with the Tree of Life and the triple
marriage effected by Éliphas Lévi has not produced speculations long
since on the astronomical and astrological correspondences of the Tarot
Trumps.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[12:\*](gbt02.htm#fr_4.md) See my annotated
translation, entitled *Transcendental Magic: Its Doctrine and Ritual*,
new and revised edition, 1923.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Doctrine](gbt03.md)
