[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt11)  [Next](gbt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/ar05.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/ar05.jpg)

#### V. The Hierophant. Leo.

The fifth step on the cosmic ladder is that of the Atma, the Spark in
macrocosmos and that of childbirth and of the heart in particular on the
physical plane. The latter is sanctified by the former and this fact is
symbolised in the image of the Hierophant.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It may also be
interpreted in its turn as the sanctifying of the profane (man) by the
holy (man) in general, and this fact gave the reason for the other
nomination of this card: *the pope*. Of course it may equally well be
called the patriarch. In the masonic lodge it is the R.W.M., the sun in
the solar system and the heart in every living body, as also the solar
plexus in the etheric body. And as the teaching of St. Paul--and
others--has it: from the heart are the issues into life. It is the
dynamic centre of every living existence.

The Hierophant "is seated between the two pillars of Hermes and of
Solomon" . . . "He is symbol of mercy and beneficence." (*M*.) This is
exact. *P*. says he is the principle "which attaches the material body
to the divine spirit." Which is precisely that of the heart. So there
remains little doubt with regard to identity. The same author identifies
further the principle of the Hierophant with the Hebrew letter *He*,
which means aspiration or breath. In fact the heart is the cause of this
periodical movement, which we find in pulsation and respiration, in
analogy with the Law of Periodicity in Cosmos.

In the different versions given by authors there is very little of
value. The Hierophant is, in short; the heart and herein resides the
motoric force for good or for evil, according to the more or less
sanctifying force that comes through. In case of affliction there may be
lack of courage, self-confidence, honesty, sometimes certain evil or bad
character.

It is rightly asserted, that this card may denote "the man to whom the
querent has recourse" (*W*.), also some authority or official having
power to sanctify or gratify demands. Leo is the 'king,' it is said

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

by astrologers. And in mundane evolution the king derived his power from
the emperor, as in the zodiac. He was invested by the latter with a
power to wield and rule a definite and concrete organisation, for which
he became individually responsible. So where the emperor was chosen and
came forth from the soul of the people and apparently from below, the
king is appointed from above, and seems more spiritual because more
actually known. There ought to be no kings, however, without an emperor
over them. The king is and remains the central official, as the heart is
the central organ of the organism.

The triple crown of the Hierophant and his triple crossed staff both
indicate his rulership in the three worlds, which I should like to name
the spiritual, the psychical and the physical.

Some say the card means marriage. This may be, but only in the inner
sense of true revelation to the heart, and consequently in the same
sense as Jesus meant when He said: "Marriages are contracted in Heaven."

In another way, in practical divination, the card means of course
'sanction,' be it of marriage or of something else, but always in the
way of inner consent, not of outer law, which is ruled by another house.

Self-centredness and some sort of natural authority are the chief
characteristics of Leo and the Hierophant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Lovers. Virgo](gbt13)
