[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt10)  [Next](gbt12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/ar04.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/ar04.jpg)

#### IV. The Emperor. Cancer.

There is much more mystery buried in every symbol than words spoken can
tell. Superficial consideration might make astrologers wonder at this

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

image, which assimilates worldly power with the sign Cancer instead of
with Leo, to which they are accustomed. Still there remains this to be
taken into account, that originally 'emperors' got their power *from the
people*,--China, Rome--long before they began to claim God as their
private protector against eventual aggression from outside. The people
are ruled by the sign of Cancer, says the astrologer. And thus
originally the chosen emperor accepted *vox populi* as *vox Dei*. This
chosen dignitary was nothing of a tyrant, originally, nor did he have
anything to do with rulership or warfare: he was simply the highest and
most pure expression of the soul of the people or nation. In China
sometimes a poor but extremely virtuous old man without any other
antecedents was elected to be emperor. All later usurpations of power
and succession were deviations from the old and pure institution. The
present position of the president in a republic comes very near to that
of the original emperor.

The sign of the soul indeed is . . . Cancer. At the same time this is
the sign of the breast (*P*.) and of the womb, as *W*. translates this
passage about the card, which *P*. says is connected with the Hebrew
letter *Daleth*. In the older pictures we see the effort to let the man
make a figure 4 or something like the symbol for Jupiter with his
crossed legs. There may be some meaning in it, but this seems futile
with regard to the general significance of the Emperor as the
representative of the past, of memory, tradition in the people and in
family life, dharma and the real motives of the soul in the background
of life, which actually rule life. It relates ..to every inner power of
the soul from which outer activity (karma) will arise.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

In different editions of the cards we find different sorts of sceptres
in the hand of the Emperor. In some there appears also an eagle. We
prefer the sceptre which Mr. *W*. puts into his hands: the *crux
ansata*, symbol of the might of inner life, which rules matter. The
planet Jupiter has only to do with this card, in so far as it is exalted
in the sign Cancer, which means, that virtually hopes and expectations
as well as ideals for the future take their origin in the deep-rooted
attachments of the soul, which themselves are the expression of dharma
or cosmic memory.

Still in a personal way the Emperor indicates the father of the querent,
because it is from his father that his soul derives its elements.
Compare in the horoscope the IVth house. Therefore this seemingly very
feminine sign was symbolised by a male figure, while the seemingly male
messenger was represented by a woman. The Empress indicates the
spiritual parentage, the Emperor the physical one. The latter finds its
counterpart (physical mother) in the Xth house, as is well known.

Some authors say this card means 'realisation.' That is correct so far
as this word means an inner realising of the significance of outer
facts: the gathering of the harvest of experience, which will become the
store of memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Hierophant. Leo](gbt12.md)
