[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt43)  [Next](gbt45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/wakn.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/wakn.jpg)

#### Knight of Wands

TRADITION: Young man, friendly. Departure, absence, flight, emigration,
change of residence, desertion, transmigration, transplantation,
transmutation, separation, disunion, rupture, discontinuance,
brouillerie, discord.

THEORY: The workings of *Air* by a special and mighty agent--for this
the knight is in all cases--on the *houses of water*, here the *Fourth*
and the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Twelfth*, causes
turbulence, motion, emotion (though it must be borne in mind, that it
*is* not emotion in itself); the action of the air on the water causes
waves. In the case of the fourth house the knight relates to family
matters or household conditions, eventually the father, to internal
conditions in society or groups of people. It must further relate to
memories and the past in general, because it means the awakening of the
sentiments. The traditional conclusions have been drawn evidently in the
negative for the greater part, in consideration of the fact that the
sentiments generally are misleading. That they give reason for many
changes is quite true. In the case of the twelfth house this is much the
same. But extending its result over a much larger circle, the mercurial
knight may represent expedition and exploration, discovery, scientific
or practical, emigration, estrangement, and the 'great work' of
transmigration. It denotes a searching for the unknown, which in weak
personal cases may appear as indiscretion or premature revelation,
divulgation, profanation, etc. We do not see why this knight should be
either young or friendly.

Quite the reverse: On account of the twelfth house there is something
inimical about him, and a certain dissension of sentiment may find its
cause in the past, in a family feud or something in the nature of a
misguiding prejudice, tradition, which will have to be given up, etc.

CONCLUSION--(From the fourth house): *A representative of the father, or
of the family, a relative; a man visiting the house bringing new and
perhaps disturbing influences into it, disturbing domestic happiness*;

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

*changes in the home, house or family; memories awakened, divulgation of
family secrets or private matters; an intruder in the home. A man of
doubtful though not necessarily bad character*. (From the twelfth
house): *An investigator, occultist, explorer, sailor, traveller on the
high seas, wanderer, a guide through strange experiences, vagrant
Bohemian type, stranger and sometimes enemy or some one with whom the
querent does not agree and from whom he will be estranged, however
earnest his endeavours to keep friendly, because he speaks either
morally or physically a foreign tongue. Translation, export, departure,
change of residence, emigration, flight, absence, rupture, etc.
Transmutation. Disturbing influences and people in general, which need
not be bad in itself, and may even cause a revolution in thought. It
brings unrest in any case*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ace of Pentacles](gbt45)
