[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt50)  [Next](gbt52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/pe07.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/pe07.jpg)

#### Seven of Pentacles

TRADITION: Money, riches, sums of money, also silver especially. Has to
do with the moon and whiteness. Candour, innocence, purgation,
purification. Business, barter. Reversed: Mental worries, suspicion,
diligence, fear, mistrust, etc.

THEORY: The *Fire* with its sunny and Venusian character on the
*Eleventh house*, the house of friends, in which the Self has to rely
for a good deal on them or to live for them, but in which it sometimes
finds it hard to give up its own desires and wishes. Still in the main
it contains 'friendly' surroundings and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

is the house of traffic and business, of practical co-operation and
interrelation. Aquarius is the house of the Angels too, and this may
account perhaps for such renderings as innocence, purgation, etc., and
may mean that the individualistic and egotistic elements have to be
modified into something more 'brotherly.' What we have to do with the
moon and its metal silver here, is less clear, unless the idea has been
induced by the electric-blue colour of this house, or by the fact that
it is the first house of the lunar body in the solar system. Neither can
we very clearly see why it should indicate riches, money, etc. This is
probably a rather coarse transmission of the idea, that friendly
relations together with the person's own good intentions and good-will
must produce advantages in material things. So the card must indicate
good business, profitable friendship, assistance and help of friends and
*vice versa;* reliable and agreeable surroundings outside the family
circle. The advantages will probably be the outcome of what has been
sown before by good action. For 'fear, mistrust,' etc., we can see no
reason.

CONCLUSION: *Friendship, concord, friendly relations and sympathetic,
reliable and agreeable surroundings outside the family circle;
profitable co-operation, advantage, good business, remuneration. Natural
and rational outcome of what has been sown previously*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eight of Pentacles](gbt52.md)
