[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbt85)  [Next](gbt87) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766157350/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Book of the Tarot*, by A. E. Thierens, \[1930\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_~../pkt/tn/swkn.jpg"></span> ![](../pkt/tn/swkn.jpg)

#### Knight of Swords

TRADITION: A military man, officer, master of the sword, master of
fencing, warrior. Dispute, war, duel, combat, attack as well as defence;
opposition, destruction, ruin, hatred, etc. Also skill, bravery,
capacity. Reversed: Incapacity, imprudence, extravagance, foolishness,
impertinence, stupidity, industry, crooked tricks.

THEORY: Finally this element on the *Fourth* and on the *Twelfth
houses*. On account of the former we find of course the armed man under
the rule of the Emperor, the military man, soldier, etc., but rather the
professional, formerly the hired, troops than the militia, which will
rather fall under the same house as the police, and be indicated by the
page of swords. Another significance of this card is that of painful
memories, suffering by ancient wrongs. In fact war is in all cases, be
it private or collective, the phenomenon of the outbreak of some ancient
wrong or evil--the wrong of oppression on one side or the evil of
desire, rapacity, overflowing force, etc., on the other. So the Knight
of swords must bear the significance of the bearer of weapons, which
avenge wrongs or serve attacks. The fourth house calls the home and the
family, the father in particular, and the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

card may well denote something in the nature of avenging family feuds or
the honour of the father or the family. Badly aspected it may mean
opposition against the power of the father or the Emperor, revolution,
which is quite in the line of the grumbling and malcontent nature of the
Cancerian of the lower type. It is, however, to be expected that such
opposition will be very much hidden, dark, in the background, not open
nor very loyal. On account of its relation with the twelfth house this
card may also mean a surgeon and operations performed by him, and, in
lower types or weaker cases, fraud and destruction of organisms,
whatever these may be. It may further relate here to all sorts of bad
passions and to degrees of hatred, incapacity, etc.

CONCLUSION: *Military man, man of arms, one avenging family or other
feuds or wrongs; wrongs avenging themselves; painful memories, distress
in the family, afflictions deriving from past events. A surgeon,
operation done by same; the knife in old sore. In badly aspected cases
hatred, destruction, extravagance, spilling, revolt, insurrection, war,
combat, fraud, impertinence, imprudence, etc*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epilogue](gbt87)
