[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cair07)  [Next](cair09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0404604161/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Confucianism and Its Rivals*, by Herbert A. Giles, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### LECTURE VI

#### A.D. 100-600

<span class="smallcaps">During</span> the closing years of Wang Ch‘ung's
life great events were happening in China, of which he would surely have
taken some notice if he had perceived their far-reaching character.
Rumours of "a divine teacher in the west" had long since penetrated to
China, and had been snapped up by the Taoists in a paltry forgery (*Lieh
Tzŭ*, ch. iv), assigned to an imaginary philosopher of the seventh
century B.C., whose alleged work can hardly be much older than the first
century B.C. Now, a writer (*Shên Kua*) of the eleventh century, in a
collection of miscellaneous jottings, quotes a number of historical
passages to support the view that Buddhism was known in China two
centuries before the Christian era; among others, the following, which
was written at the close of the sixth century A.D.: "These Buddhist
books had long been circulated far and wide, but disappeared with the
advent of the Chin dynasty"—under which occurred the Burning of the
Books (220 B.C.). With regard to the Chin dynasty, it is further on
record that "in the year 216 B.C., during the reign of the so-called
First Emperor, a

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhist priest,
named Shih-li-fang, and others, arrived at the capital, bringing with
them, for the first time, *sûtras* written in Sanskrit." That is the
historical account; a Buddhist work states that the company consisted of
eighteen priests, and adds the following details: "The officials
reported their arrival to the Emperor, who, on account of their strange
behaviour, put them into prison. Shih-li-fang and his companions recited
the *Mahâpragnâ paramitâ sûtra* (supposed to have been written by
Shâkyamuni Buddha himself); whereupon a bright alight shone out and a
beautiful nebula began to circle round and fill the prison. In a few
moments, this revealed a golden angel, sixteen feet in height, who,
majestically wielding a huge club, smashed open the prison and let the
priests out (thus vividly recalling the twelfth chapter of Acts). The
Emperor was terrified; and repenting his action, bestowed upon them
valuable presents and sent them away." The next historical notice comes
under the year 121 B.C., when we read that "for the first time an image
of Buddha was secured." This is further said to have been "taken by a
victorious Chinese general from a Hun chieftain, who was in the habit of
worshipping it." A later history says that, "when the Emperor received
the image, he had it placed in the palace among some other images, all
of which averaged about ten feet in height. He did not sacrifice to it,
but merely burnt incense and worshipped it with prayer. This," adds the
writer, "is how Buddhism gradually began to find its way into China."

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

The above historical entries are generally ignored, though they have
just as much claim to be recognized as the more romantic story which
dates from A.D. 65. In that year we read, "The Emperor sent a mission to
India, and obtained the Buddhist *Sûtra* of Forty-two Sections." The
legend attached to this brief note attributes the origin of the mission
to a dream in which the Emperor had a vision of a golden man with a
bright halo round his head. This man, so the Emperor was told, was a
Divine Being who lived in the west; and the mission was dispatched
accordingly. Two years later, in A.D. 67, the mission returned, and with
it came two Buddhist priests, Kâshiapmâdanga and Gobharana. They brought
"The *Sûtra* of Forty-two Sections," which deals with the principles of
primitive Buddhism as taught by Shâkyamuni, and which they at once set
to work to translate; but before very long Kâshiapmâdanga died, leaving
his colleague to carry on the task of further translation alone.
Gobharana remained in China until his death at over sixty years of age;
the religion, however, which he came to propagate failed to appeal
closely to the Chinese imagination until several centuries had passed
away. During these centuries, quite a number of other priests came to
China and aided in the work of translating the Buddhist Scriptures, but
it was not until A.D. 335 that the Chinese people were allowed to take
Buddhist orders. This permission was due to the influence of a
remarkable Indian priest, named Buddhachinga, who reached the capital in
A.D. 310. He claimed

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

supernatural powers, and pretended to foretell the future from the
tinkling of bells. He could take out his viscera from a hole in his
side, and wash them. He also caused a flower to bloom from an empty pot,
which looks as if he combined with religion some well-known tricks of
the Indian juggler.

Buddhism was now beginning to take a firm hold; and under the year 381,
we read of a special temple built for priests within the Imperial
palace. A further great impetus to the spread of this religion was given
by the arrival, about the year 385, of Kumârajîva, a native of India who
at the age of seven had been dedicated by his mother to Buddhism. His
daily task was said to have been the repetition of one thousand hymns of
thirty-two words to each. He devoted himself to that form of Buddhism
which is known as the *Mahâyâna* or Greater Vehicle, as opposed to the
*Hînayâna* or Lesser Vehicle, both of them means of transporting the
faithful into Nirvâna, and the latter being the older of the two.
Speaking through a parable, Buddha is said to have adumbrated the wider
success of the Greater Vehicle. A certain man's house took fire,
whereupon he brought a goat-carriage to carry away his children. By and
by, he fetched a spacious waggon. All the same, the Lesser Vehicle
represents the primitive and more esoteric form of Buddhism; while the
Greater Vehicle exhibits Buddha in the light of a personal Saviour, to
whom intercessory prayers may be successfully offered.

Kumârajîva had taught crowds of pupils, and had

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

preached with such success that his fame reached China, whither he was
ultimately induced to proceed. There he laboured for many years as a
translator, dying in 417. At death, his body was cremated; all but his
tongue, which remained unhurt in the midst of the fire. The work by
which he is best known, and that because of its more popular albeit
abstruse character, is the translation of what is called "The Diamond
*Sûtra*." This *sûtra* is especially interesting in connexion with
China, as it belongs to the *Mahâyâna* school, which now prevails there
and in Japan; also, because attempts have been made to show that the
tenets of the *Mahâyâna* school are not purely Buddhistic, but were
largely borrowed from Christianity as exhibited in the heresy of the
Gnostics, with their alleged knowledge of spiritual mysteries. There are
difficulties to be got over in this ascription; and it seems almost
certain that the *Mahâyâna* school had already developed in western
India before any knowledge of the Gospels could possibly have travelled
so far. Nâgârjuna, its reputed founder, is generally assigned to the
second century A.D.; and it does not appear to have been earlier than
the middle of that century that the Christians at Antioch began to
gather together the records of their Founder, nor indeed until the end
of the second century that the Gospels became publicly known through the
writings of Irenæus and Tertullian.

The Diamond *Sûtra* teaches us that all objects, all phenomena, are
illusory, and have no real existence. It was delivered by the Lord
Buddha to a company

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

of twelve hundred and fifty disciples, all of whom had attained to
eminent degrees of spiritual wisdom. Buddha himself had just returned
from the daily quest for food, which is obtained, without solicitation,
from the charitable. Having taken off his mendicant's robe, and laid
aside his alms-bowl, he bathed his feet, arranged the seats, and sat
down. "Then"—the following passages are translations from the Chinese
text—"the venerable Subhûti, who was among the company, rose from his
place; and baring his right shoulder he knelt upon his right knee, and
with joined palms reverently addressed Buddha, as follows: 'O rare
world-honoured One, O Tathâgata, thou who dost protect and instruct
those who are Bôdhisattvas! O world-honoured One! If a good man, or a
good woman, should show signs of unexcelled perfect intelligence, upon
what should such a one rely, and how should such a one subdue the
heart?' Buddha replied, 'Good indeed! Good indeed! As you say, I protect
and instruct those who are Bôdhisattvas. Listen therefore attentively,
and I will tell you.' Subhûti promptly answered that he would be glad to
hear, and Buddha thereupon told the Bôdhisattvas and Mahâsattvas, as
follows: 'All living creatures whatsoever, whether born from the egg, or
from the womb, or from damp (as wood-lice), or by metamorphosis, whether
having form or not, whether possessed of intelligence or not, whether
not possessed of intelligence or not not-possessed of intelligence—all
such I command to enter into the absolutely non-material state of
Nirvâna, and so by

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

extinction (of all sense-values, etc.) to obtain salvation. Thus, all
living creatures will be freed from measurement, from number, and from
space-limit, though in reality there are no living creatures by such
extinction to obtain salvation. Why so? Subhûti, if a Bôdhisattva
recognizes such objective existences as self, others, living creatures,
or such a concept as old age—he is not a Bôdhisattva.'" In another
passage, Buddha recurs to this theme. "A good disciple," he says, "must
accustom himself to think in terms of negation as regards the existence
of all living beings, whereafter it will follow that for him there will
be no living beings to think about."

Section 17 of the Diamond *Sûtra* deals with the subject of faith as
compared with works, and seems to show that faith in Buddha through the
Buddhist Scriptures can also make a man "wise unto salvation" (2 Tim.
iii. 15). It runs as follows: "O Subhûti," said Buddha, "if a good man,
or a good woman, were to give up in the morning as many of his or her
lives (in re-births) as there are sands in the river Ganges, and to do
the same at noonday, and again in the evening, and to continue to do
this every day for an innumerable number of *kalpas*, each of an
innumerable number of years; and if, on the other hand, there should be
one who, having heard this *sûtra*, should yield up his heart to
implicit belief—then the happiness of this last would exceed the
happiness of that other. And much more would this be so if he were to
write out this *sûtra*, hold fast to it himself, and recite and explain
it to others. O Subhûti, let

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

me state its importance. This sûtra has a merit which cannot be
conceived of by thought, and cannot be estimated by weight or
measurement." Towards the end of the *sûtra*, Buddha delivered a
*gâthâ*, or stanza, referring to himself as sharing in the illusory
character of all objective existences:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">If anyone sees me through the medium of form,  
Or seeks me through the medium of sound,  
Such a man is walking in a heterodox path,  
And will not be able to see the Buddha.</span>

</div>

While Kumârajîva was spreading the faith in China, and dictating
commentaries on the sacred books of Buddhism to some eight hundred
priests, the famous traveller, Fa Hsien, was engaged upon his
adventurous journey. On reaching manhood, he had been ordained, and
subsequently proceeded to the capital to make a thorough study of the
Buddhist religion. Finding that there was a lack of material for this
purpose, and full of zeal and faith, he set out in A.D. 399, in company
with several others, on an overland pilgrimage to India, his chief
object being to obtain a complete copy of the Buddhist Canon in the
original tongue. Alone of the party he reached the goal, and spent some
time in India, travelling about to various important Buddhist centres
and generally fulfilling the purposes of his mission. In A.D. 414 he was
back in China, having returned by sea, *via* Ceylon and the Straits of
Malacca, and having landed at the modern Kiaochow in Shantung. He
brought with him a large number of books and sacred relics, all of which
he nearly lost in the Bay of Bengal.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was a
violent gale, and the ship sprang a leak. As he tells us in his own
account of the journey, "he took his pitcher and ewer, with whatever
else he could spare, and threw them into the sea; but he was afraid that
the merchants on board would throw over his books and images, and
accordingly he fixed his whole thoughts upon Kuan-shih-yin, or Kuan Yin,
the Hearer of the Prayers of the World, and prayed to the sainted
priests of his own country, saying, 'Oh that by your awful power you
would turn back the flow of the leak and grant us to reach some
resting-place!'"

Buddhism was now fairly launched, and was gaining a permanent footing in
the country. We already read of Imperial devotees, and of the malign
influence of priests and nuns in the palace; we also read, but need not
believe, that by the year 405, nine people out of every ten had embraced
the faith. Miracles of all kinds became everyday events; for instance,
there was one enthusiastic priest who, in order the more effectively to
impress the public, collected a number of large stones and preached to
them so eloquently that they nodded as it were their heads in approval.

We have now to consider what was happening all this time to the
philosophy of Lao Tzŭ, already degraded from its original speculative
purity by the greed of its professional adherents, who posed as wizards
and extracted money from a confiding public. The introduction of
Buddhism was soon found to affect the receipts of Taoist charlatans to
such an

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

extent that something had to be done to check the ebbing tide of
prosperity. A mere wizard, with a magic sword and a bundle of charms
against devils and diseases, even though the people believed he could
fly or render himself invisible at pleasure, had no chance with a
Buddhist priest, his temple, his ritual, and his promise of a salvation,
understood by the Chinese in the sense of an immortality of happiness
after death. Therefore, in order to compete for public favour upon more
equal terms, the Taoists transformed what had once been a philosophic
cult into an actual religion, by the simple process of borrowing. We
have already noticed an attempt to show that the *Mahâyâna*, or Greater
Vehicle, was derived through the Gnostics from Christianity; it is a
much easier matter to prove that Taoism, as a religion, is little more
than Buddhism under another name. The Taoists took over, almost en bloc,
the ceremonial of the Buddhists, much of which bears an extraordinary
resemblance to the ceremonial of the Roman Catholic Church, though it
can hardly, in view of the relative dates, be said to have been borrowed
therefrom; any borrowing must have been the other way round.

One of the earliest formulas adopted by devout Buddhists, practically
amounting to a creed, was the following statement of faith: "I put my
trust in the Lord Buddha; I put my trust in his Law; I put my trust in
his Church." The *Mahâyâna* school based upon that creed the doctrine of
a Trinity—Buddha, his Law, and his Church, popularly known

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

as the Three Preciosities; and this trio has been further explained as a
Trinity in Unity (see Lecture VIII), the transcendency of which is not
in the least appreciated or understood by the people at large, who
regard the three representative images to be found in Buddhist temples
as three separate deities, to be conciliated by prayer and offerings.

Buddhism has covered China with monasteries, nunneries, and shrines of
varying size and importance. The priests and nuns take vows of celibacy,
and of abstinence from flesh and wine; they shave their heads; they
fast, even on a vegetable diet; they sit daily in meditation. Among
other striking features of Buddhism as seen in China, such as have
suggested a common source with Christian worship, if not actual
borrowing by one religion from the other, may be mentioned the liturgies
chanted by the priests, vestments, midnight masses, prayers for the
dead, altars decorated with flowers and candles, bowls of water as the
emblem of purity set forth in the life and teachings of the Buddha; and
the use of incense, practised, however, before Buddhism was heard of. On
the other hand, there is the ever-recurring statue of Kuan Yin, to whom
we have seen that Fa Hsien prayed in his distress; originally an
incarnation of Buddha, and represented down to the early part of the
twelfth century as a man, but now as a woman holding a baby, the two
bearing a remarkable resemblance to our own pictures of the Virgin and
Child, of which the Chinese figures are thought by some to be a late
copy.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

The copying we have now to consider is that of Taoism in regard to the
instrumental parts of the Buddhist religion. In a word, the Taoists may
be said to have copied almost all the above characteristics of Buddhism.
They built temples and monasteries, and even provided a Trinity,
consisting of Lao Tzŭ, P‘an Ku, and God, but stopping short of any
suggestion of Unity. P‘an Ku was the first being brought into existence
by cosmogonical evolution. He is said to have sprung into life fully
endowed with perfect knowledge, and his function was to set the economy
of the universe in order. He is often depicted as wielding a huge adze,
and engaged in fashioning the world. With his death the details of
creation began. His breath became the wind; his voice, the thunder; his
left eye, the sun; his right eye, the moon; his blood formed rivers; his
hair grew into trees and plants; his flesh became the soil; his sweat
descended as rain; and the parasites which infested his body were the
origin of the human race. Such was the second person of the Taoist
Trinity. The name of the third is made up of *Yü huang* = Jade Ruler,
and *Shang Ti*, which is already familiar to us as an alternative for
*T‘ien* = God. By the images of their Trinity, a Taoist temple is
readily distinguished from a Buddhist temple; there are, of course,
various other characteristics of the two places of worship, but they are
not so obvious to the uninitiated. A Taoist priest does not shave the
whole head; and formerly he was allowed to marry, but since the tenth
century celibacy has been strictly enforced.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

With the annexation by the Taoists of all the more attractive and also
minatory features of Buddhism, such as a heaven for the good and a hell
for the wicked, there began a long struggle for supremacy which lasted
through many centuries before the two faiths—Taoism having become a
religion—could agree to work side by side, as they do now, without
interfering one with the other. Sometimes Taoism flourished, under the
influence of Court favour; at other times, Buddhism would be all the
rage, with Emperor and Empress as its most earnest devotees. One of the
great poets of the fifth century wrote an elaborate eulogy of Buddhism,
perhaps the first of its kind. A statesman and scholar of the same
period objected to Taoism as opposed to the ordinary instincts of
humanity; but he hated Buddhism still more, chiefly because of its
foreign origin. In A.D. 446 he discovered a secret store of arms in a
Buddhist temple, in consequence of which many of the priests were put to
death, their books and images destroyed, and for a time the practice of
this religion was prohibited. The catastrophe would have been greater
but for the action of the heir-apparent, a devout Buddhist, who gave the
priests warning of their danger. The statesman himself was converted to
Taoism by a priest who pretended to have received a revelation from Lao
Tzŭ; the priest was appointed to be the Pope of the Taoist church, and a
magnificent temple was built for his reception.

The institution of the Taoist Papacy—to use a convenient term—is claimed
for the first century A.D.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was at that
date a precocious child, named Chang Tao-ling, who is said to have
mastered the philosophy of Lao Tzŭ by the time he was seven years old.
Declining to take office, he retired to the mountains and devoted
himself to the study of alchemy. On one occasion, he went to the
province of Ssŭch‘uan to drive out troublesome demons, which he would
better have accomplished, according to Lao Tzŭ, by staying at home and
doing nothing. An individual of the same surname, who traces his descent
from this Chang Tao-ling, still holds the title of Pope; and it has
certainly been so held for many centuries, even if it does not go so far
back as is claimed. The functions of the modern Pope are chiefly
confined to blessing and selling charms and amulets, to be used against,
disease and similar machinations of evil spirits. It has never, however,
been this aspect of Taoism which has influenced statesmen and inspired
poets. Taoism has always, since its early degradation, existed under two
forms. There is the Taoism of superstition, with its grafts from
Buddhism, for the masses; and there is the Taoism of speculation and
paradox for the cultured, though sometimes the cultured are even more
under the influence of superstition than are the masses.

In the year A.D. 471 the Emperor under the Northern Wei dynasty—China
was then divided—resigned his throne and devoted himself to Taoism. In
the same year the Emperor of the Liu Sung dynasty spent vast sums in
building a Buddhist monastery, and boasted that he was laying up merit

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

for himself in the next world. A minister is said to have remonstrated,
showing that the people had sold wives and children in order to meet the
charges laid on them, and asking where merit could lie; upon which, the
Emperor repented and caused the monastery to be pulled down. In the year
484 an Imperial prince of the Southern Ch‘i dynasty became an ardent
supporter of Buddhism, and surrounded himself with priests in great
numbers. A learned official endeavoured to persuade him that the whole
scheme of Buddhism was a sham. He argued that Buddha having died, his
spirit could no longer be in existence, spirit being to the body what
sharpness is to a knife; when the knife goes, its sharpness goes with
it. Another official told his wife, who was a firm believer, that he was
going to write an essay proving that there was no such being as Buddha.
"If there is no such being as Buddha," rejoined the lady, tartly, "why
write an essay about him?"

We left Confucianism at the close of the first century, battered but not
bruised by the attacks of Wang Ch‘ung. Taoism was then still more or
less a philosophic cult; Buddhism had as yet made no advance. The
birthplace of Confucius had become a goal for the Confucian pilgrim; a
shrine had been built there, and even Emperors found their way thither,
to do honour to the great Teacher. One of the latter had visited the
spot so early as A.D. 72, and after worshipping Confucius, coupled with
his seventy-two disciples, gave orders that the heir-apparent and all
the Court should devote themselves

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

to a study of the Confucian Canon. Under the reign of the Emperor Ming
Ti, A.D. 227-239, there is an echo of Confucianism, from its religious
side, in an edict which was published after an eclipse of the sun in
A.D. 233, in order to restore public confidence. "We have heard," says
the Emperor, "that if a sovereign is remiss in government, God terrifies
him by calamities and portents. These are divine reprimands sent to
recall him to a sense of duty. Thus, eclipses of the sun and moon are
manifest warnings that the rod of empire is not wielded aright. Ever
since We ascended the throne, Our inability to continue the glorious
traditions of Our departed ancestors and carry on the great work of
civilization has now culminated in a warning message from on high. It
therefore behoves Us to issue commands for personal reformation, in
order to avert impending calamity. The relationship, however, between
God and man is that of father and son; and a father, about to chastise
his son, would not be deterred were the latter to present him with a
dish of meat. We do not therefore consider it a part of Our duty to act
in accordance with certain memorials advising that the Grand Astrologer
be instructed to offer up sacrifices on this occasion. Do ye governors
of districts, and other high officers of State, seek rather to rectify
your own hearts; and if anyone can devise means to make up for Our
shortcomings, let him submit his proposals to the throne."

The enlightened Emperor who penned these lines was ruler of one of the
Three Kingdoms, founded by

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

his grandfather, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, the famous general, who, like many other
founders of houses in China, never mounted the throne. The grandson was
a handsome man, and when he stood up his beard touched the ground; but
he is interesting to us for a very different reason. Under his reign,
women were for the first time admitted to official life, and several
actually rose to important posts. The experiment was tried again in the
eighth century, but was soon given up. His father, who was the first
actual sovereign of the dynasty, was an ardent Taoist. He used to preach
to his Court on the doctrines of Lao Tzŭ, and always became very angry
with any official who either stretched himself, yawned, or expectorated.
At the same time, he was careful to see that the Confucian shrine, which
showed signs of decay, was put into proper repair. Throughout the long
history of China it is noticeable that Confucianism, though faced by
more attractive rivals, never quite loses its hold. Many Emperors
indulged freely in heterodox teachings, so far as their more private
life was concerned; but except in one notable instance, to which we
shall come by and by, they seem to have felt that Confucius had a
backing of the nation's intellect and scholarship which it would not do
to ignore.

In A.D. 505 the first Confucian temple, as we now understand the term,
was built and dedicated. Images of Confucius were then introduced into
the temple, some say for the first time; others hold that in A.D. 178 a
likeness of Confucius had been placed in his shrine, as a substitute for
the wooden tablet

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

in use up to that date. Although it is correct to distinguish between
the earlier shrine and the more elaborate temple which we are now about
to consider, there is no doubt that the shrine played an important part
in keeping alive the Confucian tradition. So far back as A.D. 267, an
Emperor decreed that the sacrifice of a pig, a sheep, and an ox should
be offered to Confucius at each of the four seasons. Rules were also
drawn up about A.D. 430 for regulating the ceremonies to be performed.
Gradually, the people came to look upon Confucius as a god to be
propitiated for the sake of worldly advantages; and in A.D. 472 it
became necessary to issue an edict forbidding women to frequent the
shrine for the purpose of praying for children.

About A.D. 555 it was enacted that a Confucian temple should be built in
every prefectural city in the empire. Various changes were made from
time to time in the internal arrangements of the building. Some of the
ancient sages who were admitted to share in the honours accorded to
their Master, appeared in the shape of wooden figures; the portraits of
others were painted on the walls. In the year 960 the wooden figures
were abolished, and clay images were substituted. These were in turn
replaced, in the year 1530, by simple wooden tablets. At another period,
the numbers of the musicians and dancers were altered; and so on. It
will here be convenient, perhaps, to bring the story of the Confucian
temple, with all its important bearings upon national life and religion,
down to the present day.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

In the early shrines, the only image was that of Confucius; but when the
order was given for the general erection of Confucian temples, that of
Yen Hui was added. He was emphatically the disciple whom Confucius
loved. He would listen with what appeared to be stolid indifference to
his Master's teachings, and then he would go away and strive to put into
practice the principles he had learned. He is still affectionately
remembered by his countrymen, although Ssŭ-ma Ch‘ien, the historian,
attributes his splendid reputation chiefly to his close connexion with
Confucius, quaintly likening him to a fly which travels far and fast by
clinging to the tail of a courser. By degrees, batches of disciples and
other worthies were admitted to the honours of the temple, until the
number of tablets was considerably enlarged. The first Manchu Emperors,
who were throughout among the warmest supporters of Confucianism, made
it their business to see that a temple was established in every
prefecture, district city, and market town all over the empire. The
tablets were rearranged, and a revised ceremonial was introduced. At the
present day, we find the tablet of Confucius in a hall at the north end
of the temple, facing south. It had always been placed on the east side
down to the eighth century, the south-facing position being that of an
Emperor on his throne; but from that date Confucius was recognized as
the peer of Emperors. To the right and left of his tablet are the
tablets of the Four Associates, of whom Yen Hui is the first and Mencius
is the fourth. The second and third

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

are, respectively, Tsêng Ts‘an, the author of the "Classic of Filial
Piety" and reputed author of the "Great Learning," one of the Four
Books, and Tzŭ Ssŭ, the grandson of Confucius, author of the "Doctrine
of the Mean," which, with the Confucian Analects and the works of
Mencius, completes the tale of the Four Books, the first division of the
Confucian Canon. Then come the tablets of the Twelve Sages, which number
might have for us a suggestive ring, particularly when taken in
conjunction with the Four Associates. Unfortunately for those who love
to draw hasty parallels, of the Four Associates only three could
possibly be regarded as Evangelists in the sense of spreading the Gospel
by their writings; and of the Twelve Sages only eleven had actually been
intimate disciples, the twelfth being the philosopher Chu Fu Tzŭ, of the
twelfth century A.D.

Besides the above, space has to be allotted to the tablets of the
ancestors of Confucius for five generations; also for the tablets of
seventy-nine of the most prominent worthies of past ages, including all
other known disciples of Confucius beyond those already mentioned. Then
comes a contingent of sixty to seventy tablets, representing great
Confucian scholars of all dynasties, every one of whom, as a condition
of admission, must have contributed largely to the elucidation and
support of Confucian doctrine. Altogether, there are about one hundred
and seventy tablets, inscribed with the name of each individual and his
rank in the temple. Admission to the national Walhalla, the honour of
which has always

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

been much coveted by the families of deceased Confucianists, does not
always confer that permanent place with posterity which it might be
supposed would be the case. The Chinese, always noted for an especially
practical turn of mind, have reserved to themselves the right to revise
the decisions of their ancestors in regard to the merit of all those
whose tablets stand in the temple. They feel that a popular impulse,
justifiable at the moment, a personal intrigue, or Court favour, may
sometimes have succeeded in giving a man more than was his due; it then
remains to secure the removal of such a tablet, and to substitute that
of a worthier representative. A tablet, however, which has once been
removed is under no disability; it may be restored at a later date. This
perhaps is the least satisfactory feature of all, aggravating rather
than otherwise the instability of the institution. For instance, a
Confucianist, named Fan Ning, was ranked in A.D. 647 among the
Associates, but under the next reign he was reduced to the position of
Scholar. In 1530 his tablet was removed from the temple; in 1724 it was
replaced. Still, there are many instances in which the prerogative has
been justly used; and it seems desirable that before very long some such
system should be tentatively applied to the monuments in Westminster
Abbey and other injudiciously crowded shrines.

The worship in the Confucian temple is celebrated twice a year, in
spring and in autumn. In the provinces, the official who performs the
ceremony is the chief civil authority. He is accompanied by the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

general body of civil and military officers, by a band of musicians, and
by thirty-six dancers. On the morning of the worship, the tables and
altars are covered with offerings which have been prepared the day
before. In front of the tablet of Confucius is an altar on which stand
an incense-burner and two large lighted candles. A table before this
altar is spread with bowls of grain, cups of wine, etc.; and on the east
and west sides are tables furnished with vessels containing various
articles of food. In the middle of the hall a roll of white silk is laid
out, and before it are the three victims, an ox, with a sheep on one
side and a pig on the other. Similar offerings, but fewer in number and
in all cases without the ox, are set out in front of the other tablets.
The official who is to preside as chief worshipper is supposed to have
fasted and purified himself by ablution during the three preceding days.
He arrives at the temple before daylight, and assumes his Court dress.
Under the guidance of the master of the ceremonies, he takes up a
position at the head of his civilian colleagues on the east side of the
hall, the military officials being stationed on the west side. The
service begins with music and a hymn, after which the chief worshipper
ascends to the tablet of Confucius, where he kneels, strikes the ground
with his head, and offers incense on the altar. He then resumes his
place, but only to ascend and descend twice more with the same
ceremonial. During the intervals there is music, and dancers perform
slow-time and dignified evolutions. The spirit of Confucius

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

is supposed to arrive and take part in the ceremony so soon as the music
begins. The first hymn is called "Receiving the Spirit," and is sung
very slowly and reverently, as befitting such a tremendous occasion.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Mighty art thou, O Confucius,  
Perceiver of the future, endowed with foreknowledge,  
Compeer of God our father, and of Earth our mother,  
Teacher of the myriad ages,  
Auspicious fulfilment of the skein on the *lin*,  
Thy voice has a music of metal and silk,  
By thy aid the sun and moon run their courses,  
And the stability of the universe is preserved.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The *lin* is a
fabulous animal which appeared to the mother of Confucius before the
latter's birth. She tied a skein of silk round its horn; and when, just
before the death of Confucius, the animal appeared again, the skein was
still attached to the horn. This was the "fulfilment" mentioned in the
hymn.

By the second century B.C. the old music, of which Confucius speaks, was
gone, and had been replaced by a system brought from the Greek kingdom
of Bactria about the year 126 B.C. The music of the Confucian age,
scores and instruments alike, perished at the Burning of the Books, and
we read that in the first part of the second century B.C. the hereditary
Grand Music-Master was altogether ignorant of his art. The extraordinary
similarities between the Chinese and Pythagorean systems of music place
it beyond a doubt that one must have been derived from the other. The
early Jesuit fathers declared that the ancient Greeks borrowed their
music from the Chinese; but we know that the music in question

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

did not exist in China until two centuries after its appearance in
Greece.

As to the dances, the movements of which are very like those of the
minuet, they seem to be of purely native origin. In the commentary to
the History of the Later Han dynasty, which covered the first two
centuries of the Christian era, we are told that "the origin of these
dances is not known, but that they were formerly used in the worship of
God." The dance is essentially a step-dance, and not mere posturing as
some have thought; it may be compared with the Greek ὄρχησις, which was
not only rhythmical but also pantomimic in character, though there is no
suggestion that these dances came with the music from Greece. The
ancient official dance of China was performed altogether without
accessories. A short poem of perhaps sixteen words having been chosen,
two performers, dressed in the now old-fashioned robe of the graduate
and accompanied by music, would proceed to illustrate these words,
expressing each individual word by a figure (as in a quadrille) of eight
separate movements. Thus, the number of figures to a dance would depend
upon the number of words in the poem. The dances are usually performed,
at the present day, by eight pairs of dancers, each of whom holds in his
left hand a flute, and in his right hand a triple pheasant's feather.
This arrangement was supposed to be in accordance with a verse in the
Odes; but, unfortunately, it is now certain that the word which has been
understood to mean "pheasant's feather" really means "flute."

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus, instead of
having a flute in one hand and in the other a feather, the latter of
which would effectually prevent the dancer from playing upon the former,
we find that the dancer was really provided with a flute for each hand;
in other words, a double flute like that of the Greeks, which was played
with both hands, the treble half being held in the left hand, the bass
in the right.

Such is the Confucian temple, the worship in which has been conducted
upon much the same lines for the past fourteen hundred years. An inner
meaning is attributed to the various accessories at which we have merely
glanced. The roll of white silk is an emblem of purity; the ox, of
stability; the pig, of determination—a symbolism gathered somehow from
its bristles; the sheep represents food and clothing; and the incense
suggests virtue, fragrance being always associated with good deeds and a
good reputation. The composition of the sacrifice—an ox between a sheep
and a pig—is noteworthy, if nothing more, for its identity with the
*suovetaurilia* of the Romans, a sacrifice offered at lustrations.

We left Buddhism and Taoism, both flourishing, in the fifth and sixth
centuries, and now, before picking up again the chronological thread, it
will be convenient to introduce brief notices of several foreign
religions, the majority of which enjoyed but a meteor-like existence,
leaving only one to survive to the present day. The first of these was
the religion of Zoroaster, whose idea of the resurrection glorified
man's body as his eternal companion. It is known

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

as Mazdaism, and was imported from Persia into China towards the close
of the sixth or beginning of the seventh century. As a term for God, the
early Mazdæans adopted a character, pronounced *Hsien*, already in use
in China with that same signification. They were permitted to build
temples, and these are mentioned in Chinese records as having been
erected at the capital during the seventh century. The Chinese, however,
do not seem to have been much attracted by fire-worship; and, moreover,
it was not long before there were two other rivals in the field.

The Christian schism of Manichæus, which had once been a form of faith
dear to St Augustine, enjoyed perhaps a better chance than Mazdaism. Its
dualistic theology, in which Satan is represented as co-eternal with
God, bore at least sufficient resemblance to the dual system of the
positive and negative principles to arrest the attention of the Chinese;
and this resemblance seems to have been exploited by the Manichæan
missionaries, who preached in China during the seventh century, and
during the eighth century had temples at several important centres of
population, but were finally suppressed in 843. Our interest in
Manichæism has been greatly stimulated in recent days by the discovery
of a Manichæan treatise in Chinese, unfortunately of uncertain date.
This document was brought by Professor Pelliot from the Caves of the
Thousand Buddhas at Tun-huang, in the province of Kansuh, where it had
been bricked up for many centuries. From it we gain some interesting
information. Not only is it like in form

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

to a Buddhist *sûtra*, but it is tinged here and there with traces of
Buddhist thought, reminding us how the Buddhists themselves, when they
first sought to convert Japan, were careful to begin by canonizing
various Shinto or native gods, in order to impart an air of familiarity
to the new religion. Taoist influence may also be traced. The opening
words, but apparently not very many of them, are lost; we start,
however, with a complete question put by a personage who has been
identified with Addas, mentioned in the *Acta Archelai* as the apostle
of Manichæism in the East, and answered by Manichæus himself. "Is the
original nature of the carnal body," asks Addas, "single or double?" By
"double" the questioner seems to refer to the subdivision of the soul
into light and dark, the dualism which I have just said was part of the
Manichæan system. To this, Manichæus, here called the Envoy of Light,
began his reply in the very words of Buddha in the Diamond *Sûtra*, the
Chinese characters being the same in both cases, "Good indeed! Good
indeed! In order to benefit the innumerable crowds of living beings, you
have addressed to me this query, profound and mysterious. You thus show
yourself a good friend to all those living beings of the world who have
blindly gone astray, and I will now explain the matter to you in detail,
so that the net of doubt in which you are ensnared may be broken for
ever without recall. Know, then, that before this world was created, two
Envoys of Light, namely, the Holy Ghost and the Good Mother of Life,
entered into

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

the dark abyss of the sunless land, from which they returned victorious,
clad in the cuirass of knowledge of the five divisions of bright bodies
(the five elements), which they skilfully used to help themselves to get
out of the five abysses. The five classes of demons clung to the five
elements, as flies cling to honey, like birds caught by bird-lime, or
like fishes which have swallowed the hook. Therefore, the Holy Ghost,
the Envoy of Light, took the five classes of demons and the five
elements, and combining the powers of these in due relation one to the
other, made the ten heavens and eight earths of the universe. Thus, the
universe is, for the five elements, a druggery where they may be cured,
and for the demons, a prison where they may be kept under restraint."

Manichæus goes on to show that the five elements became, as it were, the
prison in which the demons were confined—good and evil in a state of
almost chemical union, wherein the traces of each component part are
obliterated. The governors of the prison are the five sons of the Holy
Ghost, who are expressed by such abstractions as cogitation,
intelligence, reflection, thought, arid apprehension. Satan then comes
upon the scene; and "when he saw these things, he once more conceived in
his poisonous heart a wicked scheme. He ordered two demons, a male and a
female, to take upon themselves the likenesses of the Holy Ghost and of
the Good Mother, and then to create by magic the body of a man, in
imitation of the material universe. Thus, the carnal

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

body, tainted with the poison of evil passions, although on a tiny
scale, yet reproduced in itself every single feature of heaven and
earth. . . . Just as when a goldsmith copies the form of an elephant,
drawing it inside a finger-ring, and neither adding to it nor taking
away from it, so was man made in the exact likeness of the universe."
Further, in revenge for the treatment of the demons by the Holy Ghost,
Satan conceived another wicked and poisonous plan. He shut up the five
bright natures in the carnal body, of which he fashioned a small
universe, and so put an end to their independence of action. He also
planted five trees of death, in order to disturb as much as possible the
original human nature. "Thus, the tree of dark cogitation springs up
within the barrier of the bones; its fruit is resentment. The tree of
dark intelligence springs up within the barrier of the muscles; its
fruit is anger. The tree of dark reflection springs up within the
barrier of the veins; its fruit is licentiousness. The tree of dark
thought springs up within the barrier of the flesh; its fruit is rage.
The tree of dark apprehension springs up within the barrier of the skin;
its fruit is folly."

Again, we read that "the Holy Ghost had constructed two bright ships to
transport good men over the sea of life and death, back to their
original home (with God), so that their brilliantly lighted natures
should find peace and happiness at last. When Satan saw this, his mind
was at once filled with anger and jealousy; and he proceeded to make

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

two forms, one male and the other female, after the fashion of the two
great bright ships which are the sun and moon, in order to introduce
disturbance and confusion into the bright nature of man." The two forms
thus constructed by Satan became, as it were, two dark ships, in
contrast with the bright ships of the Holy Ghost, and carried their
freight of bright human nature into hell, where all sorts of torments
were suffered, and from which it was difficult to obtain deliverance.
Then, when there comes into the world some Envoy of Light, such as one
of the predecessors of Manichæus, who desires to instruct and reform
mankind, in order to deliver them from suffering, he begins, we are
told, "by causing the sound of the beautiful Word to pass through the
portal of the ear; after which he enters into the abodes of false
religions, <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) and, relying upon the
virtue of spiritual invocation, chains up the crowd of venomous serpents
and evil beasts, and no more allows them independence and freedom.
Further, armed with the axe of wisdom, he cuts down the poisonous trees,
tearing up their very roots, together with all kinds of foul
vegetation."

Enough has been said, perhaps, to give an idea of the shape in which
Manichæan Christianity was presented to the Chinese people, often
confused by them with Mazdaism, the fire-worshipping religion of
Zoroaster. As has been already stated, we do not possess the opening
words of this treatise, and cannot therefore say if they coincide with
the conventional

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

words with which a Buddhist *sûtra* begins; but we may fairly infer that
such was the case, partly from the remarkable imitation of Buddhist
phraseology throughout, and also from the closing sentence, the Chinese
text of which, *mutatis mutandis*, might well be interchanged with that
of the Diamond Sûtra:

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="45%"><p><em>Diamond Sûtra</em></p>
<p>When Buddha had delivered this <em>sûtra</em>, all the monks and nuns, lay-brothers and lay-sisters, together with all the <em>dêvas</em> and demons in the universe, having heard Buddha's words, rejoiced with one accord, and accepting them with faith, proceeded to put them into practice.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="10%"><p><em> </em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="45%"><p><em>Manichæan Treatise</em></p>
<p>Then, all the members of the great assembly, having heard this <em>sûtra</em>, accepted it with faith and rejoicing, and proceeded to put it into practice.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[194:1](cair08.htm#fr_7) Kindly suggested by
Prof. A. A. Bevan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture VII. A.D. 600-1000](cair09)
