[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m18003) 
[Next](m18005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**4**

Vaishampayana said, "King Yudhishthira, thus praised by the gods, the
Maruts and the Rishis, proceeded to that place where those foremost ones
of Kuru’s race were. He beheld Govinda endued with his Brahma-form. It
resembled that form of his which had been seen before and which,
therefore, helped the recognition. Blazing forth in that form of his, he
was adorned with celestial weapons, such as the terrible discus and
others in their respective embodied forms. He was being adored by the
heroic Phalguna, who also was endued with a blazing effulgence. The son
of Kunti beheld the slayer of Madhu also in his own form. Those two
foremost of Beings, adored by all the gods, beholding Yudhishthira,
received him with proper honours.

"In another place, the delighter of the Kurus beheld Karna, that
foremost one among all wielders of weapons, resembling a dozen Suryas in
splendour. In another part he beheld Bhimasena of great puissance,
sitting in the midst of the Maruts, and endued with a blazing form. He
was sitting by the side of the God of Wind in his embodied form. Indeed,
he was then in a celestial form endued with great beauty, and had
attained to the highest success. In place belonging to the Ashvinis, the
delighter of the Kurus beheld Nakula and Sahadeva, each blazing with his
own effulgence.

"He also beheld the princess of Pancala, decked in garlands of lotuses.
Having attained to Heaven, she was sitting there, endued with a form
possessed of solar splendour. King Yudhishthira suddenly wished to
question her. Then the illustrious Indra, the chief of the gods, spoke
to him, ‘This one is Sree herself. It was for your sake that she took
birth, as the daughter of Drupada, among human beings, issuing not from
any mother’s womb, O Yudhishthira, endued with agreeable perfume and
capable of delighting the whole world. For your pleasure, she was
created by the wielder of the trident. She was born in the race of
Drupada and was enjoyed by you all. These five highly blessed Gandharvas
endued with the effulgence of fire, and possessed of great energy, were,
O king, the sons of Draupadi and yourself.

"Behold Dhritarashtra, the king of the Gandharvas, possessed of great
wisdom. Know that this one was the eldest brother of thy sire. This one
is thy eldest brother, the son of Kunti, endued with effulgence of fire.
The son of Surya, thy eldest brother, the foremost of men, even this one
was known as the son of Radha. He moves in the company of Surya. Behold
this foremost of Beings. Among the tribes of the Saddhyas, the gods, the
Viswedevas, and the Maruts, behold, O king of kings, the mighty
car-warriors of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, viz., those heroes having
Satyaki for their first, and those mighty ones among the Bhojas. Behold
the son of Subhadra, invincible in battle, now staying with Soma. Even
he is the mighty bowman Abhimanyu, now endued with the gentle effulgence
of the great luminary of the night. Here is the mighty bowman Pandu, now
united with Kunti and Madri. Thy sire frequently comes to me on his
excellent car. Behold the royal Bhishma, the son of Santanu, now in the
midst of the Vasus. Know that this one by the side of Brihaspati is thy
preceptor Drona. These and other kings, O son of Pandu, who had warred
on thy side now walk with the Gandharvas or Yakshas or other sacred
beings. Some have attained to the status of Guhyakas, O king. Having
cast off their bodies, they have conquered Heaven by the merit they had
acquired through word, thought and deed.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](m18005)
