[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hml07)  [Next](hml09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859580017/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# CHAPTER IV: THE COMPASSION OF CONSTANTINE

### Youth of Constantine

CONSTANTINE THE GREAT was the eldest son of the Roman Emperor
Constantius and the British Princess Helena, or Elena, and was brought
up as a devout worshipper of the many gods of Rome. The lad grew up
strong and handsome, of a tall and majestic figure, skilled in all
warlike exercises, and, as he fought in the civil wars between the
various Roman emperors, he showed himself a bold and prudent general in
battle, a friendly and popular leader in time of peace. The popularity
of the youthful Constantine was dangerous to him, and he needed, and
showed, great skill in evading the deadly jealousy of the old Emperor
Diocletian, and the hatred of his father's rival, Galerius. At last,
however, his position became so dangerous that Constantius felt his
son's life was no longer safe, and earnestly begged him to visit his
native land of Britain, where Constantius had just been proclaimed
emperor and had defeated the wild Caledonians. The excuse given was that
Constantius was in bad health and needed his son; but not until the
young man was actually in Britain would his anxious father avow that he
feared for his son's life.

### Acclaimed Emperor

When the half-British Constantius died, Constantine, who was the
favourite of the Roman soldiery of the west, was at once acclaimed as
emperor by his devoted troops. He professed unwillingness to accept the
honour, and it is said that he even tried in vain to escape on horseback
from the affectionate solicitations of his soldiers. Seeing the
uselessness of further protest,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> accepted the
imperial title, and wrote to Galerius claiming the throne and justifying
his acceptance of the unsought dignity thrust upon him. Galerius
acquiesced in the inevitable, and granted Constantine the inferior title
of "Cæsar," with rule over Western Europe, and the wise prince was
content to wait until favouring circumstances should destroy his rivals
and give him that sole sway over the Roman Empire for which he was so
well fitted. He had now reached the age of thirty, had fought valiantly
in the wars in Egypt and Persia, and had risen by merit to the rank of
tribune. His marriage with Fausta, the daughter of the Emperor Maximian,
and his elevation to the rank of Augustus brought him nearer to the
attainment of his ambition; and at length the defeat and death of his
rivals placed him at the head of the world-wide empire of Rome. It is to
some period previous to Constantine's elevation to the supreme authority
that we must refer the following story, told by Gower in his "Confessio
Amantis" as an example of that true charity which is the mother of pity,
and makes a man's heart so tender that,

"Though he might himself relieve,  
Yet he would not another grieve,"

but in order to give pleasure to others would bear his own trouble
alone.

### Becomes a Leper

The noble Constantine, Emperor of Rome, was in the full flower of his
age, goodly to look upon, strong and happy, when a great and sudden
affliction came upon him: leprosy attacked him. The horrible disease
showed itself first in his face, so that no concealment was possible,
and if he had not been the emperor

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

he would have been driven out to live in the forests and wilds. The
leprosy spread from his face till it entirely covered his body, and
became so bad that he could no longer ride out or show himself to his
people. When all cures had been tried and had failed, Constantine
withdrew himself from his lords, gave up all use of arms, abandoned his
imperial duties, and shut himself in his palace, where he lived such a
secluded life in his own apartments that Rome had, as it were, no lord,
and all men throughout the empire talked of his illness and prayed their
gods to heal him. When everything seemed to be in vain, Constantine
yielded to the prayer of his council, that he would summon all the
doctors, learned men, and physicians from every realm to Rome, that they
might consider his illness and try if any cure could be found for his
malady.

### Rewards Offered for his Cure

A proclamation went forth throughout the world and great rewards were
offered to any man who should heal the emperor. Tempted by the rewards
and the great fame to be won, there came leeches and physicians from
Persia and Arabia, and from every land that owned the sway of Rome,
philosophers from Greece and Egypt, and magicians and sorcerers from the
unexplored desert of the east. But, though Constantine tried all the
remedies suggested or recommended by the wise men, his leprosy grew no
better, but rather worse, and even magic could give him no help.

Again the learned men assembled and consulted what they should advise,
for all were loath to abandon the emperor in his great distress, but
they were all at a loss. They sat in silence, till at last one very old
and very wise man, a great physician from Arabia, arose and said:

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### A Desperate Remedy

"Now that all else has failed, and naught is of any avail, I will tell
of a remedy of which I have heard. It will, I believe, certainly cure
our beloved emperor, but it is very terrible, and therefore I was loath
to name it till every other means had been tried and failed, for it is a
cruel thing for any man to do. Let the Emperor dip himself in a full
bath of the blood of infants and children, seven years old or under, and
he shall be healed, and his leprosy shall fall from him; for this malady
is not natural to his body, and it demands an unnatural cure."

### Constantine Assents Regretfully

The proposal was a terrible one to the assembly, and many would not
agree to it at first, but when they considered that nothing else would
heal the emperor they at length gave way, and sent two from among
themselves to bring the news to Constantine, who was waiting for them in
his darkened room. He was horrified when he heard the counsel they
brought, and at first utterly refused to carry out so evil a plan; but
because his life was very dear to his people, and because he felt that
he had a great work to do in the world, he ultimately agreed, with many
tears, to try the terrible remedy.

### A Cruel Proclamation

Thereupon the council drew up letters, under the emperor's hand and
seal, and sent them out to all the world, bidding all mothers with
children of seven years of age or under to bring them with speed to
Rome, that there the blood of the innocents might prove healing to the
emperor's malady. Alas! what weeping and

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

wailing there was among the mothers when they heard this cruel decree!
How they cried, and clasped their babes to their breasts, and how they
called Constantine more cruel than Herod, who killed the Holy Innocents!
The; eastern ruler, they said, slew only the infants of one poor
village, but their emperor, more ruthless, claimed the lives of all the
young children of his whole empire.

### Constantine is Conscience-stricken

But though the mothers lamented bitterly, they must needs bow to the
emperor's decree, whether they were lief or loath, and thus a great
multitude gathered in the great courtyard of the imperial palace at
Rome: women nursing sucking-babes at the breast, or holding toddling
infants by the hand, or with little children running by their sides, and
all so heart-broken and woebegone that many swooned for very grief. The
mothers wailed aloud, the children cried, and the tumult grew until
Constantine heard it, where he sat lonely and wretched in his darkened
room. He looked out of his window on the mournful sight in the
courtyard, and was roused as from a trance, saying to himself: "O Divine
Providence, who hast formed all men alike, to! the poor man is born,
lives, suffers, and dies, just as does the rich; to wise man and fool
alike come sickness and health; and no man may avoid that fortune which
Nature's law hath ordained for him. Likewise to all men are Nature's
gifts of strength and beauty, of soul and reason, freely and fully
given, so that the poor child is born as capable of virtue as the king's
son; and to each man is given free will to choose virtue or vice. Yet
thou givest to men diversity of rank, wealth or poverty, lordship or
servitude, not always according to their deserts; so much the more

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

virtuous should that man be to whom thou hast put other men in
subjection, men who are nevertheless his fellows and wear his likeness.
Thou, O God, who hast put Nature and the whole universe under law,
wouldst have all men rule themselves by law, and thou hast said that a
man must do to others such things as he would have done to himself."

### His Noble Resolve

Thus Constantine spoke within himself as he stood by the window and
looked upon the weeping mothers and children, the very sentinels of his
palace pitying them, and trying in vain to comfort them; and a strife
grew strong within him between his natural longing for healing and
deliverance from this loathsome disease which had darkened his life, and
the pity he felt for these poor creatures, and his horror at the thought
of so much human blood to be shed for himself alone. The great moaning
of the woeful mothers came to him, and the pitiful crying of the
children, and he thought: "What am I that my health is to outweigh the
lives and happiness of so many of my people? Is my life of more value to
the world than those of all the children who must shed their blood for
my healing? Surely each babe is as precious as Constantine the Emperor!"
Thus his heart grew so tender and so full of compassion that he chose
rather to die by this terrible sickness than to commit so great a
slaughter of innocent children, and he renounced all other physicians,
and trusted himself wholly to God's care.

### He Announces his Determination

He at once summoned his council, and announced to them his resolution,
giving as his reason, "He that will be truly master must be ever servant
to pity!"

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and without delay the anxious mothers were told that their children were
free and safe, for the emperor had renounced the cure, and needed their
blood no longer. What raptures of rejoicing there were, what outpouring
of blessing on the emperor, what songs of praise and thanks from the
women wild with joy, cannot be fully told; and yet greater grew their
joy and thankfulness when Constantine, calling his high officials, bade
them take all his gathered treasures and distribute them among the poor
women, that they might feed and clothe their children, and so return
home untouched by any loss, and recompensed in some degree for their
sufferings. Thus did Constantine obey the behests of pity, and try to
atone for the wrong to which he had consented in his heart, and which he
had so nearly done to his people.

### The Victims Sent Home Happy

Home to all parts of the Roman Empire went the women, bearing with them
their happy children, and the rich gifts they had received. Each one
thanked and blessed the emperor, and sang his praises, where before she
had passed with tears and bitter curses on his head; each woman shared
her joy with her neighbours; and the very children learnt from their
mothers and fathers to pray for the healing of their great lord, who had
given up his own will and sacrificed his own cure for gentle pity's
sake. Thus the whole world prayed for Constantine's healing.

### A Vision

Lo! it never yet was known that charity went unrequited and this
Constantine now learnt in his own glad experience; for that same night,
as he lay asleep, God sent to him a vision of two strangers, men of

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

noble face and form, whom he reverenced greatly, and who said to him: "O
Constantine, because thou hast obeyed the voice of pity, thou hast
deserved pity; therefore shalt thou find such mercy, that God, in His
great pity, will save thee. Double healing shalt thou receive, first for
thy body, and next for thy woeful soul; both alike shall be made whole.
And that thou mayst not despair, God will grant thee a sign--thy leprosy
shall not increase till thou hast sent to Mount Celion, to Sylvester and
all his clergy. There they dwell in secret for dread of thee, who hast
been a foe to the law of Christ, and hast destroyed those who preach in
His Holy Name. Now thou hast appeased God somewhat by thy good deed,
since thou hast had pity on the innocent blood, and hast spared it; for
this thou shalt find teaching, from Sylvester, to the salvation of both
body and soul. Thou wilt need no other leech." The emperor, who had
listened with eagerness and awe, now spoke: "Great thanks I owe to you,
my lords, and I will indeed do as ye have said; but one thing I would
pray you--what shall I tell Sylvester of the name or estate of those who
send me to him?" The two strangers said: "We are the Apostles Peter and
Paul, who endured death here in thy city of Rome for the Holy Name of
Christ, and we bid Sylvester teach and baptize thee into the true faith.
So shall the Roman Empire become the kingdom of the Lord and of His
Christ." So saying, they blessed him, and passed into the heavens out of
his sight, and Constantine awoke from his slumber and knew that he had
seen a vision. He called aloud eagerly, and his servants waiting in an
outer room ran in to him quickly, for there was urgency in his voice. To
them Constantine told his vision and the command which was laid upon
him.

 

<span id="img_07000"></span>

[![They filled the great vessel of silver with pure
water](tn/07000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07000.jpg)  
They filled the great vessel of silver with pure water  

<span id="img_07100"></span>

[![''Havelok sat up surprised''](tn/07100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07100.jpg)  
''Havelok sat up surprised''  

 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### Sylvester Summoned

Messengers rode in hot haste to Mount Celion, and inquired long and
anxiously for Sylvester. At last they found him, a holy and venerable
man, and summoned him, saying: "The Emperor calls for thee come,
therefore, at once." Sylvester's clergy were greatly affrighted, not
knowing what this summons might mean, and dreading the death of their
dear bishop and master; but he went forth gladly, not knowing to what
fate he was going. When he was brought to the palace the emperor greeted
him kindly, and told him all his dream, and the command of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, and ended with these words: "Now I have done as the
vision bade, and have fetched thee here: tell me, I pray, the glad
tidings which shall bring healing to my body and soul." When Sylvester
heard this speech he was filled with joy and wonder, and thanked God for
the vision He had sent to the emperor, and then he began to preach to
him the Christian faith: he told of the Fall of Man, and the redemption
of the world by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, of the
Ascension of Jesus and His return at the Day of Judgment, of the justice
of God, who will judge all men impartially according to their works,
good or bad, and of the life of joy or misery to come. As Sylvester
taught, the monarch listened and believed, and, when the tale was ended,
announced his conversion to the true faith, and said he was ready, with
his whole heart and soul, to be baptized.

### Constantine Baptized

At the emperor's command, they took the great vessel of silver which had
been made for the children's blood, and Sylvester bade them fill it with
pure water

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

from the well. When that was done with all haste, he bade Constantine
stand therein, so that the water reached to his chin. As the holy rite
began, a great light like the sun's rays shone from heaven into the
place, and upon Constantine; and as the sacred words were being read
there fell now and again from his body scales like those of a fish, till
there was nothing left of his horrible disease; and thus in baptism
Constantine was purified in body and soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Havelok the Dane](hml09)
