[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hml16)  [Next](hml18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859580017/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

# CHAPTER XIII: THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAYNE

### Introduction

THE heroes of chivalry, from Roland the noble paladin to Spenser's
Red-Cross Knight, have many virtues to uphold, and their characteristics
are as varied as are the races which adopted chivalry and embodied it in
their hero-myths. It is a far cry from the loyalty of Roland, in which
love for his emperor is the predominant characteristic, to the tender
and graceful reverence of Sir Calidore; but mediæval Wales, which has
preserved the Arthurian legend most free from alien admixture, had a
knight of courtesy quite equal to Sir Calidore. Courage was one quality
on the possession of which these mediæval knights never prided
themselves, because they could not imagine life without courage, but
gentle courtesy was, unhappily, rare, and many a heroic legend is spoilt
by the insolence of the hero to people of lower rank. Again, the legends
often look lightly on the ill-treatment of maidens; yet the true hero is
one who is never tempted to injure a defenceless woman. Similarly, a
broken oath to a heathen or mere churl is excused as a trifling matter,
but the ideal hero sweareth and breaketh not, though it be to his own
hindrance.

### Sir Gawayne

The true Knight of Courtesy is Sir Gawayne, King Arthur's nephew, who in
many ways overshadows his more illustrious uncle. It is remarkable that
the King Arthur of the mediæval romances is either a mere ordinary
conqueror or a secondary figure set in the background to heighten the
achievements of his more warlike followers. The latter is the conception
of

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arthur which we
find in this legend of the gentle and courteous Sir Gawayne.

### King Arthur Keeps Christmas

One year the noble King Arthur was keeping his Christmas at Carlisle
with great pomp and state. By his side sat his lovely Queen Guenever,
the brightest and most beauteous bride that a king ever wedded, and
about him were gathered the Knights of the Round Table. Never had a king
assembled so goodly a company of valiant warriors as now sat in due
order at the Round Table in the great hall of Carlisle Castle, and King
Arthur's heart was filled with pride as he looked on his heroes. There
sat Sir Lancelot, not yet the betrayer of his lord's honour and
happiness, with Sir Bors and Sir Banier, there Sir Bedivere, loyal to
King Arthur till death, there surly Sir Kay, the churlish steward of the
king's household, and King Arthur's nephews, the young and gallant Sir
Gareth, the gentle and courteous Sir Gawayne, and the false, gloomy Sir
Mordred, who wrought King Arthur's overthrow. The knights and ladies
were ranged in their fitting degrees and ranks, the servants and pages
waited and carved and filled the golden goblets, and the minstrels sang
to their harps lays of heroes of the olden time.

### His Discontent

Yet in the midst of all this splendour the king was ill at ease, for he
was a warlike knight and longed for some new adventure, and of late none
had been known. Arthur sat moodily among his knights and drained the
wine-cup in silence, and Queen Guenever, gazing at her husband, durst
not interrupt his gloomy thoughts. At last the king raised his head,
and, striking the table with his hand, exclaimed fiercely: "Are all my
knights

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

sluggards or cowards, that none of them goes forth to seek adventures?
You are better fitted to feast well in hall than fight well in field. Is
my fame so greatly decayed that no man cares to ask for my help or my
support against evildoers? I vow here, by the boar's head and by Our
Lady, that I will not rise from this table till some adventure be
undertaken." "Sire, your loyal knights have gathered round you to keep
the holy Yuletide in your court," replied Sir Lancelot; and Sir Gawayne
said: "Fair uncle, we are not cowards, but few evildoers dare to show
themselves under your rule; hence it is that we seem idle. But see
yonder! By my faith, now cometh an adventure."

### The Damsel's Request

Even as Sir Gawayne spoke a fair damsel rode into the hall, with flying
hair and disordered dress, and, dismounting from her steed, knelt down
sobbing at Arthur's feet. She cried aloud, so that all heard her: "A
boon, a boon, King Arthur! I beg a boon of you!" "What is your request?"
said the king, for the maiden was in great distress, and her tears
filled his heart with pity. "What would you have of me?" "I cry for
vengeance on a churlish knight, who has separated my love from me."
"Tell your story quickly," said King Arthur; and all the knights
listened while the lady spoke.

"I was betrothed to a gallant knight," she said, "whom I loved dearly,
and we were entirely happy until yesterday. Then as we rode out together
planning our marriage we came, through the moorland ways, unnoticing, to
a fair lake, Tarn Wathelan, where stood a great castle, with streamers
flying, and banners waving in the wind. It seemed a strong and goodly
place, but alas! it stood on magic ground, and within

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

the enchanted circle of its shadow an evil spell fell on every knight
who set foot therein. As my love and I looked idly at the mighty keep a
horrible and churlish warrior, twice the size of mortal man, rushed
forth in complete armour; grim and fierce-looking he was, armed with a
huge club, and sternly he bade my knight leave me to him and go his way
alone. Then my love drew his sword to defend me, but the evil spell had
robbed him of all strength, and he could do nought against the giant's
club; his sword fell from his feeble hand, and the churlish knight,
seizing him, caused him to be flung into a dungeon. He then returned and
sorely ill-treated me, though I prayed for mercy in the name of chivalry
and of Mary Mother. At last, when he set me free and bade me go, I said
I would come to King Arthur's court and beg a champion of might to
avenge me, perhaps even the king himself. But the giant only laughed
aloud. 'Tell the foolish king,' quoth he, 'that here I stay his coming,
and that no fear of him shall stop my working my will on all who come.
Many knights have I in prison, some of them King Arthur's own true men;
wherefore bid him fight with me, if he will win them back.' Thus,
laughing and jeering loudly at you, King Arthur, the churlish knight
returned to his castle, and I rode to Carlisle as fast as I could."

### King Arthur's Vow

When the lady had ended her sorrowful tale all present were greatly
moved with indignation and pity, but King Arthur felt the insult most
deeply. He sprang to his feet in great wrath, and cried aloud: "I vow by
my knighthood, and by the Holy Rood, that I will go forth to find that
proud giant, and will never leave him till I have overcome him." The
knights

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

applauded their lord's vow, but Queen Guenever looked doubtfully at the
king, for she had noticed the damsel's mention of magic, and she feared
some evil adventure for her husband. The damsel stayed in Carlisle that
night, and in the morning, after he had heard Mass, and bidden farewell
to his wife, King Arthur rode away. It was a lonely journey to Tarn
Wathelan, but the country was very beautiful, though wild and rugged,
and the king soon saw the little lake gleaming clear and cold below him,
while the enchanted castle towered up above the water, with banners
flaunting defiantly in the wind.

### The Fight

The king drew his sword Excalibur and blew a loud note on his bugle.
Thrice his challenge note resounded, but brought no reply, and then he
cried aloud: "Come forth, proud knight! King Arthur is here to punish
you for your misdeeds! Come forth and fight bravely. If you are afraid,
then come forth and yield yourself my thrall."

The churlish giant darted out at the summons, brandishing his massive
club, and rushed straight at King Arthur. The spell of the enchanted
ground seized the king at that moment, and his hand sank down. Down fell
his good sword Excalibur, down fell his shield, and he found himself
ignominiously helpless in the presence of his enemy.

### The Ransom

Now the giant cried aloud: "Yield or fight, King Arthur; which will you
do? If you fight I shall conquer you, for you have no power to resist
me; you will be my prisoner, with no hope of ransom, will lose your land
and spend your life in my dungeon with many other brave knights. If you
yield I will hold you to

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

ransom, but you must swear to accept the terms I shall offer."

"What are they," asked King Arthur. The giant replied: "You must swear
solemnly, by the Holy Rood, that you will return here on New Year's Day
and bring me a true answer to the question, 'What thing is it that all
women most desire?' If you fail to bring the right answer your ransom is
not paid, and you are yet my prisoner. Do you accept my terms?" The king
had no alternative: so long as he stood on the enchanted ground his
courage was overborne by the spell and he could only hold up his hand
and swear by the Sacred Cross and by Our Lady that he would return, with
such answers as he could obtain, on New Year's Day.

### The King's Search

Ashamed and humiliated, the king rode away, but not back to Carlisle--he
would not return home till he had fulfilled his task; so he rode east
and west and north and south, and asked every woman and maid he met the
question the churlish knight had put to him. "What is it all women most
desire?" he asked, and all gave him different replies: some said riches,
some splendour, some pomp and state; others declared that fine attire
was women's chief delight, yet others voted for mirth or flattery; some
declared that a handsome lover was the cherished wish of every woman's
heart; and among them all the king grew quite bewildered. He wrote down
all the answers he received, and sealed them with his own seal, to give
to the churlish knight when he returned to the Castle of Tarn Wathelan;
but in his own heart King Arthur felt that the true answer had not yet
been given to him. He was sad as he turned and rode towards the giant's
home on New Year's Day, for he feared to lose his liberty and lands,

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

and the lonely journey seemed much more dreary than it had before, when
he rode out from Carlisle so full of hope and courage and
self-confidence.

### The Loathly Lady

Arthur was riding mournfully through a lonely forest when he heard a
woman's voice greeting him: "God save you, King Arthur! God save and
keep you!" and he turned at once to see the person who thus addressed
him. He saw no one at all on his right hand, but as he turned to the
other side he perceived a woman's form clothed in brilliant scarlet; the
figure was seated between a holly-tree and an oak, and the berries of
the former were not more vivid than her dress, and the brown leaves of
the latter not more brown and wrinkled than her cheeks. At first sight
King Arthur thought he must be bewitched--no such night-mare of a human
face had ever seemed to him possible. Her nose was crooked and bent
hideously to one side, while her chin seemed to bend to the opposite
side of her face; her one eye was set deep under her beetling brow, and
her mouth was nought but a gaping slit. Round this awful countenance
hung snaky locks of ragged grey hair, and she was deadly pale, with a
bleared and dimmed blue eye. The king nearly swooned when he saw this
hideous sight, and was so amazed that he did not answer her salutation.
The loathly lady seemed angered by the insult: "Now Christ save you,
King Arthur! Who are you to refuse to answer my greeting and take no
heed of me? Little of courtesy have you and your knights in your fine
court in Carlisle if you cannot return a lady's greeting. Yet, Sir King,
proud as you are, it may be that I can help you, loathly though be; but
I will do nought for one who will not be courteous to me."

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

### The Lady's Secret

King Arthur was ashamed of his lack of courtesy, and tempted by the hint
that here was a woman who could help him. "Forgive me, lady," said he;
"I was sorely troubled in mind, and thus, and not for want of courtesy,
did I miss your greeting. You say that you can perhaps help me; if you
would do this, lady, and teach me how to pay my ransom, I will grant
anything you ask as a reward." The deformed lady said: "Swear to me, by
Holy Rood, and by Mary Mother, that you will grant me whatever boon I
ask, and I will help you to the secret. Yes, Sir King, I know by secret
means that you seek the answer to the question, 'What is it all women
most desire?' Many women have given you many replies, but I alone, by my
magic power, can give you the right answer. This secret I will tell you,
and in truth it will pay your ransom, when you have sworn to keep faith
with me." "Indeed, O grim lady, the oath I will take gladly," said King
Arthur; and when he had sworn it, with uplifted hand, the lady told him
the secret, and he vowed with great bursts of laughter that this was
indeed the right answer.

### The Ransom

When the king had thoroughly realized the wisdom of the answer he rode
on to the Castle of Tarn Wathelan, and blew his bugle three times. As it
was New Year's Day, the churlish knight was ready for him, and rushed
forth, club in hand, ready to do battle. "Sir Knight," said the king, "I
bring here writings containing answers to your question; they are
replies that many women have given, and should be right; these I bring
in ransom for my life and lands." The

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

churlish knight took the writings and read them one by one, and each one
he flung aside, till all had been read; then he said to the king "You
must yield yourself and your lands to me, King Arthur, and rest my
prisoner; for though these answers be many and wise, not one is the true
reply to my question; your ransom is not paid, and your life and all you
have is forfeit to me." "Alas! Sir Knight," quoth the king, "stay your
hand, and let me speak once more before I yield to you; it is not much
to grant to one who risks life and kingdom and all. Give me leave to try
one more reply." To this the giant assented, and King Arthur continued:
"This morning as I rode through the forest I beheld a lady sitting, clad
in scarlet, between an oak and a holly-tree; she says, 'All women will
have their own way, and this is their chief desire.' Now confess that I
have brought the true answer to your question, and that I am free, and
have paid the ransom for my life and lands."

### The Price of the Ransom

The giant waxed furious with rage, and shouted: "A curse upon that lady
who told you this! It must have been my sister, for none but she knew
the answer. Tell me, was she ugly and deformed?" When King Arthur
replied that she was a loathly lady, the giant broke out: "I vow to
heaven that if I can once catch her I will burn her alive; for she has
cheated me of being King of Britain. Go your ways, Arthur; you have not
ransomed yourself, but the ransom is paid and you are free.'

Gladly the king rode back to the forest where the loathly lady awaited
him, and stopped to greet her. "I am free now, lady, thanks to you! What
boon do you ask in reward for your help? I have promised to

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

grant it you, whatever it may be." "This is my boon, King Arthur, that
you will bring some young and courteous knight from your court in
Carlisle to marry me, and he must be brave and handsome too. You have
sworn to fulfil my request, and you cannot break your word." These last
words were spoken as the king shook his head and seemed on the point of
refusing a request so unreasonable; but at this reminder he only hung
his head and rode slowly away, while the unlovely lady watched him with
a look of mingled pain and glee.

### King Arthur's Return

On the second day of the new year King Arthur came home to Carlisle.
Wearily he rode along and dismounted at the castle, and wearily he went
into his hall, where sat Queen Guenever. She had been very anxious
during her husband's absence, for she dreaded magic arts, but she
greeted him gladly and said: "Welcome, my dear lord and king, welcome
home again! What anxiety I have endured for you! But now you are here
all is well. What news do you bring, my liege? Is the churlish knight
conquered? Where have you had him hanged, and where is his head? Placed
on a spike above some town-gate? Tell me your tidings, and we will
rejoice together." King Arthur only sighed heavily as he replied: "Alas!
I have boasted too much; the churlish knight was a giant who has
conquered me, and set me free on conditions." "My lord, tell me how this
has chanced." "His castle is an enchanted one, standing on enchanted
ground, and surrounded with a circle of magic spells which sap the
bravery from a warrior's mind and the strength from his arm. When I came
on his land and felt the power of his mighty charms, I was unable to

<span id="img_27400"></span>

[![''He hung his head and rode slowly away''](tn/27400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27400.jpg)  
''He hung his head and rode slowly away''  

<span id="img_27500"></span>

[![''Lady, I will be a true and loyal husband''](tn/27500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27500.jpg)  
''Lady, I will be a true and loyal husband''  

 

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

resist him, but fell into his power, and had to yield myself to him. He
released me on condition that I would fulfil one thing which he bade me
accomplish, and this I was enabled to do by the help of a loathly lady;
but that help was dearly bought, and I cannot pay the price myself."

### Sir Gawayne's Devotion

By this time Sir Gawayne, the king's favourite nephew, had entered the
hall, and greeted his uncle warmly; then, with a few rapid questions, he
learnt the king's news, and saw that he was in some distress. "What have
you paid the loathly lady for her secret, uncle?" he asked. "Alas! I
have paid her nothing; but I promised to grant her any boon she asked,
and she has asked a thing impossible." "What is it?" asked Sir Gawayne.
"Since you have promised it, the promise must needs be kept. Can I help
you to perform your vow?" "Yes, you can, fair nephew Gawayne, but I will
never ask you to do a thing so terrible," said King Arthur. "I am ready
to do it, uncle, were it to wed the loathly lady herself." "That is what
she asks, that a fair young knight should marry her. But she is too
hideous and deformed; no man could make her his wife." "If that is all
your grief," replied Sir Gawayne, "things shall soon be settled; I will
wed this ill-favoured dame, and will be your ransom." "You know not what
you offer," answered the king. "I never saw so deformed a being. Her
speech is well enough, but her face is terrible, with crooked nose and
chin, and she has only one eye." "She must be an ill-favoured maiden;
but I heed it not," said Sir Gawayne gallantly, "so that I can save you
from trouble and care." "Thanks, dear Gawayne, thanks a thousand times!
Now through your devotion

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I can keep my
word. To-morrow we must fetch your bride from her lonely lodging in the
greenwood; but we will feign some pretext for the journey. I will summon
a hunting party, with horse and hound and gallant riders, and none shall
know that we go to bring home so ugly a bride." "Gramercy, uncle," said
Sir Gawayne. "Till to-morrow I am a free man."

### The Hunting Party

The next day King Arthur summoned all the court to go hunting in the
greenwood close to Tarn Wathelan; but he did not lead the chase near the
castle: the remembrance of his defeat and shame was too strong for him
to wish to see the place again. They roused a noble stag and chased him
far into the forest, where they lost him amid close thickets of holly
and yew interspersed with oak copses and hazel bushes--bare were the
hazels, and brown and withered the clinging oak leaves, but the holly
looked cheery, with its fresh green leaves and scarlet berries. Though
the chase had been fruitless, the train of knights laughed and talked
gaily as they rode back through the forest, and the gayest of all was
Sir Gawayne; he rode wildly down the forest drives, so recklessly that
he drew level with Sir Kay, the churlish steward, who always preferred
to ride alone. Sir Lancelot, Sir Stephen, Sir Banier, and Sir Bors all
looked wonderingly at the reckless youth; but his younger brother,
Gareth, was troubled, for he knew all was not well with Gawayne, and Sir
Tristram, buried in his love for Isolde, noticed nothing, but rode
heedlessly, wrapped in sad musings.

### Sir Kay and the Loathly Lady

Suddenly Sir Kay reined up his steed, amazed; his eye had caught the
gleam of scarlet under the trees, and

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

as he looked he became aware of a woman, clad in a dress of finest
scarlet, sitting between a holly-tree and an oak. "Good greeting to you,
Sir Kay," said the lady, but the steward was too much amazed to answer.
Such a face as that of the lady he had never even imagined, and he took
no notice of her salutation. By this time the rest of the knights had
joined him, and they all halted, looking in astonishment on the
misshapen face of the poor creature before them. It seemed terrible that
a woman's figure should be surmounted by such hideous features, and most
of the knights were silent for pity's sake; but the steward soon
recovered from his amazement, and his rude nature began to show itself.
The king had not yet appeared, and Sir Kay began to jeer aloud. "Now
which of you would fain woo yon fair lady?" he asked. "It takes a brave
man, for methinks he will stand in fear of any kiss he may get, it must
needs be such an awesome thing. But yet I know not; any man who would
kiss this beauteous damsel may well miss the way to her mouth, and his
fate is not quite so dreadful after all. Come, who will win a lovely
bride! "Just then King Arthur rode up, and at sight of him Sir Kay was
silent; but the loathly lady hid her face in her hands, and wept that he
should pour such scorn upon her.

### The Betrothal

Sir Gawayne was touched with compassion for this uncomely woman alone
among these gallant and handsome knights, a woman so helpless and
ill-favoured, and he said: "Peace, churl Kay, the lady cannot help
herself; and you are not so noble and courteous that you have the right
to jeer at any maiden; such deeds do not become a knight of Arthur's
Round Table. Besides, one of us knights here must wed this unfortunate

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

lady." "Wed her?" shouted Kay. "Gawayne, you are mad!" "It is true, is
it not, my liege?" asked Sir Gawayne, turning to the king; and Arthur
reluctantly gave token of assent, saying, "I promised her not long
since, for the help she gave me in a great distress, that I would grant
her any boon she craved, and she asked for a young and noble knight to
be her husband. My royal word is given, and I will keep it; therefore
have I brought you here to meet her." Sir Kay burst out with, "What? Ask
me perchance to wed this foul quean? I'll none of her. Where’er I get my
wife from, were it from the fiend, himself, this hideous hag shall never
be mine." "Peace, Sir Kay," sternly said the king; "you shall not abuse
this poor lady as well as refuse her. Mend your speech, or you shall be
knight of mine no longer." Then he turned to the others and said: "Who
will wed this lady and help me to keep my royal pledge? You must not all
refuse, for my promise is given, and for a little ugliness and deformity
you shall not make me break my plighted word of honour." As he spoke he
watched them keenly, to see who would prove sufficiently devoted, but
the knights all began to excuse themselves and to depart. They called
their hounds, spurred their steeds, and pretended to search for the
track of the lost stag again; but before they went Sir Gawayne cried
aloud: "Friends, cease your strife and debate, for I will wed this lady
myself Lady, will you have me for your husband?" Thus saying, he
dismounted and knelt before her.

### The Lady's Words

The poor lady had at first no words to tell her gratitude to Sir
Gawayne, but when she had recovered a little she spoke: "Alas! Sir
Gawayne, I fear you do

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

but jest. Will you wed with one so ugly and deformed as I? What sort of
wife should I be for a knight so gay and gallant, so fair and comely as
the king's own nephew? What will Queen Guenever and the ladies of the
Court say when you return to Carlisle bringing with you such a bride?
You will be shamed, and all through me." Then she wept bitterly, and her
weeping made her seem even more hideous; but King Arthur, who was
watching the scene, said: "Lady, I would fain see that knight or dame
who dares mock at my nephew's bride. I will take order that no such
unknightly discourtesy is shown in my court," and he glared angrily at
Sir Kay and the others who had stayed, seeing that Sir Gawayne was
prepared to sacrifice himself and therefore they were safe. The lady
raised her head and looked keenly at Sir Gawayne, who took her hand,
saying: "Lady, I will be a true and loyal husband to you it you will
have me; and I shall know how to guard my wife from insult. Come, lady,
and my uncle will announce the betrothal." Now the lady seemed to
believe that Sir Gawayne was in earnest, and she sprang to her feet,
saying: "Thanks to you! A thousand thanks, Sir Gawayne, and blessings on
your head! You shall never rue this wedding, and the courtesy you have
shown. Wend we now to Carlisle."

### The Journey to Carlisle

A horse with a side-saddle had been brought for Sir Gawayne's bride, but
when the lady moved it became evident that she was lame and halted in
her walk, and there was a slight hunch on her shoulders. Both of these
deformities showed little when she was seated, but as she moved the
knights looked at one another, shrugged their shoulders and pitied Sir
Gawayne, whose courtesy had bound him for life to so deformed

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

a wife. Then the whole train rode away together, the bride between King
Arthur and her betrothed, and all the knights whispering and sneering
behind them. Great was the excitement in Carlisle to see that ugly dame,
and greater still the bewilderment in the court when they were told that
this loathly lady was Sir Gawayne's bride.

### The Bridal

Only Queen Guenever understood, and she showed all courtesy to the
deformed bride, and stood by her as her lady-of-honour when the wedding
took place that evening, while King Arthur was groomsman to his nephew.
When the long banquet was over, and bride and bridegroom no longer need
sit side by side, the tables were cleared and the hall was prepared for
a dance, and then men thought that Sir Gawayne would be free for a time
to talk with his friends; but he refused. "Bride and bridegroom must
tread the first dance together, if she wishes it," quoth he, and offered
his lady his hand for the dance. "I thank you, sweet husband," said the
grim lady as she took it and moved forward to open the dance with him;
and through the long and stately measure that followed, so perfect was
his dignity, and the courtesy and grace with which he danced, that no
man dreamt of smiling as the deformed lady moved clumsily through the
figures of the dance.

### Sir Gawayne's Bride

At last the long evening was over, the last measure danced, the last
wine-cup drained, the bride escorted to her chamber, the lights out, the
guests separated in their rooms, and Gawayne was free to think of what
he had done, and to consider how he had ruined his whole hope of
happiness. He thought of his uncle's favour,

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

of the poor lady's gratitude, of the blessing she had invoked upon him,
and he determined to be gentle with her, though he could never love her
as his wife. He entered the bride-chamber with the feeling of a man who
has made up his mind to endure, and did not even look towards his bride,
who sat awaiting him beside the fire. Choosing a chair, he sat down and
looked sadly into the glowing embers and spoke no word.

"Have you no word for me, husband? Can you not even give me a glance?"
asked the lady, and Sir Gawayne turned his eyes to her where she sat;
and then he sprang up in amazement, for there sat no loathly lady, no
ugly and deformed being, but a maiden young and lovely, with black eyes
and long curls of dark hair, with beautiful face and tall and graceful
figure. "Who are you, maiden?" asked Sir Gawayne; and the fair one
replied: "I am your wife, whom you found between the oak and the
holly-tree, and whom you wedded this night."

### Sir Gawayne's Choice

"But how has this marvel come to pass?" asked he, wondering, for the
fair maiden was so lovely that he marvelled that he had not known her
beauty even under that hideous disguise. "It is an enchantment to which
I am in bondage," said she. "I am not yet entirely free from it, but now
for a time I may appear to you as I really am. Is my lord content with
his loving bride?" asked she, with a little smile, as she rose and stood
before him. "Content!" he said, as he clasped her in his arms. "I would
not change my dear lady for the fairest dame in Arthur's court, not
though she were Queen Guenever herself. I am the happiest knight that
lives, for I thought to save my uncle and help a hapless lady, and I
have won my

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

own happiness thereby. Truly I shall never rue the day when I wedded
you, dear heart." Long they sat and talked together, and then Sir
Gawayne grew weary, and would fain have slept, but his lady said:
"Husband, now a heavy choice awaits you. I am under the spell of an evil
witch, who has given me my own face and form for half the day, and the
hideous appearance in which you first saw me for the other half. Choose
now whether you will have me fair by day and ugly by night, or hideous
by day and beauteous by night. The choice is your own."

### The Dilemma

Sir Gawayne was no longer oppressed with sleep; the choice before him
was too difficult. If the lady remained hideous by day he would have to
endure the taunts of his fellows; if by night, he would be unhappy
himself. If the lady were fair by day other men might woo her, and he
himself would have no love for her; if she were fair to him alone, his
love would make her look ridiculous before the court and the king.
Nevertheless, acting on the spur of the moment, he spoke: "Oh, be fair
to me only--be your old self by day, and let me have my beauteous wife
to myself alone." "Alas! is that your choice?" she asked. "I only must
be ugly when all are beautiful, I must be despised when all other ladies
are admired; I am as fair as they, but I must seem foul to all men. Is
this your love, Sir Gawayne?" and she turned from him and wept. Sir
Gawayne was filled with pity and remorse when he heard her lament, and
began to realize that he was studying his own pleasure rather than his
lady's feelings, and his courtesy and gentleness again won the upper
hand. "Dear love, if you would rather that men should see you

 

<span id="img_28200"></span>

[![Now you have released me from the spell completely](tn/28200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28200.jpg)  
Now you have released me from the spell completely  

<span id="img_28300"></span>

[![Queen Godhild prays ever for her son Horn](tn/28300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28300.jpg)  
Queen Godhild prays ever for her son Horn  

 

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

fair, I will choose that, though to me you will be always as you are
now. Be fair before others and deformed to me alone, and men shall never
know that the enchantment is not wholly removed."

### Sir Gawayne's Decision

Now the lady looked pleased for a moment, and then said gravely: "Have
you thought of the danger to which a young and lovely lady is exposed in
the court? There are many false knights who would woo a fair dame,
though her husband were the king's favourite nephew; and who can
tell?--one of them might please me more than you. Sure I am that many
will be sorry they refused to wed me when they see me to-morrow morn.
You must risk my beauty under the guard of my virtue and wisdom, if you
have me young and fair." She looked merrily at Sir Gawayne as she spoke;
but he considered seriously for a time, and then said: "Nay, dear love,
I will leave the matter to you and your own wisdom, for you are wiser in
this matter than I. I remit this wholly unto you, to decide according to
your will. I will rest content with whatsoever you resolve."

### The Lady's Story

Now the fair lady clapped her hands lightly, and said: "Blessings on
you, dear Gawayne, my own dear lord and husband! Now you have released
me from the spell completely, and I shall always be as I am now, fair
and young, till old age shall change my beauty as he doth that of all
mortals. My father was a great duke of high renown who had but one son
and one daughter, both of us dearly beloved, and both of goodly
appearance. When I had come to an age to be married my father determined
to take a new wife, and he wedded

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

a witch-lady. She resolved to rid herself of his two children, and cast
a spell upon us both, whereby I was transformed from a fair lady into
the hideous monster whom you wedded, and my gallant young brother into
the churlish giant who dwells at Tarn Wathelan. She condemned me to keep
that awful shape until I married a young and courtly knight who would
grant me all my will. You have done all this for me, and I shall be
always your fond and faithful wife. My brother too is set free from the
spell, and he will become again one of the truest and most gentle
knights alive, though none can excel my own true knight, Sir Gawayne."

### The Surprise of the Knights

The next morning the knight and his bride descended to the great hall,
where many knights and ladies awaited them, the former thinking
scornfully of the hideous hag whom Gawayne had wedded, the latter
pitying so young and gallant a knight, tied to a lady so ugly. But both
scorn and pity vanished when all saw the bride. "Who is this fair dame?"
asked Sir Kay. "Where have you left your ancient bride?" asked another,
and all awaited the answer in great bewilderment. "This is the lady to
whom I was wedded yester evening," replied Sir Gawayne. "She was under
an evil enchantment, which has vanished now that she has come under the
power of a husband, and henceforth my fair wife will be one of the most
beauteous ladies of King Arthur's court. Further, my lord King Arthur,
this fair lady has assured me that the churlish knight of Tarn Wathelan,
her brother, was also under a spell, which is now broken, and he will be
once more a courteous and gallant knight, and the ground on which his
fortress stands will have hence-forth no magic power to quell the
courage of any knight alive. Dear liege and uncle, when I wedded
yesterday

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the loathly lady I thought only of your happiness, and in that way I
have won my own lifelong bliss."

King Arthur's joy at his nephew's fair hap was great, for he had grieved
sorely over Gawayne's miserable fate, and Queen Guenever welcomed the
fair maiden as warmly as she had the loathly lady, and the wedding feast
was renewed with greater magnificence, as a fitting end to the Christmas
festivities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: King Horn](hml18)
