[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hml11)  [Next](hml13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859580017/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

# CHAPTER VIII: THE COUNTESS CATHLEEN

### Celtic Mysticism

IN all Celtic literature there is recognisable a certain spirit which
seems to be innate in the very character of the people, a spirit of
mysticism and acknowledgment of the supernatural. It carries with it a
love of Nature, a delight in beauty, colour and harmony, which is common
to all the Celtic races. But with these characteristics we find in
Ireland a spiritual beauty, a passion of self-sacrifice, unknown in
Wales or Brittany. Hence the early Irish heroes are frequently found
renouncing advantages, worldly honour, and life itself, at the bidding
of some imperative moral impulse. They are the knights-errant of early
European chivalry, which was a much deeper and more real inspiration
than the carefully cultivated artificial chivalry of centuries later.
Cuchulain, Diarmuit, Naesi all pay with their lives for their obedience
to the dictates of honour and conscience. And in women, for whom in
those early days sacrifice of self was the only way of heroism, the
surrender even of eternal bliss was only the sublimation of honour and
chivalry; and this was the heroism of the Countess Cathleen.

### The Cathleen Legend

The legend is old, so old that its root has been lost and we know not
who first imagined it; but the idea, the central incident, doubtless
goes back to Druid times, when a woman might well have offered herself
up to the cruel gods to avert their wrath and stay the plagues which
fell upon her people. Under a like impulse Curtius sprang into the gulf
in the Forum, and Decius devoted himself to death to win the safety of

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

the Roman army. In each case the powers, evil or beneficent, were
supposed to be appeased by the offering of a human life. When
Christianity found this legend of sacrifice popular among the heathen
nations, it was comparatively easy to adopt it and give it a yet wider
scope, by making the sacrifice spiritual rather than physical, and by
finally rewarding the hero with heavenly joys. It is to be noted, too,
that even at this early period there is a certain glorification of
chicanery: the fiend fulfils his side of the contract, but God Himself
breaks the other side. This becomes a regular feature in all tales that
relate dealings with the Evil One: all Devil's Bridges, Devil's Dykes,
and the Faust legends show that Satan may be trusted to keep his word,
while the saints invariably kept the letter and broke the spirit. To so
primitive a tale as that of "The Countess Cathleen" the pettifogging
quibbles of later saints are utterly unknown: God saves her soul because
it is His will to reward such abnegation of self, and even the Evil One
dare not question the Divine Will.

### The Story. Happy Ireland

Once, long ago, as the Chronicles tell us, Ireland was known throughout
Europe as "The Isle of Saints," for St. Patrick had not long before
preached the Gospel, the message of good tidings, to the warring
inhabit- ants, to tribes of uncivilised Celts, and to marauding Danes
and Vikings. He had driven out the serpent-worshippers, and consecrated
the Black Stone of Tara to the worship of the True God; he had convinced
the High King of the truth and reasonableness of the doctrine of the
Trinity by the illustration of the shamrock leaf, and had overthrown the
great idols and purified the land. Therefore the fair shores and fertile
vales or Erin, the clustered islets, dropped like jewels in the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

azure seas, the mist-covered, heather-clad hill-sides, even the barren
mountain-tops and the patches of firm ground scattered in the solitudes
of fathomless bogs, were homes of pious Culdee or lonely hermit. There
was still strife in Ireland, for king fought with king, and heathen
marauders still vexed the land; but many war-like Irish clans or "septs"
turned their ardour for fight to religious conflicts, and often every
man of a tribe became a monk, so that great abbeys and tribal
monasteries and schools were built on the hills where, in former days,
stood the chieftain's stronghold (*rath* or *dun*, as Irish legends name
it), with its earth mounds and wooden palisades. Holy psalms and chants
replaced the boastful songs of the old bards, whilst warriors,
accustomed to regard fighting and hunting as the only occupations worthy
of a freeborn man, now peacefully illuminated manuscripts or wrought at
useful handicrafts. Yet still in secret they dreaded and tried to
appease the wrath of the Dagda, Brigit of the Holy Fire, Ængus the
Ever-Young, and the awful Washers of the Ford, the Choosers of the
Slain; and to this dread was now joined the new fear of the cruel demons
who obeyed Satan, the Prince of Evil.

### The Young Countess

At this time there dwelt in Ireland the Countess Cathleen, young, good,
and beautiful. Her eyes were as deep, as changeful, and as pure as the
ocean that washed Erin's shores; her yellow hair, braided in two long
tresses, was as bright as the golden circlet on her brow or the yellow
corn in her garners; and her step was as light and proud and free as
that of the deer in her wide domains. She lived in a stately castle in
the midst of great forests, with the cottages of her tribesmen around
her gates, and day by day and year by

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

year she watched the changing glories of the mighty woods, as the
seasons brought new beauties, till her soul was as lovely as the green
woods and purple hills around. The Countess Cathleen loved the dim,
mysterious forest, she loved the tales of the ancient gods, and of

"Old, unhappy, far-off things,  
And battles long ago;"  
                   *Wordsworth*.

but more than all she loved her clansmen and vassals: she prayed for
them at all the holy hours, and taught and tended them with loving care,
so that in no place in Ireland could be found a happier tribe than that
which obeyed her gentle rule.

### Dearth and Famine

One year there fell upon Ireland, erewhile so happy a great
desolation--"For Scripture saith, an ending to all good things must
be" <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)--and the happiness of the
Countess Cathleen's tribe came to an end in this wise: A terrible famine
fell on the land; the seed-corn rotted in the ground, for rain and
never-lifting mists filled the heavy air and lay on the sodden earth;
then when spring came barren fields lay brown where the shooting corn
should be; the cattle died in the stall or fell from weakness at the
plough, and the sheep died of hunger in the fold; as the year passed
through summer towards autumn the berries failed in the sun-parched
woods, and the withered leaves, fallen long before the time, lay rotting
on the dank earth; the timid wild things of the forest, hares, rabbits,
squirrels, died in their holes or fell easy victims to the birds and
beasts of prey; and these, in their turn, died of hunger in the
famine-stricken forests.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

"I searched all day: the mice and rats and hedgehogs  
Seemed to be dead, and I could hardly hear  
A wing moving in all the famished woods." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

### Distress of the Peasants

A cry of bitter agony and lamentation rose from the starving Isle of
Saints to the gates of Heaven, and fell back unheard; the sky was hard
as brass above, and the earth was barren beneath, and men and women died
in despair, their shrivelled lips still stained green by the dried grass
and twigs they had striven to eat.

"I passed by Margaret Nolan's: for nine days  
Her mouth was green with dock and dandelion;  
And now they wake her."

### The Misery Increases

In vain the High King of Ireland proclaimed a universal peace, and wars
between quarrelling tribes stopped and foreign pirates ceased to molest
the land, and chief met chief in the common bond of misery; in vain the
rich gave freely of their wealth--soon there was no distinction between
rich and poor, high and low, chief and vassal, for all alike felt the
grip of famine, all died by the same terrible hunger. Soon many of the
great monasteries lay desolate, their stores exhausted, their portals
open, while the brethren, dead within, had none to bury them; the lonely
hermits died in their little beehive-shaped cells, or fled from the
dreadful solitude to gather in some wealthy abbey which could still feed
its monks; and isle and vale which had echoed their holy chants knew the
sounds no more. Over all, unlifting, unchanging, brooded the deadly
vapour, bearing the plague in its heavy folds, and filling the air with
a, sultry lurid haze.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

"There is no sign of change--day copies day,  
Green things are dead--the cattle too are dead  
Or dying--and on all the vapour hangs  
And fattens with disease, and glows with heat."

### Cathleen Heartbroken for her People

Round the castle of the Countess Cathleen there was great stir and
bustle, for her tender heart was wrung with the misery of her people,
and her prayers for them ascended to God unceasingly. So thin she grew
and so worn that the physicians bade her servants bring harp and song to
charm away the sadness that weighed upon her spirit; but all in vain!
Neither the well-loved legends of the ancient gods, nor her harp, nor
the voice of her bards could bring her relief--nothing but the attempt
to save her people. From the earliest days of the famine her house and
her stores were ever ready to supply the wants of the homeless, the
poor, the suffering; her wealth was freely spent for food for the
starving while supplies could yet be bought either near or in distant
baronies; and when known supplies failed her lavish offers tempted the
churlish farmers, who still hoarded grain that they might enrich
themselves in the great dearth, to sell some of their garnered stores.
When she could no longer induce them to part with their grain, her own
winter provisions, wine and corn, were distributed generously to all who
asked for relief, and none ever left her castle without succour.

### Her Wide Charity

Thus passed the early months of bitter starvation, and the Countess
Cathleen's name was borne far and wide through Ireland, accompanied with
the blessings of all the rescued; and round her castle, from every
district, gathered a mighty throng of poor--not only her own
clansmen--who all looked to her for a daily dole of

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

food and drink to keep some life in them until the pestilential mists
should pass away. The wholesome cold of winter would purify the air and
bring new hope and promise of new life in the coming year. Alas! the
winter drew on apace and still the poisonous yellow vapours hung heavily
over the land, and still the deadly famine clutched each feeble heart
and weakened the very springs of life, and the winter frosts slew more
than the summer heats, so feeble were the people and so weakened.

### Lawlessness Breaks Out

At last, even in the Isle of Saints, the bonds of right and wrong were
loosened, all respect for property vanished in the universal desolation,
and men began to rob and plunder, to trust only to the right of might,
thinking that their poor miserable lives were of more value than aught
else, than conscience and pity and honesty. Thus Cathleen lost by
barefaced robbery much of what she still possessed of flocks and herds,
or scanty fruit and corn. Her servants would gladly have pursued the
robbers and regained the spoils, but Cathleen forbade it, for she pitied
the miserable thieves, and thought no evil of them in this bitter
dearth. By this time she had distributed all her winter stores, and had
only enough to feed her poor pensioners and her household with most
scanty rations; and she herself shared equally with them, for the most
earnest entreaties of her faithful servants could not induce her to fare
better than they in anything. Soon there would be nothing left for daily
distribution, and her heart almost broke as she saw the misery of her
helpless dependents; they looked to her as an angel of pity and
deliverance, while she knew herself to be as helpless as they. Day by
day Cathleen went among them, with her pitifully scanty doles of

 

<span id="img_16200"></span>

[![''Day by day Cathleen went among them''](tn/16200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16200.jpg)  
''Day by day Cathleen went among them''  

<span id="img_16300"></span>

[![The Peasant's Story](tn/16300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16300.jpg)  
The Peasant's Story  

 

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

food, cheering them by her words and smiles, and by her very presence;
and each day she went to her chapel, where she could cast aside the mask
of cheerfulness she wore before her people, and prayed to the Blessed
Virgin Mary and all the saints to show her how to save her own tribe and
all the land.

### Cathleen Has an Inspiration

As the Countess knelt long before the altar one noon-tide she passed
from her prayers into a deep sleep, and sank down on the altar steps. In
the troubled depths of her mind a thought arose, which came to her as an
inspiration from Heaven itself. She awoke and sprang up joyfully,
exclaiming aloud: "Thanks be to Our Lady and to all the saints! To them
alone the blessed thought is due. Thus can I save my poor until the
dearth is over."

Then Cathleen left her oratory with such a light heart as she had not
felt since the terrible visitation began, and the gladness in her face
was so new and wonderful that all her servants noticed the change, and
her old foster-mother, who loved the Countess with the utmost devotion,
shuddered at the thought that perhaps her darling had come under the
power of the ancient gods and would be bewitched away to Tir-nan-og, the
land of never-dying youth. Fearfully old Oona watched Cathleen's face as
she passed through the hall, and Cathleen saw the anxious gaze, and came
and laid her hand on the old woman's shoulder, saying, "Nay, fear not,
nurse; the saints have heard my prayer and put it into my heart to save
all these helpless ones." Then she crossed the hall to her own room, and
called a servant, saying, "Send hither quickly Fergus my steward."

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

### She Summons her Steward

Shortly afterwards the steward came, Fergus the White, an old
grey-haired man, who had been foster-brother to Cathleen's grandfather.
He had seen three generations pass away, he had watched the change from
heathenism to Christianity, and of all the chief's family, to which his
loyal devotion had ever clung, there remained but this one young girl,
and he loved her as his own child. Fergus did obeisance to his liege
lady, and kissed her hand kneeling as he asked:

"What would the Countess Cathleen with her steward? Shall I render my
account of lands and wealth?"

### Demands to Know what Wealth she Owns

"How much have I in lands?" the Countess asked. And Fergus answered in
surprise: "Your lands are worth one hundred thousand pounds."

"Of what value is the timber in my forests?" "As much again."

"What is the worth of my castles and my fair residences?" continued the
Countess Cathleen. And Fergus still replied: "As much more," though in
his heart he questioned why his lady wished to know now, while the
famine made all riches seem valueless.

"How much gold still unspent lies in thy charge in my treasure-chests?"

"Lady, your stored gold is three hundred thousand pounds, as much as all
your lands and forests and houses are worth."

The Countess Cathleen thought for an instant, and then, as one who makes
a momentous decision, spoke firmly, though her lips quivered as she gave
utterance to her thought:

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### "Go Far and Buy Food"

"Then, Fergus, take my bags of coin and go. Leave here my jewels and
some gold, for I may hear of some stores of grain hoarded by niggard
farmers, and may induce them to sell, if not for the love of God, then
for the love of gold. Take, too, authority from me, written and sealed
with my seal, to sell all my lands and timber, and castles, except this
one alone where I must dwell. Send a man, trustworthy and speedy, to the
North, to Ulster, where I hear the famine is less terrible, and let him
buy what cattle he can find, and drive them back as soon as may be."

"Keeping this house alone, sell all I have; Go to some distant country,
and come again With many herds of cows and ships of grain."

### The Steward Reluctantly Obeys

The ancient steward, Fergus the White, stood at first speechless with
horror and grief, but after a moment of silence his sorrow found vent in
words, and he besought his dear lady not to sell everything, her ancient
home, her father's lands, her treasured heirlooms, and leave herself no
wealth for happier times. All his persuasions were useless, for Cathleen
would not be moved; she bade him "Farewell" and hastened his journey,
saying, "A cry is in mine ears; I cannot rest." So there was no help for
it. A trusty man was despatched to Ulster to buy up all the cattle (weak
and famine-stricken as they would be) in the North Country; while Fergus
himself journeyed swiftly to England, which was still prosperous and
fertile, untouched by the deadly famine, and knowing nothing of the
desolation of the sister isle, to which the English owed so much of
their knowledge of the True Faith.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### Buys Stores in England

In England Fergus spent all the gold he brought with him, and then sold
all the Countess Cathleen bade him sell--lands, castles, forests,
pastures, timber--all but one lonely castle in the desolate woods, where
she dwelt among her own people, with the dying folk thronging round her
gates and in her halls. Good bargains Fergus made also, for he was a
shrewd and loyal steward, and the saints must have touched the hearts of
the English merchants, so that they gave good prices for all, or perhaps
they did not realize the dire distress that prevailed in Ireland.
However that may have been, Fergus prospered in his trading, and bought
grain, and wine, and fat oxen and sheep, so that he loaded many ships
with full freights of provisions, enough to carry the starving peasantry
through the famine year till the next harvest. At last all his money was
spent, all his ships were laden, everything was ready, and the little
fleet lay in harbour, only awaiting a fair wind, which, unhappily, did
not come.

### His Return Delayed

First of all Fergus waited through a deadly calm, when the sails hung
motionless, drooping, with no breath of air to stir them, when the fog
that brooded over the shores of England never lifted and all sailing was
impossible; then the winds dispersed the fog, and Fergus, forgetting
caution in his great anxiety to return, hastily set sail for his own
land, and there came fierce tempests and contrary winds, so that his
little fleet was driven back, and one or two ships went down with all
their stores of food. Fergus wept to see his lady's wealth lost in the
wintry sea, but he dared not venture again, and though he chafed and
fretted at

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the delay, it was nearly two months after he reached England before he
could sail back to his young mistress and her starving countrymen. The
trusty messenger who had been sent to buy cattle had succeeded beyond
his own expectation; he also had made successful bargains, and had found
more cattle than he believed were still alive in Ireland. He had bought
all, and was driving them slowly towards the Countess Cathleen's forest
dwelling. Their progress was so slow, because of their weakness and the
scanty fodder by the way, that no news of them came to Cathleen, and she
knew not that while corn and cattle were coming with Fergus across the
sea, food was also coming to her slowly through the barren ways of her
own native land. None of this she knew, and despair would have filled
her heart, but for her faith in God and her belief in the great
inspiration that had been given to her.

### Deepening Misery in Ireland

Meanwhile terrible things had been happening in Ireland. As in England
in later days, "men said openly that Christ and His saints slept"; they
thought with longing of the mighty old gods, for the new seemed
powerless, and they yearned for the friendly "good people" who had fled
from the sound of the church hell. Thus many minds were ready to revolt
from the Christian faith if they had not feared the life after death and
the endless torments of the Christian Hell. Some few, desperate, even
offered secret worship to the old heathen gods, and true love to the One
True God had grown cold.

### Two Mysterious Strangers

Now on the very day on which Fergus sailed for England, and his comrade
departed to Ulster, two mysterious

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

and stately strangers suddenly appeared in Erin. Whence they came no man
knew, but they were first seen near the wild seashore of the west, and
the few poor inhabitants thought they had been put ashore by some vessel
or wrecked on that dangerous coast. Aliens they certainly were, for they
talked with each other in a tongue that none understood, and they
appeared as if they did not comprehend the questions asked of them. Thus
they passed away from the western coasts, and made their way inland; but
when they next appeared, in a village not far from Dublin, they had
greatly changed: they wore magnificent robes and furs, with splendid
jewelled gloves on their hands, and golden circlets, set with gleaming
rubies, bound their brows; their black steeds showed no trace of
weakness and famine as they rode through the woods and carefully noted
the misery everywhere.

### Their Strange Story

At last they alighted at the little lodge, where a forester's widow
gladly received them; and their royal dress, lofty bearing and strange
language accorded ill with the mean surroundings and the scanty
accommodation of that little hut. The dead forester had been one of the
Countess Cathleen's most faithful vassals, and his holding was but a
short distance from the castle, so that the strangers could, unobserved,
watch the life of the little village. As time passed they told their
hostess they were merchants, simple traders from a distant country,
trafficking in very precious gems; but they had no wares for exchange,
and no gems to show; they made no inquiries or researches, bargained
with no man, seemed to do no business; they were the most unusual
merchants ever seen in Ireland, and the strangeness of their behaviour
troubled men's minds.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### Mysterious Behaviour

Day by day they ate, unquestioning, the coarse food their poor hostess
set before them, and the black bread which was the best food obtainable
in those terrible days, but they added to it wine, rich and red, from
their own private store, and they paid her lavishly in good red gold, so
that she wondered that any men should stay in the famine-stricken
country when they could so easily leave it at their will. Gradually,
too, speaking now in the Irish tongue, they began to ask her cautious
questions of the people, of the land, of the famine, how men lived and
how they died, and so they heard of the exceeding goodness of the
Countess Cathleen, whose bounty had saved so many lives, and was still
saving others, though the deadly pinch of famine grew sorer with the
passing days. To their hostess they admired Cathleen's goodness, and
were loud in her praises, but they looked askance at one another and
their brows were black with discontent.

### Professed Errand of Mercy

Then one day the kingly merchants told the poor widow who harboured them
that they too were the friends of the poor and starving; they were
servants of a mighty prince, who in his compassion and mercy had sent
them on a mission to Ireland to help the afflicted peasants to fight
against famine and death. They said that they themselves had no food to
give, only wine and gold in plenty, so that men might exert themselves
and search for food to buy. Their hostess, hearing this, and knowing
that there were still some niggards who refused to part with their
mouldering heaps of corn, setting the price so high that no man could
buy, called down the blessing of God and Mary

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

and all the saints upon their heads, for if they would distribute their
gold to all, or even buy the corn themselves and distribute it, men need
no longer die of hunger.

### A New Traffic

When she prayed for a blessing on the two strangers they smiled
scornfully and impatiently; and the elder said, cunningly:

"Alas! we know the evils of mere charity,  
And would devise a more considered way.  
Let each man bring one piece of merchandise."

"Ah, sirs!" replied the hostess, "then your compassion, your gold and
your goodwill are of no avail. Think you, after all these weary months,
that any man has merchandise left to sell? They have sold long ago all
but the very clothes they wear, to keep themselves alive till better
days come. Such offers are mockery of our distress."

"We mock you not," said the elder merchant. "All men have the one
precious thing we wish to buy, and have come hither to find; none has
already lost or sold it."

"What precious treasure can you mean? Men in Ireland now have only their
lives, and can barely cherish those," said the poor woman, wondering
greatly and much afraid.

### Buyers of Souls

The elder merchant continued gazing at her with a crafty smile and an
eye ever on the alert for tokens of understanding. "Poor as they are,
Irishmen have still one thing that we will purchase, if they will sell:
their souls, which we have come to obtain for our mighty Prince, and
with the great price that we shall pay in

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

pure gold men can well save their lives till the starving time is over.
Why should men die a cruel, lingering death or drag through weary months
of miserable half-satisfied life when they may live well and merrily at
the cost of a soul, which is no good but to cause fear and pain? We take
men's souls and liberate them from all pain and care and remorse, and we
give in exchange money, much money, to procure comforts and ease; we
enrol men as vassals of our great lord, and he is no hard taskmaster to
those who own his sway."

### Slow Trade at First

When the poor widow heard these dreadful words she knew that the
strangers were demons come to tempt men's souls and to lure them to
Hell. She crossed herself, and fled from them in fear, praying to be
kept from temptation; and she would not return to her little cottage in
the forest, but stayed in the village warning men against the evil
demons who were tempting the starving people, till she too died of the
famine, and her house was left wholly to the strangers. Yet the
merchants fared ever well, better than before her departure, and those
who ventured to the forest dwelling found good food and rich wine, which
the strangers sometimes gave to their visitors, with crafty hints of
abundance to be easily obtained. Then when timid individuals asked the
way to win these comforts the strangers began their tempting, and
represented the ease to be gained by the sale of men's souls. One man,
bolder than the rest, made a bargain with the demons and gave them his
soul for three hundred crowns of gold, and from that time he in his turn
became a tempter. He boasted of his wealth, of the rich food the
merchants gave him at times, of the potent wine he drank from their
generously opened bottles, and,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

best of all, he vaunted his freedom from pity, conscience, or remorse.

### Trade Increases

Gradually many people came to the forest dwelling and trafficked with
the demon merchants. The purchase of souls went on busily, and the
demons paid prices varying according to the worth of the soul and the
record of its former sins; but to all who sold they gave food and wine,
and in gloating over their gold, and satisfying hunger and thirst, men
forgot to ask whence came this food and wine and the endless stores of
coin. Now many people ventured into the forest to deal with the demons,
and the narrow track grew into a broad beaten way with the numbers of
those who came, and all returned fed and warmed, and bearing bags heavy
with coin, and the promise of abundant food and easy service. Those who
had sold their souls rioted with the money, for the demons gave them
food, and they bought wine from the inexhaustible stores of the evil
merchants. The poor, lost people knew that there was no hope for them
after death, and they tried by all means to keep themselves alive and to
enjoy what was yet left to them; but their mirth was fearful and they
durst not stop to think.

### Cathleen Hears of the Demon Traders

At first the Countess Cathleen knew nothing of the terrible doings of
the demons, for she never passed beyond her castle gates, but spent her
time in prayer for her people's safety and for the speedy return of her
messengers; but when the starving throng of pensioners at her gates grew
daily less, and there were fewer claimants for the pitiful allowance
which was all she had to give, she wondered if some other mightier
helper had come

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

to Ireland. But she could hear of none, and soon the shameless rioting
and drunkenness in the village came to her knowledge, and she wondered
yet more whence her clansmen obtained the means for their excesses, for
she felt instinctively that the origin of all this rioting must be evil.
Cathleen therefore called to her an old peasant, whose wife had died of
hunger in the early days of the famine, so that he himself had longed to
die and join her; but when he came to her she was horror-struck by the
change in him. Now he came flushed with wine, with defiant look and
insolent bearing, and his face was full of evil mirth as he tried to
answer soberly the Countess's questions.

"Why do the villagers and strangers no longer come to me for food? I
have but little now to give, but all are welcome to share it with me and
my household."

### The Peasant's Story

"They do not come, O Countess, because they are no longer starving. They
have better food and wine, and abundance of money to buy more."

"Whence then have they obtained the money, the food, and the wine for
the drinking-bouts, the tumult of which reaches me even in my oratory?"

Lady, they have received all from the generous merchants who are in the
forest dwelling where old Mairi formerly lived; she is dead now, and
these noble strangers keep open house in her cottage night and day; they
are so wealthy that they need not stint their bounty, and so powerful
that they can find good food, enough for all who go to them. Since
Brigit died (your old servant, lady) her husband and son work no more,
but serve the strange merchants, and urge all men to join them; and I,
and many others, have

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

done so, and we are now wealthy" (here he showed the Countess a handful
of gold) "and well fed, and have wine as much as heart can desire."

"But do you give them nothing in return for all their generosity? Are
they so noble that they ask nothing in requital of their bounty?"

### "Good Gold for Souls"

"Oh, yes, we give them something, but nothing of importance, nothing we
cannot spare. They arc merchants of souls, and buy them for their king,
and they pay good red gold for the useless, painful things. I have sold
my soul to them, and now I weep no more for my wife; I am gay, and have
wine enough and gold enough to help me through this dearth!"

"Alas!" sighed the Countess, "and what when you too die?" The old
peasant laughed at her grief as he said: "Then, as now, I shall have no
soul to trouble me with remorse or conscience"; and the Countess covered
her eyes with her hand and beckoned silently that he should go. In her
oratory, whither she betook herself immediately, she prayed with all her
spirit that the Virgin and all the saints would inspire her to defeat
the demons and to save her people's souls.

### Cathleen Tries to Check the Traffic

Next day Cathleen called together all the people in the village, her own
tribesmen and strangers. She offered them again a share of all she had,
and the daily rations she could distribute, but told them that all must
share alike and that she had nothing but the barest necessaries to
give--scanty portions of corn and meal, with milk from one or two
famine-stricken cows her servants had managed to keep alive. To this she
added that she had sent two trusty messengers for help,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

one to Ulster for cattle, and Fergus to England for corn and wine; they
must return soon, she felt sure, with abundant supplies, if men would
patiently await their return.

### In Vain

But all was useless. Her messengers, had sent no word of their return,
and the abundant supplies at the forest cottage were more easily
obtained, and were less carefully regulated, than those of the Countess
Cathleen. The merchants, too, were ever at hand with their cunning
wiles, and their active, persuasive dupes, who would gladly bring all
others into their own soulless condition. The wine given by the demons
warmed the hearts of all who drank, and the deceived peasants dreamed of
happiness when the famine was over, and so the passionate appeal of the
Countess failed, and the sale of souls continued merrily. The noise of
revelry grew daily louder and more riotous, and the drinkers cared
nothing for the death or departure or their dearest friends; while those
who died, died drunken and utterly reckless, or full of horror and
despair, reviling the crafty merchants who had deceived them with
promises of life and happiness. The evil influence clung all about the
countryside, and seemed in league with the pitiless powers of Nature
against the souls of men, till at last the stricken Countess, putting
her trust in God, sought out the forest lodge where the demon merchants
dwelt, trafficking for souls. The way was easy to find now, for a broad
beaten track led to the dwelling, and as the evil spirits saw Cathleen
coming slowly along the path their wicked eyes gleamed and their
clawlike hands worked convulsively in their jewelled gloves, for they
hoped she had come to sell her pure soul.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### She Visits the Demons

"What does the Countess Cathleen wish to obtain from two poor stranger
merchants?" said the elder with an evil smile; and the younger, bowing
deeply, said: "Lady, you may command us in all things, save what touches
our allegiance to our king." Cathleen replied: "I have no merchandise to
barter, nothing for trade with you, for you buy such things as I will
never sell: you buy men's souls for Hell. I come only to beg that you
will release the poor souls whom you have bought for Satan's kingdom,
and will have mercy on my ignorant people and deceive them no more. I
have yet some gold unspent and jewels unsold: take all here is, but let
my people go free." Then the merchants laughed aloud scornfully, and
rejected her offer. "Would you have us undo our work? Have we toiled,
then, for naught to extend our master's sway? Have we won for him so
many souls to dwell for ever in his kingdom and do his work, and shall
we give them back for your entreaties? We have gold enough, and food and
wine enough, fair lady. The souls we have bought we keep, for our master
gives us honour and rank proportioned to the number of souls we win for
him, and you may see by the golden circlets round our brows that we are
princes of his kingdom, and have brought him countless souls.
Nevertheless, there is one most rare and precious thing which could
redeem these bartered souls of Ireland's peasants, things of little
worth."

### They Make a Proposal

"Oh, what is that?" said the Countess. "If I have it, or can in any way
procure it, tell me, that I may redeem these deluded people's souls."

 

<span id="img_17600"></span>

[![](tn/17600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17600.jpg)

<span id="img_17700"></span>

[![''Cathleen signed the bond''](tn/17700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17700.jpg)  
''Cathleen signed the bond''  

 

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

"You have it now, fair saint. It is one pure soul, precious as
multitudes of more sin-stained souls. Our master would far rather have a
perfect and flawless pearl for his diadem than myriads of these cracked
and flawed crystals. Your soul, most saintly Countess, would redeem the
souls of all your tribe, if you would sell it to our king; it would be
the fairest jewel in his crown. But think not to save your people
otherwise, and beguile them no longer with false promises of help: your
messenger to Ulster lies sick of ague in the Bog of Allen, and no food
comes from England."

### False Tidings

                            "We saw a man  
Heavy with sickness in the Bog of Allen  
Whom you had bid buy cattle. Near Fair Head  
We saw your grain ships lying all becalmed  
In the dark night, and not less still than they  
Burned all their mirrored lanterns in the sea."

When Cathleen heard of the failure of her messengers to bring food it
seemed as if all hope were indeed over, and the demons smiled craftily
upon her as she turned silently to go, and laughed joyously to each
other when she had left their presence. Now they had good hope to win
her for their master; but they knew that their time was short, since
help was not far away.

"Last night, closed in the image of an owl,  
I hurried to the cliffs of Donegal,  
And saw, creeping on the uneasy surge,  
Those ships that bring the woman grain and meal;  
They are five days from us.  
                                I hurried east,  
A grey owl flitting, flitting in the dew,  
And saw nine hundred oxen toil through Meath,  
Driven on by goads of iron; they too, brother,  
Are full five days from us. Five days for traffic."

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

### Cathleen's Despair

The Countess then went back in bitter grief to her desolate castle,
where only faithful old servants now waited in the halls, and whispered
together in the dark corners, and, kneeling in her oratory, she prayed
far into the night for light in her darkness. As she prayed before the
altar she slept for very weariness, and was aroused by a sudden furious
knocking, and an outcry of "Thieves! Thieves!" Cathleen rose quickly
from the altar steps, and met her foster-mother, Oona, at the door of
the oratory; and Oona cried aloud: "Thieves have broken into the
treasure-chamber, and nothing is left!" Cathleen asked if this were
true, and discovered that not a single coin, not a single gem was left:
the demons had stolen all. And while the servants still mourned over the
lost treasures of the house there came another cry of "Thieves!
Thieves!" and an old peasant rushed in, exclaiming that all the food was
gone. That, alas! was true: the few sacks of meal which supplied the
scanty daily fare were emptied and the bags flung on the floor. Now
indeed the last poor resource was gone.

### A Desperate Decision

When the Countess heard of this last terrible misfortune a great light
broke upon her mind with a blinding flash, and showed her a way to save
others, even at the cost of her own salvation. It seemed God's answer to
her prayer for guidance, and she resolved to follow the inspiration thus
sent into her mind. She decided now what she would do; her mind was made
up, and the light which shines from extreme sacrifice of self was so
bright upon her face that her old nurse and her servants, wailing around
her, were

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

awe-stricken and durst not question or check her. She returned to her
oratory door, and, standing on the steps, looking down on her weeping
domestics, she cried:

                               "I am desolate,  
For a most sad resolve wakes in my heart;  
But always I have faith. Old men and women,  
Be silent; God does not forsake the world,  
        Mary Queen of Angels  
And all you clouds and clouds of saints, farewell!"

With one last long gaze at the little altar of her oratory she
resolutely closed the door and turned away.

### She Revisits the Demons

The next day the merchants in their forest lodge were still buying
souls, and giving food and wine to the starving peasants who sold. They
were buying men and women, sinful, terrified, afraid to die, eager to
live; buying them more cheaply than before because of the increase of
sin and terror. Bargains were being struck and bartering was in full
progress, when suddenly all the peasants stopped, shamefaced, as one
said, "Here comes the Countess Cathleen," and down the track she was
seen approaching slowly. One by one the peasants slunk away, and the
demon merchants were quite alone when Cathleen entered the little
cottage where they sat, with bags of coin on the table before them and
on the ground beside them. Again they greeted her with mocking respect,
and asked to know her will.

"Merchants, do you still buy souls for Hell?"

"Lady, our traffic prospers, for the famine lies long on the land, and
men would fain live till better days come again. Besides, we can give
them food and wine and wealth for future years; and all in exchange for
a mere soul, a little breath of wind."

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

"Perhaps the Countess Cathleen has come to deal with us," said the
younger.

"Merchant, you are right; I have come to bring you merchandise. I have a
soul to sell, so costly that perhaps the price is beyond your means."

The elder merchant replied joyfully: "No price is beyond our means, if
only the soul be worth the price; if it be a pure and stainless soul,
fit to join the angels and saints in Paradise, our master will gladly
pay all you ask. Whose is the soul, and what is the price?"

### Her Terms

"The people starve, therefore the people go  
Thronging to you. I hear a cry come from them,  
And it is in my ears by night and day:  
And I would have five hundred thousand crowns,  
To find food for them till the dearth go by;  
And have the wretched spirits you have bought  
For your gold crowns, released, and sent to God.  
The soul that I would barter is my soul."

### The Bond Signed

When the demons heard this, and knew that Cathleen was willing to give
her own soul as ransom for the souls of others, they were overjoyed,
their eyes flashed, the rubies of their golden crowns shot out fiery
gleams, and their fingers clutched the air as if they already held her
stainless soul. This would be a great triumph to their master, and they
would win great honour in Hell when they brought him a soul worth far,
far more than large abundance of ordinary sinful souls. Very carefully
they watched while the trembling Countess signed the bond which gave her
soul to Hell, very gladly they paid down the money for which she had
stipulated, and very joyously they saw the signs of speedy death in her
face, knowing, as they did, how soon the coming relief

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

would show her sacrifice to have been unnecessary, though now it was
irrevocable.

### General Lamentation

Sadly but resolutely she turned away, followed by her servants bearing
the bags of gold, and as she passed through the village a rumour ran
before her of what she had done. All men were sobered by the terrible
tidings, and the redeemed people waited for her coming, and followed her
weeping and lamenting, for now their souls were free again, and they
recognised the great sacrifice she had made for them; but it was too
late to save her, though now all would have died for her. Cathleen
passed on into her castle, and there in the courtyard she distributed
the money to all her people, and bade them dwell quietly in obedience
till her steward returned.. She herself, she said, could not stay; she
must go on a long and dark journey, for her people's need had broken her
heart and conquered her; she was no longer her own, but belonged to the
dark lord of Hell; she could not bid them pray for her, nor could she
pray for herself.

### Cathleen Fades Away

Her people, who knew the great price at which she had redeemed them,
besought the Blessed Virgin and all the saints to have mercy on her; and
all the souls she had released, on earth and in Heaven, prayed for her
night and day, and the blessed saints interceded for her. Yet from day
to day the Countess Cathleen faded, and the demons, ceasing all other
traffic, lurked in waiting to catch her soul as she died. Night and day
her heart-broken foster-mother Oona tended her; but she grew feebler,
till it seemed that she would die before Fergus returned.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### The Steward Returns

On the fifth day, however, glad tidings came. Fergus had landed, and
sent word that he was bringing corn and meal as quickly as possible;
also a wandering peasant brought a message that nine hundred oxen were
within one day's journey of her castle; and when the gentle Cathleen
heard this, and knew that her people were safe, she died with a smile on
her lips and thanks to God for her people on her tongue. That same night
a great tempest broke over the land, which drove away the pestilential
mists, and left the country free from evil influences, for with the
morning men found the forest lodge crushed beneath the fallen trees, and
the two demon merchants vanished. All gathered round the castle and
mourned for the Countess Cathleen, for none knew how it would go with
her spirit; they feared that the evil demons had borne her soul to Hell.
All had prayed for her, but there had been no sign, no token of
forgiveness. Nevertheless their prayers were heard and answered.

### The Demons Cheated

In the next night, when the great storm had passed away and the vapours
no longer filled the air, when Fergus had distributed food and wine, and
the oxen had been apportioned to every family, so that plenty reigned in
every house, when only Cathleen's castle lay desolate, shrouded in
gloom, the faithful old nurse Oona, watching by the body of her darling,
had a glorious vision. She saw the splendid armies of the angels who
guard mankind from evil, she saw the saints who had suffered and
overcome, and amid them was the Countess Cathleen, happy with saints and
angels in the bliss of Paradise; for her love had redeemed her own soul
as well as the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

souls of others, and God had pardoned her sin because of her
self-sacrifice.

"The light beats down: the gates of pearl are wide,  
And she is passing to the floor of peace,  
And Mary of-the seven times wounded heart  
Has kissed her lips, and the long blessed hair  
Has fallen on her face; the Light of Lights  
Looks always on the motive, not the deed,  
The Shadow of Shadows on the deed alone."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[159:1](hml12.htm#fr_14) C. Kingsley.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[160:1](hml12.htm#fr_15) The poetical quotations
throughout this story are taken, by permission, from Mr. W. B. Yeats's
play "The Countess Cathleen."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Cuchulain, the Champion of Ireland](hml13)
