[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap01)  [Next](chap03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XSSI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk Tales From the Russian*, by Verra Xenophontovna Kalamatiano de
Blumenthal, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### SEVEN SIMEONS

<span id="img_image012"></span>

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| ![](img/image012.jpg) |

IN an empire, in a country beyond many seas and islands, beyond high
mountains, beyond large rivers, upon a level expanse, as if spread upon
a table, there stood a large town, and in that town there lived a Tsar
called Archidei, the son of Aggei; therefore he was called Aggeivitch.

A famous Tsar he was, and a clever one. His wealth could not be counted;
his warriors were innumerable. There were forty times forty towns in his
kingdom, and in each one of these towns there were ten palaces with
silver doors and golden ceilings and magnificent crystal windows.

For his council twelve wise men were selected, each one of them having a
beard half a yard long and a head full of wisdom. These advisers offered
nothing but truth to their father sovereign; none ever dared advance a
lie.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

How could such a Tsar be anything but happy? But it is true, indeed,
that neither wealth nor wisdom give happiness when the heart is not at
ease, and even in golden palaces the poor heart often aches.

So it was with the Tsar Archidei; he was rich and clever, besides being
a handsome fellow; but he could not find a bride to his taste, a bride
with wit and beauty equal to his own. And this was the cause of the Tsar
Archidei's sorrow and distress.

One day he was sitting in his golden armchair looking out of the window
lost in thought. He had gazed for quite a while before he noticed
foreign sailors landing opposite the imperial palace. The sailors ran
their ship up to the wharf, reefed their white sails, threw the heavy
anchor into the sea and prepared the plank ready to go ashore. Before
them all walked an old merchant; white was his beard and he had about
him the air of a wise man. An idea suddenly occurred to the Tsar: "Sea
merchants generally are well informed on

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

many subjects. If I ask them, perchance I shall find that they have met
somewhere a princess, beautiful and clever, suitable for me, the Tsar
Archidei."

Without delay the order was given to call the sea merchants into the
halls of the palace.

The merchant guests appeared, prayed to the holy icons hanging in the
corner, bowed to the Tsar, bowed to the wise advisers. The Tsar ordered
his servants to serve them with tumblers of strong green wine. The
guests drank the strong green wine and wiped their beards with
embroidered towels. Then the Tsar Archidei addressed them:

"We are aware that you gallant sea merchants cross all the big waters
and see many wonderful things. My desire is to ask you about something,
and you must give a straightforward answer without any deceit or
evasion."

"So be it, mighty Tsar Archidei Aggei-vitch," answered the merchant
guests, bowing.

"Well, then, can you tell me if somewhere in an empire or kingdom, or
among

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

great princes, there is a maiden as beautiful and wise as I myself, Tsar
Archidei; an illustrious maiden who would be a proper wife for me, a
suitable Tsaritza for my country?"

The merchant guests seemed to be puzzled, and after a long silence the
eldest among them thus replied:

"Indeed, I once heard that yonder beyond the great sea, on an island
called Buzan, there is a great country; and the sovereign of that land
has a daughter named Helena, a princess very beautiful, not less so, I
dare say, than thyself. And wise she is, too; a wise man once tried for
three years to guess a riddle that she gave, and did not succeed."

"How far is that island, pray tell, and where are the roads that lead to
it?"

"The island is not near," answered the old merchant. "If one chooses the
wide sea he must journey ten years. Besides, the way to it is not known
to us. Moreover, even suppose we did know the way, it seems that the
Princess Helena is not a bride for thee."

The Tsar Archidei shouted with anger:

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

''How dost thou dare to speak such words, thou, a long-bearded buck?"

"Thy will be done, but think for thyself. Suppose thou shouldst send an
envoy to the island of Buzan. He would require ten long years to go
there, ten years equally long to come back, and so his journey would
require fully twenty years. By that time a most beautiful princess would
grow old—a girl's beauty is like the swallow, a bird of passage; it
lasts not long."

The Tsar Archidei became thoughtful. "Well," he said to the merchant
guests, "you have my thanks, guests of passage, respectable men of
trade. Go in God's name, transact business in my tsarstvo without any
taxes whatever. What to do about the beautiful Princess Helena I will
try to think out by myself."

The merchants bowed low and left the Tsar's rich palace.

The Tsar Archidei sat still, wrapped in thought, but he could find
neither beginning nor end to the problem. "Let me ride into the wide
fields," he said; "let me forget my sorrow amid the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

excitement of the noble hunt, hoping that the future may bring advice."

The falconers appeared, cheerful notes from the golden trumpets
resounded, and falcons and hawks were soon slumbering under their velvet
caps as they sat quietly on the fingers of the hunters.

The Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch came with his men to a wide, wide field.
All of his men were watching the moment to loose their falcons in order
to let the birds pursue a long-legged heron or a white-breasted swan.

Now, you, my listeners, must understand that the fairy tale is quick,
but life is not. The Tsar Archidei was on horseback for a long while,
and finally came to a green valley. Looking around he saw a well
cultivated field where the golden ears of the grain were already ripe,
and oh, how beautiful! The Tsar stopped in admiration.

"I presume," he exclaimed, "that good workers are owners of this place,
honest plowmen and diligent sowers. If only all fields in my tsarstvo
were equally cultivated, my people need never know

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

what hunger means, and there would even be plenty to send beyond the sea
to be exchanged for silver and gold."

Then the Tsar Archidei gave orders to inquire who the owners of the
field were, and what were their names. Hunters, grooms, and servants
rushed in all directions, and discovered seven brave fellows, all of
them fair, red-cheeked, and very handsome. They were dining according to
the peasant fashion, which means that they were eating rye bread with
onions, and drinking clear water. Their blouses were red, with a golden
galloon around the neck, and they were so much alike that one could
hardly be recognized from another.

The royal messengers approached.

"Whose field is this?" they asked; "this field with golden wheat?"

The seven brave peasants answered cheerfully:

"This is our field; we plowed it, and we also have sown the golden
wheat."

"And what kind of people are you?"

"We are the Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch's peasants, farmers, and we are

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="img_image013"></span> ![](img/image013.jpg)

*"Hunters, grooms, and servants rushed in all directions"*

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

brothers, sons of one father and mother. The name for all of us is
Simeon, so you understand we are seven Simeons."

This answer was faithfully delivered to the Tsar Archidei by the envoys,
and the Tsar at once desired to see the brave peasants, and ordered them
to be called before him. The seven Simeons presently appeared and bowed.
The Tsar looked at them with his bright eyes and asked them:

"What kind of people are you whose field is so well cultivated?"

One of the seven brothers, the eldest of them, answered:

"We are all thy peasants, simpletons, without any wisdom, born of
peasant parents, all of us children of the same father and the same
mother, and all having the same name, Simeon. Our old father taught us
to pray to God, to obey thee, to pay taxes faithfully, and besides to
work and toil without rest. He also taught to each of us a trade, for
the old saying is, 'A trade is no burden, but a profit.' The old father
wished us to keep our trades for a cloudy day, but

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

never to forsake our own fields, and always to be contented, and plow
and harrow diligently.

"He also used to say, 'If one does not neglect the mother earth, but
thoroughly harrows and sows in due season, then she, our mother, will
reward generously, and will give plenty of bread, besides preparing a
soft place for the everlasting rest when one is old and tired of life.'"

The Tsar Archidei liked the simple answer of the peasant, and said:

"Take my praise, brave good fellows, my peasants, tillers of the soil,
sowers of wheat, gatherers of gold. And now tell me, what trades did
your father teach you, and what do you know?"

The first Simeon answered:

"My trade is not a very wise one. If thou wouldst let me have materials
and working men, then I could build a post, a white stone column,
reaching beyond the clouds, almost to the sky."

"Good enough!" exclaimed the Tsar Archidei. "And thou, the second
Simeon, what is thy trade?"

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

The second Simeon was quick to give answer:

"My trade is a simple one. If my brother will build a white stone
column, I can climb upon that column high up in the sky, and I shall see
from above all the empires and all the kingdoms under the sun, and
everything which is going on in those foreign countries."

"Thy trade is not so bad either," and the Tsar smiled and looked at the
third brother. "And thou, third Simeon, what trade is thine?"

The third Simeon also had his answer ready:

"My trade is simple, too; that is to say, a peasant's trade. If thou art
in need of ships, thy learned men of foreign birth build them for thee
as well as their wisdom teaches them. But if thou wilt order, I will
build them simply—one, two! and the ship is ready. My ships will be the
result of the quick headwork of a peasant simpleton. But where a foreign
ship sails a year, mine will sail an hour, and where others take ten
years, mine will take not longer than a week."

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

"Well, well!" laughed the Tsar. "And thy trade, the fourth Simeon?" he
asked.

The fourth brother bowed.

"My trade needs no wisdom either. If my brother will build thee a ship,
I then will sail that ship; and if an enemy gives chase or a tempest
rises, I'll seize the ship by the black prow and plunge her into the
deep waters where there is eternal quiet; and after the storm is over or
the enemy far, I'll again guide her to the surface of the wide sea."

"Good!" approved the Tsar. "And thou, fifth Simeon, what dost thou know?
Hast thou also a trade?"

"My trade, Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch, is not a fair one, for I am a
blacksmith. If thou wouldst order a shop built for me, I at once would
forge a self-shooting gun, and no eagle far above in the sky or wild
beast in the wood would be safe from that gun."

"Not bad either," answered the Tsar Archidei, well pleased. "Thy turn
now, sixth Simeon."

"My trade is no trade," answered the sixth Simeon, rather humbly. "If my

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

brother shoots a bird or a beast, never mind what or where, I can catch
it before it falls down, catch it even better than a hunting dog. If the
prey should fall into the blue sea, I'll find it at the sea's bottom;
should it fall into the depth of the dark woods, I'll find it there in
the midst of night; should it get caught in a cloud, I'll find it even
there."

The Tsar Archidei evidently liked the trade of the sixth Simeon very
well also. These were all simple trades, you see, without any wisdom
whatever, but rather entertaining. The Tsar also liked the peasants'
speech, and he said to them:

"Thanks, my peasants, tillers of the soil, my faithful workers. Your
father's words are true ones: 'A trade is not a burden, but a profit.'
Now come to my capital for a trial; people like you are welcome. And
when the season for harvest arrives, the time to reap, to bind in
bundles the golden grain, to thresh and carry the wheat to the market, I
will let you go home with my royal grace."

Then all the seven Simeons bowed

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

very low. "Thine is the will," said they, "and we are thy obedient
subjects."

Here the Tsar Archidei looked at the youngest Simeon and remembered that
he had not asked him about his trade. So he said: "And thou, seventh
Simeon, what is thy trade?"

"I have none, Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch. I learned many, but not a single
one did me any good, and though I know something very well, I am not
sure your majesty would like it."

"Let us know thy secret," ordered the Tsar Archidei.

"No, Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch! Give me, first of all, thy royal word not
to kill me for my inborn talent, but to have mercy upon me. Then only
will I be willing to disclose my secret."

"Thy wish is granted. I give thee my royal word, true and not to be
broken, that whatever thou shalt disclose to me, I will have mercy upon
thee."

Hearing these kind words, the seventh Simeon smiled, looked around,
shook his curls and began:

"My trade is one for which there is

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

no mercy in thy tsarstvo, and it is the one thing I am able to do. My
trade is to steal and to hide the trace of how and when. There is no
treasure, no fortunate possession, not even a bewitched one, nor a
secret place that could be forbidden me if it be my wish to steal."

As soon as these bold words of the seventh Simeon reached the Tsar's
ears he became very angry.

"No!" he exclaimed, "I certainly shall not pardon thee, thief and
burglar! I will give orders for thy cruel death! I will have thee
chained and thrown into my subterranean prison with nothing but bread
and water for food until thou forget thy trade!"

"Great and merciful Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch, postpone thy orders.
Listen to my peasant talk," prayed the seventh Simeon. "Our old Russian
saying is: 'He is no thief who is not caught, and neither is he who
steals, but the one who instigates the theft.' If my wish had been to
steal, I should have done it long ago. I should have stolen thy
treasures and thy judges would not have objected

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

to take a small share of them, and I could have built a white-walled
stone palace and have been rich. But, mark this: I am a stupid peasant
of low origin. I know well enough how to steal, but will not. If thy
wish were to learn my trade, how could I keep it from thee? And if thou,
for this sincere acknowledgment, wilt have me put to death, then what is
the value of thy royal word?"

The Tsar thought a moment. "For this time," he said, "I will not let
thee die, for it pleases me to grant thee my grace. But from this very
day, this very hour, thou never shalt see God's light nor the bright
sunshine nor the silvery moon. Thou shalt never walk at liberty through
the wide fields, but thou, my dear guest, shalt dwell in a palace where
no sunny ray ever penetrates. You, my servants, take him, chain his
hands and his feet and lead him to my chief jailor. And you six Simeons
follow me. You have my grace and reward. To-morrow every one of you will
begin to work for me according to his gifts and capacities."

The six Simeons followed the Tsar

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Archidei, and the seventh brother, the youngest, the beloved one, was
fallen upon by the servants, taken away to the dark prison and heavily
chained.

The Tsar Archidei ordered carpenters to be sent to the first Simeon, as
well as masons and blacksmiths and all sorts of workingmen. He also
ordered a supply of bricks, stones, iron, clay, and cement. Without any
delay, Simeon, the first brother, began to build a column, and according
to his simple peasant's habits his work progressed rapidly, and not a
moment was wasted in clever combinations. In a short time the white
column was ready, and lo, how high it went! as high as the great
planets. The smaller stars were beneath it, and from above the people
seemed to be like bugs.

The second Simeon climbed the column, looked around, listened to all
sounds, and came down. The Tsar Archidei, anxious to know about
everything under the sun, ordered him to report, and Simeon did so. He
told the Tsar Archidei all the wonderful doings all over the world. He
told how one

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

king was fighting another, where there was war and where there was
peace, and with other things the second Simeon even mentioned deep
secrets, quite surprising secrets, which made the Tsar Archidei smile;
and the courtiers, encouraged by the royal smile, roared with laughter.

Meantime the third Simeon was accomplishing something in his line. After
crossing himself three times the fellow rolled up his sleeves to the
elbow, took a hatchet and—one, two—without any haste built a vessel.
What a curious vessel it was! The Tsar Archidei watched the wonderful
structure from the shore and as soon as the orders were given for
sailing, the new vessel sailed away like a white-winged hawk. The cannon
were shooting and upon the masts, instead of rigging, were drawn strings
upon which musicians were playing the national tunes.

As soon as the wonderful vessel sailed into deep water, the fourth
Simeon snatched the prow and no trace of it remained on the surface; the
whole vessel

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

went to the depths like a heavy stone. In an hour or so Simeon, with his
left hand, led the ship to the blue surface of the sea again, and with
his right he presented to the Tsar a most magnificent sturgeon for his
"kulibiaka," the famous Russian fish pie.

While the Tsar Archidei enjoyed himself with looking at the marvelous
vessel, the fifth Simeon built a blacksmith shop in the court back of
the palace. There he blew the bellows and heated the iron. The noise
from his hammers was great and the result of his peasant work was a
self-shooting gun. The Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch went to the wild fields
and perceived high above him, very high under the sky, an eagle flying.

"Now!" exclaimed the Tsar, "there is an eagle forgetting himself with
watching the sun; shoot it. Perchance thou shalt have the good luck to
hit it. Then I will honor thee."

Simeon shook his locks, smiled, put into his gun a silver bullet, aimed,
shot, and the eagle fell swiftly to the earth. The sixth Simeon did not
even allow the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

eagle to fall to the ground, but, quick as a flash, he ran under it with
a plate, caught it on that big plate and presented his prey to the Tsar
Archidei.

"Thanks, thanks, my brave fellows, faithful peasants, tillers of the
soil!" exclaimed the Tsar Archidei gayly. "I see now plainly that all of
you are men of trade and I wish to reward you. But now go to your dinner
and rest awhile."

The six Simeons bowed to the Tsar very low, prayed to the holy icons and
went. They were already seated, had time to swallow each one a tumbler
of the strong, green wine, took up the round wooden spoons in order to
attack the "stchi," the Russian cabbage soup, when lo! the Tsar's fool
came running and shaking his striped cap with the round bells and
shouted:

"You ignorant simpletons, unlearned peasants, moujiks! Is it a suitable
moment for dinner when the Tsar wants you? Go in haste!"

All the six started running toward the palace, thinking within
themselves: "What can have happened?" In front

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of the palace stood the guards with their iron staves; in the halls all
the wise and learned people were gathered together, and the Tsar himself
was sitting on his high throne looking very grim and thoughtful.

"Listen to me," he said when the peasants approached, "you, my brave
fellows, my clever brothers Simeon. I like your trades and I think, as
do my wise advisers, that if thou, the second Simeon, art able to see
everything going on under the sun, thou shouldst climb quickly on yonder
column and glance around to see if there is, as they say, beyond the
great sea an island, Buzan by name. And see if on that island, as men
assert, there is a mighty kingdom, and in that kingdom a mighty king,
and if that king, as the story goes, has a daughter, the most beautiful
princess Helena."

The second Simeon bowed and ran quickly, even forgetting to put on his
cap. He went straight to the column, climbed it, looked around, came
down, and this was his report:

"Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch, I have

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

accomplished thy sovereign wish. I looked far beyond the sea and have
seen the island Buzan. Mighty is the king there, and he is proud and
merciless. He sits within his palace and his speech is always the same:

"'I am a great king and I have a most beautiful daughter, the princess
Helena. There is no one in the universe more beautiful and more wise
than she; there is no bridegroom worthy of her in any place under the
bright sun, no tsar, no king, no tsarevitch, no korolevitch. To no one
will I ever give my daughter, the princess Helena, and whoever shall
dare to court her, on such an one will I declare war, ruin his country,
and capture himself.'"

"And how great is the army of that king?" asked the Tsar Archidei; "and
also how far is his kingdom from my tsarstvo?"

''Well, according to the measure of my eyes," answered Simeon, "I fancy
it would take a ship ten years less two days; or, if it happened to be
stormy, I am afraid even a little longer than ten

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

years. And that king has not a small army. I have seen altogether a
hundred thousand spearmen, a hundred thousand armed men, and a hundred
thousand or more could be gathered from the Tsar's court, from his
servants and all kinds of underlings. Besides, there is no small
armament of guards held in reserve for a special occasion, fed and
petted by the king."

The Tsar Archidei remained for a long time in thoughtful silence and
finally addressed his court people:

"My warriors and advisers: I have but one wish; I want the princess
Helena for my wife. But tell me, how can I reach her?"

The wise advisers remained silent, hiding themselves behind each other.
The third Simeon looked around, bowed to the Tsar, and said:

"Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch, forgive my simple words. How to reach the
island of Buzan there is no need to worry about. Sit down on my ship;
she is simply built, and equipped without any wise tricks. Where others
require a

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

year she takes but a day, and where other ships take ten years mine will
take, let us say, a week. Only order thine advisers to decide whether we
ought to fight for or peacefully court the beautiful princess."

"Now, my warriors brave, my advisers sage," spoke the Tsar Archidei to
his men, "how will you decide upon this matter? Who among you will go to
fight for the princess, or who will be shrewd enough to bring her
peacefully here? I will pour gold and silver over that one. I will give
to him the first rank among the very first."

And again the brave warriors and the sage advisers remained silent. The
Tsar grew angry; he seemed to be ready for a terrible word. Then, as if
somebody had asked the fool, out he jumped from behind the wise people
with his foolish talk, shook his striped fool's cap, rang his many
bells, and shouted:

"Why so silent, wise men? why so deep in thought? You have big heads and
long beards; it would seem that there is plenty of wisdom, so why not

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

show it? To go to the island of Buzan to obtain the bride does not mean
to lose gold or army. Have you already forgotten the seventh Simeon?
Why, it will be simple enough for him to steal the princess Helena.
Afterwards let the king of Buzan come here to fight us, and we will
welcome him as an honored guest. But do not forget that he must take ten
years' time to reach us, and in ten years—ah me! I have heard that some
wise man somewhere undertook to teach a horse to talk in ten years!"

"Good! Good!" exclaimed the Tsar Archidei, forgetting even his anger. "I
thank thee, striped fool. I certainly shall reward thee. Thou must have
a new cap with noisy bells, and each one of thy children a ginger
pancake. You, faithful servants, run quickly and bring here the seventh
Simeon."

According to the Tsar's bidding the heavy iron gates of the dark prison
were thrown open, the heavy chains were taken off and the seventh Simeon
appeared before the eager eyes of the Tsar Archidei, who thus addressed
him:

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

"Listen to me attentively, thou seventh Simeon, for I had almost decided
to grant thee a high honor; to keep thee thy life long in my prison. But
if thou shouldst prove useful to me, then will I give thee freedom; and
besides, thou shalt have a share out of my treasures. Art thou able to
steal the beautiful princess Helena from her father, the mighty king of
the island of Buzan?"

"And why not?" cheerfully laughed the seventh Simeon. "There is nothing
difficult about it. She is not a pearl, and I presume she is not under
too many locks. Only order the ship which my brother had built for thee
to be loaded with velvets and brocades, with Persian rugs, beautiful
pearls and precious stones, and bid my four brothers come along with me.
But the two eldest keep thou as hostages."

Once said, quickly done. The Tsar Archidei gave orders while all were
running hither and thither, and everything was finished so promptly that
a short-haired girl would scarcely have had time to plait her hair. The
ship, laden with

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

velvets, brocades, with Persian rugs and pearls, and costly precious
stones, was ready; the five brothers, the brave Simeons, were ready;
they bowed to the Tsar, spread sail, and disappeared.

The ship floated swiftly over the blue waters; she flew like a hawk in
comparison with the slow merchant vessels, and in a week after the five
Simeons had left their native land they sighted the island of Buzan.

The island appeared to be surrounded with cannon as thick as peas; the
gigantic guards walked up and down the shores tugging fiercely at their
big mustaches. As soon as the ship became visible from a tower somebody
shouted through a Dutch trumpet:

"Stop! Answer! What kind of people are ye? Why come ye here?"

The seventh Simeon answered from the ship: "We are a peaceful people,
not enemies but friends, merchants everywhere welcomed as guests. We
bring foreign merchandise. We want to sell, to buy, and to exchange. We
also have gifts for your king and for the korolevna."

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

The five brothers, our brave Simeons, lowered the boat, loaded it with
choice Venetian velvets, brocades, pearls, and precious stones, and
covered all with Persian rugs. They rowed to the wharf, and landing near
the king's palace, at once carried their gifts to the king.

The beautiful korolevna Helena was sitting in her terem. She was a fair
maiden with eyes like stars and eyebrows like precious sable. When she
looked at one it was like receiving a gift, and when she walked it was
like the graceful swimming of a swan. The korolevna was quick to notice
the brave, handsome brothers and at once called her nurses and maidens.

"Hasten, my dear nurses, and you, swift maidens, find out what kind of
strangers are these coming to our royal palace."

All of the nurses, all of the maidens, ran out with questions ready. The
seventh Simeon answered them thus:

"We are merchant guests, peaceful people. Our native land is the country
of the Tsar Archidei Aggeiviteh, a great

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Tsar indeed. We came to sell, to buy, to exchange; moreover, we have
gifts for the king and his princess. We do hope the king will favor us
and will accept these trifles; if not for himself, at least for the
adornment of his court's lovely maidens."

When Helena heard these words she at once let the merchants in. And the
merchants appeared, bowed low to the beautiful korolevna, unfolded the
showy velvets and golden brocades, strewed around the pearls and
precious stones, such stones and pearls as had never been seen before in
Buzan. The nurses and the maidens opened their mouths in amazement, and
the korolevna herself seemed to be greatly pleased. The seventh Simeon,
quick to understand, smiled and said:

"We all know thee to be as wise as beautiful, but now thou art evidently
joking about us or mocking us. These simple wares are altogether too
plain for thine own use. Accept them for thy nurses and maidens for
their everyday attire, and these stones send away to the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

kitchen boys to play with. But if thou wilt listen to me, let me say
that on our ship we have very different velvets and brocades; we have
also precious stones, far more precious than any one has ever seen; yet
we dared not bring them at once lest we might not suit thy temper and
thy hearty wish. If thou shouldst decide to come in person and choose
anything from among our possessions, they all are thine and we bow to
thee gratefully for the bright glance of thy beautiful eyes."

The royal maid liked well enough these polite words of the handsome
Simeon, and to her father she went:

"Father and king, there have come to visit us some foreign merchants and
they have brought some goods never before seen in Buzan. Give me thy
permission to go on board their wonderful ship to choose what things I
like. They also have rich gifts for thee."

The king hesitated before answering her, frowning and scratching behind
his ear.

"Well," he said at last, "be it accord-

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

ing to thy wish, my daughter, my beautiful korolevna. And you, my
counselors, order my royal vessel to be ready, the cannons loaded, and a
hundred of my bravest warriors detailed to escort the vessel. Send
besides a thousand heavy armed warriors to guard the korolevna on her
way to the merchants' vessel."

Then the king's vessel started from the island of Buzan. Numbers of
cannon and warriors protected the princess, and the royal father
remained quiet at home.

When they reached the merchants' ship the korolevna Helena came down,
and at once the crystal bridge was placed and the korolevna with all her
nurses and maidens went on board the foreign ship, such a ship as they
had never seen before, never even dreamed of. Meanwhile the guards kept
watch.

The seventh Simeon showed the lovely guests everywhere. He was talking
smoothly while leisurely unfolding his precious goods. The korolevna
listened attentively, looked around curiously, and seemed well pleased.

At the same moment the fourth

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Simeon, watching the proper moment, snapped the prow and down to
mysterious depths went the ship where no one could see her. The people
on the king's vessel screamed in terror, the warriors looked like
drunken fools, and the guards only opened their eyes wider than before.
What should they do? They directed the vessel back to the island and
appeared before the king with their terrible tale.

"Oh, my daughter, my darling princess Helena! It is God who punishes me
for my pride. I never wanted thee to marry. No king, no prince, would I
consider worthy of thee; and now—oh! now I know that thou art wedded to
the deep sea! As for me, I am left alone for the rest of my sorrowful
days."

Then all at once he looked around and shouted to his men:

"You fools! what were you thinking about? You shall all lose your heads!
Guards, throw them into dungeons! The most cruel death shall be theirs,
such a death that the children of their great-grandchildren shall shiver
to hear the tale!"

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

Now, while the king of Buzan raved and grieved, the ship of the brothers
Simeon, like a golden fish, swam under the blue waters, and when the
island was lost from sight the fourth Simeon brought her to the surface
and she rose upon the waters like a white-winged gull. By this time the
princess was becoming anxious about the long time they were away from
home, and she exclaimed:

"Nurses and maidens, we are leisurely looking around, but I fancy my
father the king finds the time sadly long." She hastily walked to the
deck of the ship, and behold!—only the wide sea was around her like a
mirror! Where was her native island, where the royal vessel? There was
nothing visible but the blue sea. The princess screamed, struck her
white bosom with both hands, transformed herself into a white swan and
flew high into the sky. But the fifth Simeon, watching closely, lost no
time, snapped his lucky gun and the white swan was shot. His brother,
the sixth Simeon, caught the white swan, but lo! instead of the white
swan there was a

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

silvery fish, which slipped away from him. Simeon caught the fish, but
the pretty, silvery fish turned into a small mouse running around the
ship. Simeon did not let it reach a hole, but swifter than a cat caught
the mouse,—and the princess Helena, as beautiful and natural as before,
appeared before them, fair-faced, bright-eyed.

On a lovely morning a week later the Tsar Archidei was sitting by the
window of his palace lost in thought. His eyes were turned toward the
sea, the wide, blue sea. He was sad at heart and could not eat; feasts
had no interest for him, the costly dishes had no taste, the honey drink
seemed weak. All his thoughts and longings were for the princess Helena,
the beautiful one, the only one.

What is that far away upon the waters? Is it a white gull? Or are those
white wings not wings, but sails? No, it is not a gull, but the ship of
the brothers Simeon, and she approaches as rapidty as the wind which
blows her sails. The cannon boom, native melodies are played on the
cords of the masts. Soon the ship is

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

anchored, the crystal bridge prepared, and the korolevna Helena, the
beautiful princess, appears like a never-setting sun, her eyes like
bright stars, and oh! how happy is the Tsar Archidei!

"Run quick, my faithful servants, you brave officers of state, and you,
too, my bodyguard, and all you useful and ornamental fellows of my
palace, run and prepare, shoot off rockets and ring the bells in order
to give a joyful welcome to korolevna Helena, the beautiful."

All hastened to their tasks, to shoot, to ring the bells, to open the
gates, to honorably receive the korolevna. The Tsar himself came out to
meet the beautiful princess, took her white hands and helped her into
the palace.

"Welcome! welcome!" said the Tsar Archidei. "Thy fame, korolevna Helena,
reached me, but never could I imagine such beauty as is thine. Yet,
though I admire thee, I do not want to separate thee from thy father.
Say the word and my faithful servants will take thee back to him. If
thou choosest, however, to remain in my tzarstvo, be the tsaritza

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

over my country and rule over me, the Tzar Archidei, also."

At these words of the Tsar the korolevna Helena threw such a glance at
the Tsar that it seemed to him the sun was laughing, the moon singing,
and the stars dancing all around.

Well, what more is there to be said? You certainly can imagine the rest.
The courtship was not long and the wedding feast was soon ready, for you
know kings always have everything at their command. The brothers Simeon
were at once dispatched to the king of Buzan with a message from the
korolevna, his daughter, and this is what she wrote:

"Dear father, mighty king and sovereign: I have found a husband
according to my heart's wish and I am asking thy fatherly blessing. My
bridegroom, the Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch, sends his counselors to thee,
begging thee to come to our wedding."

At the very moment when the merchant ship was to land at the island of
Buzan, crowds of people had gathered to witness the execution of the
unfortunate

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

guards and brave warriors whose ill-luck it was to have allowed the
princess to disappear.

"Stop!" Simeon the seventh shouted aloud from the deck. "We bring a
missive from the korolevna Helena. Holla!"

Very glad indeed was the king of the island of Buzan, and glad were all
his subjects. The missive was read and the condemned were pardoned.

"Evidently," the king said, "it is fated that the handsome and witty
Tsar Archidei and my beautiful daughter are to become husband and wife."

Then the king treated the envoys and the brothers Simeon very well and
sent his blessings with them, as he himself did not wish to go, being
very old. The ship soon returned and the Tsar Archidei rejoiced over it
with his beautiful bride, and at once summoned the seven Simeons, the
seven brave peasants.

He said to them: "Thanks! thanks! my peasants, my brave tillers of the
soil. Take as much gold as you wish. Take silver also and ask for
whatever is your heart's desire. Everything shall be given

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

you with my mighty hand. Would you like to become boyars, you shall be
the greatest among the very great. Do you choose to become governors,
each one shall have a town."

The first Simeon bowed to the Tsar and cheerfully answered:

"Thanks also to thee, Tsar Archidei Aggeivitch. We are but simple people
and simple are our ways. It would not do for us to become boyars or
governors. We do not care for thy treasures either. We have our own
father's field, which shall always give us bread for hunger and money
for need. Let us go home, taking with us thy gracious word as our
reward. If thou choosest to be so kind, give us thine order which shall
save us from the judges and tax-gatherers; and if we should be guilty of
some offense, let thyself alone be our judge. And do, we pray thee,
pardon the seventh Simeon, our youngest brother. His trade is surely
bad, but he is not the first and not the last one to have such a gift."

"Let it be as you wish," said the Tsar; and every desire was granted to
the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

seven Simeons, and each one of them received a big tumbler of strong
green wine out of the hands of the Tsar himself. Soon after this the
wedding was celebrated.

Now, honorable dames and gentlemen, do not judge this story of mine too
severely. If you like it, praise it; if not, let it be forgotten. The
story is told and a word is like a sparrow—once but it is out for good.

<span id="img_image014"></span> ![](img/image014.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Language of the Birds](chap03)
