[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0231)  [Next](sbe0233.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA I, PA*T*ALA 10, KHA*ND*A 29.

1\. And he shall take the foot of a bed instead of a staff and,
proclaiming the name of his deed, he shall go about (saying), 'Who
(gives) alms to the murderer of a Bhrû*n*a?' Obtaining thus his
livelihood in the village, he shall dwell in an empty house or under a
tree, (knowing that) he is not allowed to have intercourse with Aryans.
According to this rule he shall act until his last breath. He cannot be
purified in this world. But (after death) his sin is taken away.

2\. He even who slays unintentionally, reaps nevertheless the result of
his sin.

3\. (His guilt is) greater, (if he slays) intentionally.

4\. The same (principle applies) also to other sinful actions,

5\. And also to good works. <span id="fr_495"></span>[5](#fn_494.md)

6\. A Brâhma*n*a shall not take a weapon into his hand, though he be
only desirous of examining it.

7\. In a Purâ*n*a (it has been declared), that he who

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

slays an assailant does not sin, for (in that case) wrath meets wrath.

8\. But Abhi*s*astas shall live together in dwellings (outside the
village); considering this their lawful (mode of life), they shall
sacrifice for each other, teach each other, and marry amongst each
other.

9\. If they have begot sons, let them. say to them: 'Go out from amongst
us, for thus the Âryas, (throwing the guilt) upon us, will receive you
(amongst their number).' <span id="fr_496"></span>[9](#fn_495.md)

10\. For the organs do not become impure together with the man.

11\. (The truth of) that may be learned from this (parallel case); a man
deficient in limbs begets a son who possesses the full number of
limbs. <span id="fr_497"></span>[11](#fn_496.md)

12\. Hârita declares that this is wrong.

13\. A wife is similar to the vessel which contains the curds (for the
sacrifice). <span id="fr_498"></span>[13](#fn_497.md)

14\. For if one makes impure milk curdle (by mixing it with whey and
water) in a milk-vessel and stirs it, no sacrificial rite can be
performed with (the curds produced from) that. Just so no intercourse

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

can be allowed with the impure seed which comes (from an Abhi*s*asta).

15\. Sorcery and curses (employed against a Brâhma*n*a) cause a man to
become impure, but not loss of caste.

16\. Hârita declares that they cause loss of caste.

17\. But crimes causing impurity must be expiated, (when no particular
penance is prescribed,) by performing the penance enjoined for crimes
causing loss of caste during twelve months, or twelve half months, or
twelve twelve-nights, or twelve se’nnights, or twelve times three days,
or twelve days, or seven days, or three days, or one day.

18\. Thus acts causing impurity must be expiated according to the manner
in which the (sinful) act has been committed (whether intentionally or
unintentionally).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[90:5](sbe0232.htm#fr_495.md) **29**. Haradatta
gives, as an example, the case where a warrior saves the property of a
traveller from thieves. If the traveller turns out to be a Brâhma*n*a,
and the warrior did not know his caste before rescuing his property, his
merit will be less than if he had rescued knowingly the property of a
Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[91:9](sbe0232.htm#fr_496.md) It is impossible to
agree with Haradatta's explanation of the words to be addressed by
Abhi*s*astas to their children. No Vedic license can excuse the use of
the second person plural instead of the third. I propose the following:
'Go out from among us; for thus (leaving the guilt) to us, you will be
received (as) Âryas.' it is, however, not improbable that our text is
disfigured by several very old corruptions, compare Baudhâyana II, 1, 2,
18.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[91:11](sbe0232.htm#fr_497.md) 'In like manner a
man who has lost his rights, (can) beget a son, who possesses the rights
(of his caste). For the wife is also a cause (of the birth of the son),
and she is guiltless.'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[91:13](sbe0232.htm#fr_498.md) The statements now
following are those with which Âpastamba agrees. Those contained in
Sûtras 8-11 are merely the pûrvapaksha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Pa*t*ala 11, Kha*nd*a 30](sbe0233.md)
