[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0213)  [Next](sbe0215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### PRA*S*NA I, PA*T*ALA 3, KHA*ND*A 11.

1\. (The recitation of the Veda shall be interrupted for a day and
evening if he has eaten), on beginning a fresh Kâ*nd*a (of his Veda),
food given by a motherless person, <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_280)

2\. And also if he has eaten, on the day of the completion of a Kâ*nd*a,
food given by a fatherless person.

3\. Some declare, that (the recitation shall be interrupted for the same
space of time), if he has eaten at a sacrifice offered in honour of gods
who were formerly men. <span id="fr_282"></span>[3](#fn_281)

4\. Nor is the recitation interrupted, if he has eaten rice received the
day before, or raw meat (though these things may have been offered in
honour of the dead), <span id="fr_283"></span>[4](#fn_282)

5\. Nor (if he has eaten at a funeral dinner) roots or fruits of herbs
and trees.

6\. When he performs the ceremony for beginning of a Kâ*nd*a, or when he
studies the index of the Anuvâkas <span id="fr_284"></span>[6](#fn_283)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of a (Kâ*nd*a), he shall not study that (Kâ*nd*a) on that day (nor in
that night).

7\. And if he performs the ceremonies prescribed on beginning or ending
the recitation of one entire Veda, he shall not study that Veda (during
that day). <span id="fr_285"></span>[7](#fn_284)

8\. If the wind roars, or if it whirls up the grass on the ground, or if
it drives the rain-drops forward during a rain-shower, (then the
recitation shall be interrupted for so long a time as the storm
lasts). <span id="fr_286"></span>[8](#fn_285)

9\. (Nor shall he study) on the boundary between a village and forest,

10\. Nor on a highway.

11\. If (some of his) fellow-students are on a journey, he shall not
study during that day, (the passage) which they learn together. <span
id="fr_287"></span>[11](#fn_286)

12\. And whilst performing acts for his pleasure,

13\. Such as washing his feet, shampooing or anointing himself,

14\. He shall neither study nor teach, as long as he is thus occupied.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

15\. (He shall not study or teach) in the twilight, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[15](#fn_287)

16\. Nor whilst sitting on a tree, <span
id="fr_289"></span>[16](#fn_288)

17\. Nor whilst immersed in water,

18\. Nor at night with open doors,

19\. Nor in the day-time with shut doors.

20\. During the spring festival and the festival (of Indra), in the
month of Âshâ*dh*a (June-July), the study of an Anuvâka is
forbidden. <span id="fr_290"></span>[20](#fn_289)

21\. (The recitation) of the daily portion of the Veda (at the
Brahmaya*gñ*a is likewise forbidden if done) in a manner differing from
the rule (of the Veda). <span id="fr_291"></span>[21](#fn_290)

22\. (Now follows) the rule (for the daily recitation) of that
(Brahmaya*gñ*a).

23\. Before taking his morning-meal, he shall go to the water-side, and
having purified himself, he shall recite aloud (a portion of the Veda)
in a pure <span id="fr_292"></span>[23](#fn_291)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

place, leaving out according to (the order of the) texts (what he has
read the day before).

24\. If a stoppage of study is enjoined (for the day, he shall recite
the daily portion) mentally.

25\. If lightning flashes without interruption, or, thunder rolls
continually, if a man has neglected to purify himself, if he has
partaken of a meal in honour of a dead person, or if hoarfrost lies on
the ground, (in these cases) they forbid the mental recitation (of the
daily portion of the Veda). <span id="fr_293"></span>[25](#fn_292)

26\. Some forbid it only in case one has eaten a funeral dinner. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[26](#fn_293)

27\. Where lightning, thunder, and rain happen together out of season,
the recitation shall be interrupted for three days. <span
id="fr_295"></span>[27](#fn_294)

28\. Some (declare, that the recitation shall stop) until the ground is
dry.

29\. If one or two (of the phenomena mentioned in Sûtra 27 appear, the
recitation shall be interrupted) from that hour until the same hour next
day.

30\. In the case of an eclipse of the sun or of the moon, of an
earthquake, of a whirlwind, of the fall of a meteor, or of a fire (in
the village), at whatever time these events happen, the recitation of
all the sacred sciences (Vedas and Aṅgas) must be interrupted from that
hour until the same hour next day. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[30](#fn_295)

31\. If a cloud appears out of season, if the sun or the moon is
surrounded by a halo, if a rainbow, a parhelion or a comet appears, if a
(high) wind (blows), <span id="fr_297"></span>[31](#fn_296)

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

a foul smell (is observed), or hoarfrost (lies on the ground, at all
these occasions (the recitation of all the sacred sciences must be
interrupted) during the duration (of these phenomena).

32\. After the wind has ceased, (the interruption of the recitation
continues) for one muhûrta. <span id="fr_298"></span>[32](#fn_297)

33\. If (the howl of) a wolf or of a solitary jackal (has been heard, he
shall stop the reading) until he has slept.

34\. At night (he shall not study) in a wood, where there is no fire nor
gold.

35\. Out of term he shall not study any part of the Veda which he has
not learnt before.

36\. Nor (shall he study during term some new part of the Veda) in the
evening. <span id="fr_299"></span>[36](#fn_298)

37\. That which has been studied before, must never be studied (during
the vacation or in the evening). <span id="fr_300"></span>[37](#fn_299)

38\. Further particulars (regarding the interruption <span
id="fr_301"></span>[38](#fn_300)

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

of the Veda-study may be learnt) from the (teaching and works of other)
Vedic schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[40:1](sbe0214.htm#fr_281) **11**. The Black
Ya*g*ur-veda, to which Âpastamba belongs, is divided throughout into
books called Kâ*nd*as.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[40:3](sbe0214.htm#fr_282) Haradatta names as
such gods, Nandîsvara and Kubera. Other commentators, however, explain
Manushyaprakriti by Manushyamukha, 'possessing human faces.' A similar
rule occurs Gautama XVI, 34, Where a Manushyayagña is mentioned as a
cause for discontinuing the recitation of the Veda. In his Commentary on
Gautama, also, Haradatta is in doubt. He first refers the term to the
sacraments like the Sîmantonnayana, and then adds, that some explain it
to mean 'a sacrifice to gods who formerly were men.'

<span id="fn_282"></span>[40:4](sbe0214.htm#fr_283) This Sûtra is an
exception to I, 3, 10, 28.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[40:6](sbe0214.htm#fr_284) Haradatta's
commentary on this Sûtra is very meagre, and he leaves the word
anuvâkyam unexplained. I am not ccrtain that my explanation is correct.
But it is countenanced by the statements of the G*ri*hya-sutras
regarding the order of studying. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 132.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[41:7](sbe0214.htm#fr_285) Yâ*gñ*. I, 145. This
Sûtra is a *Gñ*âpaka or 'such a one which indicates the existence of a
rule not expressly mentioned! Above (I, 3, 9, 1) the yearly -performance
of the Upâkarma and Utsarga ceremonies for the beginning and end of the
Brahmanic term has been prescribed. In this Sûtra the performance of the
Upakarma and Utsarga at the beginning and completion of the Pârâyana or
the vow to go through a whole Veda is incidentally mentioned. Thence it
may be inferred that these ceremonies must. be likewise performed on the
latter occasions, though no absolute rule to this effect has been given.
Such *Gñ*âpakas are of frequent occurrence in all Sûtras, and constitute
one of the chief difficulties of their interpretation.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[41:8](sbe0214.htm#fr_286) Yâ*gñ*. I, 149; Manu
IV, 102, 122.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[41:11](sbe0214.htm#fr_287) Others explain the
Sûtra thus: 'If he meets fellow-students, after they have come home from
a journey, he shall not study with them on that day.'

<span id="fn_287"></span>[42:15](sbe0214.htm#fr_288) Yâ*gñ*. I, 145;
Manu IV, 113.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[42:16](sbe0214.htm#fr_289) Yâ*gñ*. I, 51; Manu
IV, 120.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[42:20](sbe0214.htm#fr_290) According to
Haradatta, Âpastamba uses the word Anuvâka in order to indicate that
smaller portions of the Veda may be studied. Others think, that by
Anuvâka, the Sa*m*hitâ and the Brâhma*n*a are meant, and that the study
of the Aṅgas is permitted. The Vasantotsava, or spring festival, which,
according to the Dramas, was, in olden times, kept all over India,
falls, according to Haradatta, on the thirteenth of the first half of
*K*aitra, about the beginning of April.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[42:21](sbe0214.htm#fr_291) 'Hence, if one has
forgotten it and eaten one's breakfast, a penance, not the
Brahmaya*gñ*a, must be performed'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[42:23](sbe0214.htm#fr_292) See Taittirîya
Âra*n*yaka II, 11, 1 and 11; Â*s*v. G*ri*. Sû. III, 2, 1-2. In our days
this rule is usually not observed. Brâhma*n*as mostly recite at the
daily Brahmaya*gñ*a, 'Veda-offering,' one particular formula, which
symbolically comprises the whole Veda. A few learned Brâhma*n*a friends,
however, have assured me, that they still recite the whole of their
*S*âkhâ every year according to this rule of Âpastamba.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[43:25](sbe0214.htm#fr_293) Yâ*gñ*. I, 149;
Manu IV, 106, 120, 127; Taitt. Âr. II, 15, 1.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[43:26](sbe0214.htm#fr_294) Manu IV, 109, 116.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[43:27](sbe0214.htm#fr_295) Manu IV, 103 and
104.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[43:30](sbe0214.htm#fr_296) Yâ*gñ*. I, 145;
Manu IV, 105, 118.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[43:31](sbe0214.htm#fr_297) Manu IV, 104, and
see above.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[44:32](sbe0214.htm#fr_298) One muhûrta = 48
minutes.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[44:36](sbe0214.htm#fr_299) Other commentators
interpret the Sûtra in a different sense. They take it to mean: 'And
(luring the night (from the twelfth to the thirteenth of each half of
the month, he shall not study at all, be it in or out of term).'

<span id="fn_299"></span>[44:37](sbe0214.htm#fr_300) 'What has been
studied before, must not be studied (again) at any time in the vacation
nor in the evening.'-- Haradatta.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[44:38](sbe0214.htm#fr_301) Haradatta thinks
that by 'Parishad,' Manu's and other Dharma-*s*âstras are meant. This
explanation is, however, not exact. Parishad, 'assemblage,' means, in
the language of the *S*âstras, either a Pa*ñk*, an assemblage of learned
Brahmans called together to decide some knotty point of law, or a
Brahminical school, which studies a particular redaction of the Veda
(see the Petersburg Dict. s. v.) The latter meaning is that applicable
to this Sûtra. By 'Parishada*h*' are here intended the Vedic schools,
and their writings and teaching. Gautama also says, XVI, 40.
Prâtividya*m* yân smaranti smaranti, '(he shall observe the stoppages of
the Veda-study) which they teach in (the writings belonging to) each of
the Vedas.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na I, Pa*t*ala 4, Kha*nd*a 12](sbe0215)
