[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0248)  [Next](sbe0250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA II, PA*T*ALA 6, KHA*ND*A 14.

1\. He should, during his lifetime, divide his wealth equally amongst
his sons, excepting the eunuch, the mad man, and the outcast. <span
id="fr_653"></span>[1](#fn_652)

2\. On failure of sons the nearest Sapi*nd*a (takes the
inheritance). <span id="fr_654"></span>[2](#fn_653)

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

3\. On failure of them the spiritual teacher (inherits); on failure of
the spiritual teacher a pupil shall take (the deceased's wealth), and
use it for religious works for the (deceased's) benefit, or (he himself
may enjoy it);

4\. Or the daughter (may take the inheritance). <span
id="fr_655"></span>[4](#fn_654)

5\. On failure of all (relations) let the king take the
inheritance. <span id="fr_656"></span>[5](#fn_655)

6\. Some declare, that the eldest son alone inherits. <span
id="fr_657"></span>[6](#fn_656)

7\. In some countries gold, (or) black cattle, (or) black produce of the
earth is the share of the eldest. <span id="fr_658"></span>[7](#fn_657)

8\. The chariot and the furniture in the house are the father's
(share). <span id="fr_659"></span>[8](#fn_658)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

9\. According to some, the share of the wife consists of her ornaments,
and the wealth (which she may have received) from her relations. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[9](#fn_659)

10\. That (preference of the eldest son) is forbidden by the
*S*âstras. <span id="fr_661"></span>[10](#fn_660)

11\. For it is declared in the Veda, without (marking) a difference (in
the treatment of the sons): Manu divided his wealth amongst his
sons. <span id="fr_662"></span>[11](#fn_661)

12\. Now the Veda declares also in conformity with (the rule in favour
of the eldest son) alone: They distinguish the eldest by (a larger share
of) the heritage. <span id="fr_663"></span>[12](#fn_662)

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

13\. (But to this plea in favour of the eldest I answer): Now those who
are acquainted with the interpretation of the law declare a statement of
facts not to be a rule, as for instance (the following): 'Therefore
amongst cattle, goats and sheep walk together;' (or the following),
'Therefore the face of a learned Brâhma*n*a (a Snâtaka) is, as it were,
resplendent;' (or), 'A Brâhma*n*a who has studied the Vedas (a
*S*rotriya) and a he-goat evince the strongest sexual desires.' <span
id="fr_664"></span>[13](#fn_663)

14\. Therefore all (sons) who are virtuous inherit.

15\. But him who expends money unrighteously, he shall disinherit,
though he be the eldest son. <span id="fr_665"></span>[15](#fn_664)

16\. No division takes place between husband and wife. <span
id="fr_666"></span>[16](#fn_665)

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

17\. For, from the time of marriage, they are united in religious
ceremonies,

18\. Likewise also as regards the rewards for works by which spiritual
merit is acquired,

19\. And with respect to the acquisition of property.

20\. For they declare that it is not a theft if a wife spends money on
occasions (of necessity) during her husband's absence. <span
id="fr_667"></span>[20](#fn_666)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_652"></span>[133:1](sbe0249.htm#fr_653) **14**. The last
Sûtra of Kha*nd*a 13 and the first of Kha*nd*a 14 are quoted by
Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text xlii, and Mitâksharâ, Chap. I, Sect.
iii, Par. 6. Colebrooke translates *g*îvan, 'during his lifetime,' by
'who makes a partition during his lifetime.' I think that this is not
quite correct, and that Âpastamba intends to exhort householders to make
a division during their lifetime, as later they ought to become ascetics
or hermits. Haradatta introduces into his commentary on this Sûtra the
whole chapter on the division of a father's estate amongst his sons,
supplementing Âpastamba's short rule by the texts of other lawyers. No
doubt, Âpastamba means to lay down, in these and the following Sûtras,
only the leading principles of the law of inheritance, and he intends
that the remaining particulars should be supplied from the law of custom
or other Sm*ri*tis.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[133:2](sbe0249.htm#fr_654) Haradatta gives in
his commentary a full summary of the rules on the succession of remoter
relations. One point only deserves special mention. He declares that it
is the opinion of Âpastamba, that widows cannot inherit. In this he is
probably right, as Âpastamba does not mention them, and the use of the
<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> masculine singular 'sapi*nd*a*h*' in
the text precludes the possibility of including them under that
collective term. It seems to me certain, that Âpastamba, like
Baudhâyana, considered women, especially widows, unfit to inherit.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[134:4](sbe0249.htm#fr_655) 'Some say "on
failure of sons," others that the rule refers to the preceding Sûtra
(i.e. that the daughter inherits on failure of pupils
only).'--Haradatta. The latter seems to be the correct interpretation.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[134:5](sbe0249.htm#fr_656) 'Because the word
"all" is used, (the king shall take the estate) only on failure of
Bandhus and Sagotras, i.e. gentiles within twelve degrees.'--Haradatta.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[134:6](sbe0249.htm#fr_657) 'The other sons
shall live under his protection.'--Haradatta. Colebrooke, Mitâksharâ,
Chap. I, Sect. iii, Par. 6.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[134:7](sbe0249.htm#fr_658) '"Black produce of
the earth," i.e. black grain, or according to others black
iron.'--Haradatta. Compare for this and the following Sûtras Colebrooke,
Mitâksharâ, Chap. I, Sect. iii, Par. 6, and Digest, Book V, Text xlviii.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[134:8](sbe0249.htm#fr_659) The translation
given above agrees with what I now recognise to be Haradatta's
explanation, and with Colebrooke, Mitâksharâ, Chap. I, Sect. iii, Par.
6. Both the P. U. and Mr. U. MSS. of the U*gg*valâ read ratha*h*
pitura*ms*o g*ri*he yatparibhâ*nd*am upakara*n*am pî*th*âdi tadapi, 'the
chariot (is) the father's share; the furniture which (is) in the house,
that also.' To this reading Mahâdeva's U*gg*valâ on the Hira*n*yake*s*i
Sûtra points likewise, which gives pîtur anta*h*. The N. U. MS. of the
U*gg*valâ, according to which <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> I made
the translation given in the Appendix to West and Bühler's Digest (1st
edition), leaves out the word a*ms*a*h*, and therefore makes it
necessary to combine this Sûtra, with the preceding one, and to
translate, 'The father's chariot and the furniture in the house (are)
also (the share of the eldest).' This latter translation agrees nearly
with that given by Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text xlviii, where this
and the preceding Sûtra have been joined; but the chariot is not
mentioned. A further variation in the interpretation of this Sûtra
occurs in Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text lxxxix, and Mitâksharâ, loc.
cit., where the words 'the furniture in the house' are joined with Sûtra
9, and the furniture is declared to be the wife's share. Considering
that Sûtra 9 is again quoted in Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text
cccclxxii, and is not joined with the latter part of Sûtra 8, it is not
too much to say that *G*agannâtha has not shown any greater accuracy
than his brethren usually do.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[135:9](sbe0249.htm#fr_660) The Mitâksharâ,
loc. cit., apparently takes the words 'according to some' as referring
only, to property received from relations. I follow Haradatta. The
former interpretation is, however, admissible, if the Sûtra is split
into two.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[135:10](sbe0249.htm#fr_661) The *S*âstras are,
according to Haradatta, the Vedas.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[135:11](sbe0249.htm#fr_662) Taittirîyâ
Sa*m*hitâ III, 1, 9, 4.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[135:12](sbe0249.htm#fr_663) 'Athâpi (now also)
means "and certainly." They distinguish, they set apart the eldest son
by wealth: this has been declared in the Veda in conformity with (the
rule regarding) one (heir, Sûtra 6). He denies (Sûtra 13) that a passage
also, which <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> agrees with the statement
that the eldest son alone inherits, is found in the Veda.'--Haradatta.
See Taittirîyâ Sa*m*hitâ II, 5, 2, 7.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[136:13](sbe0249.htm#fr_664) Those who are
acquainted with the interpretation of the law are the Mimâ*m*sakas. The
translation of the second Vedic passage is by no means certain, as the
root ribh, translated by 'to be resplendent,' usually means 'to give a
sound.' Haradatta thinks that Âpastamba means to show that the passage
'Manu divided his wealth among his sons' is likewise merely a statement
of facts, and cannot be considered a rule. This is probably erroneous,
as Sûtras 10 and 11 distinctly state, that the practice to allow the
eldest alone to inherit, is forbidden by the abovementioned passage of
the Veda.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[136:15](sbe0249.htm#fr_665) Compare for this
Sûtra and the following one Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text cccxv. The
translation of pratipâdayati, 'expends,' by 'gains,' which is also
proposed by *G*agannâtha, is against Âpastamba's usage, see II, 5, 11,
17, and below, II, 8, 20, 19.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[136:16](sbe0249.htm#fr_666) According to
Haradatta, this Sûtra gives the reason why, in Sûtra 1, no share has
been set apart for the wife. Compare Colebrooke's Digest, Book V, Text
lxxxix, for this Sûtra and the following two.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[137:20](sbe0249.htm#fr_667) See below, II, 11,
29, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na II, Pa*t*ala 6, Kha*nd*a 15](sbe0250)
