[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0247)  [Next](sbe0249.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA II, PA*T*ALA 6, KHA*ND*A 13.

1\. Sons begotten by a man who approaches in the proper season a woman
of equal caste, who has <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_646.md)

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

not belonged to another man, and who has been married legally, have a
right to (follow) the occupations (of their castes),

2\. And to (inherit the) estate,

3\. If they do not sin against either (of their parents). <span
id="fr_648"></span>[3](#fn_647.md)

4\. If a man approaches a woman who had been married before, or was not
legally married to him, or, belongs to a different caste, they both
commit a sin.

5\. Through their (sin) their son also becomes sinful.

6\. A Brâhma*n*a (says), 'The son belongs to the begetter.' <span
id="fr_649"></span>[6](#fn_648.md)

7\. Now they quote also (the following Gâthâ from the Veda): '(Having
considered myself) formerly a father, I shall not now allow (any longer)
my wives (to be approached by other men), since they have declared that
a son belongs to the begetter in the world of Yama. The giver of the
seed carries off the son after death in Yama's world; therefore they
guard <span id="fr_650"></span>[7](#fn_649.md)

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

their wives, fearing the seed of strangers. Carefully watch over (the
procreation of) your children, lest stranger seed be sown on your soil.
In the next world the son belongs to the begetter, an (imprudent)
husband makes the (begetting of) children vain (for himself).'

8\. Transgression of the law and violence are found amongst the ancient
(sages).

9\. They committed no sin on account of the greatness of their lustre.

10\. A man of later times who seeing their (deeds) follows them, falls.

11\. The gift (or acceptance of a child) and the right to sell (or buy)
a child are not recognised. <span id="fr_651"></span>[11](#fn_650.md)

12\. It is declared in the Veda that at the time of marriage a gift, for
(the fulfilment of) his wishes, should be made (by the bridegroom) to
the father <span id="fr_652"></span>[12](#fn_651.md)

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

of the bride, in order to fulfil the law. 'Therefore he should give a
hundred (cows) besides a chariot; that (gift) he should make bootless
(by returning it to the giver).' In reference to those (marriage-rites),
the word 'sale' (which occurs in some Sm*ri*tis is only used as) a
metaphorical expression; for the union (of the husband and wife) is
effected through the law.

13\. After having gladdened the eldest son by some (choice portion of
his) wealth,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_646"></span>[130:1](sbe0248.htm#fr_647.md) **13**.
'*S*âstravihitâ (translated by "who has been married to him legally")
means either "married according to the rites prescribed in the
*S*âstras," or "possessed of the qualities (which have been described)
by (the rule of) the *S*âstras, He shall not give his daughter to a man
of the same Gotra," and in similar (passages).'Haradatta. See also
Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text cxcix.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[131:3](sbe0248.htm#fr_648.md) Another
(commentator) says, 'Neither of the parents shall pass them over at (the
distribution of) the heritage. Both (parents) must leave their property
to them.'--Haradatta. The text of the Sûtra admits of either
explanation.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[131:6](sbe0248.htm#fr_649.md) See also Manu IX,
32 seq., where the same difference of opinion occurs.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[131:7](sbe0248.htm#fr_650.md) According to
Haradatta this Gâthâ gives the sentiments of a husband who neglected to
watch his wives, and who had heard from those learned in the law that
the sons or his unfaithful wives would in the next world belong to their
natural fathers, and that be would not derive any spiritual benefit from
their oblations. He adds that this verse does not refer to or prevent
the appointment of a eunuch's wife or of a childless widow to a
relation. He also quotes a passage from the *S*rauta-sûtra 1, 9, 7, in
which the dvipitâ, 'the son of two fathers,' is mentioned. But
Haradatta's view cannot be reconciled with the statements made below,
II, 10, 27, 2-7, <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> where the Niyoga, is
plainly forbidden. Baudhâyana, who (II, 2, 3, 34) quotes the same Gâthâ,
reads in the first line the vocative '*g*anaka' instead of the
nominative '*g*anaka*h*,' and in the fifth line 'pare bî*g*âni' instead
of 'parabî*g*âni.' The commentator Govindasvâmin adds that the verses
are addressed by the *Ri*shi Aupa*g*aṅghani to king *G*anaka of Videha.
The translation of the first line must therefore run thus: 'O *G*anaka,
now I am jealous of my wives, (though I was) not so formerly,' &c.
Baudhâyana's readings are probably the older ones, and Govindasvâmin's
explanation the right one. See also Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text
ccli.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[132:11](sbe0248.htm#fr_651.md) Haradatta thinks
that, as most other Sm*ri*tis enumerate the adopted son, and 'the son
bought' in their lists of substitutes for lawful sons of the body,
Âpastamba's rule can refer only to the gift or sale of an eldest son, or
to the gift or sale of a child effected by a woman. Though it is
possible that he may be right in his interpretation, it remains a
remarkable fact that Âpastamba does not mention the 'twelve kinds of
sons,' which are known to other Sm*ri*tis.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[132:12](sbe0248.htm#fr_652.md) This Sûtra seems
to be directed against Vasish*th*a I, 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na II, Pa*t*ala 6, Kha*nd*a 14](sbe0249.md)
