[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ara21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VH8HW4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Aradia, Gospel of the Witches*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1899\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# Note

As a curious illustration of the fact that the faith in Diana and the
other deities of the Roman mythology, as connected with divination,
still survives among the Italians of "the people," I may mention that
after this work went to press, I purchased for two soldi or one penny, a
small chapbook in which it is shown how, by a process of conjuration or
evocation and numbers, not only Diana, but thirty-nine other deities may
be made to give answers to certain questions. The work is probably taken
from some old manuscript, as it is declared to have been discovered and
translated by P. P. Francesco di Villanova Monteleone. It is divided
into two parts, one entitled *Circe* and the other *Medea*.

As such works must have pictures, Circe is set forth by a page cut of a
very ugly old woman in the most modern costume of shawl and mob-cap with
ribbons. She is holding an ordinary candlestick. It is quite the ideal
of a common fortune-teller, and it is probable that the words *Maga
Circe* suggested nothing more or less than such a person to him who
"made up" the book. That of Medea is, however, quite correct, even
artistic, representing the sorceress as conjuring the magic bath, and
was probably taken from some work on mythology. It is ever so in Italy,
where the most grotesque and modern conceptions of classic subjects are
mingled with much that is accurate and beautiful--of which indeed this
work supplies many examples.
