[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Americana](../../index) 
[9/11](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](070903)  [Next](111903) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### NATIONAL COMMISSION ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

#### Public Hearing

Tuesday, October 14, 2003

253 Russell Senate Office Building  
Washington, DC

#### WITNESSES

JAMES R. SCHLESINGER, CHAIRMAN, MITRE CORPORATION, AND FORMER DIRECTOR
OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AND SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

JOHN M. DEUTCH, PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY, MIT, AND FORMER DIRECTOR OF
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AND DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

JAMES B. STEINBERG, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF FOREIGN POLICY
STUDIES, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, AND FORMER DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER

RICHARD KERR, FORMER DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE, CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

MARY O. MCCARTHY, VISITING FELLOW, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, AND FORMER NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE OFFICER FOR
WARNING, CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

JOHN GANNON, STAFF DIRECTOR, HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

#### PROCEEDINGS

GOV. THOMAS H. KEAN: Okay, I'd like to call the hearing to order. On
behalf of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United
States, I hereby call the public hearing to order. We are holding this,
our fourth open session, to hear testimony on the topic of intelligence
in the war on terrorism; how to improve the effectiveness of the
intelligence community against the terrorist threat. That's one of the
areas that Congress has directed us to look at.

Between now and the end of this calendar year we'll continue to explore
questions involving policy. In the new year, our hearings will focus
increasingly on key fact questions in the events that led up to the
attacks on September 11 and their aftermath. In both open and closed
sessions, we will question individuals who held positions of
responsibility in the present and in the past administration. Hearings
will run for several days duration. Upon the conclusion of this hearing,
the vice chair and I will be available if there are any questions from
the press.

During the first part of our hearings today, questions will focus on
organization and leadership within the intelligence community and the
national security structure. In the afternoon we're going to turn our
attention to the important question of how our government prepares and
provides warnings about terrorist attacks. Questions for our witnesses
this morning will include the attacks of September 11, estimates of
systematic failure with the leadership, organization, performance or
funding of the intelligence community, and what changes can best address
that particular problem.

Should there be a director of national intelligence, with direct
authority over the national intelligence agencies of our government? How
well is the government coordinating the conduct of efforts against
terrorism and relevant work of the intelligence community? What changes
are needed in the role or structure of the National Security Council and
the Homeland Security Council? Has the Congress met its responsibility
in establishing priorities, providing resources and providing oversight
of the intelligence community?

To start off, our first witness this morning I think is known to
everyone in this room. The Honorable James R. Schlesinger, currently the
chairman of the MITRE Corporation, he's a former Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, as well as a former Secretary of Defense. We
appreciate your willingness very much to appear before the Commission.
Your prepared statements will be entered into the record in full, so if
you could proceed with your testimony.

MR. JAMES R. SCHLESINGER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
Commission for inviting me today to testify. I shall try to summarize my
testimony. My initial observation is a caution to remind you that
intelligence is a very difficult business. Intelligence is not only
supposed to gather facts, many of which others are attempting to conceal
or disguise and increasingly so, may I say in passing. It is also
expected to provide a coherent picture that helps to prepare us for
future developments. To be sure, few of us are clairvoyants. When events
throw the inherent limitations of intelligence into bold relief, we are
surprised and frustrated because intelligence has failed to predict the
future.

Intelligence is highly successful in dealing with routine developments.
It is, however, particularly prone to failure at the turning points of
history. It is perhaps obvious that the problems of intelligence become
even harder when we deal with non-Western cultures, amplified when we
are attempting to understand those who regard us as infidels.
Nonetheless, I believe that we can do better in responding to terrorism.
Until now we have not been sufficiently strategic and long term in our
analytical efforts. We have relied too much on secret intelligence and
too much on country expertise.

When events do throw the inherent limitations of intelligence into bold
relief, the immediate response is to seek the restructuring of the
intelligence community in organization or in management. It is perhaps
an American tendency to minimize inherent substantive problems and to
believe that failures are failures of organization, which can be
prevented by the right organizational solution. No one would question
that management can always be improved, but major organizational change
is not the salvation. I would submit that the real challenge lies in
recruiting, fostering, training and motivating people with insight, and
when necessary bring about long-term changes in the ethos of
intelligence organizations.

Intelligence is produced by normal human beings with their
preconceptions, their habits of mind, their associations and the like.
Tinkering with the organizational structure can help, but by itself will
not improve and bring about a major improvement. Now, ideas regarding
organizational reform have a long history. Over the years there have
been dozens of studies. I myself produced a study in 1971 at the behest
of President Nixon, at a time that it was felt that the benefits of
intelligence were not commensurate with the costs and the central
problem of intelligence was the quality of analysis.

I recommended against the creation of a director of national
intelligence, because it would only dilute the role of the DCI without
corresponding advantage. Instead, I urged that the DCI be given greater
authority over the entire intelligence community, provide budgetary
guidance and overall plan, much of which President Nixon subsequently
ordered. In 1982, I argued against proposed legislation that would have
created an intelligence charter intended to rein in the intelligence
community. That legislation would have established in effect a
Department of Intelligence that would have combined intelligence assets
scattered across the government.

The point that I made then was that intelligence had to be oriented
toward the consumers of intelligence, that agency heads and others
needed to know and to trust the people that were providing intelligence,
and that if intelligence was centralized in the prescribed manner,
inevitably and surreptitiously intelligence activities would be
recreated in departments, agencies and the several commands. Indeed, the
widespread tendency to deplore duplication and to embrace the efficiency
of centralization lasted only until one could see the consequences.

Still, the urge to combine intelligence activities under central command
and control continues to reappear. I urge this commission to reflect on
the long history involved and refrain from recommending major surgery,
unless substantial improvement is to be obtained. It takes awhile to
settle down after surgery and the disruptions that are inevitable are
likely to distract us from the main goal: the improvement of the
intelligence product.

With regard to performance, one must seek to achieve two somewhat
contradictory things. On the one hand, one must seek to engage the
policymakers in the intelligence process so that they do more than read,
if they do, the intelligent product or listen to the briefings. It is
essential for good intelligence to understand the concerns of the
policymakers so that both collection and analysis can focus on those
concerns. At the same time, one must seek to avoid mixing intelligence
and policy, even though in a complicated world that cannot be avoided
entirely. Regrettably, that essential line frequently is crossed from
either side.

In this connection, one must understand the distinct role of the
policymaker once he has decided he must explain, that is sell, that
policy to the public, the press and the Congress. Intelligence
unavoidably deals with shades of gray, not with black and white. But
leaders cannot dwell on the uncertainties, the fuzzy evidence, the
equivocations of intelligence. Leaders have to decide. When decisions
are made, they are regularly hyped in the quest for public support. One
can cite notable examples from the Roosevelt administration, from the
Reagan administration, from the Clinton administration, if not in more
recent years. All administrations will engage in the practice. In a
democracy administrations are obliged to seek public support.

At the other end of this dichotomy, analysts cannot be vestal virgins
operating in an academic environment. If they want their product to be
taken seriously by the policymakers, they must be prepared for some
interaction. If the subject is relevant and the product is interesting,
there should be questioning. Nonetheless, analysts all too frequently
act like a bunch of college professors: how dare they challenge me? The
analytic fraternity varies between two moods. In one mood it is said
that the policymakers pay no attention to what I write. There must be
more interaction. In that second mood, the policymakers are interacting,
and one hears the cries, I am being pressured or even attacked. In
politics, those cries will attract attention. But one must bear in mind
that the questioning is desirable. Nonetheless, it will regularly be
described as pressure.

Mr. Chairman, over the years it has been recognized for this continuous
need for interaction between the policymakers and the intelligence
community. Efforts have been made in that direction. They have been
brief and they usually are terminated. It is only in periods of crisis
that regularly we have the kind of interaction between the policymakers
and the intelligence community that is most fruitful.

Mr. Chairman, we all recognize that priorities must be adjusted over
time, particularly so is this -- is this so when there is a major change
in the international scene, such as there was after the collapse of the
Soviet Union and subsequently with the rise of terrorism. Those are
major turning points. Yet what is conceptually easy to accept remains
difficult to implement and practice. Intelligence organizations are
large bureaucracies, particularly -- they do not adapt immediately.
Particularly, this is the case when there is little budget leeway and
resources must be wrested away from others in the organization.

In the late 1990s, for example, intellectually it was recognized that we
were at war with the terrorists. Nonetheless, resources did not stream
into counterterrorism to the degree that one might expect for a nation
at war. The reason of course: those resources had to be pried loose from
other entities in the intelligence establishment, which stood ready to
resist such loss of resources. After 9/11 we readily, if belatedly,
recognized that more resources should have moved in accordance with the
indicated change in priorities.

That was easy to recognize in retrospect, though even now we are not
creating the strategic framework for a long-term war. We must recognize
that large bureaucracies do tend to become inbred and that inevitably
there is resistance to new ideas, particularly those that come in from
the outside. Though we cannot simply acquiesce in such behavior, we must
recognize the difficulty of adaptation in large organizations. That is
why we need to protect and foster competition in analysis. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Ben-Veniste?

MR. RICHARD BEN-VENISTE: Good morning, Mr. Secretary, and thank you very
much for appearing here today to share your extraordinary experience
with us. And on a personal note I would simply like to say that your
extraordinary service to the country, over now I guess four decades, is
both remarkable and a tremendous opportunity for us to have you share
that experience with us today. So I thank you again for your willingness
to appear.

MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you, sir.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Over the years you have certainly been consistent in
stating that competing centers of analysis and interpretation within the
intelligence community is superior to centralization, and you've also
observed that centralization would probably be quixotic or impossible
because the centers -- various competing centers would surreptitiously
go back to their status quo or something close to it, even if there was
an attempt to foist centrality upon it. I think that's a very
interesting observation and one which obviously we need to take note of,
because we live not in a theoretical world, but a practical world.

But having said that, when you have these competing centers of
intelligence analysis and interpretation, would you agree that there is
a concomitant impulse to protect and husband that intelligence analysis
within each of these competing centers? And I see you nodding. Is that
consistent with your experience?

MR. SCHLESINGER: It is and it must be resisted.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: But once you have these sort of practical issues of
protecting turf and thereby protecting the substance of intelligence
analysis, it occurs to me and perhaps others on this commission that
although there was a significant amount of intelligence collected prior
to 9/11, this very same desire to protect and concomitant resistance to
share intelligence seemed to be a substantial contributing factor in the
failure to prevent the 9/11 disaster. And I'd like to get your comment
on that observation.

MR. SCHLESINGER: The biggest source of so-called intelligence failures
are axioms that grip the political community. Axioms that grip the
political community and infiltrate, as it were, affect intelligence
estimates. And for that reason, the prevailing wisdom in intelligence
has to be resisted. When I was DCI, however briefly, I was going to set
up a division of devil's advocacy within the Central Intelligence Agency
so that whenever there was a prevailing view, such as the Soviet Union
will stop producing missiles at 1,000 -- ICBMs at 1,000 because all they
want to do is match us. There was another view, which is that the Soviet
Union might want to exceed our productions, our deployment. And so you
need to have devil's advocacy within the system, and you need to
institutionalize that within each agency.

Now, what you describe is in part the result of the hearings in the
mid-1970s. Remember that it was the Congress that held those hearings
and wanted to establish a wall between intelligence and the law
enforcement community, such that the FBI could not draw on CIA
information. Since 9/11 we've knocked down that wall, but the tendency
to stay within organizations has in part been driven by the legislation
and the rules that came out of the 1970s. We are breaking down some of
those barriers. Within the intelligence community, narrowly defined, we
have now something called Intel-link. And what Intel-link has done has
been to weaken, though not eliminate, the baronies to which you refer.
We need to go further.

One of the problems is the attitude of indifference to certain
information, rather than the desire to hold that information within the
organization. Take for example the report of the FBI agent out in
Phoenix. It wasn't that the FBI felt that was so valuable that that was
a nugget that had to be retained and not shared with anybody else. It
was, "That's a small matter. Let's get on with fighting crime and
disregard that." So a lot of this is a problem of insufficient attention
to what is really relevant. And I think that this can in part be -- what
you describe can be in part achieved by better scrutiny over the entire
flow of intelligence, picking out those things that appear to be
relevant to the current problem, even though you recognize that there's
some future problem down the road that will be relevant but you don't
know what it should be.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Well, I appreciate that analysis, Dr. Schlesinger.
You've raised in the course of that a number of important issues. Would
you not agree that having some central form of receipt of analytical
information would go a long way toward remedying the inherent problems
in these baronies, as you put it so colorfully? In addition, you have
touched on an issue relating to what I would regard as analysis and
interpretation within our domestic intelligence gathering apparatus, the
FBI. And the combination of those two I think speaks again to the issue
of improving our analysis and interpretation mechanism and to put that
information into the right hands for prevention, which has now since
9/11 obviously reared itself as an important second priority of the FBI,
besides their primary goal of law enforcement.

And so could you comment based on your experience and whether you feel
there is a need on the analytical and interpretation side within our
domestic intelligence gathering apparatus to improve, or in some way
differentiate between the law enforcement functions of the FBI and the
analytical functions of domestic intelligence interpretation.

MR. SCHLESINGER: It's not only in the world of terrorism, and it is, of
course, not only domestic. There is the interweaving of intelligence
that comes from overseas with what we gather domestically. One of the
problems that occurred from the legislation in the 1970s was that
although the Central Intelligence Agency was set up to gather all
information, after the changes of the 1970s the FBI was precluded from
turning to the CIA and that led to some of the problems that we saw with
respect to the two terrorists who were in Kuala Lumpur.

I overstate when I say that the FBI was not into analysis. They didn't
do analysis. Organizations are bureaucracies. You go to the place, you
go to the functions, to the specialties within an organization in which
you will have promotions. In the FBI prior to 9/11, as I recall it, you
could soar all the way up to GS11 if you were in analysis. That was not
the way to attract the best talent. And analysis tended to be to confirm
that General Motors -- "Where is General Motors headquartered?" would
come a question from the special agent in charge out in Paducah, and the
answer will come back from the analytical shop, "General Motors is
headquartered in Detroit, Michigan."

I think that it's changing. I think that the Director is working hard at
changing, but he has got to create an analytical frame of mind within an
organization that has not been strong in that area.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: So you would recommend, I take it, that the -- if the
intelligence analysis function is to remain within the FBI, there be a
separate form of promotion and a professional cadre of analysts within
the FBI who would be promoted on criteria that is much different --

MR. SCHLESINGER: From those of the past.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: -- from those criteria used for promoting the law
enforcement side of the FBI?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, they have to an opportunity, a serious
opportunity, to rise within the organization. It's the same way that it
was in the military services. If you spent too much time in joint
commands in the past, your chances for promotion were modest.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And would you agree that in the recruitment effort in
getting the best and the brightest analysts possible, that the criteria
might be substantially different than the recruiting criteria
traditionally for law enforcement agents?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, sir.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you.

Slade?

MR. KEAN: Senator Gorton?

SEN. SLADE GORTON: Thank you, sir.

That certainly leads to my question. Jim, in one trenchant sentence,
which regrettably you don't follow up, you say: "I would submit that the
real challenge is recruiting, fostering and motivating the right
people." What suggestions do you have for accomplishing or reaching that
goal?

MR. SCHLESINGER: That in itself is not an easy question. One has got to
move away from narrow expertise and to convey the broader picture of the
new environment in which the United States finds itself as a result of
the global war on terrorism. It is a substantially different
environment. No longer can you focus on being the leading authority on
Soviet deployment of the SS-9 or SS-18 missile. Country expertise, to
which I referred here, is in a sense too narrow because terrorism
spreads beyond many of the countries in the Muslim world.

And as I indicate, even though at the moment we are responding
tactically to many of these problems, I don't think that we have a
sufficiently good strategic framework of the overall problem of
terrorism, a problem that stems from a civil war that is going on within
the Muslim worlds and which, partly for reasons of political correctness
here in the United States, we tend to blur somewhat. So I think that you
have to have people that you protect. And, as I mention in here, when
analysts read in the paper every day how they've failed and so forth,
they begin to get risk averse. It's important that we have straight talk
from the analysts and that we protect them in a way that they do not
become risk averse. I'm not sure that I've fully answered that question,
Senator?

MR. GORTON: It is an aspiration that is not easy to achieve. But let me
go to a second question. A good deal of the public inquiry, now
reflected at this commission, has to do with the so-called question of
"connecting the dots." In your view from all of your reading and
expertise in this area, was the failure to anticipate and prevent 9/11 a
failure to connect the dots that were available, or were there too few
dots? And if the former, would a different organization have resulted in
connecting the same dots that we had in a way that was more productive
than constructive?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, thank you for that question. I have here a
diagram that shows a large number of dots of different hues and the
problem, Senator, is not that we have too few dots, but that there are
too many dots and we cannot identify which of them is significant. In
retrospect it is easy to identify the significant dots. I've got here,
"Mohammed Atta, one-way tickets, paid cash, four Arab looking men in
aisle seats." In retrospect, since we know what happened, we can select
amongst the various dots and we will be able to identify those that were
important and we -- if we had known they were important before, we could
have taken action.

The problem, the challenge is to find means of highlighting these areas,
those that were significant. And there are a number of ways that we can
do that, and I don't believe that the intelligence community is
sufficiently focused on some of the cheaper ways in SIGINT, cellular
phones and so forth, that would be of help in this area. Of finding, of
highlighting, what is a countless set of dots.

MR. GORTON: But was that an organizational failure, or a failure of
imagination?

MR. SCHLESINGER: It's both. It's both. Imagination is a precious and
rare commodity and we need to understand that within any organization
that those who presently have the resources like it that way, and they
don't like to sacrifice those resources because somebody comes up with
what he thinks is an imaginative idea. That is the responsibility of
leadership. To find those areas, in this case of new technologies, we
are spending billions up there on new satellites. And some of the things
that we could be doing to highlight these areas I believe can be
achieved through tens of millions of dollars. But as your question
implies, we have to recognize them.

Let me go back to your initial question if I may, Senator. I thought
that we did not connect the dots before 9/11, in particular. And I said
this at the time. This is not a retrospective view. We had the seizure
of that French aircraft, we had the episode in Manila in which there was
the plan to shoot -- to blow up 10 or 11 American airliners coming out
of the Far East and included, as a throwaway line, to take an aircraft
and to drive it into the headquarters of the CIA in Langley, Virginia.

Now, I think that should have gotten more attention at CIA headquarters
in Langley, Virginia, than may have been the case. That certainly should
be an attention grabber. It was plain that they were thinking in terms
of using aircraft in this way. In general, the problem remains that
there are many, many dots out there and it is -- one of the effects of
the criticism that has gone on of the intelligence community is that
analysts have become more risk averse. And so instead of evaluating
these dots and saying, well, that comes from an incredible source, and
we can disregard it, or we should pay less attention to it, they are
saying, suppose that that source, even though he's got a very poor
record of credibility, turns out to have been right. Then my job is on
the line, so pass along all the dots to the highest authority -- that
gets to be problem.

MR. GORTON: Well, with respect, each one of the dots, each one of the
incidents to which you refer, was generally and publicly known before
9/11.

MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes.

MR. GORTON: Did you anticipate or fear this kind of attack? Did anyone
of like experience with you outside government that you know of do so?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Did I anticipate that? I thought that it was not
unlikely given what had happened particularly in Manila. Given, as you
will recall, the episode with the Egyptian aircraft and so forth. I
don't think, in retrospect, we should have been surprised.

MR. GORTON: You say that in 1971 you recommended against the creation of
a Director of National Intelligence, is that still your view?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, sir.

MR. GORTON: You also say that you urged the DCI be given greater
authority over the entire intelligence community. You implied that that
took place during the Nixon administration. Is it still desirable to
increase that authority?

MR. SCHLESINGER: It has been an evolution. It started -- at that time
the DCI had control of about 15 percent of the intelligence budget. And
therefore there was -- and there was tension as the previous question
suggested, there was tension within elements of the community in that --
to take one clear example, the NSA did not like to be directed by people
from the Central Intelligence Agency, and we had to break that down
otherwise -- and let me say also that at that time the people who were
running the intelligence community staff all -- virtually all were drawn
from the clandestine services. Clandestine services provide you with
many insights, but they do not necessarily provide you with the best
insight with respect to SIGINT.

And so there was legitimate resistance on the part of the NSA as well as
institutional resistance. We moved slowly in that direction, it went up,
at some times it receded, I think that the DCI has substantial authority
now, the necessary authority if it is pushed too hard, if he pushes that
authority too hard he will run into resistance. First from the military
services, then from the NSA, then from the Secretary of Defense, or
perhaps in the reverse order.

MR. GORTON: Do you -- are you aware of the recommendations that John
Deutch is going to make as our next witness?

MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm not specifically aware.

MR. GORTON: All right. Let me share what I consider the heart of them
and ask for your comments on them. He, as I read his testimony, is going
to recommend that the DCI be given executive authority for domestic
intelligence activities. That is to say, that the DCI will in effect be
in charge of that portion of the FBI that is now dealing with domestic
intelligence activities, just as he has control over the CIA today. What
is your reaction to that recommendation?

MR. SCHLESINGER: My reaction is the DCI is a pretty busy man already. I
would approach that with great caution. I think that we now have an
experiment, and these experiments as it were, take a considerable period
of time to reach fruition. We have the director of the FBI attempting to
move in the right direction with regard to improving analytical
activities within -- analytical intelligence activities within that
agency. To disrupt it now I think might be a mistake. We will see.

Perhaps more significant, it has been the suggestion, which I'm not yet
ready to endorse, that we create an MI5 in this country, which in effect
takes that intelligence function away from the FBI. I don't think we
should do that as yet, but we should consider it as an alternative. And
I think that that may be a more effective way than simply handing over
the intelligence functions of the FBI to the DCI. Over the years we have
had -- what shall I say? An interesting history of relations between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the FBI. When J. Edgar Hoover was
director, he had instructed his people not to talk to the people in the
CIA. Well, that was a prime example, I think, of the baronies -- I
should add that despite that directive from the Director, that the
people in the agency understood that they had to talk to each other, so
that they did that surreptitiously.

MR. GORTON: One more question, Mr. Schlesinger. The investigations and
the resulting reforms from the Church Committee, in your view did they
improve our intelligence capabilities, derogate from them, were they
neutral? Or if they derogated from them, did they have other values
which made them worthwhile? What is your general view of the aftermath
of that dramatic set of changes?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, I think that in the large that they probably were
detrimental. I think that it was useful to point to certain activities
that had been going on, but that, particularly on the House side, rather
than the Senate side, that the investigations got out of hand; that more
was -- far more was revealed in those investigating than it was
desirable to reveal, and that some of the legislation and rules that
evolved from it have not been helpful.

MR. GORTON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Ben-Veniste?

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Dr. Schlesinger, another recommendation that has been
discussed is to invest in a Director of National Intelligence with
certain authorities over budget, many of which you've mentioned that now
reside within the Pentagon. And now you see the Director of CIA who has
obligations with respect to running that agency and, nominally, is
supposed to direct traffic in terms of where intelligence resources go,
but has no actual authority because he does not control the budget.
Eighty percent or so of the intelligence budget is held within the
Department of Defense.

What would your reaction be -- and I know you have expressed over the
years the injunction against emulating kiddy soccer whenever there's a
crisis, where everybody, all the kids run to the ball. Mindful of that,
however, and in view of this very significant change in the intelligence
needs of this country after the Cold War, what would your view be about
a Director of National Intelligence who was disassociated from running a
particular agency, had no troops, but yet had budget allocation
authorities to direct how the enormous amount of money that's spent on
intelligence is allocated?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, he would be without troops and he would be
essentially another special assistant to the President. There is always
a temptation to try to move things towards the White House, and the
White House is better at setting overall policy than running operations,
and only a limited number of operations can be run from the White House.
I think that you really want to keep that back in the agencies and the
departments.

I would add that the President proposes, the Congress disposes, that it
is the Congress that will decide on the level of appropriations for
various intelligence activities, and that these appropriations may or
may not be used or may be amplified for the purposes prescribed. The
NRO, to take an example, is -- I would not like to see the Air Force
begin to lose its interest in running the NRO because the authority over
the NRO has been shifted off some place else. I think that one has to be
very careful once again in motivating the people who are actually doing
the work. If the NRO, which has over the years drawn very qualified Air
Force officers, were suddenly to be an orphan of the Air Force -- that
would not be desirable for that particular arm of the intelligence
community, and the consequence would be that you would draw in fewer
capable people. And I think that that is more or less inevitable. It is
now some 40 years since I wrote a paper on how you had to motivate
agencies and institutions to do what you want to do. Simply handing down
directives usually runs into considerable resistance.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: You have been very articulate in expressing all of the
things that shouldn't be done to change.

MR. SCHLESINGER: Uh-huh.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Where do you come out in terms of your recommendations
of what should be done?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, the first point, once again, is that management
changes can be helpful, but they should be a result of modest adjustment
rather than gross surgery. Gross surgery probably -- unless it is very
carefully conceived in advance, probably does more harm than good for an
extended period simply because you've shaken up all of these
institutions. People are wondering who's in charge, whatever the formal
organizational chart. So adjustments: Build up the counter-terrorism
work, draw better people into it, set up a special group that would deal
with establishing a conceptual framework for -- a conceptual strategic
framework for dealing with the terrorism problem, which we have not as
yet, I believe, thought through. Those are the kinds of things: recruit
better people and protect them. The real problem is the quality of
intelligence.

When the CIA was started, when the intelligence community was started,
there was a greater tendency in the intelligence community to go outside
and to find what were regarded as the best minds in the country. That
has diminished, and I think that there ought to be encouragement,
greater encouragement, to go out and find some of the people. There's
too much of talking to each other and not talking to the people out
there. Just take an example. There was, I think, insufficient contact
with the people in the oil industry with regard to the ferment in the
Middle East. These people are out there. They know what's going on. They
know what's going on better than somebody sitting in his cubicle at
Langley or in the DIA. And there needs to be more outreach, it seems to
me. There is an outreach program. It has always been there, but it has
become more and more formalistic: debriefing people who visited Baghdad
since 1995, or what have you.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you, sir.

MR. SCHLESINGER: Let me add that I don't think, given what they had,
that the analytical -- the analysts did too badly with regard to the
issues of weapons of mass destruction. The real problem is that with all
the commerce that goes on in -- that has gone on in Iraq, that we were
unable to get agents in who would tell us what was going on in the
country.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Fielding and then Commissioner Gorelick.

MR. FRED F. FIELDING: (Off mike.) Is that better? Thank you very much
for appearing here today and for your government service over the years.
You have to bear with us; we have to analyze something that you've
thought about for years and years, and what we're trying to do is, in
fulfilling our mandate, come up with a recommendation of what changes,
if any, should be done. So if we're asking questions that seem a little
mundane or a little off the walls, because we're searching.

One of the issues Richard just touched upon is something that is
confusing to me as well, and that is dealing with budgetary authorities
and that sort of thing. And I noted that in -- you gave some testimony
in 1972 in which you said be careful of those who are paying for the
intelligence -- who are paying the intelligence analysts, that if -- and
the example you cited was that if the CIA was paying for the analyst,
then the Secretary of State or at least the Foreign Service would
probably look askance at the information. They would deem that to be
penetration. And you stated that you were concerned that the DCI might
have difficulty effectively executing budget authority outside of his
ambit.

In that regard I guess I have two questions. If a Director of National
Intelligence is created, or if the Director of CIA is given greater
authority over the intelligence agencies within the various departments,
Defense et cetera, should each department continue to pay for its own
analysts and its own intelligence? And a follow up to that is, is there
an effective way to centralize authority of our counterintelligence
agencies, though they're located in different departments and different
subsets, without creating too much tension again due to budgetary
control issues?

MR. SCHLESINGER: Let me deal with that second question first. Yes, I
think we need to think long and hard about mechanisms for a greater
cohesion within the counterterrorism effort, simply because we have not
thought about it very much in the past and that it has been, at least
for some agencies, a secondary effort. And so now that the global war on
terrorism is the central priority of American foreign policy, we need to
think better how to bring together these elements that are dealing with
the counterterrorism issue. I think that that, indeed, is the case.

Now, as to your earlier part of your question, this goes back to that
need for competition. I note that in the press and amongst members of
Congress there has been great enthusiasm expressed that the Department
of State took a footnote, if that was what it was, in the recent NIE,
October 2002, saying that they didn't see that there was all that much
evidence that there was weapons of mass destruction. I think that you
need to have that kind of ferment going on and protecting that source of
special information for the Secretary of State is highly desirable. It
took us years to break down the resistance of what were then called
CINCs to making use of the very costly satellites that we are utilizing,
because they were national intelligence and they weren't under the
CINCs' direct control. I think that we have shown that those national
assets can be responsive to the needs of the CINCs, now the Combatant
Commanders, and that as a result they welcome this source of information
not under their direct control.

But I read in the press about allegations at least that the Department
of Defense set up a special entity to examine certain aspects of our
Middle Eastern problem. I think that that may have been exaggerated. The
press does exaggerate from time to time. But it does point to the fact
that when an agency head is disappointed with the quality of information
that he's getting, he is going to find some way of setting up in effect
his additional sources of intelligence under his guidance.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you.

MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm not sure that I answered your question.

MR. FIELDING: No, you have. Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Ms. Gorelick.

MS. JAMIE S. GORELICK: Dr. Schlesinger, I'd like to follow up on Slade
Gorton's question. He asked you whether there was a failure of
imagination or a failure of organization, and you essentially responded
there was a failure of leadership. And I personally would add a failure
of urgency.

MR. SCHLESINGER: I think I said there was both.

MS. GORELICK: Yes, both and you added leadership. My question is an
organizational one, and I know you've warned us against organizational
changes. But I'm having trouble squaring that with the observations in
your testimony. Right now we have a situation where there is no
accountability for the entire government's intelligence capacity, except
in the person of the President of the United States and the National
Security Advisor as his aide. And my question to you is how do you get
the organization, the imagination, the leadership, the urgency if you
haven't invested someone with authority to move resources to where they
need to go?

You say in your testimony, you're not going to get the resources away
from a certain agency that has them, the Defense Department, to the
place where they might be needed at the observation of the DCI, for
example, who doesn't have them, because the Secretary of Defense is not
going to part with them. We are faced with that. We have to remedy that.
We have to address that. You've sat in both places, as has Dr. Deutch of
-- from whom we'll hear in a few minutes. You know that as Secretary of
Defense if you wanted resources to stay put, they stayed put in your
agency. And you know when you were DCI, if you wanted them from the
Secretary of Defense, in that battle you were likely to come out the
loser.

So my question to you is what are we supposed to make of that? How do we
remedy the fact that there is no accountability anywhere in the
government for the intelligence product right now, except at the
presidential level?

MR. SCHLESINGER: I think that the DCI has responsibility for the
intelligence product. The President does not deal with producing
intelligence. The President has got too many other things on his mind,
and the DCI is the advisor to the National Security Council, which
presumably does these allocations. Now, the example that I cited was not
the unwillingness of Department X to give up resources to Agency Y. It
was within Agency Y it is difficult to reallocate resources under a
budget constraint, simply because the resistance to taking away
resources from the other established entities is too fierce. And it is,
as your question implies, even more fierce when you cross agency lines.

I don't know -- I do not know that this issue has a resolution. It is
that we will just have to cope with it. And George Shultz when he was
here, when he used to describe what is the function of government is to
cope with the same damn issue day after day, month after month. We
aren't going to resolve the budget issues. Budgets are the heart of
government policy and conceptually we can put somebody in charge and he
will allocate here and there and so forth, and you do not know after
you've put that somebody in charge what the consequences will be of that
allocation; whether you will be able to retain good people or recruit
good people in the NRO, an example I cited earlier.

So conceptually you are suggesting that we have some overall
intelligence, not in the technical sense, that deals with the allocation
problem and far-seemingly allocates resources. I don't think that you're
going to be able to achieve that.

MS. GORELICK: Because of the politics of it? Because of the oversight? I
mean, we had a situation in which the DCI literally was pounding on
tables all over town, saying -- in February of 2001 saying, we have a
very big problem here. This issue of al Qaeda and particularly threats
to the United States had skyrocketed to the top of his attention, and
yet we don't see a -- what the follow up was. We don't see the urgency.
And the question is how do you get that? Is there an organizational way
to address it? Obviously that is not all that you would do. But it
strikes me anyway that simply saying, well, this is what we've got is,
quite frankly, not a sufficient answer.

MR. SCHLESINGER: The Agency has much of the analytical talent of the
intelligence community, and the Director of -- and, as I mentioned
earlier, the analytical question is the heart of the problem. The
Director presumably is able to influence the analytical effort. In the
case that you cited, my recollection is, at least according to the
press, that after we pounded the table that we wound up with five people
working on the al Qaeda problem prior to 9/11. You know, if you want to
deal with a problem, this country is at war. That is a major threat, all
of which was right and all of which the director said, and he didn't get
the support or understanding, as your question implies, that he should
have gotten. But still there was a minimal effort directed towards the
al Qaeda problem, and that is something that could have been handled
within the Agency.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Secretary, thank you very, very much. I know there are
commissioners who have additional questions, three or four of them.
We've simply got to move on because of our time constraints. But I want
to thank you very, very much, Mr. Secretary.

MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAX CLELAND: Mr. Chairman, we can't ask a question?

MR. KEAN: Well, it just -- we have another witness who's going to be
late if we don't move on. We've got a schedule beyond this for other
witnesses. We're already 15 minutes beyond schedule, but I apologize.

MR. CLELAND: Mr. Chairman, while Mr. Deutch is taking his seat, would it
be possible for those of us who have not had a chance to ask a question
to start the second round of questioning?

MR. KEAN: I'm sorry?

MR. CLELAND: For those of us who have not had a chance to ask a question
yet, would it be possible for us to come to the front of the line here
in terms of questions to Mr. Deutch?

MR. KEAN: Yes. But there are two people who were already ahead of you,
Senator, in the last round.

Our next witness is the Honorable John Deutch, professor of Chemistry,
MIT. Of course, for our purposes most importantly former Director of
Central Intelligence and Deputy Secretary of Defense. Like our first
witness, this is a man who has served our government long and well, for
which we all appreciate and thank him, and has had very important
experience at senior levels of government.

We do appreciate your willingness to appear before the Commission. Your
prepared statement will be in the record in full, so if you'd like to
proceed, sir.

MR. JOHN M. DEUTCH: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. What I'd like to
do if it's suitable, sir, is to summarize the basic points of my
testimony and then answer the many questions that I'm sure you will
have. We owe it to the families of the victims of the 9/11 attacks and
to all U.S. citizens to assure that the United States intelligence is
the best -- in the best possible position to protect Americans from
future terrorist attacks.

In my judgment -- sir? Is that better, sir? In my judgment, the U.S.
intelligence capabilities are inadequate to meet today's terrorist
threats and other security threats that our nation faces. This is not
surprising. Intelligence responsibilities and authorities were really
established 50 years ago to meet Cold War challenges. They were based on
distinctions which no longer hold today: that there was a bright line
between peace time and war time; that there was a bright line between
foreign and domestic threats; and that there was a bright line between
national security and law enforcement.

In my judgment, significant change is required and in my comments I
would like to describe to you the realignments that in my judgment are
needed to accomplish this improvement in U.S. intelligence. My principal
and my underlying proposed realignment is that I believe that the
balance between national security and law enforcement in
counter-terrorism efforts, that the priority must be given to national
security and to defense of the American people. As you understand, at
present the Director of Central Intelligence has little executive
authority over the intelligence programs for which he or she is
responsible. Even though that -- he is the senior intelligence official
responsible for national security, he has executive authority only over
the Central Intelligence Agency and over none of the other intelligence
-- many other intelligence agencies that are in our government,
including in the Defense Department and the FBI.

By "executive authority" I mean the combination of two kinds of
functions. One is the budget and resource allocation function, and the
second thing is the responsibility for day-to-day management of
operations. The Director of Central Intelligence is responsible for the
Central Intelligence Agency and therefore for foreign intelligence
collection, but domestic intelligence collection activities are in the
FBI and that separation of foreign and domestic intelligence collection
places limits on the effectiveness of our intelligence which I believe
have to be removed in order to better combat terrorist threats.

The single most important change that I propose for your consideration,
Mr. Chairman, is that the Director of Central Intelligence be given
executive authority for domestic intelligence collection where U.S.
persons are involved. This would mean transfer of the FBI's intelligence
division and counter-terrorism division to the new Domestic Intelligence
Service established as an agency under the director of Central
Intelligence. And that this new Domestic Intelligence Service would
report and be responsible to the director of Central Intelligence, just
as the CIA is today.

There should be transfer of those individuals, special agents in the FBI
who are dedicated to and able to help in this domestic intelligence
collection, but the principal function would be to bring together
domestic and foreign intelligence collection under the executive
authority of the director of Central Intelligence. The principal
advantage of this arrangement would be that it would permit integration
of domestic and foreign intelligence efforts to combat terrorism.
Consider a database put together to look at the movements of suspected
foreign terrorists into the United States, or dealing with foreign
persons abroad. All of this needs to be handled under a single
collection and analytical umbrella to provide the information, the
intelligence and the warning for the leadership of this country.

I don't believe that this can be adequately pursued in the Federal
Bureau of Investigation because their traditional approach, highly
successful as it has been, is to build a case for prosecution under the
laws -- under the rules and the procedures which work for law
enforcement. Their view, their tradition, and a strong tradition it is,
is to collect a case, provide the basis for a case suitable for bringing
to prosecution in a case of law. The intelligence community on the other
hand is collect information, give it as wide as possible dissemination
with appropriate caveats in order to provide warning of potential
attacks or warning of potential actions.

The FBI as a consequence has limited analytical capability for
intelligence collection and, more importantly, analysis. And while I'm
sure that there have been improvements in past years, I believe that
ultimately the fundamental culture of having it in a law enforcement
environment where law enforcement rules hold mean that the intelligence
dissemination, collection and analysis will not be as wide as it should
be.

There are, of course, disadvantages to the centralization of domestic
and foreign intelligence under the Director of Central Intelligence, and
most of that has to do with the risk of misuse of intelligence
information bearing on Americans. That's a very serious matter. But,
indeed, I would suggest that that risk exists in all arrangements that
are under consideration, including the present one where the FBI is
involved in these activities. And that the Department of Justice, a very
important responsibility, must assure and have the power of oversight to
make sure that there is no violation of what are the agreed upon
American rights, rights of Americans during the collection and analysis
of domestic intelligence.

The second most important recommendation that I make is to -- for
strengthening our intelligence capability to combat terrorism and other
national security threats is to change the balance of authority between
the Director of Central Intelligence and the Secretary of Defense. As
you know, the Director of Central Intelligence has limited ability to
coordinate or plan the resource efforts of the intelligence community.
Of the three major national security intelligence programs, the national
foreign intelligence program, the joint military intelligence program,
and the tactical intelligence and related activities, all of which are
-- many of -- most of which are in the Department of Defense, the
Director of Central Intelligence does not have authority over two out of
three of those programs: the so-called JMIP and the TIARA program. The
Director of Central Intelligence has little ability to influence some of
the key intelligence agencies in the Department of Defense, the National
Security Agency, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, the Defense
Intelligence Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office.

I believe that effective intelligence requires an integrated effort of
all these programs and all these different agencies. One must establish
a metric for performance, a metric for following costs, a schedule for
achieving different benchmarks for better intelligence collection and
analysis. For example, it is vital to have the strongest link between
the National Security Agency and the CIA's Directorate of Operations.
That could only be managed more effectively over time if there is
integrated resource planning by the Director of Central Intelligence.
Therefore, I would propose that the Director of Central Intelligence be
given responsibility for resource management -- principal responsibility
for resource management over all intelligence programs of this country,
but specifically of the Department of Defense.

I would leave the day-to-day management of the agencies with the
Secretary of Defense for very practical reasons. The activities of the
National Security Agency, for example, in communications security, the
activities of the Defense Intelligence Agency in supporting troops in
the field require that the Secretary of Defense have day-to-day
management authority. Unlike my proposal for a domestic intelligence
service where I would give executive authority to the director of
Central Intelligence, in this case I believe the day-to-day management
responsibility must be with the Secretary of Defense, and resource
planning should be -- and resource allocation with the Director of
Central Intelligence, that person being held accountable, and in the end
with the secretary of Defense having to concur in the proposed program.

If these different authorities are given -- these additional authorities
are given to the Director of Central Intelligence, I believe we have to
recognize that the responsibilities of that individual are different
than the Director of Central Intelligence Agency and that those two
positions should be separated. There should be an individual who
functions as the Director of Central Intelligence, with responsibility
over the new domestic intelligence service, over the CIA and the
resource planning for the entire intelligence community, and there
should be a director of the CIA who reports to the DCI just as the new
Director of the Defense Intelligence Service.

Clearly, to do this responsibly, properly, the Director of Central
Intelligence will need a stronger community staff with greater
responsibilities to integrate different efforts. I've included in the
testimony -- I know it doesn't show up well -- a chart that indicates
the proposed realignment of responsibilities. And the central features
of the chart are the creation of a new domestic intelligence service
under the Director of Central Intelligence, and the creation of a single
integrated resource planning effort for the combined intelligence
budgets. Finally, it indicates the responsibility of the intelligence
community staff providing needed functional oversight over many parts of
the intelligence community activities that are required to strengthen
our intelligence capability. I'm just going to briefly mention what
these are. They are mentioned in more detail in my testimony.

First, this new realignment will strengthen human intelligence
collection by integrating various efforts which are taking place today
at DOD, in the FBI and certainly in the Directorate of Operations in the
Central Intelligence Agency. It should, very importantly, improve
intelligence analysis by giving analysts access to information from
every possible source, especially domestic collection efforts. It will
make the Director of Central Intelligence more accountable for
performance because that individual now will have a responsibility for
resource management for the entire community, and it will give that
individual executive authority over domestic and foreign intelligence
collection.

There are other accompanying changes which should help make this a more
effective arrangement. There are measures which could be done to
strengthen covert action, an extremely important feature of our fight
against terrorism. The ultimate success is to learn of a serious
terrorist threat and to interdict it before it occurs to threaten
American people and American lives and property. The new arrangement
should also be organized to do better oversight and management of
information operations, offensive information operations.

I believe the Director of Central Intelligence needs to be given greater
authority to coordinate cooperation with other countries. Currently this
is done on an agency by agency basis and we do not have a general
approach to our -- it's been my experience, to cooperation with all
aspects of intelligence with various countries who are extremely
important partners to us in the fight against terrorism and other
intelligence matters. The new arrangement should help the Director of
Central Intelligence plan for and execute a better and more effective
science and technology program, bringing online advances in technology
which will help collect intelligence, more information for our
protection. For example, in the management and exploitation of
databases. For example, the detection of biological warfare and chemical
warfare agents. For example, in the downstream processing, exploitation
and dissemination of the enormous amount of material which are now
collected by our satellites.

And, finally, I would mention the importance of having rotation of
personnel between intelligence agencies, just like was done in
Goldwater-Nichols here in this building, I guess, to assure that
officers in one of the intelligence agencies some time in their career
as they gain in seniority have the experience of working in other
intelligence agencies.

Let me summarize, sir. Terrorism and national security threats demand
greater integration of intelligence collection and analytic activities
in this country. The walls that exist between law enforcement and
intelligence in the intelligence community must be just done away with.
And the intelligence community must have greater ability to manage the
resources which are presently in the Department of Defense's budget.

I've proposed integration under the Director of Central Intelligence as
the best way to achieve and improve intelligence for the security of the
U.S. people. There are, of course, other options. Let me mention three.
One is do nothing. Work at the margins to improve the existing practice.
That's always a prudent thing to do. It's always the easy thing to do.
In my judgment, that will not lead to the necessary improvement of
intelligence which should be given to the American people.

The second is to establish a domestic intelligence service, but to place
it in the Department of Homeland Security. This is sort of the MI5 model
where the MI5 model really reports to the Home Office in the United
Kingdom. Here I think that would be moving in exactly the opposite
direction. Instead of consolidating the intelligence activities, it
would be creating yet a third center. You could give the responsibility
to the Secretary of Defense. On the other hand, the Secretary of
Defense's primary responsibility is military matters and, as I said
earlier, that person is very busy indeed as things stand. Or, finally,
you could give principal authority to the FBI and the Department of
Justice.

I believe that there is an essential conflict between law enforcement
and national security that makes that a bad idea. I believe that the
FBI, for the cultural reasons I've mentioned, is unlikely to quickly
build up the necessary capability for either collection or analysis.
And, frankly, I believe the Department of Justice should have a focus on
defending and protecting and assuring that U.S. rights are respected
however the balance is struck in these matters.

So in my judgment the best option and the option that I would urge this
commission to consider carefully is to a centralization of the
intelligence activities and responsibilities under the Director of
Central Intelligence, with the provisos that I have mentioned. Thank you
very much for your attention, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: (Off mike.)

MR. FIELDING: Dr. Deutch, thank you very much not only for being here
today and for providing us with some interesting reading prior to this,
but also for your many, many years of government service to your
country. As I explained to Dr. Schlesinger earlier, we're trying to work
within our mandate and trying to figure out, looking at existing
structures, what if anything we should recommend by way of change. It's
clear that the system certainly can stand scrutiny. The real question is
whether changes should be made.

We don't want to recommend change for change sake, obviously, and we
certainly want to get it right. But by the same token, I don't think
anybody is served if we recommend something that's purely aspirational
but can't effectively solve whatever problems exist. You've given us a
very, very serious and well thought out proposal and I know we're
appreciative, and please don't misunderstand if I ask questions that
seem like I don't necessarily agree with it. I just -- I'm trying to
make sure I understand the facets of it, and I'm sure my fellow
commissioners will have the same goal.

But the first thing I'd like to discuss with you is in February of 1992
the Chairmen of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees held a
press conference and announced their plans they were going to create a
Director of National Intelligence. And according to the legislation they
then introduce, the Director of National Intelligence would have
complete control over the U.S. intelligence community, including the
management of assets owned and operated by the Defense Department. All
of the assets. And they argued that a DNI was badly needed because the
intelligence community had grown into an empire without an emperor, so
to speak, and responsibility was decentralized, money was being wasted
on duplicative programs that were turf battles among agencies, with
little legal authority to guide U.S. intelligence operational
activities.

I know this sounds all very familiar to all of us now, but this was 11
years ago and they announced that this was going to be a czar with
teeth. Dave McCurdy was pushing this was the czar with teeth. He's going
to be a czar with troops and forces and budgets. And obviously the
reaction to the legislation was relatively swift and overwhelmingly
negative. And I know you're now familiar with the recommendations of the
Joint Inquiry, which again came out 10 years later and concerned -- and
recommended a Director of National Intelligence. And they -- I have a
quote here. This was to be the principal advisor to the President on
intelligence and, quote, "have the full range of management, budget and
personnel responsibilities needed to make the entire U.S. intelligence
community operate as a coherent whole," end of quote. And they
recommended that that position be cabinet level, as you know, and that
no person simultaneously serves as Director of National Intelligence and
Director of CIA.

Your proposal suggests that you keep the Director of CIA -- excuse me,
Director of Central Intelligence as the head of the intelligence
community, and that you establish, as I understand it, the domestic
intelligence service under that director's leadership. And I guess I
have two threshold questions before we get to specifics. One of them is
why do you believe that we should keep -- specifically keep the Director
of Central Intelligence as the head of the intelligence community, as
opposed to creating a cabinet level -- or the DNI with some specificity?
And the second question is why wouldn't both proposals, yours which
modifies DNI, suffer the same fate in Congress, as it did 11 years ago?

MR. DEUTCH: Mr. Fielding, the first point is words. Whether you call it
a director of National Intelligence or a director of Central
Intelligence to me is not material. What is material is the description
of the authorities and responsibilities that that person will have. If
you at the last moment want to, for basically cosmetic reasons, change
DCI to DNI, I think that that's -- you know, that is a question of
cosmetics. The question is what is the authority and the
responsibilities of the individual?

There have been a lot of past studies and people who have recommended
the creation of greater authorities under the DCI or DNI, as you have
mentioned in your comments, and I am here doing it again today, however
with a little bit more precision in the sense that I only suggest
executive authority for the DCI over the Central Intelligence Agency in
the domestic intelligence service. I do not suggest executive authority
over the Defense agencies. I think that must remain with the Secretary
of Defense, and the best balance can be struck by having the resource
planning responsibility given to the DCI, but not the day-to-day
management. That is a question of my experience as Deputy Secretary of
Defense, as well as DCI, how that balance can best be struck.

Would Congress approve such a proposal after the very strong endorsement
of this commission? Let me say that you're as -- better. Everyone here
is better able to estimate that possibility. And I am -- I'm, after all,
a chemistry professor for MIT. But let me tell you something. I think
it's the right thing to do and it reminds me very much of the debate
that went on prior to the formation of the Secretary of Defense. Could
it be that a secretary of Defense could balance being Secretary of War,
Secretary of Navy, later Secretary of the Air Force? And it took a long
time and there was still occasionally tangents and struggles. But
inevitably, that's where time's arrow is going and that's really what
I'm saying here.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you. I mean, I want to follow up on that just for a
second too because you've got unique background to help us. You were
Director of Central Intelligence and you were Deputy Secretary of
Defense. So you know, if you will, from both sides of that issue when
there is an issue of who's in charge. You suggest that the Director not
manage the day-to-day operations of agency activities, as I understand
it.

MR. DEUTCH: Yes, sir, in the Defense Department.

MR. FIELDING: That's what I'm talking -- I'm sorry. But I guess if
they're an integral part of military operations, that's the need for
that. But won't such a structure that just will lead to an overlap of
duties between the Defense Department and the Director and perhaps
confusion as to the lines of jurisdiction and who's going to be the
arbiter of these disputes, so to speak? I mean, are we creating an
absolute mess on our hands?

MR. DEUTCH: Well, first of all, I think we do have an absolute mess on
our hands now and the American people are at risk because of it. But let
me say to you, you can't do this with complete clarity. There are going
to be lots of places where it's blurred and you must have a cooperative
relationship between the Secretary and the Director of Central
Intelligence. I believe that, had I not been deputy Secretary of Defense
and had my Secretary in the office, Bill Perry, my job would have gone
from being impossible to truly impossible. And so I do think that there
is going to be some mess there and I can point out to you in great
detail where it could occur.

Dual budget processes which kind of exist now and that cannot be allowed
to happen. Directionally, it's the right way to go. If you want to make
better integration of different intelligence collection, specially from
the NSA and the Directorate of Operations in these matters, specially
when it may deal with information on U.S. persons, this has to be done.

MR. FIELDING: Harking back to your experience as DCI, you obviously had
some concerns as to the ambit of your authority and your control -- and
I'm making that assumption. And if that be true, will this correct those
problems that you had from the point of view of the DCI?

MR. DEUTCH: Let me divide it into two pieces. First of all, with respect
to the Department of Defense, I personally didn't have this problem
because I went, day one, from having done the Defense allocation issue
on one side to the other side. So I personally didn't have this
difficulty. My predecessor had this difficulty with me and I believe
subsequently my successors have had this difficulty with others. But I
didn't have it because I came from being deputy secretary of Defense.

With the FBI, the issue was entirely different, and while a lot of
progress has been made, a lot of progress since the time of John Foster
Dulles -- I mean Allan Dulles and J. Edgar Hoover, there still are
tremendous difficulties. And if it had not been in the case of
counterintelligence, with Louis Freeh and myself and my deputy taking an
immediate interest, we would have serious problems, and I think that
regardless of the good intentions of many, many people and both those
strong and important organizations, it's just set up wrong. And you
can't make it right by telling them to cooperate more.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Gorelick.

MS. GORELICK: Dr. Deutch, I want to echo Fred Fielding's comments of
appreciation for the time and energy that you've put into this. You have
given us in your testimony and in your written statement really a very
rich and thoughtful product and I hope we'll have some time beyond the
limited hour that we have today to benefit from your views and, as Fred
pointed out, your unique experience.

I'd like to ask you some questions about focusing on the domestic side
and first, to seek a very clear statement from you with regard to your
proposal. I take it that you would not change in any way the
constitutional or statutory protections of rights that American citizens
currently have with regard to the investigative techniques that may be
used against them, or about them, or in relation to them. Is that
correct?

MR. DEUTCH: I certainly am not proposing that here today. I am
suggesting that whatever balance is struck, the arrangement that I
suggest puts the Department of Justice in a better position to assure
that that set of rules was followed for the current arrangement.

MS. GORELICK: Is that because you believe that the Department of Justice
is now somewhat conflicted in that regard?

MR. DEUTCH: I think Department of Justice is tremendously conflicted
between hugely important and valued goals. Goal one is to defend
Americans. Goal two is to bring people to justice, and goal three is to
protect the rights of Americans. And I think that is a very tough set of
differences -- strains to resolve when you are working on databases
which contain information about American citizens.

MS. GORELICK: So you would give the Department of Justice sort of policy
oversight responsibility for the domestic collection capacities of this
new DIS?

MR. DEUTCH: The word "policy" troubles me there, Counselor. I would say
not only would they set the policy, they would also have the
responsibility to making sure and enforcing that it was followed. So
they would have, you know, a direct hand in determining that the rules
of the game, with regard to American citizens especially, were
scrupulously followed by the Domestic Intelligence Service.

MS. GORELICK: Now you say that there are -- you reject the notion of
tinkering at the edges, working with what we've got is the way you put
it and I'd like to turn your attention to the discussion of Terrorist
Threat Integration Center, which, as you know, calls itself a joint
venture. It's supposed to fully integrate information whether gathered
at home or abroad. But there does not appear to be one person or one
entity in charge of it. In your view, what are its limitations because
this is the place where the intelligence is supposed to come together in
the manner that you suggest would be possible under your new system? And
could whatever shortcomings there may be, be overcome short of the
organizational changes that you propose?

MR. DEUTCH: Well, let me first of all say that I have not had the
occasion to know how the new Terrorist Threat Integration Center is
operating and what the rules of the game are. So what I'll have to do in
answering this question is to ask you certain questions. You know, I
would ask, does the head of that TTIC have the right to reassign people
to different jobs and call in from the FBI or call in from the NSA, I
need 10 more analysts, bring them here tomorrow morning?

MS. GORELICK: No.

MR. DEUTCH: Sorry? I didn't hear you.

MS. GORELICK: Let's assume the answer is no.

MR. DEUTCH: Let's assume the answer is no.

MS. GORELICK: But why don't you continue with your rhetorical question?

MR. DEUTCH: Does the Director -- who's actually an excellent, excellent
individual, a person who's the head of this -- does that person -- can
he pick up the phone and say, I want you to shift $10 million from this
activity to this activity? It's a reprogramming, we'll have to inform
Congress but I want to do that right now and the director supports this.
No. Does the Director of this agency have the ability to say, You know,
we got to think about this over the long term. The way you get good
intelligence is to follow a target for a long time. This idea that you
just could drop in one day and collect a lot of good agents is wrong.
You really have to pursue a target for a long period of time. That's
when you really develop good sources and understand what you're dealing
with.

Because we want to develop a collection strategy over several years in a
certain region of the world. Does the director of this center have the
ability to set such a plan for several years and make it stick with the
different agencies? That's another question I would ask. I don't think
you can fix that around the edges.

MS. GORELICK: At our very first hearing I examined the chairs and
ranking members of the intelligence committees on one of the subjects
that you addressed, which is whether they did or whether even under the
current construct they could perform effective oversight of the
intelligence community. One of the advantages, I presume, of this
organizational structure is that there would be oversight across the
board throughout the intelligence communities. Their response, roughly,
was we can review budget items line by line but we don't have effective
means to look across the intelligence community to match up the threat
with the capacity that is supposed to address that threat.

You have been overseen by the committees that oversee defense and the
committees that oversee intelligence. And having been overseen by two of
the three committees, the other relevant committee being judiciary, what
are the upsides, if you can identify them, of the shifts that you
proposed from an oversight point of view?

MR. DEUTCH: If I were able to see this realignment take place, I would
suggest that you would have a separate budget category in the defense
accounts, the national security accounts, the 050 accounts just like we
do today -- for example, for atomic energy defense activities -- I would
set one up for the intelligence activities which included NFIP, JMIP and
TIARA, and associated budget for the domestic intelligence service. And
I would create that as a separate budget category in the overall
National Security Budget 050 accounts. I believe that that would
eventually lead Congress to establish a single committee to follow those
set of functions. If you could have a single authorizing committee, you
would do much, much better with respect, in my judgment, I think, to
congressional support and knowledge, informed judgment about these
activities.

So I think that this naturally leads to a single congressional committee
oversight and one which would be better informed and basically more
supportive of intelligence activities.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you for that response. One last question. I was
following you all the way through your presentation where the thrust of
it was, we need to give responsibility and authority to the same person,
and we need to hold them accountable because we've given that person --
whether it's the DCI or the DNI -- authority over budgets and resources
and programmatic efforts. With regard to the Defense Department, you say
let's keep the executive authority over there because they have
operational capacity that is well placed there. Nevertheless, you say
let us give this authority to this DCI or the DNI, but the Secretary of
Defense has to concur -- now, concur in the exercise of the authority by
this DCI or DNI.

Now, in my experience, when the secretary of Defense, given his powerful
position in the cabinet, given his stature, given the resources that he
has at his disposal has to concur in anything, that's the end of the
story. That concurrence becomes all the power that is needed to maintain
the current status quo. So I will ask you, having sat in both places,
with all of the honesty you are capable of mustering in a public setting
- (laughter) -- to tell us whether the concurrence you suggest
undermines the thoughtful proposal you've put on the table?

MR. DEUTCH: I may need help on this, Mr. Chairman. You, of course, have
raised a very excellent point here, but I want to make really two
remarks about it. The first is, I did not say that the executive
authority lay with the Secretary of Defense with these defense agencies,
I said the day-to-day management authority. I would say the principal
planning and resource allocation authority for these agencies lies with
the Director of Central Intelligence. That's different. And I don't want
to see a parallel structure run by the financial side of the Office of
the Secretary of Defense redo all the budget analysis to get into the
kinds of bureaucratic problems that Mr. Fielding also alluded to.

Basically, in my heart I don't think you can tell the Secretary of
Defense use these agencies for combat support, and to support troops
that are deployed abroad, and not have the Secretary of Defense happy
with that -- with what the program is. There's also an element of trying
to keep Mr. Fielding on my side by saying without this proposal from the
Secretary of Defense having concurrence at the last analysis, this
proposal goes nowhere. It goes nowhere. You must give the Secretary of
Defense that last -- as I can tell you by speaking with several of them.
Without that, you can't possibly get the additional oversight, the
additional authorities within the Director of Central Intelligence.

So there is an element of it that just says this is the best way of
keeping the legitimate military concerns on board. So that's why I came
on it.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Fielding.

MR. FIELDING: One follow up question on our analysis. It has been
suggested that we also consider a structure similar to MI-5. I would
appreciate any comments you could give us and your thoughts on that as
we look as this whole structural issue.

MR. DEUTCH: I know the MI-5 very well and its operation. The MI-5, as
you know, reports to the Home Office, so presumably the comparable
suggestion here would be to put the domestic intelligence service in the
Department of Homeland Security. And that, it seems to me, goes in the
wrong direction because it fragments two groups into three. On the other
hand, I believe that the Secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security has a tremendously important role to play in intelligence
analysis, because remember the domestic intelligence service is
principally concerned with collection activities, so the Department of
Homeland Security has a tremendously important role to play in
intelligence analysis and analyzing information from all sources, just
as the Department of State does today, or the Department of Defense does
today.

And so the intelligence community has the Secretary of Homeland Security
as a principal customer, but I do not believe that you should establish
a collection agency away from these others. I think it's going in
exactly the wrong direction.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Roemer.

MR. TIMOTHY J. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, nice to see you again.

MR. KEAN: Good to see you, sir.

MR. ROEMER: We appreciate your time today. You've talked a lot about the
relationship between the DCI and the SecDef, the Secretary of Defense.
I'm more interested, given the fact that you've given that a lot of
thought and a lot of time today and our commissioners have zeroed in on
that, I'm more interested in coming back to some of the mandate that we
have on this 9/11 commission, both at what happened on 9/11 and prior to
it, and the relationship between the DCI and the National Security
Advisor. You were a DCI in 1995 and 1996. There were, in the 1997, 1998
time period, there were a couple of Presidential Decision Directives
that Mr. Steinberg talks about in his open testimony, that one created
the position of a coordinator for national terrorism, another set forth
-- as Mr. Steinberg's open testimony talks about -- set forth ways to
protect the critical infrastructure in the United States of America.

Given that this commission is supposed to look at not just the technical
failures in the intelligence community -- and the Joint Inquiry found
several and numerous failures -- you said we're at a crisis position
with respect to the intelligence community. We're also supposed to look
at policy, and were there policy failures? Let me put this question
directly to you. Who within the government is responsible for enforcing
a Presidential Decision Directive? Is it the DCI? Is it the National
Security Advisor? Is it both? And how do we improve this nexus in this
relationship in the future so that we can formulate policy to react to
these transnational threats directly against the people and the
interests of the United States of America, and formulate effective
policy through the venues of government?

How would you directly answer that question?

MR. DEUTCH: Well, Congressman, I would say the National Security Advisor
is responsible for that in the national security area absolutely. That's
certainly the way it was in my time and there was never any difficulty
in my experience in either the Defense Department or the intelligence
community. On the other hand, in law enforcement you have a much more
complex question. If you have the National Security Advisor breeze in
and say, please let's do this, with respect to some colorable law
enforcement activity, you may end up with a huge problem on your hands.

And indeed, there were plenty of occasions where that came up in
domestic and international matters where the ability to enforce
executive branch views on the law enforcement community came to quite a
set of loggerheads. And so I would say to you it's quite clear in the
national security area, a little less clear to me about how you do it
when it's involved in law enforcement.

MR. ROEMER: And along those lines of enforcement of PDDs by the national
security advisor, given your time there, do you think that those were
adequately -- was there that adequate enforcement at that time? Was
there an aggressive tendency to go back to the agencies and see that
they enforced that new PDD?

MR. DEUTCH: The PDDs you've mentioned, the two you've mentioned,
occurred after my time.

MR. ROEMER: They occurred in '98, '97, '98, you were there in '95, '96.

MR. DEUTCH: Right. I can't comment on that. I will tell you that we had
many struggles, many struggles about infrastructure protection. That's
another very complicated subject. And also there, regarding
infrastructure protection as a law enforcement matter is in my mind --
as opposed to a national security matter -- a separate problem, related
but separate problem, was not resolved happily in any way, but also
didn't lead to a PDD.

In other words, because it wasn't resolvable the President didn't
promulgate a decision memorandum on it because it wasn't resolved but it
still, I think, has its problems. Infrastructure protection.

MR. ROEMER: Two of the top three recommendations made by the Joint
Inquiry were regarding the structure and the performance of the National
Security Council. The first one you've addressed significantly today,
the DNI. Number two and number three addressed the National Security
Council. Do you have specific recommendations as to how we better
structure the National Security Council in relation to the current
ongoing threat that we have?

MR. DEUTCH: I do not. I did not find in my time that the National
Security Council was part of the problem of anything, so I do not have a
specific recommendation on that. And a little bit to echo my boss, Jim
Schlesinger, prior boss Jim Schlesinger, I'm not sure how much you
really want the White House to get into the management of these kinds of
issues.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Senator Cleland.

MR. CLELAND: Yeah, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.

Mr. Secretary, this is such a clear and cogent and well thought out
proposal I fear for your future in the federal government.

MR. DEUTCH: You don't have to fear for it, sir.

(Laughter.)

MR. CLELAND: Let me just say, Secretary Schlesinger mentioned something
that peaked my interest. He mentioned the phrase, "turning point of
history," or turning points of history. And yet I still desire to have a
coherent picture about future developments. As a history guy I'm
fascinated with one of the Winston Churchill quotes that, "How do you
know where you're going unless you know where you've been?" One of the
things that's been fascinating to me was looking a little bit about
where we've been, when was the last attack on this country, it was Pearl
Harbor.

And my father was stationed at Pearl Harbor after the attack, so I've
been fascinated with that period of our history. It does seem that right
after Pearl Harbor there was an immediate critique that it was
intelligence failure, that information was stove-piped not disseminated
and certainly not available in a clear picture to decision makers. If
that all sounds familiar that was the conclusion right after 1941, and
about four commissions went into this in depth over a period of about
four or five years.

You mentioned that this sounds a little bit today like the debate about
creating a Secretary of Defense, well, that whole structure apparently
came about in 1947, the Defense Reorganization Act, which among other
things not only created the Secretary of Defense but created the CIA,
the Central Intelligence Agency. And one of the things that was
fascinating to me too was your testimony that back in those days, in the
days of the Cold War, there were bright lines. There was a line, there
was a barrier about where our power ended and the Soviet power began.

The Berlin Wall, the various lines along -- the hundred divisions behind
the Warsaw Pact and so forth. Those bright lines are gone now, we're in
another world. And I think that's what you're at. Doesn't it seem to you
that in the wake of the 9/11 attack we're at another one of those
turning points in history where we have to adapt and adjust,
particularly in terms of the way we read the tea leaves and making those
estimates of where the tea leaves carry us to the decision makers.

I think your chart moves us in that direction and I think you're right,
doing nothing maintains the current mess. One of the things I always
noticed was -- being on the Armed Services Committee for six years here
in the Senate -- was that the intelligence community was always referred
to as the intelligence community. I always tried to find out who was
accountable. In many ways more than 12 different agencies under six
different cabinet officers were part of the intelligence community. But
who was accountable?

And in the intelligence failure of 9/11 I've been trying to find out who
was accountable. And this government did have a lot of information but
it wasn't shared, the tea leaves weren't looked at appropriately, and
obviously not enough to get to the decision makers. So I agree with you.
We've got to adjust to this turning point in history to a new kind of
threat and that is the terrorist threat that doesn't acknowledge bright
lines. They don't acknowledge the bright lines between domestic and
foreign intelligence. They hit the seams, so to speak.

And so I'd just like for you to elaborate a little bit more maybe on the
history that you're aware of maybe in the former discussion about
creating a new organization to connect the dots, back in those days of
1947 in the wake of Pearl Harbor and World War II and what we needed in
terms of centralizing intelligence. Can you share a little bit and just
some of that information, is some of that information relevant to us
now?

MR. DEUTCH: Senator, let me give you a very brief answer because I know
our time is short here. But Roberta Wohlstetter wrote a book on the
failure, the intelligence failure of Pearl Harbor, which has stuck in my
mind because it explains not only Pearl Harbor, it explains lots of
these intelligence failures. And when I say intelligence failures I
don't mean to disparage the community, and certainly not the people who
work in it.

But successful intelligence requires three steps. Collection of
information, analysis of that information, and then transmission to a
policy maker who is willing to listen. And when you look in detail at
these events, always there is something which was going wrong in part of
those three steps. Sometimes the policy maker is not willing to listen,
and that was in part the problem in Pearl Harbor, military commanders
there and here. Often it is inadequate analysis and it always is better
to have more information rather than less.

But the heart of the matter is to have a set of dedicated and capable
intelligence analysts who have access to all available information and
who can objectively give you their unvarnished best estimate. It doesn't
guarantee you successful intelligence because the policy maker may still
not listen, but you have to have the elements, collect the information,
do fabulous analysis and have a policy maker who's willing to listen.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you, Mr. Secretary, that was a powerful statement.
Thanks very much.

MR. KEAN: Thank you.

I'm curious, if the recommendations that you are now proposing had been
in effect some years ago, do you think it would have changed what
happened on 9/11?

MR. DEUTCH: Governor, I can't answer a question like that, it is too
hypothetical. I think it is a catastrophe what happened to this country,
and I think it signals the need to do something. But I could not
possibly give you a fair answer to that question.

MR. KEAN: Okay. I understand that.

Yes. Slade, then Commissioner Lehman.

MR. GORTON: Dr. Deutch, as fascinating as this is, it reminds me -- you
mentioned a book about Pearl Harbor. It reminds me of that wonderful
title of a tragedy in World War II, "A Bridge Too Far." And so my
question to you is, if you took out the blue lines and didn't get
yourself into a fight with the Secretary of Defense, and perhaps only
had what you have here as CIA and the Domestic Intelligence Service
under a single head, would that be a significant improvement over the
present situation?

MR. DEUTCH: Senator, it would be a significant improvement. And I'm well
aware that this is a bridge too far. My effort was to try and clearly
describe what I thought the necessary changes were. But you are quite
right. If you let the -- if you leave the Defense stuff out, you've got
lots of big things you've given up, especially the connection between
human intelligence collection and signals intelligence collection. It
would be a big step but I don't think it would be a sufficient step.

MR. GORTON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Secretary Lehman.

MR. JOHN F. LEHMAN: Dr. Deutch, one of the critiques of the current
intelligence community is that, as a result of the tremendous technical
breakthroughs of the '60s, '70s, and then the political assaults of the
Pike Committee and the Church Committee during -- on the intelligence
community as a whole that this drove a total domination and the creation
of a completely technical culture in the intelligence community. If it
wasn't measurable, if it wasn't countable, then it had -- it was
dismissed as anecdotal. And this has been applied even to subjective
analysis, having to have a mathematical probability assigned to it
before it could be passed forward.

Given that not much in the war on terror, not much of the enemy target
base is countable, do we have too much investment both in hardware and
in culture, in the technical dimension of intelligence today.

MR. DEUTCH: Mr. Secretary, it's a very good question. I would first of
all argue that if you look in detail at even the most far-reaching human
collection possibility you might think of, that there are elements of
technical intelligence which can support that and make it more
effective. So first of all, I sort of resist saying we have human
intelligence, then we have, you know, satellites, and they're kind of
disconnected. I think that, in fact, if you look in detail, you can see
occasions where if you work them closely together, and I think that's
happening more and more, that it's really a very good thing.

There's no question that human intelligence capability, especially in
the CIA, suffered dramatically in the early '90s. No question about it,
including during my time. But the overwhelming reason for that fact, Mr.
Secretary, had nothing to do with technical or non-technical. It had to
do with one thing, and that was Aldrich Ames. If you go back to 1991 and
this town -- 1992, '93, the one thing which was quite clear was what had
happened to Soviet and Russian penetration of our intelligence services
and the FBI. And so if you say to me, why was there such, you know,
declining budgets, yes, all these other things, everything would have
been okay if it hadn't been for Aldrich Ames. I believe that the history
of the Director of Operations would have been much smoother sailing.

And I'm very, very pleased that my deputy, who is now Director, has
managed to build up and strengthen that Directorate of Operations. But
please would you describe what has been the great decline and then
coming back up of the Directorate of Operations. Remember, it was
Aldrich Ames that caused the problem, not anything else.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Last question from Commissioner Ben-Veniste.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Dr. Deutch, I am intrigued with something which was
mentioned in your prepared remarks with respect to recruitment of
foreign assets. I sit on another commission which is charged with
declassifying millions of pages of documents from the post -- World War
II and post-World War II period. And the focus there is on

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Could you turn on the microphone?

MR. BEN-VENISTE: I'm sorry. Did you hear --

MR. DEUTCH: I heard, yes, sir.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Okay. The focus there is on the recruitment of those
with Nazi war crimes histories in the post-World War II period as a
matter of expediency to get up and running against a Soviet threat. And
I notice that you have discussed the question which has been raised
broadly in the post-9/11 period of whether restrictions on recruitment
of foreign assets who have histories of crimes against humanity make
sense to continue in the post-9/11 period. In having seen the result of
the compromising of the West German Intelligence Organization from the
recruitment of those with that kind of tainted past and noticing your
remarks on the subject, I wonder if you could elaborate.

MR. DEUTCH: Could you tell me where these remarks are, Mr. Ben-Veniste?

MR. BEN-VENISTE: This would be on page three of five --

MR. DEUTCH: Three?

MR. BEN-VENISTE: -- in an article which you wrote.

MR. DEUTCH: Oh, I see. It's not in my testimony?

MR. BEN-VENISTE: I'm sorry. It was in the materials which our very
diligent staff had collected. It was an article which you wrote with
Jeffrey Smith in Foreign Policy Magazine fairly recently.

MR. DEUTCH: I don't have the article in front of me. If you read that
article with care, it also has a proposal similar to this but less --
thank you. But let me just say that you absolutely have to recruit
individuals with the worst kinds of backgrounds, the worst kinds of
criminal and humanitarian deficiencies. You absolutely have to do that.
The question is the procedure that is used for a case officer in the
field to recruit such individuals. But let there be no doubt about it,
we can have no barriers on the kind of character, criminal record or
personality of agents that are case officers try to recruit in the
field. That is essential.

How they get approval for that is what is at issue, I think, in the
article that you refer to. And it is my judgment that case officers of
the field are best protected and best able to take those risks if
there's a procedure that validates their decision to recruit a bad
person. But let me be clear about it so there's not a moment of doubt.
If you cannot -- you must be able to recruit the very worst kinds of
people in order to pursue our national interests.

MR. KEAN: Dr. Deutch, thank you very, very much.

MR. DEUTCH: Thank you.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much.

Our final witness this morning is James B. Steinberg, Vice President and
Director of Foreign Policy Studies at the Brookings Institute, and
former Deputy National Security Advisor. We're going to hear from Mr.
Steinberg about the question of terrorism, about how the policy process
works and perhaps should work at the senior levels of government. We
look forward to his recommendations as to how the national security
structure can perform better.

Mr. Steinberg, your prepared statement will be entered into the record
in full, and so please proceed with your testimony.

MR. STEINBERG: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the
opportunity to appear today before the Commission. The subject of this
morning's hearing is crucial to developing an effective strategy towards
homeland security, and it's clear from the discussion already that you
all have given considerable thought and attention to this, which I think
is a great service to the country. There's little dispute about the
central role that information plays in combating terrorist threats to
the United States and to our interests.

And similarly, there is a broad consensus about the need to adapt the
way we handle the collection, analysis and dissemination of information
to meet these new threats. This consensus is reflected in the
Congressional Joint Inquiry, in the enactment of the USA Patriot Act,
the creation of the Department of Homeland Security and the broad range
of institutional changes adopted by the Administration since 9/11. The
question is not whether we should act, but whether we have gone far
enough in thinking about the systematic implications of this challenge.

My overall judgment is that while Congress and the administration have
taken important and positive steps, we need to think more boldly. The
basic tact taken thus far has been based on an incremental adaptation of
existing institutions. Even the Department of Homeland Security to date
has not fundamentally changed the way we handle the information
challenge. This is perhaps not surprising given the deep institutional
inertia that provides obstacles to change, and the legitimate fear that
disruption at a time of great risk carries its own risks.

But as is often is the case, the short run imperative to get on with the
urgent task at hand can stand in the way of making the changes we need
for the long run. And as Director Deutch and you have discussed already,
the post-World War II history of adapting our national security
structures is instructive. Not until the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1985
did we really move effectively to integrate the military services, and
even today important challenges remain.

On the intelligence front, the concept behind the creation of the
Director of Central Intelligence in 1947 has never been realized. In my
statement I identify seven features of the counterterrorism challenge
that, when taken together, constitute a powerful argument for a
systematic rethinking about the way we do business. At the core is a
realization that the community that is key to the counterterrorism task
is much broader than the Cold War model of the national security and
intelligence communities.

Today state and local governments and the private sector play a much
larger role than the federal government, and the prevention task extends
far beyond the law enforcement community. Therefore we need an approach
that reflects this far flung, highly decentralized universe of critical
actors, both in the United States and abroad. These features of the new
challenge have direct implications for policy, which I have identified
in my written submission. I want to just touch on a few of them here.

First, we must give greater priority to information sharing. There's no
question that there have been important improvements since 9/11, but
they still do not fully reflect the sea change that is needed. A
critical portion of the community of collectors and users of information
related to homeland security are outside the corral of cleared
personnel, and the solution cannot simply be to increase the number of
people with security clearances. Similarly, the core concept of need to
know, which is so fundamental to our current structure, is difficult to
apply and often counterproductive in counterterrorism. Sometimes we
don't know who needs to know, as the 9/11 experience itself
demonstrates.

We need an approach where the priority is to get the information out to
those who could make effective use of it. The burden should be on those
who want to classify and restrict to justify the restriction, rather
than presume that information needs to be closely held, particularly
when the originating agency that often makes these decisions has the
greatest stake in protecting its sources and methods, but little
accountability for the failure to share.

I can illustrate this point by drawing on the story of how the
scientific community ultimately tracked down and identified the SARS
virus. The key to this effort was not a predetermined community of
experts closely holding information among themselves. Instead, all those
involved were encouraged to post their speculations and their research
results on the Internet, where anyone could access and build on them. In
some cases, insights came from unexpected quarters, and this was in
clear contrast with the process by which scientists uncovered the cause
of AIDS, in the pre-Internet world.

In that case, researchers worried as much about gaining credit for the
discovery as with sharing with other researchers. In the case of AIDS,
the process took a decade, compared to several months for SARS. Now, of
course, advances in biological research also helped speed the SARS
identification process, but the comparison and the nature of the network
that was used is instructive.

The issue of balancing risks between sharing and protecting information
is also illustrated in the debate over open source code versus
proprietary source code in the cyber security world. Those who favor
keeping source code secret argue that opening them to the public might
expose security holes to potential hackers. Proponents of open code
argue that by making the code public, more minds can be brought to bear
to identify and patch potential security problems. More and more of this
argument for openness is winning the day. The second major point is that
we need to examine the two key walls that characterized our intelligence
community during the Cold War, the line between law enforcement
intelligence and the line between domestic and foreign intelligence.

I won't repeat the arguments made so articulately and eloquently by
Director Deutch in his testimony to you, but suffice to say I largely
agree with his recommendations. We do need a Director of National
Intelligence to integrate domestic and foreign counterterrorism efforts,
and a domestic security agency which is separate from the FBI and law
enforcement. While Director Schlesinger and others rightly warn that
reorganization isn't everything, the example I cited of the 1947
National Security Act and Goldwater-Nichols also illustrates that at
times nothing short of organizational reform will change the incentives
to change the way the individuals act in the system.

I know that some have expressed fears about the civil liberties
consequences from creating a domestic security agency. I believe that
the civil liberties issues, while real, exist today in the current
system as the debate over aspects of the USA Patriot Act make clear.
Moreover, the best way to address this problem is to tackle it head on
rather than rely on imperfections in the existing system to safeguard
civil liberties. It would be unfortunate indeed if the only way we could
protect civil liberties was at the expense of protecting our security. I
think this is a false choice, and I'll return to this issue in a moment.

The third major point is that we need a parallel integration of the
policy apparatus to mirror the proposed changes on the intelligence
side. In particular, we need to examine how to integrate better the
domestic and foreign policy dimensions of counterterrorism. And to
accomplish this, as I state in more detail in my written submission, I
suggest that we strengthen the role of the Secretary of DHS in the
interagency process, and integrate the Homeland Security Council better
into the NSA.

Finally and most important, we need a system that will be effective in
taking on the counterterrorism challenge while sustaining the support of
the American people. As a result of the controversies over intelligence
collection and analysis programs like the TIA and CAPPS II, and the
recent revelations concerning JetBlue's provision of personally
identifiable information to an army contractor, today we risk creating
the worst of two worlds.

The public thinks that the government is guilty of massive invasions of
privacy, while government officials may become so gun-shy about
collecting information that they refrain from legitimate activities that
could be vital to stopping terrorists. We can avoid both dangers by
developing a clear, transparent approach to information gathering and
use that empowers government officials to do their jobs while providing
reassurance the public that the information is being used in appropriate
and tailored ways.

Guidelines that set out the rules and procedures, backed by effective
accountability practices, serve both goals simultaneously. As a member,
along with Senator Gorton, of the Markle Foundation Task Force on
Security in the Information Age, we've been working to help develop in
more detail a strategy that would integrate advances in information
technology with the necessary policies to achieve these two goals. We
issued our first report last fall under the able leadership of Phillip
Zelikow, and we plan to complete a second report later this fall on this
issue of guidelines and accountability, and look forward to sharing our
results with the Commission.

Establishing a system of guidelines and accountability should be a
priority for Congress as a part of its overall oversight responsibility.
Although I believe that the guidelines themselves should be issued by
the Executive Branch rather than enacted by Congress. This will allow a
learning experience as we move into relatively uncharted and
technologically fast moving waters. These guidelines should be developed
in close cooperation with the private sector, with as much public
transparency as possible, consistent legitimate security needs. Thank
you for your attention and I look forward to your questions.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much.

Secretary Lehman.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

Mr. Steinberg, I found your testimony very compelling and it goes right
to the heart of the issues. I would like to start by asking your views
about the role of the National Security Council, because as you know it
was envisioned to solve all of the problems that we're worrying about
here. It was supposed to have the ability to coordinate differing views
on priorities on budgets and to resolve differences between the cabinet
barons. In my own limited experience, on the NSC staff, I found that it
worked pretty well doing that, particularly on issue of priorities on
intelligence. There was a thing called the Forty Committee where
differences of views between State, Defense and individual elements of
the intelligence community were resolved, and money moved against the
wishes of certain of the players around the table.

And they came to every meeting because if they didn't, they knew
Kissinger would move the money anyway, so it functioned pretty well. And
what in the intervening time between the establishment of the NSC and
its initial implementation by President Truman, which was very different
than what Forrestal had intended. What's gone wrong? Why is that
mechanism no longer sufficient to resolve these kinds of budgetary
priority targeting and personnel issues?

MR. STEINBERG: I think you've raised a very important question, and I
think the answer is that within its traditional ambit I think the NSC
still does work well. There is a community that is part of the NSC
community, the traditional one, the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs, the Director of the CIA, the Secretary of State,
occasionally the Secretary of the Treasury, who are familiar with the
system, work within the system. But what we found moving into the 1990s
with these new set of challenges, which was very different than dealing
with a foreign state adversary, was that there were a set of actors who
didn't function with the ambit of the NSC system.

The most important was the Justice Department and particularly the FBI,
and for the reasons that we've been discussing this morning, there was a
deep reluctance to submit the FBI to the overall responsibilities of the
NSC, questions about the role of the White House, questions about
whether the independence of the law enforcement function would be
compromised. And while there were considerable discussions throughout
President Clinton's term about trying to reconcile these differences, we
were unable to reach an agreement that was comfortable on both sides and
had the imprimatur of the broader support that would be needed, I think,
to make those kinds of changes.

And this similarly is true with respect to aspects of the economic and
domestic policy system which were not traditionally part of the NSC. And
so I think that the basic model that you've described can work and can
work very effectively. But we need to rethink what that community is and
who ought to be part of it. And one of the reasons why I believe, along
with Director Deutch, that we do want to separate the law enforcement in
the domestic security function is that I think it is -- it will remain
uncomfortable to bring the FBI in its law enforcement capacity under the
NSC system, but it's imperative that we bring this domestic
counterintelligence and counterterrorism function into that system and
integrate it what we're doing.

So I think that's why I would favor basically returning the NSC to its
traditional role but with a new concept of what national security is
about. If that is the function -- and we understand the national
security challenge to be different than the challenge of dealing with
the Soviet Union or with foreign states -- then we want to think about
the composition and the interaction among the agencies in a different
way.

MR. LEHMAN: So how would we structure the role of a DNI or DCI along the
lines you're recommending into that NSC structure? I mean, there always
has been one National Security Advisor. Now, in effect, there would be
two. How would you divide the functions of a DNI, a DCI and the NSC, the
National Security Advisor, and, of course, I'm presuming that you're not
recommending that a DCI enhanced or DNI be a member of a cabinet.

MR. STEINBERG: That's correct. I don't think there'd be two National
Security Advisors, because I think that the DNI would still be providing
intelligence input into a policy process. In effect, they're an advisor
to the NSC system rather than a member of the NSC system. I think that I
have, in my testimony, not wandered into the perilous grounds that John
Deutch did about the relationship between the DNI and the Secretary of
Defense, he knows it better than I do. I've certainly observed it and I
think that both points that he made about some desirability and the
points that you've made about the practicalities are both real. But what
I think -- what the key issue now is for domestic security isn't this
question about the role of either the DCI or the DNI over domestic
intelligence collection and analysis, over which now he does not have
appropriate authority.

So I don't see this as a significant change of the role of either of the
DNI or the DCI in the NSC system, I do think it is an expansion of the
role with respect to counterterrorism intelligence collection and
analysis within the United States and vis-à-vis U.S. persons, where his
responsibility will be functioning the same but will cover set of
activities.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you. There are people who believe that the greater
blame in intelligence failures over 9/11 lies not necessarily with the
intelligence community but with the lack of the proper prioritizing
given by senior political decision makers, and this is part of a larger
issue that's always been debated about should the policy maker take a
much more active role in directing the priorities of what is to be
collected, and direct the intelligence community to find a way to
collect it rather than taking a more passive role and saying okay, tell
me what's happening, giving no priorities as to what hypotheses should
be collected against, and I think in the reading of recent post World
War II history, that's a pretty strong case that the intelligence
community has not been given the kinds of priorities of targeting and
the hypotheses to collect against that would have made their focus and
their collection and analysis much more effective.

In your time as Deputy National Security Advisor, was there an effective
prioritizing of the assets or was it more driven by capabilities? We
have these wonderful satellites that can count things, so let's count
camps, and if we can't count camps then they don't exist sort of thing.
Would you comment on that?

MR. STEINBERG: That's a very good question. I think during the time that
I was in the White House, we began to move in a direction that increased
the role of the policy, community and setting priorities. I don't
remember the number of that PDD, but we instituted a process by which
there was a formal involvement of the policy community in identifying
collection and analysis priorities which was then fed into the
Director's own tasking responsibilities. And I say, it was formal
process that was led by the NSC and Directorate of Intelligence to, in
effect, solicit from the policy agencies and to develop a ranking or
categories of ranking of different levels of priority which would then
-- to be turned into tasking.

I would say it was a step in the right direction but I do agree with you
that the policy community is ultimately responsible for setting those
priorities, that the Director can provide advice based on what the
intelligence community sees as the threats, but the policy community is
ultimately accountable for those allocation of resources and for
protecting the national security. So what I think we need to do is to
take that one step further, which is to make sure that that input, which
the policy community now provides, is actually reflected in the
decisions that are made by the tasking done by the DCI and the Secretary
of Defense, and that there is a feedback loop in that so that those
decisions are again reviewed in a timely and effective way to make sure
that the policy community is not only having a chance to say in a front
end what it thinks the priorities are, but really meaningfully engage
with the results that come out of that process when those general
priorities are translated into actual operational allocations of
resources.

MR. LEHMAN: I have two more questions related. Jim Schlesinger earlier
testified that much more important than moving around the blocks on the
chart are recruiting and supporting the right kinds of people, and I'd
like to get your views on what kind of people are we recruiting. And I'm
more talking about analysis than the operational side. First, at the
top, what kind of person should be the CIA Director? And then at the
analytical level, are we recruiting -- I mean, Kissinger used to say
that one of the problems with CIA analysis is the way they recruit
people. They can have nothing in their past and hence can have nothing
in their future. That's obviously not very fair. But the point of
self-recruiting is true in any bureaucracy. You end up with the same
round pebbles, smooth and edgeless, and so what they produce is smooth
and edgeless.

And the related second question is how in that kind of a community and
in the community you now want to centralize under a DNI do you keep
diversity and competition of hypotheses and of interpretation?

MR. STEINBERG: On your first question, the leadership, it's hard to make
a broad statement because you really depend on very uniquely qualified
special individuals, and we've had a couple of them here today. I think
what we've seen from both previous speakers is that individuals who've
had experience both in the analytic world and the policy world I think
tend to make good Directors of Central Intelligence, simply because they
understand the policy process and how intelligence and information fits
into it, but they need strong analytic backgrounds of their own so
they're not simply translating the policymakers' process. And I think if
you look at the history of recent directors, we've had a number of
enormously talented people.

The more important question in terms of trying to figure out a process
is the one that you've raised, which is who do we bring in? And I think
I'd make a couple of points about that. First, we do need diversity. And
while I believe that we need a Director of National Intelligence, I
don't think we should get rid of all of the intelligence -- the
components of the intelligence community. I served in INR at the
beginning of the Clinton administration and have enormous respect both
for the analysts there and for the fact that there is an intelligence
component which is closely connected to the State Department, because I
think it brings insights and perspective into the broader intelligence
community that would be absent if it were really centralized, as had
been proposed for a number of years, to have one intelligence community.
And I think the same is true about DIA and other components, the service
intelligence components and the like. So I'm not for creating a single
entity to do the analysis. I think there should be somebody who's
responsible overall for that.

The INR experience is instructive because one of the things that brings
strength to the INR analysts is many of them have served as foreign
service officers in foreign posts. And there's a tendency for exactly
the reasons that you said in the core parts of the intelligence
community, and particularly in the analytic part of the CIA to be leery
of people who've ever been anywhere and who may have been part of those
things. They want people who come in from university, who have strong
educational backgrounds, but who can sort of make sure that there aren't
any risks. And so what happens is that they tend to be very strong
analytically trained but not a lot of experience in the world. And there
is -- and then once they become part of the community, it's even harder
to send them out because of fears of compromise and the like, and so
they don't rotate out into the field.

And while there's clearly a place for strong academically trained
individuals, I think we need to have a much more diverse sense of who we
want to bring in, people from the business community who offer enormous
insights into these problems, people from different walks of life, from
religious communities and like missionary groups who've been abroad. And
sometimes they won't be people you want to have full time on the
intelligence community staff, but we need to have a much more diverse
array of expertise. We need to let people in the analytic community get
out into the world some. Let them serve with state and local governments
if we're dealing with counterterrorism to see the perspective from the
cop on the beat or the public health worker.

I think it's that sense of rather than having a very cabined off
community that fits in with my broader sense of what the more
decentralized, more open sense of what the intelligence community ought
to consist of.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Roemer.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and nice to see you again. And on
behalf of the Commission, we all thank you for your valuable and very
capable public service throughout the 1990s.

I want to ask, as somebody who was there, as somebody who was on the
National Security Council during the 1990s, that there was an important
event that the Joint Inquiry looked at and that we will certainly look
at on this commission when, in December of 1998, the Director of Central
Intelligence, George Tenet, issued a memorandum to senior CIA managers,
the Deputy DCI and others, and he said this, and I quote. He said, "We
must now enter a new phase in our effort against bin Laden. We are at
war. I want no resources or people spared in this effort, either inside
the CIA or the community." End quote.

Now, despite his exclamation there or his memorandums, the Joint Inquiry
concluded that the intelligence community was not on a war footing prior
to September 11th. Do you agree with that, and if not, why not?

MR. STEINBERG: I think you have to look at that period during the 1990s
in an evolutionary way. I think that throughout the period there was a
growing and growing sense of the urgency and the priority that needed to
be given to the counterterrorism task, particularly the specific threat
that al Qaeda represented. I cited in my testimony since statements from
the President in the mid-1990s, I think there was a clear awareness of
this being of growing importance, and certainly by the time of the
bombings in August of 1998 on our embassies, about the absolute first
priority.

And I can tell you, having had a chance to watch Mr. Berger close up,
that this was by far and away, without even a shadow of a close second,
his most dominant priority, as I said, growing throughout the 1990s but
certainly following the August 1998 bombings. It was the first thing he
worried about every day and the last thing he worried about every night
before he went home, which was never very often.

And I think that the memorandum that you identified reflected the fact
that particular in the CIA, which was dealing with what was most known
about al Qaeda and its operations, that is its overseas activities, that
at least what I saw, which is in the senior level of the CIA, a real
appreciation of just how important and how urgent this was.

And, frankly, I think if you look at what took place in the period
post-1998, and you obviously will have access to the details, and there
are some that I can't go into in specifics here, there was an enormous
amount of activity that led to significant disruptions of terrorist
cells in a number of countries abroad, as I mentioned in my testimony
the significant activity that took place in the run-up to the
millennium, some of it from just outstanding casework by officers, some
by alert border agents and all the kinds of things, the combination of
both good work and good luck that you need to have in these things.

So I think there was clearly a movement in that direction and it's
obviously, I think we would all say in retrospect that more could be
done, that there were aspects of the community that resisted change,
that there's enormous inertia. And I think that was a fundamental
problem on the domestic side because it was simply outside the ambit of
what we had in the authority over it. This was -- there was a very, very
thick wall between the NSC process and the White House and domestic
related activities that involved the Justice Department and the FBI. And
for the reasons we discussed, there were good reasons for aspects of
that, but it created a system that made it harder to integrate the
overall effort.

MR. ROEMER: Given the fact that it was the DCI and it was a memorandum,
a piece of paper. Given that former DCI Deutch said that he thought that
responsibility should go to the National Security Council, in
retrospect, should there have been something else coming, especially
after 1998 and the embassy bombings? Should it have elevated to a
different set of actors? Should it have been through a different set of
policy directives? What might have changed this from, as you stated it,
evolutionary status to a war footing?

MR. STEINBERG: Well, I think if you look at the activities of the NSC
principals in the post-August 1998 period, you would see something that
looked pretty much like a war footing. And particularly in the period in
1999, as we became concerned with the millennium, there were practically
daily conversations by the NSC principals about this problem. And
certainly in the fall of 1999 there were daily and sometimes multiple
times a day meetings of the NSC principals about this. So I think at the
highest levels there was a recognition that this was a challenge the
likes of which we had not seen in a very long time. Because even during
the height of the Cold War, this was not a kind of a tactical day-to-day
crisis with the exception of periods like the Cuban Missile Crisis or
the Berlin Crisis.

So people understood that. I think that the problems with changing the
way the system as a whole worked, as opposed to what individual cabinet
members and sort of principal deputies were doing was that we hadn't
thoroughly taken apart the system. What we did was to create a focus at
the NSC, both through the National Security Advisor and through the
Director of Counterterrorism, who I think did an extraordinary job, and
I think, as many of you know, I think Dick Clark was an enormous civil
servant who provided a considerable amount of energy and drive into
action to that. But I think that what is clear and clearly what I've
advocated here is that we try to work it through an existing system. We
made the changes in PDD 62, but we still relied on the lead agency
concept and we still weren't able to deal with the two barriers that I
talked about which is the divide between foreign and domestic and the
divide between law enforcement and intelligence.

We had endless discussions with the FBI and the Justice Department about
how to solve these problems. But without, I think, direction not only
from the President, but also from Congress and from leading voices such
as the Commission, I think that the public support for the kind of
changes that are needed now is possible. But that's why we have to, I
think, have the kind of leadership that you all can show in making that
happen.

MR. ROEMER: Given what you learned in the National Security Council
during the 1990s and given the fact that you said that you learned more
and more, especially after the African bombings, especially after the
Millennium threat, what specifically did you tell the Bush
administration when they came into office about how to organize the
National Security Council, so that it could respond quickly in a
transition period to this imminent threat?

MR. STEINBERG: I can only speak for myself. I know that Mr. Berger had
extensive conversations with him as well, but since I've also talked
about this in some of my public writing since then, I think I can feel
comfortable in saying, which is that I felt very strongly that the
counterterrorism and the law enforcement intelligence connection needed
to be brought explicitly into the NSC process. I wrote a short op-ed in
the Washington Post in January of 2001, suggesting one model to do that
because I think the theme that struck me most clearly was the fact that
we were very much hampered by this divide and that this was something
that the NSC had to get a hold of, that we could not simply allow that
piece of what is crucial for our security to be held at arm's length
from the most effective process of integrating these functions.

And then I thought that, while the President would need to have
independent advice from the agencies, there needed to be a stronger role
for the NSC to integrate all of those aspects. It goes beyond the law
enforcement intelligence function. I also felt there was a need to
integrate better the economic and political security side of our work
because we're moving in a seamless world, where these lines that we
built up over the years that have been mirrored in the bureaucratic
institutions that we've created simply don't correspond to what we now
have to deal with and that in order to have accountability for these
things, we needed to have a place in which all these pieces came
together rather than through separate stovepipes up to the President
who, obviously, ultimately has all the accountability but who can't
really manage it unless he has got a process that can help integrate
these things better.

MR. ROEMER: And finally, Mr. Steinberg, you've been very helpful. When I
was on the Joint Inquiry, we expressed our concern about getting access
to the Presidential Decision Briefs. I think they are important for two
reasons, one because not only do they inform the President about -- and
other policymakers about what intelligence they've gathered from
different kinds of sources and methods about what the threat might be
but maybe even more importantly, how a certain group of people in the
bureaucracy and the organization are able to put information together to
inform and advise and warn policymakers. So it's very, very important, I
think, as informative to policymakers, informative about the
bureaucracy. What do you feel about PDBs?

MR. STEINBERG: There's certainly a very strong reason why, first, the
dissemination of the PDB is very small and that the President and the
executive branch has been very reluctant to share that more broadly. And
I think that's appropriate. I think it is an important fact itself as to
what the President and his advisers are focusing on in addition to the
fact that, as you well know, some of the most sensitive information
available to advisors is in that in ways that's just not available in
almost any other intelligence product.

MR. ROEMER: Including the SEIBs?

MR. STEINBERG: Including the SEIBs. Absolutely. I do believe in the
unique case that you are facing here when we really need to think about
this process. We are being asked to make such core and critical
decisions about the future of the way we do business to deal with this
new threat that it is appropriate for the Commission to have access to
this. But I take that on the basis that the Commission will treat it as
a very special exercise and one in which -- with the sensitivity to why
it is, as a general matter, that the PDB should not be generally
available, because I think otherwise we would just undercut the PDB as
the instrument that it needs to be of dealing with the way the President
and his barely most senior advisors learn about the things that are most
important to their job.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Gorelick.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Thank you, Mr. Steinberg, for being here and for your very helpful
testimony. I would like to follow up very briefly on Commissioner
Lehman's questions to you about priority setting and Commissioner
Roemer's question to you about the operational role of the National
Security Council.

You had -- it was PDD-35 -- the PDD-35 process, the ability to set
priorities across the government for the collection of intelligence.
But, as you just described with regard to the millennium, when you had
warning that something was going to occur or might occur, the NSC had
the ability to surge, to bring everyone to the table many times a week,
often many times a day to break through the barriers among the different
agencies, including the big barrier that you have alluded to, the
barrier between domestic and foreign intelligence.

So this is my question to you. Absent the kind of structural reform that
you have suggested and others have suggested where you literally tear
down the wall between domestic and foreign collection and put someone in
control of both, what is the role of the National Security Council in
breaking through those barriers in a period of heightened warning as we
had when Director Tenet made his statements in February of '01 that
we're in a crisis period and need to be at our most wary? What is the
proper role of the National Security Council in those circumstances?

MR. STEINBERG: To think about it, you have to think about the two
different roles that the NSC generally plays, which is, one, their
overall policy coordination and policy setting process and the other,
what I could call a crisis management function. Both of them are
critical but they've very different. The policy-making process is a
deliberative process. It tries to set long-term goals and priorities. It
tries to look at how you meld the different claims on time and resources
and tries to think forward in a pro-active way about what needs to be
done. It brings everybody to the table but the debates are important and
they provide guidance for the decisions that agencies are going to make
and to reconcile conflicting claims.

But, inevitably, those things don't touch on the operational side and
for the day-to-day operations, we do rely on the agencies. One of the
reasons why, I think, where we are now, I believe we should strengthen
the role of the Secretary of DHS is because I think for many of the
day-to-day responsibilities of Homeland Security, it would be important
to have a Cabinet level operation official who is accountable and
responsible for this set of activities and that responsibility should
not reside at the NSC.

However, for crisis management -- and this is as true for dealing with
crises abroad as it is with this particular crisis -- there are times in
which you need to accelerate and intensify the focus of actors around
the problem that requires high-level decisions and doing not business as
usual, however good the business as usual is and business as usual can
be quite good. I'm not meaning to disparage it. And there is a function
there in which the NSC process continues to focus attention and make
sure that timely information is brought to the table, decisions are
being made in a timely way and there is an ability to review the way
those decisions are being implemented.

But just as though we've talked about this as being a war, this is not
an acute war. It has acute phases where we have particular heightened
periods of warning. But it is simply unsustainable to think that we're
going to solve the problem by having NSC principals meet every day to
deal with this challenge. There are other things they have to do. We
need to build a system that can embody as part of its business as usual
a better way of handling this, understanding that in periods of crisis,
we're going to have to surge and use this mechanism of crisis management
in the NSC to deal with these extremely heightened periods.

MS. GORELICK: So if you were still Deputy National Security Advisor, I
take it your advice on structure within the White House, obviously
acknowledging that the structure within the White House is the
prerogative of any individual president and has to mirror the way that
person and his key advisers feel comfortable operating, but you would
bring within the ambit of the National Security Council the Department
of Homeland Security and the domestic intelligence capacities of the
FBI, whether it's as the FBI or as some new entity. And I take it you
would not then have a competing additional Homeland Security Council. Is
that correct?

MR. STEINBERG: And I think the problem right now is we've ended up with
what is arguably the worst of both worlds, which is -- I think it was
possible to say at the beginning that we're going to have a very strong
Homeland Security Council and a homeland security advisor who has the
same role, clout, responsibilities that the national security advisor
did. There'd be problems about the foreign and domestic scene, but you'd
at least have a strong and dynamic process.

Under those circumstances you would not have a strong Secretary of
Homeland Security. Alternatively, we could have a strong Secretary of
Homeland Security who has large responsibilities for all the domestic
functions, both within his agency and the broader domestic community,
and then the NSC to bridge that gap. I think given the fact we've now
created DHS, that latter model is the better model. It allows some of
the domestic functions which the NSC is not particularly connected to,
particularly the FEMA-type connections, not to be something that the NSC
has to worry about day-to-day, but allows us to both get the strength of
an executive agency with implementation capability in a strong Secretary
of Homeland Security. And the coordination across the foreign and
domestic scene to the NSC with the deputy as exists now and is very
capably by Fran Townsend, who has a full time responsibility for this
job.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you for those clear and incisive answers.

MR. KEAN: Senator Gorton.

MR. GORTON: On the seventh page of your written testimony, Jim, I think
in one paragraph you summarize as cogently as I've ever seen it the case
against combining law enforcement with these preventive activities in
the FBI, and in that, of course, you have many allies, at least outside
of the FBI and the Department of Justice. But you go on to say with
further reasons as you outline that a separate domestic security
organization is needed for prevention. And then say that they are three
possibilities for that agency.

In Justice but separated from the FBI, in the Department of Homeland
Security or as an independent agency. Unless that latter is an awfully
broad definition, aren't there more than three? Is it not at least
conceivably possible, and I'd like your critique on it, to simply merge
this function with the present CIA, or to do what John Deutch
recommended, to have both the CIA and this domestic entity under a DCI,
which from -- I think that's sort of a modest DNI, it isn't as broad as
your recommendations on it, these backed off from that.

And wouldn't either of those be a superior response or way to respond to
this because of this divorce, this present divorce between domestic
intelligence and intelligence coming from overseas?

MR. STEINBERG: Maybe I wasn't clear enough in my written testimony. When
I talk about an independent agency I had in mind reporting to the DNI. I
mean, not as something separate from the entire system. I meant
independent only that it would not be in any cabinet level agency. And
so I completely agree with you.

MR. GORTON: Let's say, you know, this DNI idea has been around for years
and the political objections to it from -- or at least the policy
objections to it from Secretaries of Defense have always prevented it
from being seriously considered. Even if we regarded a DNI as the ideal
solution, my backup question to John Deutch, would it not be an
improvement to have it married more closely somehow or other with the
CIA, even if we don't have an overall DNI?

MR. STEINBERG: Absolutely. I completely agree with that. The only thing
I would be careful about is I would not want to see this merged with the
DO. I mean, I think that there is -- Justice, there is an MI5 and an
MI6, it's a slightly different model because it reports to the Home
Secretary. I would not want the -- I think it's important that the DO
have its distinct functions from what this domestic intelligence service
would be doing, and particularly in the collection function.

But I have no problem in saying that the model that you've suggested,
because the very fact of giving the DCI that authority creates a mini
DNI, in my view. I mean, it creates a broader spectrum of integration
over the whole counterterrorism function, and the prevention function to
the DCI. So whether we change the name or not, I think we've
accomplished an important part of what needs to be done through the
model that you've described.

MR. GORTON: Thank you, and thank you for a remarkable analysis.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Ben-Veniste.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Good afternoon, almost, Mr. Steinberg. And thank you
for coming, it's good to see you again. I would like to turn from the
theoretical to the historical, as you have ample experience in both of
those areas. Secretary Schlesinger today testified that, and I think
it's consistent with the general public perception, that there was an
insufficient sense of urgency in the intelligence community prior to
9/11 about the terrorist threat, and particularly the potential for a
domestic event.

That seems contrary to the testimony which you have given here today,
which indicates that there were frequent conversations at the highest
level within the intelligence community about terrorist threats, and so
can you explain whether there was some sort of disconnect once there was
a change in administrations, or was there a communication of the sense
of urgency which you have testified about as our administrations
transitioned from one to the other?

MR. STEINBERG: I think one of the hardest things to do from somebody who
has been inside and now is outside is to pretend that we know what was
going on in the administration that you're not serving. And so I'm very
reluctant to make a judgment about what has been going on within the
current Administration. I think we all rely on second and third-hand
accounts, and I think we need to hear -- and I would certainly be
uncomfortable with making judgments until I heard more from the current
administration itself.

I want to go back to my main point, though, which is that I think that
one of the problems, again, nobody disputes that one can always do more
and in retrospect, post 9/11, there are things that one could say should
have been done, indisputably that's true. But I want to convey the sense
that there was a profound sense about the change in the nature of the
world and that the absolute priority that the counterterrorism mission
and particularly the al Qaeda threat represented.

I think one of the problems is that we could see at the NSC, a lot about
what the CIA was doing. We got briefed all the time, we had access to
learning about what their activities were both on the DO and the DI
side. We had no transparency vis-à-vis the domestic side. There was a
wall, and it was, as Ms. Gorelick said, the curtain was slightly raised
during the millennium, when the rules were kind of bent, but for the
most part that was not true. And so it's very hard for me to make a
judgment, frankly, about how well things were being done on that side,
because we didn't have oversight and were not thought appropriately to
have oversight over that part of the process.

And I think that what we have learned from that is the need to establish
accountability somewhere in the system so that when you say, well, was
enough urgency given, were enough priority, you can say, here's where
the responsibility lies. And I think that there are two dimensions to
that. Where is the responsibility on the intelligence collection and
analysis side, and where is it on the policy side? And I think the
American people are entitled to know that short of the President, who do
we look to for these things?

And we must structure ourselves in a way that creates the incentives,
where somebody has their authority and their accountability match up,
and you can say, yes, they had the ability to make the decisions, and if
they didn't make them then they're accountable, and if they did then
they deserve the credit for what was done.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Perhaps I was imprecise in my question. Let me go about
it in a more direct way. You indicate that there was a high sense of
urgency in your administration, particularly as you got to the
millennium, with respect to the terrorist threat. It was, as you have
said, the number one priority of the National Security Council. My
question is whether that sense of urgency was communicated to the
incoming administration.

MR. STEINBERG: I think undoubtedly yes. I mean, indisputably yes. That
is, it was -- you could not have been sitting where we were sitting and
spending our day-to-day and trying to describe to our successors about
what we were doing day-to-day and not have that be the priority, because
it was in fact what we were doing and it was transformative in terms of
the way we did business, the focus that we had, and the activities that
were the preoccupation of the most senior people not only in the NSC but
in all senior levels.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Steinberg, thank you very much for your articulate
testimony. We appreciate it very much, it's been extraordinarily
helpful. We will take a break now, I would remind commission members we
have a very important meeting now so if you have any business to do,
personal or otherwise, if you could do it as fast as possible and join
in the back for our meeting. Thank you very much. We'll reconvene at as
close to 1:00 as we can.

(Recess.)

MR. KEAN: Okay. I'll call the hearing back to order and I want to
apologize to the witnesses and to those of you here. We're way behind
schedule and it was because we had some extraordinarily important
committee business, something that has come up very recently, in fact,
today. But I thank you for your patience and the panel is on the topic
of warning. Should we change the way the government prepares and issues
warnings of terrorist attacks? We've asked three witnesses with long
experience in the intelligence community to address that particular
questions. Mr. Richard Kerr, former Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence, Dr. Mary McCarthy, visiting fellow at the Center for
Strategic International Studies and former National Intelligence Officer
for Warning, and Mr. John Gannon, Staff Director, House Select Committee
on Homeland Security, and former Chair of the National Intelligence
Council and Assistant Director of Central Intelligence for Analysis and
Production.

We will hear the panelists' views on questions such as what are the
essential methods or principles for analyzing and preparing warnings of
surprise attack. Were they properly applied before 9/11? What is right
and what is wrong with our current system of warning? What needs to be
done to improve our ability as a government to provide better warning of
catastrophic terrorist attack? Your prepared statements already are
being entered into the record, and I think, Mr. Kerr, if you would
begin.

MR. RICHARD KERR: You want to change the order?

MR. KEAN: That's fine with us.

MR. RICHARD KERR: Well, thank you. I appreciate your inviting me. It's a
very important subject to address and I thought I would -- I have one
important thing that I need to say at the beginning, just for full
disclosure. I about a month and a half ago, two months ago, was asked by
the Director of Central Intelligence to review the organizations in the
intelligence community responsible for counterterrorism, which included
the CTC, Counter Terrorism Center, and the new Threat Integration
Center. And that report was due on the 15th of October, and we will
provide it to the Director tomorrow -- we need our deadline -- but
because of that, and because of the fact that he has not seen that
report yet, I'm a little reluctant obviously to talk about the details
of it, but still are quite willing to talk about the larger issues and
the issues surrounding it.

On Warning, I was in the analytic business and involved what I thought
was the warning business for something like 35, 40 years now at this
point in time. And I tended to think of Warning as an integral process
to the fundamental intelligence process, not as an offline business. The
main objective, it seemed to me, in warning and looking at the threat
was to look for -- understand first of all, country problems and issues
that extended beyond countries' trans-national issues -- but try to
identify the key threats and fundamentally to look at discontinuity.
Trying to understand what might change that would make a significant
difference, or have a dramatic impact.

Intelligence is quite honestly very good at continuity, as most of us
are. Things usually happen the way we think they're going to happen.
Events turn out the way we -- nine times out of 10 the way they have
turned out in the past. It's that small amount that turn out
differently, the discontinuity that becomes incredibly important and
those tend to constitute the failures, if you will, in intelligence or
policy or in the full dimension of national policy.

Warning in my view -- I spend a lot of my life, as I said, working on
intelligence and working on warning, but warning that was relatively
static. It was strategic warning on the Soviet Union. It was looking for
large changes in military capabilities. It was looking for changes in
emphasis, changes in different strategy. But it was strategic. It was
while there was current intelligence and short-term threat analysis. It
tended to be the minor part of that larger Cold War kind of intelligence
that I was involved in.

Clearly terrorism brings to the problem, as do some other areas like
weapons of mass destruction, an immediacy -- not only a strategic
problem but an immediate tactical problem. It seems to me both require,
as did the larger problems in the past, the same fundamental things.
They require first of all clear understanding of the problem. They
involve a good deal of research and in-depth analysis. Before you can
put pieces and make sense out of them, you need context. You need to
have some place to put them.

There is a premium I think in this area of terrorism and
counterterrorism, a premium on structuring information. One of the most
difficult problems is to identify the problem. My experience in
intelligence is the areas where I've made mistakes, and I can tell you
I've made enough of them on my own or with others -- the help of others.
The problem was not so much in many cases that we did not have
information; the problem was that we did not understand the appropriate
question to address, and therefore missed a key element.

I think that one point I would make here today is that I think it's
terribly important for a commission like this, and I think you probably
do at this stage, but it's terribly important for the American people to
understand the limitations of intelligence. It is not an all-seeing,
all-knowing organization. We had that impression for a number of years,
an omnipotence, that was useful in some cases, but it is no longer a
useful label to have on it. We deal with uncertainty, we deal with
fragmentary information, we deal with supposition. We do not often have
a full array of information. It's terribly important to understand that.

I was talking to a reporter the other day who was saying, "Well, you
could do a lot better. You're paid to do a lot better." And my reaction
to that was, "Tell me who's going to be the Democratic nominee in 2004.
Tell me who it is? You have perfect information. You have polls, you can
talk to all the people, you have history with you." It should be an easy
problem, right? Well, then try to deal with Saddam Hussein who protects
his information, who's 3,000 miles away in a culture we don't fully
understand. I mean, there is I think too much of a view that says that
this is a kind of all-knowing complete understanding that intelligence
has.

In fact, in my view we're doing rather well in the foreign intelligence
area and in some other areas. In my view we will have another terrorist
attack and it will be a successful attack, and that attack will show
another intelligence, if you will, failure. More than likely it will
show an inability to get the right information in the right place, in
the right hands, with the right understanding of the problem. And that
is the challenge of the counterintelligence elements today.

One last statement. I would say that if I were in 9/11 -- prior to 9/11
if I came to -- if I was the Deputy Director for Central Intelligence
and I came to the Hill and I said I wanted to increase -- "I've
identified a strategic threat," and there had clearly been a strategic
threat identified prior to 9/11. "I have identified a strategic threat
and I want to increase my budget five or six or seven times. I want to
put billions of dollars into it. I want to increase my manpower by the
hundreds." I'm sure the reception I would have gotten from my own
comptroller, from the organizations within my own organization, from the
Congress, from the executive, from OMB would have said, "Wait a minute.
Wait a minute. We know this is a threat, but that is a rather -- an
overreaction to a problem." And I think that's important to put that in
some context. We have increased significantly -- it would have been very
interesting to look back, and maybe you've done that, at what the budget
requests were prior to 9/11 and how those were responded to. How
comptrollers and budget people deal with new ideas, with radical
significant increases. Usually not favorable because somebody loses in
that process. It's not just a full gain. Let me stop there and look
forward to your questions in our exchange.

MR. KEAN: Okay, thank you.

Ms. McCarthy, you may.

MS. MARY O. McCARTHY: Okay, thank you. I don't have this on. Is it on
now? No. Well, Mr. Chairman and commissioners, it's my honor to be here
today. As you know, I have been a CIA officer for almost 20 years and
have held positions in the intelligence community as a national
intelligence officer for warning, amongst other things, and in the
policy world on the National Security Council staff in two
administrations. I'm here today to share with you some of what I learned
about intelligence warning in the course of that experience, and from my
own research and teaching. Thus, the views I express here will be my own
and as a current CIA employee, I'll have to say they are not necessarily
those of the Central Intelligence Agency.

First, I'd like to say briefly what I mean when I talk about warning. I
am talking about more than just sound an alarm to say that a bad thing
is nigh. I am, rather, talking about warning analysis as a process by
which analysts identify threats, develop or imagine possible outcomes
than explore the relevant data and demand relevant data that are not at
hand, and they keep the decision makers informed. The idea is to be able
to provide these decision makers with a series of assessments or
warnings of increasing precision regarding the likelihood and proximity
of the unwelcome event.

Such a system of warning analysis must also entail an ensured flow of
information across agencies, and more and more today to different levels
of government. And it also must have a reliable access to the
information by means of integrated information technology. There is no
question that analysis of and collection on the so-called transnational
threats, such as terrorism and proliferation, have made the warning job
more complicated. The mobility and the small footprint of the terrorist
groups, for example, present greater challenges to intelligence analysts
and collectors than does the job of following large armies, or even
traditional insurgencies, whose range of activities is more clearly
understood. But it is still possible, indeed necessary, to apply the
same system of meticulous conceptualizing, sorting of data and vigorous
dialogue with collectors that form the basis of sound analysis.

Secondly, it is crucially important that this strategic warning analysis
be conducted as a separate activity from that which produces the daily
analytic reports and threat lists, and where the pace of work simply
does not permit reflection, research or exploration of alternative
hypotheses. But that near-term analysis or tactical effort is
strengthened by the strategic analysis, which provides context for fast
breaking events and because the process identifies the most dangerous
intelligence gaps and stimulates collection, the likelihood that the
relevant helpful intelligence for interdiction in disruption efforts,
for example, will have been collected.

Also, it is important to recognize that we are mere human beings who are
doing this work. What we need to do is develop systems that will help us
do the work better, while minimizing the known human propensities for
error. In my written testimony for the record I recount in some detail
the history of intelligence warning failures since World War II.
Previous reviews of those events by Congress and by the intelligence
community itself have recommended that a national intelligence officer
for warning be created or strengthened or empowered to provide advice to
the Director of Central Intelligence and to be the substantive leader on
the discipline of warning intelligence.

The one thing that I would like to underscore in my testimony today is
that having such an individual is not sufficient. Rather, it is a system
that is needed with expert analysts in each analytic area dedicated to
the task of big picture analysis and the exploration of alternative
hypotheses. And finally the Congress, with its budget and oversight
authorities, has a role here as well. There is much that Congress can do
to encourage the necessary reforms and establishing ongoing review
mechanisms to ensure that these reforms endure.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you.

Mr. Gannon.

MR. JOHN GANNON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, in -- am I on?
Okay. Mr. Chairman, in my written statement I argued that warning in my
view is a subset of the rigor and discipline that should be
characteristic of all intelligence community analysis. And while the
administration and the general public may be disappointed to find out
what we don't know, they should not be disappointed in the rigor that we
apply to the analysis that we do on what we know and what we don't know.

What I argued for in my written testimony was greater emphasis on
interagency training and interagency approaches to raise the standards
with regard to warning and analytic trade path overall. There is a clear
need to achieve connectivity among the analytic programs as electric
connectivity and also collaborative technologies across those programs
so that you can have the analytic programs work together, including on
warning issues. Outreach. That is, recognition by all the intelligence
producers that information we need to deal with the complex set of
issues that are before us. The expertise and a lot of the information
now resides outside the intelligence community is not going to be picked
up in traditional collection systems and we have to have ways of getting
that information and to some degree our analysts have to be out there to
get it.

I also stress the importance of accountable leadership in any of the
changes that we make, and also the -- in my experience in the
intelligence community, particularly in the last six years when I was
Deputy Director for Intelligence and then moved on to -- at CIA, and
then moved on to intelligence community jobs, I saw what I thought was a
very discouraging lack of a capability on the part of Congress and of
the DCI really to evaluate programs across the agencies, in a way that
he and then the Congress could really make judgments in the budgetary
tradeoffs that they are responsible for.

With those recommendations, I wanted to just use the remainder of my
five minutes to say that it's easy to make these kinds of
recommendations. You've heard them before. The question is how do you
implement them? How do you get there from here? And in my experience of
being involved in a number of commission studies, that was the essential
problem. Sometimes very erudite, wise observations made about the
community, but no direction on how you get to where the commissioners
want to be from where we were in the intelligence community. And as a
result, I think very often very little was actually implemented out of
some very good work that was done in evaluating our performance.

I believe that intelligence community reform should not be seen as an
exercise in major surgery. I believe there are a lot of smaller things,
bite-size things that can be done that will I think help move us in a
constructive direction. I would strongly argue that the analytic
community is ripe for reform in ways that I think can be done. It can be
done reasonably cheaply and I think with very positive effect on
improving the quality of analysis and the discipline that goes into it.
I also think that at times the community is burdened with the notion
that intelligence community reform is a zero sum gain: either we do it
all or we don't do any. I think we should remove that notion and
identify those areas where we really can make progress and then proceed
with the reform. Any reform needs to -- I think with regard to analysis,
does need to be interagency in its scope, given the issues that we're
covering today, and the interdependence of the community both
technologically and with regard to the threat environment that we face.
I think there needs to be accountability built in for the initiatives
that we adopt. There needs to be sustained -- sustainability.

I presented to you, in addition to my written statement, a copy of the
strategic investment plan that was produced by the analytic community of
the intelligence community back in 2000/2001, and I cite this just as an
example -- or a case study of how well the community can do when it is
brought together. But also I wanted to bring it to your attention as
something that I believe is not sustainable unless we approach these
kinds of challenges in a more structured way.

The strategic investment plan looked out 10 years and we had the 11
agencies who produce analysis working together over a period of two
years on this plan. And I believe what they said about the threat, if
you skim it, it was right and I think the intelligence community needs
to be given a lot more credit than it is given on understanding the
complexity of the integrated threat environment that we were facing in
the late '90s and up to 2001.

It prioritized across those programs strategic goals for interagency
training, which all the members thought and all the program managers
thought was important. Having accessible interoperable databases,
developing connectivity and a collaborative work environment, and a
system that would enable us to prioritize not only the analytic issues
that we're working on on a continuing basis, but collection. Having
analysis much more involved in assisting collectors to understand
priorities in a more complex world.

It also looked at outside expertise and how we could in our various
programs avail ourselves more of the expertise that was out there. And
also an open source strategy, which I believe the intelligence community
really has not been able to achieve to the degree that it needs to,
given the importance of open source information. I would say -- or would
tell you also that I was Chairman of the National Intelligence Council
at this time and we did a project called Global Trends 2015, which was
an effort to show the intelligence community how engaging with outside
experts could be done to enhance our understanding of the future and to
improve our ability to prioritize.

The strategic investment plan also said very clearly that we need to
expand the mandate of the intelligence community and warning
organization to include a leading role for it in competitive and
alternative analysis. That is, bringing technology to bear on the rigor
that we apply to our analysis. It also recommended, just for your
interest, the consideration of an intelligence community fusion center,
recognizing that we needed to have a better capability to fuse data to
integrate foreign and domestic analysis and so forth.

So let me just say in conclusion that there are pluses and minuses to
this experience. I think the experience of the strategic investment plan
showed that there is tremendous collaborative potential in the analytic
community, and this was a part of the wisdom of Congress in establishing
the Assistant Director for Analysis and Production and collection
positions in the first place. Data was shared. A predecessor's study to
the investment plan was actually an effort to understand how many
analysts we have in the community, what their capabilities are, what
their shortfalls are, what they're working on, what their priorities
are. And while there was great resistance initially, the programs shared
data and we were able to make some basic findings about the community
before we moved into the strategic investment plan.

This was never an attempt to unify the budgets. Legally we couldn't do
that. But it was an effort to show what the various programs are
investing in and whether it was consistent with what we had identified
as the objectives for analysis. And that -- I did participate with the
Defense Intelligence Agency, for example, on their budget planning
process, and I think it was a very constructive exercise. What this was
about -- it was also not about consolidating programs. I think the
analytic programs recognized that they are dedicated -- their analysts
are dedicated to very specific and defensible missions, either
operational, collection or whatever, and we did not want to homogenize
the effort. What we wanted to do was understand the differences, but
find common ground for sensible strategic planning. What are the common
needs and language training and understanding collection management and
so forth.

My point to you finally is that this kind of exercise, however much work
went into it, I don't believe is sustainable in the intelligence
community the way it is now structured. I think the ADCIAP, the
Assistant Director for Analysis Production for Collection, and actually
the Deputy Director for Community Management, those positions were
established by Congress but they were put in a staff, a community
management staff. And I believe two things. If you really want these
programs to be sustained in the kind of modest reform that I'm talking
about, I think you have to do one of two things. They have to be given a
program status within the intelligence community, or preferably in my
judgment, they really have to be put into the resource base on top of
which the Director of Central Intelligence sits, and that means CIA.

I think the -- if you want to sustain efforts, really build structure
and resources around these initiatives, the DCI does have to be in
charge and I think what this calls for is a return of Central
Intelligence to CIA in the way that I think Walter Bedell Smith, the
original director of Central Intelligence, envisioned it. I'll stop
there.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, Mr. Gannon. The two lead commissioner
questions will be by Senator Cleland and then Governor Thompson. Other
commissioners will follow with questions after they've completed their
questions.

Senator Cleland.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Gannon, you said that Walter Bedell Smith was the first Director of
the CIA, wasn't he Eisenhower's Chief of Staff?

MR. GANNON: Yes, he was, sir, yeah.

MR. CLELAND: So there was a sense in 1947, after World War II and after
Pearl Harbor and after four commissions looked at Pearl Harbor and
looked at all of that, that there was a need for centralizing
intelligence, where you had somebody like Eisenhower's chief of staff in
effect pull it all together. Is that your reading of that period of
time?

MR. GANNON: It is. I think what we was trying to do was a coordination
function.

MR. CLELAND: Coordination?

MR. GANNON: Yes.

MR. CLELAND: Then we move to now, where the most recent book on 9/11
called, "1,000 Years For Revenge" by a guy named Peter Lance says, "The
mass murders of September the 11th were the culmination of a plot that
had been in the works for seven years. The pathology that spawned it had
begun to infect our country another five years before that. Twelve
years. That's how far back I followed the trail to 9/11." That's the
author here. "With all the dots on that line, why couldn't our
government see it coming?"

He refers to 9/11 as the greatest failure of intelligence since the
Trojan Horse. That might be a little bit exaggerated. In the sense that
Pearl Harbor was looked upon as a tragic failure of intelligence as
well. My question to each of you, starting with Mr. Gannon, is two-fold.
Who is responsible for warning this country of an attack on this nation,
and who's accountable?

Mr. Gannon?

MR. GANNON: Well, I believe the President of the United States is
responsible for warning in that context, because he's not only dealing
with intelligence but all the resources of the government and his
responsibility for them. But I also believe that his major intelligence
advisor should be and must be the Director of Central Intelligence, as a
single focus on a warning.

MR. CLELAND: Ms. McCarthy?

MS. McCARTHY: Yes, I agree with John. The President is ultimately
responsible and the Director of Central Intelligence must have the
apparatus to be able to provide those warnings to the President. As far
as who is accountable, I think that's what the Commission is
discovering, and hopefully what we will discover is that our systems
were not adequate. I'm not talking about technical systems, I'm talking
about our organizational systems, were not correctly configured to
address these kinds of threats. And the systems that we had in place
during the early Cold War period at least that developed the warning
mechanisms had more or less atrophied, so that our direction was a
little bit different.

Now, whether or not there are individuals in individual positions that
were accountable, I leave it to the Commission to determine.

MR. CLELAND: Well, I actually asked you who was responsible for warning
who? I didn't say systems, which systems or which agency, I deliberately
asked the question, who is responsible for warning this country of an
attack on itself, and who is accountable? I'm not pulling your chain
here, I'm trying to make a point here. Are you saying systems are
accountable?

MS. McCARTHY: No, I'm saying that --

MR. CLELAND: Mr. Gannon says the President of the United States is
accountable and then the CIA Director, or DCI, is responsible.

MS. McCARTHY: Yes, Senator, I was saying that the systems were faulty,
therefore they may be in part responsible, not accountable. I think
accountability is a person, ultimately, but I'm not in a position to
make that judgment.

MR. CLELAND: Well, after Pearl Harbor, two people were relieved of their
jobs. The Naval commander at Pearl Harbor and the Army commander at
Pearl Harbor. No one has lost their job, no one has been held
accountable, no one has been fired for 9/11. I'll just throw that out.
My whole point here is in this whole section on warning of transnational
threats and this whole warning system concept, I thought that's what the
defense system and the CIA and the intelligence community did.

See, that's been my point. I sat six years on the Senate Armed Services
Committee, and I was always told about the intelligence community. But
when I looked into it, the intelligence community was more than a dozen
different agencies, stove-piped into a dozen different budgets, 12
different systems that were responsible or accountable to six different
cabinet level secretaries. So my point is that if the community is
responsible, then nobody's responsible. See, that's the whole point.

And shouldn't we have a centralized point of warning and accountability?
Others have testified today about that need. Do you have a point to make
about that? A real head of the intelligence community, call it the
National Director of Intelligence, Director of Central Intelligence,
empowered with budgets and authority. Do you have an opinion about that?

MS. McCARTHY: I absolutely agree. I mean, what you have laid out,
Senator, I think is necessary.

MR. CLELAND: Mr. Kerr?

MR. KERR: Well --

MR. CLELAND: Who's responsible, who is for warning this country, and
who's accountable?

MR. KERR: Well, I would agree with John in terms of presidential
accountability. It does seem to me that the Director of Central
Intelligence has a very clear charter as the principal foreign
intelligence advisor to the President. So certainly in that area. Now,
to hold the Director of Central Intelligence responsible for information
in the domestic arena, at least prior to 9/11, I think is a mistake. I
don't think that's a -- that is not in his area of responsibility.

I do tend to -- you referred to Pearl Harbor. I think both of those were
-- both of the ones court-martialed, as you mentioned, were wrong, in
fact. And in history, in hindsight, we had strategic warning that Japan
was a real immediate threat, strategic warning. So one can go back much
further than those two officers, I think, and find responsibility. To
try to find a focus of holding a person responsible or a single
organization responsible for an action that occurs against the United
States, I personally think is a mistake.

This is a complex country, the Congress has responsibility, the courts
have responsibility, individuals throughout the executive have different
responsibility. I think you need much better focus than we have now, I
think you need a much clearer line of reporting and much more clarity in
that. But to say you need a, you know, as the military would say, belly
button, I think is a simple answer to a complex problem.

MR. CLELAND: I don't think so. First of all, my Daddy served at Pearl
Harbor after the attack. I'm well aware that Admiral Kimmell and General
Short were not really responsible for Pearl Harbor, they were hung out
to dry. And I voted in the Senate to reverse Admiral Kimmell's court
martial, as a matter of fact.

My whole point here is this. A few years ago Senator Pat Roberts, who's
a dear friend of mine and has a great sense of humor, was subcommittee
Chairman on Terrorist Threats or Emerging Threats in the Armed Services
Committee.

And he brought in people from all kinds of agencies, 20, 30 different
people, and said, okay, sit in the order in which you're involved in the
chain of command. And there was this musical chairs. And that was a
powerful point that he made. What I'm suggesting here is that if we use
the term intelligence community that means nobody's accountable,
nobody's responsible. See, that's my whole point. We've got a committee
here, and so we have to -- I think part of 9/11 is that somebody
somewhere in the lexicon didn't connect the dots.

But it's more than that. Didn't see or wasn't able to read the tea
leaves and put things together in this mosaic that we called
intelligence information. And if nobody's in charge then, nobody's going
to be pulling all this together. So I asked the question deliberately,
since this is on warning. Now, we now know that the FBI was responsible,
President Reagan made the FBI responsible for in effect terrorist
attacks and this is a massive failure on the part of the FBI. But as
we've discussed, the FBI is not culturally attuned to warning.

It's culturally attuned to prosecution. So, what do we do about that?
Where do we pinpoint the accountability and the responsibility for
dealing with the question of warning against the terrorist attacks that
does come across the bright lines. The bright lines were there in the
Cold War. That was their line and this is our line. No more bright
lines.

Mr. Gannon, you have any comment to make?

MR. GANNON: On a solution, or --

MR. CLELAND: Yeah, on the recommendation. Now, we've had recommendations
here --

MR. GANNON: Well, first of all --

MR. CLELAND: -- about strengthening powerfully the Director of the
Central Intelligence --

MR. GANNON: Well, I think in my own view I guess I wouldn't be as hard
on the FBI as you have just been or as the author of that book has been.
I think the threat of 9/11 actually came from abroad, so I think it's
the conundrum we face, that we had a challenge where a lot of the
intelligence and the planning of that operation was abroad, it was not
domestic. And I would also say that going back to Dick's point about
sometimes not having information, sometimes information is knowable but
not retrievable. And an example I would give you is that the Hamburg
cell in Germany where we know a lot of the 9/11 was planned, it would
have been a real breakthrough for us to have known that that planning
was taking place. And it didn't have to be HUMINT, it could have been
SIGINT, it could have been any one of the INTs, it could have been any
one of the INTs, but the point is we didn't know.

Why didn't we know? Was it an intelligence failure? I will tell you it
had a lot more to do with the fact that the relationship between law
enforcement and intelligence in Germany was very distant and that's
exactly the way all of us wanted it because of Germany's particular
history. There was also a legislation of the books in Germany that did
not allow the government to go after organizations that were religiously
based, and this planning was being done in the cover of a mosque. So
what we have done since 9/11, we have worked with -- I think we have
achieved a level -- or the intelligence community has achieved a level
of collaboration that's unprecedented in not just intelligence but on
the political and legal fronts where we have gotten those laws changed,
not just in Germany but in the United Kingdom and Spain, so I think that
we are recognizing that we were hampered not by intelligence but by a
lot of other factors that prevented us from knowing what we needed to
know.

To answer your question, I happen to believe working the Department now
from the Homeland Security environment and having come out of the
intelligence community that the domestic challenge that you're talking
about, I think, can be addressed by a Department of Homeland Security
that has major information collection responsibilities, as dealing with
the 22 agencies that have come into the Department, and both training
them to be collectors of information but critically providing them with
threat assessment so they know what they should be collecting. This is
just information, not clandestine intelligence, and there's a lot of
information in our ports, our borders and our airports. I think the
Department of Homeland Security could greatly improve our posture with
regard to the analysis of the domestic threat, simply performing that
domestic function.

I also happen to believe that FBI, whatever its failings or its case
orientation, can do the intelligence collection effort if it is
resourced and directed to do so.

MR. CLELAND: As one who --

MR. GANNON: It's a combination of the --

MR. CLELAND: As one who was an author of the Homeland Security bill, I
understand that. We can get a lot of intelligence, shall we say, from
the first responders, the policemen on the beat and so forth. I
understand that. What I'm talking about is the national strategic
responsibility for warning this country. This book says that -- we're
talking about Germany here -- it says from the early 1990s, Osama bin
Laden was running an active al Qaeda terrorist cell in New York City.
The FBI had sufficient intelligence to capture the bomb maker before he
even attacked the World Trade Center the first time in 1993.

The point being here, some have said that we don't need radical surgery,
we don't need major surgery here, but we've had a major attack on our
country, we've had a major intelligence failure and what I'm trying to
ask you all is, what is your best way that you would recommend to us
that we think about structuring warning? Ms. McCarthy? And who's
accountable for that?

MS. McCARTHY: I would go back to my initial remark, and that is I think
that having a single individual below the Director of Central
Intelligence level, who is the substantive expert on warning, is one
solution but not the entire solution. The entire solution would
encompass integrating the warning function into every single analytic
unit in the intelligence committee and making sure that that's their
mission.

MR. CLELAND: Can we follow up on that from some of the readings, some of
the testimony here. I understand that the people who were involved in
Warning were somehow separate or different than the people involved in
normal analytical efforts. I thought all analytical efforts, all data,
all information was out there to estimate what the threat to the United
States was.

MS. McCARTHY: Not everyone would agree with me on this, but I think that
the conscious effort to do warning analysis on much of the community
actually had gotten diverted to the exercise of producing the daily
intelligence that needed to be produced for senior policymakers, and on
the issue that you cited earlier about the early identification of an al
Qaeda cell in New York, for example. That to me is an indication that
the kind of warning analysis on the counterterrorism front was not
taking place. In other words, we tended to look at individual cells and
individual activities and actors rather than at the broad strategic
cultural picture to identify the kinds of activities, the kinds of goals
and missions that these groups would intend to have, and my fix for that
would be -- and I don't have a notion that this is the only fix, but my
fix for that would be to have -- on the counterterrorism issue, which I
think is sui generis in terms of its complexity --would be to have a
central component.

I don't favor a new agency, because if you develop a new agency, you end
up having to develop a new culture, and trying to fix the cultures we
have already is difficult enough. But I would have a separate component
that would deal with all of the information across the government
including domestic intelligence, all the information including
information from state and local levels and from the private sector,
when available, to do the warning job on counterterrorism. I would not
have that particular -- it's a difficult choice, because I think it's
very dangerous to have that component involved in any kind of collection
or operation.

Then you end up with -- as a citizen rather than as an intelligence
expert, that would concern me. That you have a group of operatives,
essentially, who are used to very proactive -- in a different kind of
legal framework -- activity, undertaking domestic operations. So I think
it has to be solely an analytic component. But it would also have to
have some way of stimulating collection, which I think makes it very
difficult to try to kind of visualize or legislate such a component,
because it's kind of a fine line sometimes between collecting --
particularly in domestic groups -- and interfering in their lives and
First Amendment issues and so on. But that would be what I would favor.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you, Ms. McCarthy.

Mr. Kerr, a comment? In terms of how to enhance our warning capability
and our accountability for warning in this country?

MR. KERR: Well, I think you do need to strengthen the position of the
DCI, the authorities of the DCI in a number of areas. And I would agree
with John. I think it's very important to go back to a concept that
thinks more clearly about a Central Intelligence Agency. Call it what
you wish, but one which incorporates those functions in a much clearer
way.

I do think there are two other things that are worth looking at. One is
there is nothing like information when it comes to analysis. You know,
you can have a ton of analysis and an ounce of information and not get
very far with it. We were information short. And I understand this
concern about all these dots that needed to be connected. It's easier to
do that in hindsight than it is at the time. It is the relationship
among information that's not associated in anybody's mind or in the
machinery, or have the analytic techniques or the analytic methodologies
to do that.

There are ways to do that. You know, there are ways to mine databases
that have unconnected information and apply logic to it and do some very
sophisticated things. It still comes down to people, good research, good
analysis and people committed to it. And quite honestly over the past --
in my view, and I think John and Mary would probably agree with me. Over
the past several years, quite a few years now, our analytic base for
research in-depth has been sacrificed to current intelligence and to
other ideas. We've spread around people on staffs, and while John will
talk about all these nice new community management staffs and the
analytic staffs, those are staffs. Their value-added and my judgment is
interesting, but not critical. So I think we need a lot more people who
do the work.

I had this feeling at one point in time we were going to have an
organization that was kind of an inverted pyramid. There was one analyst
at the bottom and everybody was sitting on his shoulders, or her
shoulders. And there is some truth to that. We need people to do the
work, not just manage the resources.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you very much, Mr. Kerr.

Thank all of you for your service to our country.

Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much.

Governor Thompson.

MR. JAMES R. THOMPSON: My question primarily is consisting of re-plowing
plowed ground, so I'll keep it brief. But I'm struck by something that
you said, Ms. McCarthy, and I'll use that as a lead off to the question
that I'd like all three of you to answer as clearly as you can. We
talked about this this morning with earlier witnesses, Mr. Deutch, Mr.
Schlesinger, and for me it wasn't fleshed out enough.

You said, Ms. McCarthy, there ought to be an element or a component for
analysis that took into account both domestic and foreign intelligence,
but that you as a citizen sort of drew the line at collection. See if
you can agree with me on this, in the old days, the Cold War days, where
it was nation state against nation state, it was us versus the Soviets
or their proxies and the issue was land armies that moved, or missiles
that were manufactured and moved around. There was a clear difference
between domestic intelligence and foreign intelligence.

Now we have private actors on the scene, al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden
and their proxies around the world in dozens of countries literally,
united perhaps by language if not by religion, so that national
boundaries to them are less important. The ability to move money around
this world through technology didn't exist back in the '40s and the
'50s. Immigration has produced a different nation than we were 30 or 40
years ago, we now have ethnic enclaves which we sometimes suspect harbor
planners or those who would aid terrorism if the indictments of federal
prosecuting authorities are to be taken at face value.

Doesn't this argue for the elimination of this organizational difference
between the collection of domestic and foreign intelligence? Doesn't
this argue for taking the functions of both the FBI and the CIA and
other agencies in that regard and putting them into a single agency
which reports up to somebody who's got the ability to spread all of this
combined information, not only before the president of the United
States, but the analysts responsible for warning and would you favor the
retreat from what our Cold War organizations were?

MR. KERR: Are you asking?

MR. THOMPSON: All three of you.

MR. KERR: Well, let me take a stab at it. I think what you've described
as putting that person that does the -- that walks in with that final
bit of information in a role that's pretty distant from the people that
do the work, that take action on a daily basis that know how to respond
to it. I'll tell you, I go -- I've gone in this job, I mentioned to you
that I've been working for George Tenet in the last month and a half,
I've gone to his 5:30 meeting which is a meeting of George and his
principle officers that are involved in the clandestine services,
someone from the Homeland Security, someone from the Bureau, his
counterterrorism person, John Brennan from TTIC and a variety of others.

That meeting, I would guess, is the closest you can come to an
operational meeting where someone says, I want to do the following, go
do it, talk to somebody in this country and tell them not to do this
tonight, because we're worried about it, do something else. It is an
operational role that is, in my experience, when I was in the Agency
that the Director of Central Intelligence did not have, did not need to
have, because we were not in that kind of immediate kind of situation.
George Tenet, I believe, and I -- I've gone to some of the other
meetings and no one else in government, other than perhaps George Tenet
and his meeting with the President in the morning, does that kind of
operational level detail.

Now, I don't know how to replicate that, and at what level you do it,
but I know it needs to be done. And quite honestly, I've talked to some
people about this and they'd say, well, you talk about micromanagement,
that's the ultimate in micromanagement. The guy is the top of the
Central Intelligence Agency, and Director of Central Intelligence, who's
making operational decisions, but that's the way it works in fact.
That's what you have to do, because the things that are being acted upon
make a real difference. Liaison with other countries, with the Bureau
and its case, with the Homeland Security and its action.

Now, can someone else do that? It's not obvious to me that someone more
distant than George Tenet from the people who do real stuff, who send
real messages and say, talk to foreign liaison and wrap those people up
tonight, or talk to the Bureau and do a real action, if you get much
farther away from that ability I think you're in a fair amount of
trouble. So I don't know how far -- how much further you can centralize
it? It does sound like micromanagement to me but from my perspective
that's really damn good micromanagement, that's doing the hard work at
the right place. So, you know -- I don't know that if I designed -- you
asked me can I design a system that will be better? I wouldn't have come
to that conclusion that he should do what he's doing, but having watched
it and listened to it and seen it operate, I'm pretty impressed by how
good it works.

And I'll tell you, if he wasn't there right now doing what he does at
5:30 to 7:30 every night, a lot of things would fall between the cracks.
And so you know, how do you turn that into an institution, an
organization? Right now, it's a leadership, because he's got the target
on his back, he's the guy that feels he has the responsibility to do it,
and he's doing it. Now, how do you institutionalize that and make that a
part of the system? And over to you, that's a good question, I don't
understand quite how to do, but I think it works reasonably well, not
perfect.

MR. THOMPSON: It strikes me as ironic that you took some comfort from
the fact that the laws were changed in the U.K. and Spain and Germany
but we haven't changed the laws in the United States.

MR. KERR: Well, foreign liaison has always been in the system.

MR. THOMPSON: Ms. McCarthy?

MS. McCARTHY: Well, I think there's a dilemma, and I don't know what the
answer is, but I think on balance it's easier to modify the culture of
the FBI to collect domestic intelligence and to use the departments --
the agencies in Homeland Security that collect a lot of intelligence
that John was recounting, border patrol, customs and so on, and send
that intelligence to a central place where it's -- it along with foreign
intelligence can be analyzed but does not, but the head of that
component does not direct operations. The system that Dick has just
described wherein the DCI takes some responsibility for orchestrating
domestic and overseas operations at that level is probably a good one.

But again, we're dealing with a legal framework here that we've become
accustomed to and which I think that doesn't mean we can't change it,
but I think we take some comfort in the legal mechanisms to oversee the
current domestic agencies that are not the same mechanisms, for example
that our foreign intelligence agencies serve under. It's easier in my
view to have a single individual to oversee that process than it is to
change the cultures and the legal framework to sort of yank us around to
have a new organization. That's where I come out on.

MR. THOMPSON: John?

MR. GANNON: As an analyst and a practicing analyst for most of my
career, I think we have to distinguish between the analysis in
integrating foreign and domestic and data fusion and so forth and then
collection. I think it is in the collection area that you do really have
the legal problems and concerns, domestic concerns about having $40
billion worth of collection systems working against our citizens. I
think that's a profound issue of concern. But it began, as an analyst,
even 25 years ago when I was an analyst on the Caribbean, I didn't have
to depend on a collection system which is a human brain, that naturally
integrates foreign and domestic analysis.

When I was analyzing the Caribbean I knew what the trade implications
were in the United States, I think I would have been a failure as an
analyst if I didn't. So I think to some extent in the dialogue that's
taken place today, there's an exaggerated notion in the analytic
community about this distinction about foreign and domestic. I would
also say that I don't believe you could structure any analytic program
today that wouldn't integrate foreign and domestic analysis, that
wouldn't use the best technology to fuse data, and that wouldn't share
information. So again, a lot of I think there's a certain mythology
that's grown up about that.

But I do think there are some real concerns that I think were addressed,
and Senator Cleland was a part of it, went in the framing of the
Homeland Security Act. You know, we recognized that we need to improve
foreign collection on CIA's part, we recognized that the FBI had some
work to do with regard to the intelligence function that we expected it
to perform, but there were also some significant residual issues that
related to the fact that we had new stakeholders now in our national
security arena and they were the state and local governments and the
private sector. They were the first responders to whom we needed to
providing intelligence.

And when you deal with those communities, there are very significant
civil liberty and privacy issues that have to be addressed, it's a new
model of information sharing as I said, both with the legacy agencies
that are coming into the Department, making them really intelligence
collectors, but then also sharing with the state and local government
and the private sector the intelligence community I think it was
correctly perceived, was not the agent to be doing that. I think that
was the justification for establishing the Department of Homeland
Security Act, and I continue to believe if we sort of get back to that
legislation called for, having a department that really can work with
the legacy agencies of the state and local government and the private
sector, developing a new model for information sharing, I think that is
-- that will help us to address the problem.

At the same time, strictly on the collection side, I think we have to
work with FBI to enable it, to resource it, to do a better intelligence
collection on the domestic side. The concern, of course, among those
agencies as I worked with them, both in the transition planning office
and now on the committee, is who is responsible for actually
articulating the threat? And there's been a real tension between the FBI
and the Department with that regard.

But what has resulted and I said this in my written testimony, is that
when we ask for a briefing on the domestic threat, we now have CTC,
TTIC, the Department of Homeland Security and FBI which tend to come as
a family which looks larger to us than it ever was, so I think we are at
risk of at least creating a certain confusion or perception that we have
divided accountability. Again, I think with the implementation of the
Homeland Security, standing up a department that has the capabilities
that that legislation calls for, having FBI strengthen its capabilities
and the same on the foreign side, the President is accountable, he has
three different sources of expertise and I think that is -- in my
judgment, is workable and it will improve our posture both on the
foreign and domestic side.

MR. THOMPSON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Congressman Roemer, and then Secretary --

MR. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Nice to have all three of you here. We very much appreciate your
testimony and I hope -- I know on our part it was certainly worth the
wait, we apologize for the long delay and I hope, although I'm not
claiming it will be, reciprocated on your part. Dr. McCarthy, I want to
ask you a couple of questions, I've read some of your extensive writing
on the National Intelligence Officer for Warning, and I want to be
clear. You were Officer for Warning?

MS. McCARTHY: Yes, I was.

MR. ROEMER: And you were serving in that position when?

MS. McCARTHY: I served as the Deputy National Intelligence Officer from
1991 to 1994 and then '94 to mid '96 as the National Intelligence
Officer for Warning.

MR. ROEMER: So, mid '96, so about five years you had experience in this
position --

MS. McCARTHY: That's right.

MR. ROEMER: -- and then you've written extensively on this as well, too.
I believe in your writing you have said that in 2001 when the 9/11
terrorist attack took place, that the National Intelligence Officer for
Warning did not have responsibility for terrorism, is that correct?

MS. McCARTHY: Well, I don't -- that's my understanding, that's correct.
That some time after I left the position in '96 I think sometime around
that time, it was decided that, and I suppose although I can't say this
authoritatively, that the counterterrorism center would in fact have
that responsibility. In any case, the National Intelligence Officer for
Warning did not have terrorism as part of his portfolio.

MR. ROEMER: Explain to me and explain to the American people who may be
watching this, how is it that the National Intelligence Officer for
Warning at the Central Intelligence Agency tasked with telling the
country when there's an imminent threat, and certainly through the Joint
Inquiry hearings we heard of the alarm and the record chatter in the
summer of 2001, that that person did not even have it in their
portfolio? To warn the CIA nor the country about a threat from terrorism
or al Qaeda?

MS. McCARTHY: Mr. Roemer, I really can't speak with first hand knowledge
of how that decision was made, I was as you know, down at the White
House by that time.

MR. ROEMER: But the decision was made and to the best of your
understanding they did not have that in their portfolio, is that
correct?

MS. McCARTHY: That's to the best of my understanding, that's right.

MR. ROEMER: And if that was the case in September of 2001, has that been
fixed?

MS. McCARTHY: I don't know. I don't know, I believe that is still not
the case, so if the follow up question then is who does have
responsibility, I can't answer that but maybe Mr. Kerr can.

MR. ROEMER: Well, as I move on to somebody else, and I don't mean to
hone too much in on you, it's because you have such good knowledge in
this area. My next question would be, why hasn't it been fixed, and then
who has responsibility for warning our country about terrorism? Mr.
Kerr, before I ask you the question, you were the one that said in your
very eloquent and helpful statement, that you would predict that there's
going to be another terrorist attack, it's going to be successful, why
haven't we fixed the system at this point?

MR. KERR: Well, I -- John may have the specific dates but my
understanding is that the decision was made that because you had the
Counter Terrorism Center, because you had both analysts in it and you
had collection people in it, and it assumed responsibility for the
judgments about the threat, that having the warning function performed
where the bulk of the people, large number of people were working on the
threat itself, was the most logical place. An NIO for Warning, you know,
Mary will excuse me I'm sure, lives off the other organizations, they
have very little staff, they fundamentally have to live off the other
organizations. What they can do, and this is a point that's legitimate I
think implicit in your question, is they can ask questions in a
different way, or turn the problem around slightly from what the
analytic elements might do.

But I think the anticipation was that given the size of CTC, the
collection, the counterterrorism center, the fact that the bulk of the
analysts, in fact, many regional analysts had been transferred there,
and their responsibilities that it would be a better organization to
assume this larger role. And John may be able to help a little bit, but
I think that's the logic behind it. And why they didn't recreate it, I
think is the very reason that they moved it there in the first place. It
is where the bulk of counter terrorism work is done today, and was done
at that time.

MR. ROEMER: I'm still not sure I understand how that's going to be
helpful post 9/11 in terms of getting warning out and fixing a system
that had some real problems in it, but John can you -- Mr. Gannon, can
you help at all in explaining why that officer was not responsible for
terrorism and if it in fact has been fixed at this point?

MR. GANNON: Well, I think there were -- prior to 9/11 I think there were
-- there was more than one officer who was responsible for articulating
the terrorist threat. If you will pardon me, if I could go back to that
point, and I left the intelligence community about that time and I think
the major problem we were having and those officers were having was
prioritizing the various threats we had. I recall going to the I think
it was the Armed Services Committee with Director Tenet and Senator
Levin at the time, did what he does so well, he said okay, you have laid
out for us, a very rich and diverse threat assessment here.

We were talking about the ballistic missile threat, a growing threat now
from Iran, Iraq, North Korea, a residual threat from China and Russia,
we're worried about the military modernization in China, you're talking
about more regional threats like in Bosnia, Africa, we just went through
the crisis in East Timor. Terrorism in all its dimensions, so it wasn't
just conventional, that we were talking about chemical, biological and
biological was a major concern, because we didn't know what we needed to
know about the biological threat. But radiological, nuclear and then you
know, humanitarian disasters and refugee flows and all those other
issues that intelligence officers are being required to deal with, how
did you put -- Senator Levin said, well tell me one to 10, what are the
real threats, what are the most important ones?

And the Director responded, if any of those happens, I'm accountable, I
can't prioritize. I went back and got some analysts together and tried
to prioritize and what we came up with was a terrorist threat, probably
abroad. And this was just very close to the eve of 9/11. But I would
also say that we were dealing with a stretch at the time of our
resources to deal with what I would call conventional kinds of threats
and then the new technology based threats. We talked for example, about
terrorists or adversaries who might be able to get hold of laser
technology and do damage to our satellites.

So here we had a community that was being forced to deal with the new
technological threats, but at the same time, while we worried about
lasers we still had to worry about the Palestinian who would throw a
rock. Because of the political implications of that. So, we couldn't
prioritize, the Congress could not prioritize either, and we were hit by
a terrorist incident that we would not have ruled out, in any of the
exercises we would not have ruled out that that could have happened, or
it might even be probable, but what we would have needed was hard
intelligence that it was about to happen. So we --

MR. ROEMER: Can I ask you a question on that light?

MR. GANNON: Sure.

MR. ROEMER: We saw Dr. Schlesinger this morning, hold up a graph with a
bunch of dots scattered all over it, of equal size and difficulty of
deciphering and reading. And then he held up one with some rather large
red and green, yellow dots that were easier to find and hopefully
analyze and decide what they meant.

What do we need to do to help our strategic analytical capabilities so
that when there are clues, not clues that say X is going to attack New
York City on such and such a date at 11:50 p.m., but clues that say --
like the Bojinka plot -- that say that a plane is going to be flown by
terrorists into CIA headquarters in Langley, or other evidence comes in
that we have a body of strategic analytical thinkers and people that
come back with different kinds of controversial or disagreeing
statements about something, that they could put that type of evidence
together. The Joint Inquiry listed probably two dozen instances of
planes being used as weapons. How do we restructure that so that those
dots look bigger and that we have an opportunity at least to prevent
that kind of terrorist attack from taking place.

MR. GANNON: Well, in my experience with intelligence community analysts,
the best dot connectors are, in fact, people. It's brainpower that does
it, it isn't systems. But you do have to have systems in place that
enable the brains to come together. And this is really what the
Strategic Investment Plan was all about. I think -- as the Assistant
Director for Analysis and Production, I could not communicate with the
eleven agencies that were doing analysis electronically. I had three
different systems on my desk, one computer with two CPUs, and another
system that enabled me to communicate with the CIA's CWE system, which
was an excellent system.

So I could actually talk to a station chief in a remote station and get
a response quicker than I could talk to the Director of DIA, because of
the lack of connectivity and collaborative technology.

MR. ROEMER: Within CIA headquarters?

MR. GANNON: I was in CIA headquarters, yes. And so I think those --
bringing the analytic community together, and I'm not talking about
homogenizing it and I'm not talking about reducing CIA's -- but
recognizing that you have, for example, in the United States Air Force
-- I think it's the major repository of science and technology expertise
in the community -- places like Fort Patrick have tremendous
capabilities that can be brought to bear that could help us and bring
tremendous brainpower to dealing with these issues.

So I think bringing the analytic community together, which again, this
is not rocket science and it is not a very hard thing to do. But
creating a collaborative environment where the director of Central
Intelligence can call on the Air Force, the Army down in NGIC down in
Charlottesville, for example, and have that expertise working the same
set of problems together so that he can do -- advise the President
really based on what the intelligence community as a whole and also that
community's ability to leverage outside expertise can do, and not just
be narrowly focused on what the CIA can do for him.

So I think the -- the analytic community I think did recognize how it
could do better, but I think it struggles, partly because of the
resistance within the community, to having those kinds of collaborative
relationships developed.

MR. KERR: Just one comment I agree with John, although I would -- I
think it's very easy to overstate the analytic connections. You can do
an awful lot with a small group. The real key is in information. Hard
insight, information coming out of penetrations of terrorist
organizations, could foreign intelligence. You can have as good a
collaboration as you wish. You can go around and talk to everybody, you
can involve everybody in it, but if you're arguing about information
that's ambiguous, unclear and imprecise, it will not carry you to the
warning -- through the warning problem. You need hard, specific factual
information out of foreign intelligence collected against the elements
that are planning.

MR. ROEMER: You're talking about, Mr. Kerr, human intelligence -

MR. KERR: You need human intelligence --

MR. ROEMER: -- unilateral and foreign liaisons.

MR. KERR: -- or a full range of intelligence, but you -- but it has to
be intelligence directed against, in my view, against the organizations
that are planning. You can analyze all you want. And, I mean, we're all
analysts here and we've done -- I've analyzed information that led you
nowhere for years because we didn't know enough. We spent the first 15
years of our work on Soviet ICBMs, we never accurately identified where
a Soviet ICBM was because we didn't have a picture of the site until we
had satellite reconnaissance going over an ICBM site. We were
misestimating where they were and that problem is compounded.

I mean, it's the same kind of problem, not the Soviets but the same kind
of problem. There's nothing like hard information. And analysis will
carry you so far but only so far. And if you're going to do your
investment, that I would say -- if you're going to do an investment
about where you spend your money, it would be very useful to think about
where you get the biggest bang for the buck. And as an old analyst, it's
not clear to me that it's in analysis.

MR. KEAN: Congressman Hamilton.

MR. LEE H. HAMILTON: Mr. Gannon, I was struck by your comment a moment
ago about prioritization. And it always seemed to me that this was one
of the key problems. And you're all from the intelligence community. Who
has the responsibility to prioritize and how does it work? I mean, you
have all of these threats out here that when we listen to the
intelligence people, scare you to death. And any one of them could cause
great damage to the country. Is it the intelligence people that have the
responsibility to prioritize, or is it the policymaker that has that
responsibility, or is it some interaction between the two? You have to
prioritize threats.

There are dozens of threats against the United States and it makes an
awful difference how you allocate resources as to how you prioritize
those threats. You have thousands and thousands of targets in the United
States. It makes a huge difference how you prioritize those targets.
Now, the tendency, I can tell you, of the policymaker is not to make the
decision, because it's too tough and because you could be wrong. And
therefore you want to do everything, but you can't do everything,
because you don't have the resources to do it. How do we get a better
sense of prioritization of threats and targets in this system?

MR. GANNON: When it comes to actually doing something about a threat or
developing policy, I think that is on the political side. But I think
the development of an integrated threat assessment which explains what
we know and what we don't know, is I think, the responsibility, and
should be, of the Director of Central Intelligence. He has been --

MR. HAMILTON: When you were ticking off all of those threats a moment
ago, I think, with regard to Senator Levin's question, did the
intelligence community at that time respond to the Senator and say,
these are the threats and these are the priorities of the threats?

MR. GANNON: We made an effort that I described when I went back with our
analysts. But again, I think we have the analysts who are responsible
for these accounts and --

MR. HAMILTON: Is it the responsibility of the analysts to come forward
and say, okay, we've got a dozen of these threats and this is the order
in which we see the seriousness of those threats? Is that your
responsibility?

MR. GANNON: I believe it is the responsibility of the Director of
Central Intelligence to bring the analysts together and to prioritize to
the extent you can, and also to explain why you can't prioritize with
regard to the intelligence issue. I'd say on the operational side that's
the responsibility of -- and the policy side, the responsibility of
others. But I think it's very important to hold the DCI accountable for
that prioritization or for an explanation of why we cannot prioritize.

MR. HAMILTON: So the DCI then should make known to the President and
perhaps his top aides, Mr. President, these are the threats the United
States faces and we put this at the top of the list and we put this at
the bottom of the list?

MR. GANNON: Yes.

MR. HAMILTON: That's their responsibility.

MR. GANNON: I believe so.

MR. KEAN: Secretary Lehman.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you. I have two questions. The first one you're at
liberty to duck, but I'd like to hear any of you who have a comment on
it. It's a follow-up to Chairman Hamilton's.

We had testimony this morning that the NSC was totally mobilized after
'98 to focus on terrorism, and specifically al Qaeda. The DCI had sent a
memo shortly thereafter saying that we were at war with al Qaeda. Yet by
the end of the Clinton administration and on into 9/11 itself, the sum
total of that was that terrorism had to have been dropped from the NIO
for Warning's portfolio, and there were only five people in the entire
CIA who were assigned to al Qaeda. Who gets the blame? What went wrong?
And don't say the system.

(Laughter.)

MR. GANNON: Well, I was in a position as Chairman of the National
Intelligence Council and as Assistant Director for Analysis and
Production to see a lot of what was collected and a lot of what was
produced, and there was not a single day that went by that I didn't see
UBL, Usama bin Laden, related traffic. So I believe it would be
inaccurate to say that we did not have a major program in place to
analyze and to collect against Usama bin Laden. I would also say that
the major change I think -- I left the intelligence community in July of
2001, and I believe the date where the major change occurred in the
intelligence community with regard to the approach to terrorism was 11
September, it was not 20 January.

I noted no difference in the approach in the change of the
administrations.

MR. LEHMAN: Okay. Anybody else?

MS. McCARTHY: I'll just try to add something to what John said. The fact
that the NIO for Warning no longer had the terrorism account I think
points to my earlier statement, that sort of bureaucracies take over and
the NIO for Warning turns out to be not always a popular person. And
that's why I urged that the Commission, that they make a recommendation
on the NIO for Warning, not just say that we need to have an empowered
NIO for Warning because bureaucracies will win out again.

My perspective, however, was that there was a lot of work going on on al
Qaeda, and I don't know where the information comes from that there were
only five people, because I personally saw lots of people who were both
analyzing and working on the collection against UBL during that period.
What I think was missing was what I described earlier, and that was to
Senator Cleland, which was the overall picture of al Qaeda, and the
development of that picture from a strategic perspective that had more
to do than what individual actors were doing, but what the strategic
picture was in terms of the cultural impetus and the networks and what
was driving recruitment, you know, particularly.

We had a vague notion of what this was, oh, it's anti-Americanism, oh,
it's the American presence in the Gulf, but a much more learned
appraisal was needed of the strategic view of al Qaeda, and that's what
was missing. And I know there certainly was an increased effort, but it
was not probably proportional to what we perceived to be the threat at
the time.

MR. KERR: I would respond by saying --

MR. LEHMAN: Dick, could I -

MR. KERR: Mr. Chairman, I regret that I have to excuse myself to make
another appointment, and I'd be happy to come back or in any way assist
any of the members.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, we appreciate your help.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

MR. KERR: Secretary Lehman, in response to your question, I was asked in
-- I don't know the exact date but sometime around probably '97, '98,
with a couple of other people to come in and review the counterterrorism
program as an outsider. And quite honestly, at that time as I looked at
it, I thought the activities that were going on against al Qaeda and
others were rather impressive in terms of the scope of their activities,
the coordination with NSA and NIMA and the other organizations, a very
focused attack on information and on activities.

But I would pose a larger response to your question, and that is, the
relationship between the expenditure of money and the hiring of analysts
does not very directly relate to the priority given to problems in the
intelligence community or policy problems generally. Now, why? Because
the system is very difficult to move around. So you say, this is my
priority, the DCI I'm sure would have said many times that terrorism is
my priority. But when you get down into the bureaucracy, when people
start arguing, well, how about weapons of mass destruction? And how
about what's going on in the Soviet Union? The future development of
nuclear weapons or in Korea or in this and that?

Then the system tends to break down, and what you end up doing is
spreading it around. You spread around the money, you spread around the
analysts. So the relationship between priority and resources and
expenditure of money is a hard one to come by. You know, if you're the
DCI and you say, how much have we really increased in this area, you get
a lot of fluff back, quite honestly, and a lot of dancing around. And my
guess is that is -- the direct response to requirements is very hard to
pin down in the intelligence community.

One thing the DCI does not really control, the resources of NSA, or the
NIMA or DIA or the NRO, he has some influence, but he cannot say, this
is your priority because it's my priority. You know, one might want to
think about whether you should change that. But no one can really say,
this is our highest priority and by God we're going to have our
resources and our manpower and our activities relate to that. And I
personally think that's a mistake. I think the system should be more
responsive. I think you can jerk it around too much and lose your place,
but I think it needs to be, and as Lee Hamilton said, he's been through
-- we had in my experience five or six major systems to get priorities.

They all involved the executive. They all involved we'll have a meeting
at the beginning of this year and we'll bring in the Secretary of State
or the Deputy Secretary of State and the deputy of this and that. You
have one meeting and they say, you've got to be kidding, and I'm not
going back to another meeting like that. So then you get somebody down
in the system, pretty soon it's all intelligence officers talking to
each other. And that's not all bad, because they have some idea of the
threat.

But sooner or later those systems break down to the lowest common
denominator, because other people have too much to do, they don't think
it's that important, the system's not that good.

MR. LEHMAN: But that's letting the system do it. I can guarantee you
there have been times when there have been decision- makers in these
agencies who didn't let that happen. And we talked earlier about the way
that the system worked at one period under Kissinger, where everybody
came to every one of those meetings because they were terrified if they
didn't he'd move the money where he felt like moving it and have the
President sign an order laying off half of one analytic section and
adding the bodies to another.

So you cannot blame it on the system, it is people making these
decisions. And that leads to my second question, which was precipitated
by my distinguished colleague, Senator Cleland, with whom I almost never
disagree. But I must disagree today, and that was in the Pearl Harbor.
I've studied a good bit of the Pearl Harbor aftermath, and as some of
the evidence has come to light since, like the discovery of the mini
submarine off Pearl Harbor, and I think they shot exactly the right
people in General Short and Admiral Kimmell, and they shot them for the
right reasons. Because they had succumbed to Groupthink in their
intelligence staffs, who had accepted the view which became unquestioned
in both commands, that though both of them knew there was going to be
war within days, there was no lack of warning that the Japanese were
going to attack. But the Groupthink had both accepted the fact that they
were going to hit Singapore and the Malay Archipelago first. And so
Short and Kimmell both sent the troops home for the weekend, closed down
the radar on Sunday, gave everybody leave, and he was dressing for golf,
Kimmell, when the report came in from the O'Kane that a Japanese sub was
trying to get into Pearl Harbor and he dismissed it. So that is my
question. My own short experience in the government in the '70s and
'80s,

I encountered perhaps more Groupthink from CIA than any other agency.
And they were all guilty of it, not the least being naval intelligence
on their particular view of what the Soviets were doing. There was an
unquestioned orthodoxy that didn't change for a long time. But two
examples of the Groupthink that became dominant in CIA that screamed out
warning, in my judgment, strategic warning of other things that did then
happen, were in Vietnam it became the house view in CIA that all the
supplies for operations in the south came down the trail.

Now, there were dissident views from operating people actually operating
within CIA, but the house view was -- and they defended it and got more
entrenched as the war went on - when in fact, it turned out some 80
percent came in through Sihanoukville. We only found that out
afterwards. And then Secretary Schlesinger earlier today testified about
his rather famous fight with CIA over Soviet intentions on the SS18s,
where CIA had a house view that the Soviets were not going to go beyond
parity. They wanted to achieve equality and then that was it.

Of course, subsequent events proved that wasn't at all what they were
doing but there was a -- any bureaucracy has a way, if the top guy or
the top NIO on a subject has made the judgment on good and honest basis
that everything was coming down the trail. It is not particularly career
enhancing for some junior analyst to tell the boss that he's totally
wrong. And so there gradually becomes an orthodoxy in any big
bureaucracy and CIA is, I think, particularly prone to it. How do we
break that culture as we proceed in this war on terrorism? Because it is
a factor and some of it can be assisted perhaps by these organizational
changes we have and some of it depends on the personnel and what kind of
a culture you cultivate in the agency. Your views?

MS. McCARTHY: Well, it is a huge problem and it is one that I think
cannot resolve just by organizational changes or by pronouncements that
from now on, we want to see more alternative hypothesis, discovery by
alternative hypothesis investigation. It's not going to work. We've
tried that in the past. My own view is it has to be legislated and
people have to be made legislatively accountable and there has to be
continual oversight and I would suggest a continual review and I
suggested that we may want to have something like the GAO take the
responsibility under legislation for doing an absolute review of the
strategic warning function within the intelligence community, not just
CIA but the intelligence community at large or perhaps another staff
that the Congress may wish to establish. But I think it has to be
legislated.

We've been through this dance several times now with warning failures
followed by investigation followed by recommendations to have more
attention to warning. And we have more attention to warning for a short
period of time and then the sort of culture, the dominant culture in the
bureaucracy take over. So we have to say most of the time, it works.
Most of the time, they are very bright people, they do very good work.
And most of the time, they get away with it. But it's when they don't
that the sort of warts of the system, if I may use the word, are
revealed. So I think it's going to take more than just a recommendation
to fix it.

MR. KERR: I would -- I mean, I understand your points about
Sihanoukville and about the Groupthink. But I think, quite honestly --
and it will show my parochialism but even people who are parochial could
be right occasionally -- I think the institution is much richer in
dissent than you would -- I mean I found an organization where I could
and I thought others around us could argue all kinds of issues and take
them very high in the system, if you could make a good argument. I mean,
you have to be careful with cranks who have an argument but have no
basis for it. But I think it was an organization that was quite
transparent in that way and actually the debate within the organization
is constant, always arguing. We argue at every level.

My analyst, when I started as a junior analyst used to argue with me
about things I already published in the current intelligence. He would
come in the next morning and rewrite it for me to show me how wrong I
was. We would argue about everything. We had this sense about all kinds
of things. The Navy is a very interesting problem too. We had a
continual fight with the Navy on everything and quite often, we were
right and not the Navy. Sometimes we were wrong. But it's a rich --
that's what I think you get out of an -- it's a matter of leadership.
You don't always have it. Some issues, you do get caught up in a
Groupthink, kind of thing where you're convinced you're right. Evidence
just supports you so well.

You know, I would give the organization a lot more credit in looking at
it historically. You want to look at Vietnam, apart from the trail down
the Sihanouk, and you'll see a very strong story of dissent: dissent
with NACV, dissent with Washington, dissent with all the people that
said what was going to happen in the war was a very clear argument. Now
it wasn't always right but if you are looking for one organization that
was on the right side of it, you'd have to go to CIA, quite honestly.
Very rich debate. Very rich argument. Lots of debate inside the
organization. So I wouldn't sell it short on that. It's not big
organizations that make mistakes but it's also pretty darn good on a lot
of issues.

MR. LEHMAN: Point well taken. Just one follow-up. How do you preserve
that diversity, that openness, that willingness to accept defeat --

MR. KERR: Leadership --

MR. LEHMAN: -- if you over-centralize, if you bring all of the agencies
under one hierarchy, which to a greater or lesser degree is going to
have an orthodoxy?

MR. KERR: I think that is an issue, a serious issue. I think one would
have to be very careful about too big an organization that's too well
organized, that doesn't allow dissent and I think it's still true in
that -- when I was Deputy Director, people walked into my office on a
regular basis and said, You don't know what the hell you're doing.
You've got this thing so sprawled and so screwed up. Analysts, not some
senior officer. Somebody coming in saying, You're all wrong. You're
doing it wrong. I think that happens today.

You have to have that intimacy. It's a fairly intimate organization that
works together rather well. And I think you need -- I don't know what
would happen if you had a Director of National Intelligence and
everybody was in this nice, neat structure and it was all kind of very
well organized. Would it be better? I don't know. I'd like to think
about it. I'm not an organizational person. I think you can beat any
organization. You can go around it, run over it. You do it in if you're
smart enough and clever enough. You can get the right thing out of it.

MR. KEAN: Final question for Commissioner Ben-Veniste.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: I would like to pick up on something that Mr. Gannon
raised earlier, which is that one of our greatest assets is the brain
power of the individuals who are performing the analytical function,
something that I very much agree with just based on my own human
experience rather than the kind of experience that you bring to us.
First of all, we read in the newspaper about various individuals in key
roles resigning their positions at a time now. I notice that nobody here
on this panel is currently in the administration. Yet the collective
investment in your intelligence, in your experience is very significant.
And so that's one thing I'd like you to comment on and that is the
recruitment and retention of individuals who are capable.

Secondly, the collegiality that we've talked about is obviously lacking
in terms of the kinds of counter-indications of husbanding intelligence
information, husbanding views within each of the many, many separate
compartments and agencies which collect and analyze information.

Mr. Kerr, I must take issue with something which you said earlier and
that is the fact that if you had a heck of a lot more money, maybe you
would have gotten the kind of intelligence which was specific to the
9/11 threat. Yes, clearly, if you had known, if we had known that al
Qaeda specifically was going to direct airplanes, hijacked airplanes
into our buildings, that would have been very useful to know in
interdicting. We are in a war against an adversary that recognizes the
danger of penetration which is very insular in its make-up, is
compartmentalized and so doesn't necessarily offer that opportunity.
Yet, prior to 9/11, we knew that al Qaeda was planning a major effort
against the United States within the United States. We knew, as is
reflected in the Joint Inquiry report, that at least on a dozen separate
kinds of plots, airplanes were considered to be used as weapons.

My goodness, the CIA itself was a target of a plot to fly an airplane
into the CIA headquarters and you have, by the same token, an indication
from CIA that al Qaeda operatives have entered the United States and you
have from the FBI information that suggests that individuals from the
Mid-East in the United States, in flight schools, in numbers, learning
how to steer aircraft, disregarding landing or taking off. Now, isn't
that enough information to get some collaborative group together and
figure out maybe airplanes are going to be used as weapons in the next
attack against the United States and provide sufficient information for
warning and countermeasure steps?

MR. KERR: Clearly -- first of all, if I implied or I said that using
more money would have solved the problem, I didn't mean it that way. I
said if you're going to have more money, how you invest it would be
important and quite honestly, I would invest it in clandestine --
getting secret information out of the inside of terrorists, not on other
things. But so if I said other than, I misspoke.

In terms of the question that you ask, I don't know the details of the
events leading up to 9/11 as well as you do. I mean, that's not
something I'm expert on. I would say, however, what little I do know,
that the way you put it, the neatness with which you described it does
not, it seems to me, reflect the situation as it really was. I said of
disconnected events that while if you had all those on your desk neatly
arrayed, one, two, three, four, a reasonably good group of analysts
could have gone down and associated them.

When you're looking at a world of information and my guess is today, if
you went to CTC and to TTIC and said, tell me information, the best
information you have today and I assume you talked to John Brennan and
the CTC people, they would say, Let me show you, give you some idea of
the multiplicity of warning that we have. They're going to blow up a
bridge. It's going to be a power station. It's going to be this, it's
going to be that. It's going to be overseas. That information though
doesn't come with enough specifics to allow you to do more than go back,
try to follow up a source, follow up another source. The idea of then
taking that and following it to action, that's what I was saying
earlier. I think right now George Tenet is in the process of doing
action each night, of taking action against things. That's the key.

Now, how we -- why we didn't do it, I just don't know enough about it.
And the way you put it would suggest we should have known. But my guess
is it's not that straightforward.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: I'm not suggesting it's simplistic. But with the
billions of dollars that we spend in this country on intelligence, on
safeguarding our security, the question is when two separate agencies of
government have in their possession this amount of information and yet
they are not talking to each other, would you not agree that there must
be for the future, whether it has to be crammed down the throats of
those who are protecting their turf, some kind of integration of
information --

MR. KERR: No question --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: -- it breaks apart this historic inability to share
information.

MR. KERR: There's no question and there's no question that the
integration of domestic and foreign intelligence didn't exist except in
a few areas, maybe counterintelligence and a couple of other areas and
there was exchange at some level. But an integration of real and
analytic integration, it's not clear to me that it exists completely
today. It's better. People are doing better with that but that's a very
challenging -- and certainly was not done prior to 9/11. I think there's
no question about that.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you, sir.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, Commissioner. Ms. McCarthy, Mr. Kerr,
thank you very much. It was lively, interesting and I appreciate very
much the time you took to be with us and to help us today. The hearing
record will remain open for 10 days, if anybody wants to add anything,
correct anything.

And we will now be adjourned.

Thank you all very much.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9/11 Commission Hearing 11/19/2003](111903)
