[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap04) 
[Next](bap06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. TITLE, AND ATTRIBUTION TO PHILO.

4\. The TITLE of the book is somewhat of a puzzle. Sichardus calls it
*Philonis Judaei antiquitatum Biblicarum liber*, the Fulda catalogue
(and the label on the Fulda MS.) *Philonis antiquitatum liber*; a late
title in the same MS. is: *libri Philonis iudei de initio mundi*; P has
a title of cent. XV.: *Philo iudeus de successione generationum veteris
testamenti*; R, in the colophon: "*ystoria Philonis ab initio mundi
usque ad David regem*" (so also two at least of the Munich M SS.);
Trithemius has *De generationis successu*. Sixtus Senensis has two
notices of the book: in the first, which is drawn from Sichardus., he
calls it *Biblicarum antiquitatum liber*; in the second, which depends
on some MS., his words are: "In Gen. Cap. 5 *de successione generis
humani* liber unus, continens enarrationem genealogiae seu posteritatis
Adae. Liber incipit: Ἀδὰμ ἐγέννησε *Adam genuit* 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

tres filios." The two Greek words I take to be no more than a
re-translation from Latin. The MS. V has no title at all.

Thus we have authority for three names. The first, *Biblicarum
antiquitatum*, I think, must be in part due to Sichardus; the epithet
"Biblicarum" savours to my mind of the Renaissance, and has no certain
MS. attestation. "Antiquitatum" (which is as old as cent. XIV.) is
probably due to a recollection of Josephus's great work, the *Jewish
Antiquities*. The other name, *de successione generationum* or the like,
has rather better attestation, and: *Historia ab initio mundi*, etc. (if
original in the Munich MSS.) the oldest of all. I can hardly believe,
however, that any of them are original; it seems more probable that some
Biblical name was prefixed to the book when it was first issued. Rather
out of respect to the first editor than for any better reason I have
retained the title *Biblical Antiquities*, under which the text was
introduced to the modern world.

The ATTRIBUTION TO PHILO I regard as due to the accident that the text
was transmitted in company with genuine Philonic writings. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](bap06.htm#fn_9) Certainly, if the *Antiquities* had
come down to us by themselves, no one in his senses could have thought
of connecting them with Philo; unless, indeed, knowing of but two Jewish
authors, Philo and Josephus, he assumed that, since one had written a
history of the Jews, the other must needs have followed suit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Original Language](bap06)
