[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap11) 
[Next](bap13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. EXTENT OF THE COMPLETE BOOK: THE LOST CONCLUSION DISCUSSED.

11\. A question remains to be discussed, for answered it can hardly be
unless fresh manuscript evidence comes to hand. It is this: How far did
*Philo* carry on his narrative, and are there any traces of the lost
conclusion?

There are certain anticipations in our text which, it is reasonable to
suppose, were fulfilled. We can predict with confidence that Edab the
son of Agag, who appears in the last few lines as the slayer of Saul,
will be killed (as in 2 Sam. 1.), with appropriate denunciation. Again,
there is a sensational story of the slaying of Ishbi-benob by David and
Abishai (Talmud, Tract *Sanhedr*., f. 45, ap. Eisenmenger, I. 413), in
which Abishai kills Orpah the mother of the giant, and eventually David
says to Ishbi, "Go, seek thy mother in the grave," whereat he falls.
Now, in *Philo* (LXI. 6) David reminds Goliath that Orpah was his
mother, and says to him, "After thy death thy three brethren also will
fall into my hands, and then shall ye say unto your mother: He that was
born of thy sister (Ruth) did not spare us." I see a foreshadowing here
of another tale of giants slain by David. Further, David in his song
before Saul (LX.) predicts the mastery over evil spirits that will be
attained by Solomon; and elsewhere the writer, in his own person, names
Solomon, and speaks of his building the Temple (XXII. 9). The allusion
to

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Solomon and the demons, though unmistakable, is
veiled, and, if I may judge from *Philo's* usual practice, would have
received an explanation, accompanied by a reference back to David's
song: *Nonne haec sunt uerba quae locutus est pater tuus*, etc. Another
possible instance of foreshadowing is this: Phinehas (XLVIII.), when he
has reached the term of 120 years, is commanded to go up into the Mount
Danaben and dwell there. In years to come the heavens will be shut at
his prayer, and opened again, and then he will be "taken up," and in a
yet more remote future will taste of death. In other words, he will be
Elijah. I do not think this obscure prediction would have been left
hanging in the air: in some form it would have received interpretation.
I imagine, therefore, that the story of Elijah (and Elisha) was told in
the book. I hardly know if one can fairly adduce here the fact that in
an old treatise called *Inuentiones Nominum* (printed by me in JTS,
1903) some names are given of personages belonging to that period who
are anonymous in the Bible. Thus, Abisaac is the 'little maid" of 2
Kings v., Meneria is the Shunamite, and Phua the woman who devoured her
child in the siege of Samaria. I lay no stress on this suggestion, for
other names are given in the same document which disagree with those in
*Philo*. Still, those I have cited did come from some written source of
similar character. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Here is another curious phenomenon. In the *Apostolic Constitutions*
(II. 22, 23) the whole story of Manasseh is quoted in a text avowedly
compounded from 2 Kings and 2 Chronicles, with the addition of the
Prayer and deliverance of Manasseh,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

which are non-Biblical, and after a short interval the story of Amon is
given, with a spurious insertion to this effect: "Amon said, 'My father
did very wickedly from his youth, and repented in his old age. Now
therefore I will walk as my soul listeth, and afterward I will return to
the Lord.'" just so, in *Philo* LII. 4, when Eli said to Hophni and
Phinehas, "Repent of your wicked ways," they said, "When we are grown
old we will repent": and therefore God would not grant them repentance.
The resemblance is arresting. The consideration of it suggests the
question whether this of Amon and the Prayer of Manasseh and the story
of his deliverance can be excerpts from *Philo*. So far as the Prayer is
concerned I cannot think it likely, for that composition is not in our
author's manner, and is not believed to be a translation from Hebrew.
And, if the Prayer is not from *Philo*, we need not unnecessarily
multiply the authorities used by *Const. Ap*.

For all that, the story of Manasseh and his deliverance may have been
told in *Philo*: the form of it which appears in the *Apocalypse of
Baruch* (64) rather suggests to me that it was. The Apocalyptist uses
Philonic language when he says of Manasseh that "his abode was in the
fire"; and, further, he does not account Manasseh's repentance to have
been genuine or final, and in this--if I read my author rightly--he
writes in the Philonic spirit: for *Philo*, if he is willing to dwell on
the repentance and reform of Israel as a whole, seems to take pleasure
in recording the apostasies and transgressions of individuals who do not
repent--the sinners under Kenaz, Jair, Gideon, Micah, Doeg.

When Saul protests to Samuel that he is too obscure to be made King,
Samuel says (LVI. 6):

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Your words will be like those of a prophet yet
to come who will be called Jeremiah." This odd prediction is modelled, I
suppose, upon the mention of Josiah in 1 Kings 13<sup>2</sup>, and is
comparable to Hannah's quotation of a psalm by Asaph (LI. 6). That the
fulfilment of it was mentioned is likely enough, but by no means
necessary.

Lastly, a phrase in the story of Kenaz demands notice. When God gives
him the new set of twelve precious stones to replace certain others that
had been destroyed, He says (XXVI. 12) that they are to be placed in the
ark, and to be there "until Jahel shall arise to build an house in my
name, and then he shall set them before me upon the two cherubim . . .
and when the sins of my people are fulfilled, and their enemies begin to
prevail over their house, I will take those stones and the former ones
(*i.e.* those already in the priest's breastplate) and put them back in
the place whence they were brought, and there shall they be until I
remember the world and visit them that dwell on the earth. . . . And
Kenaz placed them in the ark . . . and they are there unto this day."

Apart from the mention of Jahel (by whom Solomon is meant, but why so
called I know not) this is rather a perplexing passage. Taken as it
stands, it ought to mean that the temple, or at least the ark, was
extant at the supposed date of the writer, *i.e.* that the story was not
carried down as far as the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar;
which, on general grounds, one would select as a likely point for the
conclusion. We must however, remember the legend that the ark and its
contents were preserved and hidden by Jeremiah or by an angel (2 *Macc*.
2. *Apoc. Bar.* 64) . Besides, *Philo* elsewhere says (XXII. 9)

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that in the new sanctuary which was at Gilgal, "Joshua appointed unto
this day (*usque in hodiernum diem*)" the yearly sacrifices of Israel,
and that until the temple was built sacrifice at the other place was
lawful. We cannot, then, press his use of the phrase "unto this day";
yet if it be insisted upon, there is a detail in *Baruch*
(6<sup>7</sup>) which may throw some light on *Philo's* meaning.
*Baruch* says that the angel took, among other things, "the forty-eight
precious stones wherewith the priest was adorned" and committed them to
the guardianship of the earth. No one offers any reason for the mention
of forty-eight (instead of twelve) stones, and though only twelve more
figure in the story of Kenaz, I think it not unreasonable to suggest
that here as elsewhere the Apocalyptist has our text in his mind, and
that a belief in the legend of the hidden ark was common to both.

The sketch of Israel's history contained in *Apoc. Bar.* 56-67 (a
section which shows many resemblances to *Philo*), with its alternations
of righteousness and sin, gives, to my mind, a very fair idea of what
*Philo* may have comprised when it was complete. We begin with the sin
of Adam and of the angels: both are alluded to more than once in
*Philo*. Then we have Abraham (important in *Philo*), the wickedness of
the Gentiles, and especially of the Egyptians (not emphasized in
*Philo*), the ages of Moses and Joshua (treated at length), the
sorceries of the Amorites under the Judges (dwelt on at great length),
the age of David and Solomon (*Philo* breaks off in David), the times of
Jeroboam and Jezebel and the captivity of the nine and a half tribes,
the reign of Hezekiah, the wickedness of Manasseh, the reforms of
Josiah, the destruction by Nebuchadnezzar. *Baruch* then continues the
history to the Messianic kingdom

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and the final triumph of right, of which *Philo* speaks only in general
terms, though it may have developed clearer views as it proceeded. For
the present, my conjecture is that *Philo* ended with the Babylonian
captivity, and not without an anticipation of the Return. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[61:1](bap12.htm#fr_15) Another book which
deserves consideration in this connexion is the *Lives of the Prophets*,
attributed to Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[65:1](bap12.htm#fr_16) But see the Additional
Note, [p. 73](bap14.htm#page_73).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Conclusion. Character of the Present Edition](bap13)
