[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap12.md) 
[Next](bap14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. CONCLUSION. CHARACTER OF THE PRESENT EDITION.

12\. I fear that we cannot regard the writer of *Philo* as a man of very
lofty mind or of great literary talent. He has some imagination, and is
sensible of the majesty of the Old Testament literature, but he has not
the insight, the power, or the earnestness of the author of 4 *Esdras*,
nor again the ethical perception of him who wrote the *Testaments of the
Twelve Patriarchs*. From this point of view the obscurity which has hung
over his book is not undeserved. Nevertheless it is a source by no means
to be neglected by the student of Christian origins and of Jewish
thought, and for that reason I have suggested that it should find a
place in this series of translations.

I hope that the pretensions of this edition will not be misconceived. It
is not a critical edition in the sense that it presents all the variants
of all the authorities and lays the whole body of evidence before the
reader. Such a presentation would only be possible if the text as well
as the translation were included in this volume. (I do not myself, let
me say in passing, believe that the result of a complete statement of
various readings would differ very importantly from what the reader now
has before him, seeing that the text depends upon a single thread of
tradition.) Nor, again, will every available illustrative passage be
found in such notes as I have written on the subject matter in Rabbinic
literature especially it should be possible to find many more parallels.
Notes of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

a linguistic kind, too, are out of place where a translation only is in
question. Neither has every Biblical allusion been marked: as a rule,
the reader who knows his Bible will easily recognize the phrases which
the author weaves together often deftly enough. Besides these omissions,
larger problems remain unsolved. There are not a few unhealed places in
the text, and there are some whole episodes of which the bearing is very
obscure.

On the other hand, I may claim that account has here been taken for the
first time of a fairly representative selection of the authorities for
the text, and that the relation of the book to some, at least, of its
fellows has been elucidated; and I hope that the translation, in which I
have followed as closely as possible the language of the Authorised
Version (though I have kept the Latin forms of the proper names), may be
found readable.

I have, further, provided a means of referring to passages in the text
by a division into chapters and verses, or sections, which I think must
prove useful. Something of the kind was much needed, for it has hitherto
only been possible to cite by the pages of one or other of the
sixteenth-century editions. My division is of course applicable to any
future edition.

The present volume is, then, a step in the direction of a critical
edition, but only a step. Like the first editor, Sichardus, I recognize
its defects (or some of them) and should welcome the opportunity, if it
ever came, of producing an improved form of the original text. As it is
the kindness of the Society under whose auspices the book appears allows
me to include in it a selection of the most important readings and some
particulars of the Latinity of the original. For this indulgence my
readers, as well as myself, will assuredly be grateful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Synopsis of the Contents](bap14.md)
