[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap28.md) 
[Next](bap30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

XIII\. And Moses hasted and did all that God Ex. 34 commanded him, and
came down and made the tables &lt;&lt;and the tabernacle&gt;&gt;, and
the vessels thereof, and the ark and the lamps and the table and the
altar of burnt offerings and the altar <span
id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66.md) of incense and the shoulderpiece and the
breastplate and the precious stones and the laver and the bases and all
things that were shewn him. And he ordered all the vestures of the
priests, the girdles and the *rest*, the mitre, the golden plate and the
holy crown: he made also the anointing oil for the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

priests, and the priests themselves he sanctified. And when all things
were finished the cloud covered all of them. 2. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md) Then Moses cried unto the Lord, and God
spake to him from the tabernacle saying: This is the law of the altar,
whereby ye shall sacrifice unto me and pray for your souls. But as
concerning that which ye shall offer me, offer ye of cattle the calf,
the sheep and the she goat: but of fowls the turtle and the dove. 3, And

|         |
|---------|
| Lev. 14 |

if there be leprosy in your land, and it so be that the leper is
cleansed, let them take for the Lord two live young birds, and wood of
cedar and hyssop and scarlet; and he shall come to the priest, and he
shall kill one, and keep the other. And he shall order the leper
according to all that I have commanded in my law. 4. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68.md) And it shall be when the times come round
to you, ye shall sanctify me with a feast-day and rejoice before me at
the feast

|         |
|---------|
| Lev. 23 |

of the unleavened bread, and set bread before me, keeping a feast of
remembrance because on that day ye came forth of the land of Egypt. 5.
And

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

in the feast of weeks ye shall set bread before me and make me an
offering for your fruits. 6. But the feast of trumpets shall be for an
offering for your watchers, because therein I oversaw my creation, that
ye may be mindful of the whole world. In the beginning of the year, when
ye show them me, I will acknowledge the number of the dead and of them
that are born, and the fast of mercy. For ye shall fast unto me for your
souls, that the promises of your fathers may be fulfilled. 7. Also the
feast of tabernacles bring ye to me: ye shall take for me the pleasant
fruit of the tree, and boughs of palm-tree and willows and cedars, and
branches of myrrh: and I will remember the whole earth in rain, and the
measure of the seasons shall be established, and I will order the stars
and command the clouds, and the winds shall sound and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the lightnings run abroad, and there shall be a storm of thunder, and
this shall be for a perpetual sign. Also the nights shall yield dew,
 <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md) as I spake after the flood of the
earth 8. when I (*or* Then he) gave him precept as concerning the year
of the life of Noe, and said to him: These are the years which I
ordained after the weeks wherein I visited the city of men, at what time
I shewed them (*or* him) the place of birth and the colour (*or* and the
serpent), and I (*or* he) said: This is. the place of which I taught the
first man saying: If thou transgress not that I bade thee, all things
shall be subject unto thee. But he transgressed my ways and was
persuaded of his wife, and she was deceived by the serpent. And then was
death ordained unto the generations of men. 9. And furthermore the Lord
shewed (*or*, And the Lord said further: I shewed) him the ways of
paradise <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70.md) and said unto him: These
are the ways which men have lost by not walking in them, because they
have sinned against me.

10\. And the Lord commanded him concerning the salvation of the souls of
the people and said: If they shall walk in my ways I will not forsake
them, but will alway be merciful unto them, and will bless their seed,
and the earth shall haste to yield her fruit, and there shall be rain
for them to

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

increase their gains, and the earth shall not be barren. Yet verily I
know that they will corrupt their ways, and I shall forsake them, and
they will forget the covenants which I made with their fathers. Yet will
I not forget them for ever: for in the last days they shall know that
because of their sins their seed was forsaken; for I am faithful in my
ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[113:3](bap29.htm#fr_66.md) XIII. 1, 2. altar:
*thuribulum* (lit. censer).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[114:1](bap29.htm#fr_67.md) 2-7. This short section
contains practically all that is said of the ceremonial law. It is
remarkably "scrappy" and unsystematic.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[114:2](bap29.htm#fr_68.md) 4-7. This passage is
well illustrated by one in the Talmud. *Tract. Rosh ha-Shana* (tr.
Schwab, p. 63): A 4 époques différentes de l'année, le monde est jugé
par Dieu: à Pâques pour la récolte; à Pentecôte pour les produits des
arbres; à la féte du nouvel-an tous les êtres de la terre passent devant
l'Éternel comme les troupeaux devant le berger, puisqu'il est dit (Ps.
xxxiii. 15): *Celui qui a créé tous les cœurs, qui connaît toutes leurs
actions* (il sait et scrute tout). Enfin, aux Tabernacles, la question
des eaux sera résolue.

This corresponds fairly well with our text. The same four feasts are
spoken of in connexion with the Passover. The harvest is not mentioned;
it is only said *constituetis in conspectu meo panem*. At Pentecost (the
Feast of Weeks) we have *facietis mihi oblationem pro fructibus
vestris*. At the Feast of Trumpets (the New Year feast) the words are no
<span id="page_115">p. 115</span> doubt obscure, but they contain
mention of a review of the whole creation. "But the Feast of Trumpets
shall be for an offering to (or for) your watchers (*prospeculatoribus
vestris*: or *pro spec*. I suppose angelic guardians to be meant),
inasmuch as I reviewed (*praespexi*, *perspexi*) the whole creation,
that ye may be mindful of the whole world" (the connexion of this clause
is obscure): "and at the beginning of the year I will acknowledge, when
ye show them, the number of your dead, and of them that are born, and
the fast of mercy. For ye shall fast unto me for your souls," etc. This
represents the sense of the text as I understand it. Lastly, of the
Feast of Tabernacles it is said: "I will remember the whole earth in
rain." The comment on this passage of the Talmud makes it clear that
this is the meaning of the "question des eaux": prayer for rain was
offered at the Feast of Tabernacles (cf. *Taanith* I.).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[116:1](bap29.htm#fr_69.md) <span id="page_115">p.
115</span> 7. *fin*., 8. "*As I spake after the flood of the earth, at
what time I gave commandment concerning the year of the life of Noah,
and said unto him.. These are the years which I ordained after that I
visited the city of men* (*i.e.* at the flood) *at the time when I
showed them* (? him) *the place of generation and the colour, and said:
This is the place whereof I taught the first-formed man*," etc. This is
the text of VR, <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> and on the whole it
seems the best, but it is not at all clear. As is remarked in the
Introduction, there may be a reference to a passage in *Jubilees*. It
seems to be implied that God showed Paradise to Noah. The words, "and
the colour: *et colorem*" are particularly puzzling. Ought we to read
*et colubrum* "and the serpent"? Two lines below we have *de colubro*.
Or is there a reference to what we find in the Revelation of Moses in
Jerahmeel 92:10? God showed him the heavenly temple, and the four
different hues in which the tabernacle was made, by means of angels
clothed in blue, white, scarlet, and purple.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[116:2](bap29.htm#fr_70.md) 9. Here God seems
certainly to show Paradise to Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](bap30.md)
