[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap24) 
[Next](bap26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

IX\.  <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) And it came to pass after the
departure of

|              |
|--------------|
| Ex. 1:6, 1:7 |

Joseph, *the children of Israel were multiplied and increased greatly.
And there arose another king in*

|         |
|---------|
| Ex. 1:8 |

*Egypt which knew not Joseph: and he said to his people: Lo, this people
is multiplied more than we*.

|         |
|---------|
| Ex. 1:9 |

*Come let us take counsel against them that they multiply not. And the
king of Egypt commanded*

|          |
|----------|
| Ex. 1:22 |

*all his people saying: Every son that shall be born to the He brews,
cast into the river, but keep the females alive*. And the Egyptians
answered their king saying: Let us slay their males and keep their
females, to give them to our bondmen for

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

wives: and he that is born of them shall be a bondman and serve us. And
this is that that did appear most evil before the Lord.

2\. Then the elders of the people assembled the people with mourning and
mourned and lamented saying: An untimely birth have the wombs of our
wives suffered. Our fruit is delivered over to our enemies and now we
are cut off. Yet let us appoint us an ordinance, that no man come near
his wife, lest the fruit of their womb be defiled, and our bowels serve
idols: for it is better to die childless, until we know what God will
do.

3\. And Amram answered and said: It will sooner come to pass that the
age shall be utterly abolished and the immeasurable world fall, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) or the heart of the depths touch the
stars, than that the race of the children of Israel should be
diminished. And it shall be, when the covenant is fulfilled whereof God
when he made it spake to Abraham saying: Surely thy sons shall dwell in
a land that is not theirs, and shall be brought into bondage and
afflicted 400 years.--And lo, since the word was passed which God spake
to Abraham, there are 350 years. (And) since we have been in bondage in
Egypt it is 130 years. 4. Now therefore I will not abide by that which
ye ordain, but will go in and take my wife and beget sons, that we may
be made many on the earth. For God will not continue in his anger,
neither will he alway forget his people, nor cast forth the race of
Israel to nought upon the earth, neither did he in vain make his
covenant with our fathers: yea, when as yet we were not, God spake of
these things. 5. Now therefore I will go and take my wife, neither will
I consent to

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the commandment of this king. And if it be right in your eyes, so let us
do all of us, for it shall be, when our wives conceive, they shall not
be known to be great with child until 3 months are fulfilled, like as
also our mother Thamar <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) did, for her
intent was not to fornication, but because she would not separate
herself from the sons of Israel she took thought and said: It is better
for me to die for sinning with my father-in-law than to be joined to
Gentiles. And she hid the fruit of her womb till the 3rd month, for then
was it perceived. And as she went to be put to death she affirmed
it <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) saying: The man whose is this
staff and this ring and goatskin, of him have I conceived. And her
device delivered her out of all peril. 6. Now therefore let us also do
thus. And it shall be when the time of bringing forth is come, if it be
possible, we will not cast forth the fruit of our womb. And who knoweth
if thereby God will be provoked, to deliver us from our humiliation?

7\. And the word which Amram had in his heart was pleasing before God:
and God said: Because the thought of Amram is pleasing before me, and he
hath not set at nought the covenant made between me and his fathers,
therefore, lo now, that which is begotten of him shall serve me for
ever, and by him will I do wonders in the house of Jacob, and will do by
him signs and wonders for my people which I have done for none other,
and will perform in them my glory and declare unto them my ways. 8. I
the Lord will kindle for him my lamp to dwell in him, and will show him
my

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

covenant which no man hath seen, and manifest to him my great
excellency, and my justice and judgments and will shine for him a
perpetual light. For in ancient days I thought of him, saying: My spirit
shall not be a mediator among these men for ever, for they are flesh,
and their days shall be 120 years. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)

9\. And Amram of the tribe of Levi went forth and took a wife of his
tribe, and it was so when he took her, that the residue did after him
and took their wives. Now he had one son and one daughter, and their
names were Aaron and Maria,

10\. And the spirit of God came upon Maria by night, and she saw a
dream, <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) and told her parents in the
morning saying: I saw this night, and behold a man in a linen garment
stood and said to me: Go and tell thy parents: behold, that which shall
be born of you shall be cast into the water, for by him water shall be
dried up, and by him will I do signs, and I will save my people, and he
shall have the captaincy thereof alway. And when Maria had told her
dream her parents believed her not.

11\. But the word of the king of Egypt prevailed against the children of
Israel and they were humiliated and oppressed in the work of bricks.

12\. But Jochabeth conceived of Amram and hid *the child* in her womb 3
months, for she could not hide it longer: because the king of Egypt had
appointed overseers of the region, that when the Hebrew women brought
forth they should cast the males into the river straightway. And she
took her child and made him an ark of the bark of a

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

pine-tree and set the ark on the edge of the river. 13. Now the boy was
born in the covenant of God and in the covenant of his flesh. 14. And it
came to pass, when they cast him out, all the elders gathered together
and chode with Amram saying: Are not these the words which we spake
saying: "It is better for us to die childless than that our fruit should
be cast into the water?" And when they said so, Amram hearkened not to
them.

15\. But the daughter of Pharao came down to wash in the river according
as she had seen in a dream, <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) and her
maids saw the ark, and she sent one of them and took it and opened it.
And when she saw the child and looked upon the covenant, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) that is, the testament in his flesh, she
said: He is of the children of the Hebrews. 16. And she took him and
nourished him and he became her son, and she called his name Moyses. But
his mother called him Melchiel. <span id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48) And
the child was nourished and became glorious above all men, and by him
God delivered the children of Israel, as he had said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[99:3](bap25.htm#fr_40) IX. 1. A Midrash quoted
by Cohn (p. 317) agrees that the Egyptians desired to marry the Hebrew
girls. *Jashar* and other authorities also say that Amram, in common
with others, put away his wife when the Egyptian decree was promulgated.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[100:1](bap25.htm#fr_41) 3. in uictoria minuatur
seculum: utterly, εἰσ νῖκοσ. The Hebraism (למנצח) occurs again, XII. 6,
and perhaps in XLIX. 6.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[101:1](bap25.htm#fr_42) 5. *Tamar*. Here the
author first introduces a story from the past history of Israel by way
of illustration: it is his constant practice later on.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[101:2](bap25.htm#fr_43) *Affirmed it: statuit
hoc*. Perhaps "presented" the staff, etc.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[102:1](bap25.htm#fr_44) 8. *fin*. The point of
the quotation is that Moses was 120 years old when he died. Cf. II. 2.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[102:2](bap25.htm#fr_45) 10. *Miriam's vision*.
In *Jashar* and elsewhere (*e.g.* Talmud Bab. *Megillah*, tr. Rodkinson,
p. 36) Miriam prophesies the birth of Moses. Cf. Cohn, p. 318.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[103:1](bap25.htm#fr_46) 15. *according as she
had seen in a dream*. The usual story is that God sent a great heat upon
Egypt, so that the people were constrained to bathe (*Jashar*, etc.).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[103:2](bap25.htm#fr_47) *covenant*. Zaticon =
διαθήκην. The Midrashim (Cohn, l.c.) agree that Moses was born
circumcised.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[103:3](bap25.htm#fr_48) 16. Melchiel. Syncellus
and Cedrenus say that he was called by his parents Melchias. Clement of
Alexandria (*Strom*. I. 23) says they called him Ioacim, and he "had a
third name after the assumption, as the initiated (μύσται) say, viz.
Melchi." *Jashar* (and *Jerahmeel*) give a number of names, but Melchiel
is not among them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](bap26)
