[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap37) 
[Next](bap39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXII.

|         |
|---------|
| Jos. 22 |

XXII\. And it came to pass after these things, when Jesus and all Israel
had heard that the children of Ruben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasse which dwelt about Jordan had built them an altar
and did offer sacrifices thereon and had made priests for the sanctuary,
all the people were troubled above measure and came unto them to Silon.
2. And Jesus and all the elders spake to them saying: What be these
works which are done among you, while as yet we are not settled in our
land? Are not these the words which Moses spake to you in the wilderness
saying: See that when ye enter into the land ye spoil not your doings,
and corrupt all the people? And now wherefore is it that our enemies
have so much abounded, save because ye do corrupt your ways and have
made all this trouble, and therefore will they assemble against us and
overcome us.

|                   |
|-------------------|
| Jos. 22:21 *sqq*. |

3\. And the children of Ruben and the children of Gad and the half tribe
of Manasse said unto Jesus and all the people of Israel: Lo now hath God
enlarged the fruit of the womb of men, and hath set up a light that that
which is in darkness may see, for he knoweth what is in the secret
places of the deep, and with him light abideth. Now the Lord God of our
fathers knoweth if any of us or if we ourselves have done this thing in
the way of iniquity, but only for our posterity's sake, that their heart
be not separated from the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lord our God lest they say to us: Behold now,
our brethren which be beyond Jordan have an altar, to make offerings
upon it, but we in this place that have no altar, let us depart from the
Lord our God, because our God hath set us afar off from his ways, that
we should not serve him. 4. And then verily spake we among ourselves:
Let us make us an altar, that they may have a zeal to seek the Lord. And
verily there be some of us that stand by and know that we are your
brothers and stand guiltless before your face. Do ye therefore that
which is pleasing in the sight of the Lord. 5. And Jesus said: Is not
the Lord our king mightier than woo sacrifices? And wherefore taught ye
not your sons the words of the Lord which ye heard of us? For if your
sons had been *occupied* in the meditation of the law of the Lord, their
mind would not have been led aside after a sanctuary made with hands. Or
know ye not that when the people were forsaken for a moment in the
wilderness when Moses went up to receive the tables, their mind was led
astray, and they made themselves idols? And except the mercy of the God
of your fathers had kept *us*, all the synagogues should have become a
byword, and all the sins of the people should have been blazed abroad
because of your foolishness. 6. Therefore now go and dig down the
sanctuaries that ye have builded you, and teach your sons the law, and
they shall be meditating therein day and night, that the Lord may be
with them for a witness and a judge unto them all the days of their
life. And God shall be witness and judge between me and you, and between
my heart and your heart, that if ye have done this thing in subtlety it
shall be avenged upon you, because you would destroy your brothers: but
if ye have

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

done it ignorantly as ye say, God will be merciful unto you for your
sons' sake. And all the people answered: Amen, Amen.

7\. And Jesus and all the people of Israel offered for them 1,000 rams
for a sin-offering (*lit*. the word of excusing), and prayed for them
and sent them away in peace: and they went and destroyed the sanctuary,
and fasted and wept,

|           |
|-----------|
| Acts 1:24 |

both they and their sons, and prayed and said: O God of our fathers,
that knowest before the heart of all men, thou knowest that our ways
were not wrought in iniquity in thy sight, neither have we swerved from
thy ways, but have served thee all of us, for we are the work of thy
hands: now *therefore* remember thy covenant with the sons of thy
servants.

8\. And after that Jesus went up unto Galgala, and reared up the
tabernacle of the Lord, and the ark of the covenant and all the vessels
thereof, and set it up in Silo, and put there the Demonstration and the
Truth (*i.e*. the Urim and *Thummim*). And at that time Eleazar the
priest which served the altar did teach by the Demonstration all them of
the people that came to inquire of the Lord, for thereby it was shown
unto them, but in the new sanctuary that was in Galgala, Jesus appointed
even unto this day the burnt offerings that were offered by the children
of Israel every year. 9. For until the house of the Lord was builded in
Jerusalem, and so long as the offerings were made in the new sanctuary,
the people were not forbidden to offer therein, because the Truth and
the Demonstration revealed all things in Silo. And until the ark was set
by Solomon in the sanctuary of the Lord they went on sacrificing there
unto that day. But Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest of the Lord
ministered in Silo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](bap39)
