[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap41) 
[Next](bap43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI.

XXVI\. And when Cenez had taken all these words and written them in a
book and read them before the Lord, God said to him: Take the men

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and that which was found with them and all their goods and put them in
the bed of the river Phison, and burn them with fire that mine anger may
cease from them. 2. And Cenez said: Shall we burn these precious stones
also with fire, or sanctify them unto thee, for among us there are none
like unto them? And God said to him: If God should receive in his own
name any of the accursed thing, what should man do? Therefore now take
these precious stones and all that was found, both books and men: and
when thou dealest so with the men, set apart these stones with the
books, for fire will not avail to burn them, and afterwards I will shew
thee how thou must destroy them. But the men and all that was found thou
shalt burn with fire. And thou shalt assemble all the people, and say to
them: Thus shall it be done unto every man whose heart turneth away from
his God. 3. And when the fire hath consumed those men, then the books
and the precious stones which cannot be burned with fire, neither cut
with iron, nor blotted out with water, lay them upon the top of the
mount beside the new altar; and I will command a cloud, and it shall go
and take up dew and shed it upon the books, and shall blot out that
which is written therein, for they cannot be blotted out with any other
water than such as hath never served men. And thereafter I will send my
lightning, and it shall burn up the books themselves.

4\. But as concerning the precious stones, I will command mine angel and
he shall take them and go and cast them into the depths of the sea, and
I will charge the deep and it shall swallow them up, for they may not
continue in the world because they have been polluted by the idols of
the Amorites, And I will command another angel, and he

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

shall take for me twelve stones out of the place whence these seven were
taken; and thou, when thou findest them in the top of the mount where he
shall lay them, take and put them on the shoulder-piece over against the
twelve stones which Moses set therein in the wilderness, and sanctify
them in the breastplate (*lit*. oracle) according to the twelve tribes:
and say not, How shall I know which stone I shall set for which tribe?
Lo, I will tell thee the name of the tribe answering unto the name of
the stone, and thou shall find both one and other graven. 5. And Cenez
went and took all that had been found and the men with it, and assembled
all the people again, and said to them: Behold, ye have seen all the
wonders which God hath shewed us unto this day, and lo, when we sought
out all that had subtilly devised evil against the Lord and against
Israel, God hath revealed them according to their works, and now cursed
be every man that deviseth to do the like among you, brethren. And all
the people answered Amen, Amen. And when he had so said, he burned all
the men with fire, and all that was found with them, saving the precious
stones.

6\. And after that Cenez desired to prove whether the stones could be
burned with fire, and cast them into the fire. And it was so, that when
they fell therein, forthwith the fire was quenched. And Cenez took iron
to break them, and when the sword touched them the iron thereof was
melted; and thereafter he would at the least blot out the books with
water; but it came to pass that the water when it fell upon them was
congealed. And when he saw that, he said: Blessed be God who hath done
so great wonders for the children of men, and made Adam the
first-created and shewed him all things; that when Adam had

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

sinned thereby, then he should deny him all these things, lest if he
shewed them unto the race of men they should have the mastery over them.

7\. And when he had so said, he took the books and the stones and laid
them on the top of the mount <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) by
the new altar as the Lord had commanded him, and took a peace-offering
and burnt-offerings, and offered upon the new altar 2000, offering them
all for a burnt sacrifice. And on that day they kept a great feast, he
and all the people together. 8. And God did that night as he spake unto
Cenez, for he commanded a cloud, and it went and took dew from the ice
of paradise and shed it upon the books and blotted them out. And after
that an angel came and burned them up, and another angel took the
precious stones and cast them into the heart of the sea, and he charged
the depth of the sea, and it swallowed them up. And another angel went
and brought twelve stones and laid them hard by the place whence he had
taken those seven. And he graved thereon the names of the twelve tribes.

9\. And Cenez arose on the morrow and found those twelve stones on the
top of the mount where himself had laid those seven. And the graving

|              |
|--------------|
| Cf. Zech. 39 |

of them was so as if the form of eyes was portrayed upon them.

10\.  <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) And the first stone, whereon
was written

|                      |
|----------------------|
| See Ex. 28:17 *sqq*. |

the name of the tribe of Ruben, was like a sardine

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

stone. The second stone was graven with a tooth (*or* ivory), and
therein was graven the name of the tribe of Simeon, and the likeness of
a topaz was seen in it; and on the third stone was graven the name of
the tribe of Levi, and it was like unto an emerald. But the fourth stone
was called a crystal, wherein was graven the name of the tribe of Juda,
and it was likened to a carbuncle. The fifth stone was green, and upon
it was graven the name of the tribe of Isachar, and the colour of a
sapphire stone was therein. And of the sixth stone the graving was as if
it had been inscribed, (*or* as a chrysoprase) speckled with diverse
markings, and thereon was written the tribe of Zabulon, And the jasper
stone was likened unto it.

11\. Of the seventh stone the graving shone and shewed within itself, as
it were, *enclosed* the water of the deep, and therein was written the
name of the tribe of Dan, which stone was like a ligure. But the eighth
stone was cut out with adamant, and therein was written the name of the
tribe of Neptalim, and it was like an amethyst. And of the ninth
stone <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) the graving was pierced, and
it *was* from Mount Ophir, and therein was written the tribe of Gad, and
an agate stone was likened unto it. And of the tenth stone the graving
was hollowed, and gave the likeness of a stone of Theman, and there was
written the tribe of Aser, and a chrysolite was likened unto it. And the
eleventh stone was an elect stone from Libanus, and thereon was written
the name of the tribe of Joseph, and a beryl was. likened to it. And the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

twelfth stone was cut out of the height of Sion <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) (*or* the quarry), and upon it was
written the tribe of Benjamin; and the onyx stone was likened unto it.

12\. And God said to Cenez: Take these stones and put them in the ark of
the covenant of the Lord with the tables of the covenant which I gave
unto Moses in Oreb, and they shall be there with them until Jahel
arise <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) to build an house in my
name, and then he shall set them before me upon the two cherubim, and
they shall be in my sight for a memorial of the house of Israel. 13. And
it shall be when the sins of my people are filled up, and their enemies
have the mastery over their house, that I will take these stones and the
former together with the tables, and lay them up in the place whence
they were brought forth in the beginning, and they shall be there until
I remember the world, and visit the dwellers upon earth. And then will I
take them and many other better than they, from that *place* which *eye
hath not seen* <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) *nor ear heard
neither hath it come up into*

|                 |
|-----------------|
| Isa. 64:4, etc. |

*the heart of man*, until the like cometh to pass

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

|                   |
|-------------------|
| Isa. 60:19, 60:20 |

unto the world, and the just shall have no need for the light of the sun
nor of the shining of the moon, for the light of the precious stones
shall be their light. 14. And Cenez arose and said: Behold what good
things God hath done for men, and because of their sins have they been
deprived of them all. And now know I this day that the race of men is
weak, and their life shall be accounted as nothing. 15. And so saying,
he took the stones from the place where they were laid, and as he took
them there was as it were the light of the sun poured out upon them, and
the earth shone with their light. And Cenez put them in the ark of the
covenant of the Lord with the tables as it was commanded him, and there
they are unto this day. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[155:1](bap42.htm#fr_106) XXVI. 7.
*superponens* (*ea in holocaustum*). This is the word used in the old
Latin of Lev. iv., etc, in the Würzburg palimpsest. The Lyons Pentateuch
has inponens.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[155:2](bap42.htm#fr_107) 10. *seq*. The order
of the stones agrees with that of Exod. 28:17 *sqq*., except that agate
and amethyst are here transposed, and in the Hebrew carbuncle precedes
emerald. The principle of the list seems to be that each of the new
stones is "likened to" (should we render "placed opposite <span
id="page_156">p. 156</span> to" or "corresponds to"?) a stone already in
the breastplate; but the new stones, being supernatural, have as a rule
no names of their own.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[156:1](bap42.htm#fr_108) 11. (The 9th stone)
*pierced*. I read *terebrata*, with R, for *tenebrata*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[157:1](bap42.htm#fr_109) 11. (The 12th stone)
*cut out of the height of Sion*. Again I prefer R's reading, *de excelso
Syon*, to *de excisione* of AP.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[157:2](bap42.htm#fr_110) 12. *until Jahel*
(*Jabel* R) shall arise. J substitutes *Solomon* in its paraphrase of
the passage, and no doubt Solomon is meant; but I cannot find any other
instance of this name being applied to him, or any reason for it. The
Jael of judges iv. means a gazelle: Jael is also found as a name of God
(Jah El) in the Greek *Apoc. of Moses*: neither helps us here. It can
hardly be a corruption of Ἰεδδεδί, the Greek form of Jedidiah (2 Sam.
12:25).

<span id="fn_111"></span>[157:3](bap42.htm#fr_111) 13. *from that place
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it come up into the
heart of man*. This is a combination of phrases from Isa. 64:4; 65:16,
65:17. It is quoted in this form by St. Paul in 1 Cor. 2:9. Mr.
Thackeray, in *St. Paul and Contemporary Jewish Thought*, p. 240 seq.,
discusses the source in the light of this passage, and concludes, I
believe rightly, that the combination was already <span id="page_158">p.
158</span> current in Jewish circles when Paul wrote. The early
commentators on the Epistle assigned to the *Secreta Eliae* (Origen),
*Apocalypse of Elias*, or *Ascension of Isaiah*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[158:1](bap42.htm#fr_112) 15. there they are
unto this day. See [p. 63](bap12.htm#page_63).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](bap43)
