[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap46.md) 
[Next](bap48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI.

XXXI\. And Debbora sent and called Barach and said to him: Arise and
gird up thy loins as a man, and go down and fight against Sisara, For I
see the constellations greatly moved in their ranks and preparing to
fight for you. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) I see also

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 5:20 |

the lightnings unmoveable in their courses, and setting forth to stay
the wheels of the chariots of them that boast in the might of Sisara,
who saith: I will surely go down in the arm of my might to fight against
Israel, and will divide the spoil of them among my servants, and their
fair women will I take unto me for concubines. Therefore hath the Lord
spoken concerning him that the arm of a weak woman shall overcome him,
and maidens shall take his spoil, and he also himself shall fall into
the hands of a woman.

2\. And when Debbora and the people and Barach went down to meet their
enemies, immediately the Lord disturbed the goings of his stars, and
spake unto them saying: Hasten and go ye, for our (*or* your) enemies
fall upon you: confound their arms and break the strength of their

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

hearts, for I am come that my people may prevail. For though it be that
my people have sinned, yet will I have mercy on them. And when this was
said, the stars went forth as it was commanded them and burned up their
enemies. And the number of them that were gathered (*or* burned) and
slain in one hour was go times 97,000 men. But Sisara they destroyed
not, for so it was commanded them.

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 4:17 |

3\. And when Sisara had fled on his horse to deliver his soul, Jahel the
wife of Aber the Cinean decked herself with her ornaments and came out
to meet him: now the woman was very fair: and when she saw him she said:
Come in and take food, and sleep: and in. the evening I will send my
servants with thee, for I know that thou wilt remember me and recompense
me. And Sisara came in, and when he saw roses scattered upon the bed he
said: If I be delivered, O Jahel, I will go unto my mother and thou
shalt (*or* Jahel shall) be my wife. 4. And thereafter was Sisara
athirst and he said to Jahel: Give me a little water, for I am faint and
my soul burneth by reason of the flame which I beheld in the stars. And
Jahel said unto him: Rest a little while and then thou shalt drink. 5.
And when Sisara was fallen asleep, Jahel went to the flock and milked
milk therefrom. And as she milked she said: Behold now, remember, O
Lord, when thou didst divide every tribe and nation upon the earth,
didst thou not choose out Israel only, and didst not liken him to any
beast save only unto the ram that goeth before the flock and leadeth it?
Behold therefore and see how Sisara hath thought *in his heart* saying:
I will go and punish the flock of the Most Mighty. And lo, I will take
of the milk of the beasts whereunto thou didst liken thy people, and
will go and

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

give him to drink, and when he hath drunk he shall become weak, and
after that I will kill him. And this shall be the sign that thou shalt
give me, O Lord, that, whereas Sisara sleepeth, when I go in, if he wake
and ask me forthwith, saying: Give me water to drink, *then* I *shall*
know that my prayer hath been heard.

6\. So Jahel returned and entered in, and Sisara awaked and said to her:
Give me to drink, for I burn mightily and my soul is inflamed. And Jahel
took wine and mingled it with the milk

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 4:19 |

and gave him to drink, and he drank and fell asleep.

7\. But Jahel took a stake in her left hand and drew near unto him
saying: If the Lord give me this sign I *shall* know that Sisara shall
fall into my hands. Behold I will cast him upon the ground from off the
bed whereon he sleepeth, and it shall be, if he perceive it not, that I
shall know that he is delivered up. And Jahel took Sisara and pushed

|             |
|-------------|
| Judith 13:9 |

him from off the bed upon the earth, but he perceived it not, for he was
exceeding faint. And Jahel said: Strengthen in me, O Lord, mine

|             |
|-------------|
| Judith 13:7 |

arm this day for thy sake and thy people's sake, and for them that put
their trust in thee. And Jahel 'took the stake and set it upon his
temple

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 4:21 |

and smote with the hammer. And as he died Sisara' said to Jahel: Lo,
pain hath come upon me, Jahel, and I die like a woman. And Jahel said
unto him: Go boast thyself before thy father in hell, and tell him that
thou hast fallen into (*or* say, I have been delivered into) the hands
of a woman. And she made an end and slew him and laid his body *there*
until Barach should return.

8\. Now the mother of Sisara was called Themech,

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 5:28 |

and she sent unto her friends saying: Come, let us

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

go forth together to meet my son, and ye shall see the daughters of the
Hebrews whom my son will bring hither to be his concubines.

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 4:22 |

9\. But Barach returned from following after Sisara and was greatly
vexed because he found him not, and Jahel came forth to meet him, and
said: Come, enter in, thou blessed of God, and I will deliver thee thine
enemy whom thou followedst after and hast not found. And Barach went in
and found Sisara dead, and said: Blessed be the Lord which sent his
spirit and said: Into the hands of a woman shall Sisara be delivered.
And when he had so said he cut off the head of Sisara and sent it unto
his mother, and gave her a message saying: Receive thy son whom thou
didst look for to come with spoil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[171:1](bap47.htm#fr_122.md) XXXI. 1, etc. *The
stars fighting*. Cf. *Pirke R. Eliezer* 52: Joshua, when fighting, saw
the magicians of Egypt compelling the constellations to come against
Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](bap48.md)
