[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap40) 
[Next](bap42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXV.

XXV\. And the Philistines sought to fight with

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

the men of Israel: <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) and they inquired
of the Lord and said: Shall we go up and fight against the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Philistines? and God said to them: If ye go up
with a pure heart, fight; but if your heart is defiled, go not up. And
they inquired yet again saying: How shall we know if all the heart of
the people be alike? and God said to them: Cast lots among your tribes,
and it shall be unto every tribe that cometh under the lot, that it
shall be set apart into one lot, and then shall ye know whose heart is
clean and whose is defiled. 2. And the people said: Let us first appoint
over us a prince, and so cast lots. And the angel of the Lord said to
them: Appoint. And the people said: Whom shall we appoint that is
worthy, Lord? And the angel of the Lord said to them: Cast the lot upon
the tribe of Caleb, and he that is shown by the lot, even he shall

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

be your prince. And they cast the lot for the tribe of Caleb and it came
out upon Cenez, and they made him ruler over Israel. 3. And Cenez said
to the people: Bring your tribes unto me and hear ye the word of the
Lord. And the people gathered together and Cenez said to them: Ye know
that which Moses the friend of the Lord charged you, that ye should not
transgress the law to the right hand or to the left. And Jesus also who
was after him gave you the same charge. And now, lo, we have heard of
the mouth of the Lord that your heart is defiled. And the Lord hath
charged us to cast lots among your tribes to know whose heart hath
departed from the Lord our God. Shall not the fury of anger come upon
the people? But I promise you this day that even if a man of mine own
house come out in the lot of sin, he shall not be saved alive, but shall
be burned with fire. And the people said: Thou hast spoken a good
counsel, to perform it.

4\. And the tribes were brought before him, and there were found of the
tribe of Juda 345 men, and of the tribe of Ruben 560, and of the tribe
of Simeon 775, and of the tribe of Levi 150, and of the tribe of Zabulon
655 (*or* 645), and of the tribe of Isachar 665, and of the tribe of Gad
380. Of the tribe of Aser 665, and of the tribe of Manasse 480, and of
the tribe of Effraim 468, and of the tribe of Benjamin 267. And all the
number of them that were found by the lot of sin was 6110. And Cenez
took them all and shut them up in prison, till it should be known what
should be done with them. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99)

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

5\. And Cenez said: Was it not of this that Moses the friend of the Lord
spake saying: *There is a*

|           |
|-----------|
| Dt. 29:18 |

*strong root among you bringing forth gall and bitterness*? Now blessed
be the Lord who hath revealed all the devices of these men, neither hath
he suffered them to corrupt his people by their evil works. Bring hither
therefore the Demonstration and the Truth and call forth Eleazar the
priest, and let us inquire of the Lord by him. 6. Then Cenez and Eleazar
and all the elders and the whole synagogue prayed with one accord
saying: Lord God of our fathers, reveal unto thy servants the truth, for
we are found not believing in the wonders which thou didst for our
fathers since thou broughtest them out of the land of Egypt unto this
day. And the Lord answered and said: First ask them that were found, and
let them confess their deeds which they did subtilly, and afterwards
they shall be burned with fire. 7. And Cenez brought them forth and said
to them: Behold now ye know how that Achiar confessed when the lot fell
on him, and declared all that he had done. And now declare unto me all
your wickedness and your inventions: who knoweth, if ye tell us the
truth, even though ye die now, yet God will have mercy upon you when he
shall quicken the dead? 8. And one of them named Elas said unto him:
Shall not death come now upon us, that we shall die by fire?
Nevertheless I tell thee, my Lord, there are none inventions like unto
these which we have made wickedly. But if thou wilt search out the truth
plainly, ask severally the men of every tribe, and so shall some one of
them that stand by perceive the difference of their sins. 9. And Cenez
asked them of his own tribe and they told him: We desired to imitate and
make the calf that they made in the wilderness. And after that he asked
the men

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of the tribe of Ruben, which said: We desired to sacrifice unto the gods
of them that dwell in the land. And he asked the men of the tribe of
Levi, which said: We would prove the tabernacle, whether it were holy.
And he asked the remnant of the tribe of Isachar, which said: We would
inquire by the evil spirits of the idols, to see whether they revealed
plainly: and he asked the men of the tribe of Zabulon, which said: We
desired to eat the flesh of our children and to learn whether God hath
care for them. And he asked the remnant of the tribe of Dan, which said:
The Amorites taught us that which they did, that we might teach our
children. And lo, they are hid under the tent of Elas, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) who told thee to inquire of us. Send
therefore and thou shall find them. And Cenez sent and found them. 10.
 <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101) And thereafter asked he them that
were left over of the tribe of Gad, and they said: We committed adultery
with each other's wives. And he asked next the men of the tribe of Aser,
which said: We found seven golden images which the Amorites called the
holy Nymphs, and we took them with the precious stones that were set
upon them, and hid them: and lo, now

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

they are laid up under the top of the mount Sychem. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) Send therefore and thou shalt find them.
And Cenez sent men and removed them thence. 11. Now these are the Nymphs
which when they were called upon did show unto the Amorites their works
in every hour. For these are they which were devised by seven evil men
after the flood, whose names are these: &lt;? Cham&gt; Chanaan, Phuth,
Selath, Nembroth, Elath, Desuath. Neither shall there be again any like
similitude in the world graven by the hand of the artificer and adorned
with variety of painting, but they were set up and fixed for the
consecration *(i.e.* the holy place?) of idols. *Now* the stones were
precious, brought from the land of Euilath, among which was a crystal
and a prase (*or* one crystalline and one green), and they shewed their
fashion, being carved after the manner of a stone pierced with
open-work, <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) and another of them was
graven on the top, and another as it were marked with spots (*or* like a
spotted chrysoprase) <span id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104) so shone with
its graving as if it shewed the water of the deep lying beneath.

12\. And these are the precious stones which the Amorites had in their
holy places, and the price

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of them was above reckoning. For when any entered in by night, he needed
not the light of a lantern, so much did the natural light of the stones
shine forth. Wherein that one gave the greatest light which was cut
after the form of a stone pierced with open-work, and was cleansed with
bristles; <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) for if any of the
Amorites were blind, he went and put his eyes thereupon and recovered
his sight. Now when Cenez found them, he set them apart and laid them up
till he should know what should become of them.

13\. And after that he asked them that were left of the tribe of
Manasse, and they said: We did only defile the Lord's sabbaths. And he
asked the forsaken of the tribe of Effraim, which said: We desired to
pass our sons and our daughters through the fire, that we might know if
that which was said were manifest. And he asked the forsaken of the
tribe of Benjamin, which said: We desired at this time to examine the
book of the law, whether God had plainly written that which was therein,
or whether Moses had taught it of himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[146:1](bap41.htm#fr_98) XXV. Up to this point
*Philo* has followed the Bible story faithfully enough. He now draws
freely on his own imagination, and presents us with an entirely new
history of the beginning of the period of the Judges.

Kenaz is the first judge. He and Seenamias, as we read in XX. 6, were
the sons of Caleb, and were the two spies sent by Joshua to Jericho (who
in the Bible are nameless): at Caleb's request (XX. 10) Joshua gave
Kenaz the territory of the three towers (or the tribe of the towers).
The context in which this is told is copied from Josh. 14:6 (Cf. 15:16
*sqq*.). In that place, and in Num. 32:12, Caleb is called the Kenezite.
In Josh. 15, Othniel, son of Kenaz, the (younger) brother of Caleb (but
another view makes Othniel brother of Caleb), takes Kirjath-sepher and
marries Caleb's daughter. This is repeated in Judges 1:13. In Judges
3:10, 3:11 Othniel figures as the first of the judges proper: but all
that is said of him is that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he
judged Israel and conquered Chushan-rishathaim.

Thus in the Bible Kenaz is a mere name: he is a younger brother (or
other relative) of Caleb, and father of Othniel the first judge: and his
is an ancestral or clan-name in the family of Caleb. In *Philo* he
completely ousts Othniel, and there is no pretence of assimilating his
story to that of any one who appears in the Bible. He figures as a
divinely appointed ruler, a detecter of crime, a mediator, it may be
said, between God and Israel, and the recipient of God's own
instructions: then as a mighty man of valour, and lastly as a seer. In
respect of the amount of space devoted to him be is second only to
Moses. It may be merely the author's desire to strike out a new line, or
perhaps to import a fresh religious interest into the history of the
Judges (though this he could do in other ways, and much of the story of
Kenaz has no religious value) that has prompted this sudden burst of
inventiveness; or there may have been another motive at work and a
hidden meaning in the tale, which I cannot penetrate. I do not find any
hint in other writings that tradition clustered round the name of Kenaz:
but it is noticeable that the best text of Josephus (Ant. V. 33)
substitutes his name (Κενιαζοσ) for that of Othniel: and that in the
Pseudo-Epiphanian *Lives of the Prophets* it is said that Jonah was
buried "in the cave of Kainezias, who was judge of one tribe in the days
of the anarchy," a sentence <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> which
neither suggests a knowledge of *Philo* nor explains itself. All that
it, and the passage of Josephus, do suggest is that *Philo* may be
following a current fashion in discarding the name of Othniel, and that
he has taken as his text the words in judges: "the Spirit of the Lord
came upon" Othniel, and has written a variation upon that theme.

The next judge is Zebul. The name is taken, no doubt, from the story of
Abimelech in judges 9:28, etc. Otherwise he is a completely imaginary
figure. From him we pass to Deborah; she is followed by Aod (= Ehud),
who is here not a judge, but a Midianitish wizard. As in the case of
Zebul, *Philo* has borrowed a Biblical name from another part of Judges,
and affixed it to a totally different personality. The remainder of his
judges follow the Biblical order fairly well: Gideon, Abimelech (Tola
may have disappeared in a *lacuna*), Jair (whose character is
gratuitously blackened), Jephtha (Ibzan is then omitted), Addo (=
Abdon), Elon (these two being transposed from the Biblical order),
Samson. Then follow, as in the Bible, the stories of Micah's idolatry
(the migration of the Danites being wholly passed over) and of the
Benjamite outrage, which is located at Nob, the priestly city, instead
of Gibeah. Thus the narrative in Judges is represented with approximate
faithfulness, save in the case of the first judges, where *Philo*
substitutes Kenaz and Zebul for Othniel, Ehud, and Shamgar.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[148:1](bap41.htm#fr_99) XXV. 4. In the
enumeration of the sinners among the tribes Dan has accidentally dropped
out, though it appears in 9. The separate numbers in the text add up to
5410 or 5400, so that 700 or 710 is the number to be assigned to Dan in
order to make up the total of 6110.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[150:1](bap41.htm#fr_100) 9. *under the tent of
Elas, who told thee to inquire of us*. R. has: under the mount of
Abraham, and laid up under a mound of earth. J has: under the mount of
Abarim.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[150:2](bap41.htm#fr_101) 10 *seq*. The
Amorites are described in *Jubilees* 29:11 as being particularly wicked.
A special section in the Talmud treating of superstitious practices is
called "the ways of the Amorites" (see *Jewish Encycl*., s.v.
*Amorites*).

The idols are too vaguely described to enable us to form an idea of
them: *Philo* does not seem to have had any special heathen deities in
mind. Of the seven sinners who made them we recognize the names of
Canaan, Phuth, Nimrod, Elath, who are mentioned in IV. 6, 7, as
descendants of Ham. The land of Euilat (Havilah) is described in Gen.
2:11, 2:12 as the home of gold, bdellium, and onyx.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[151:1](bap41.htm#fr_102) 10. *the mount
Sychem*: possibly a malicious allusion to the Samaritans.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[151:2](bap41.htm#fr_103) 11. *stone pierced
with open-work*: *uelut in diatrium sculpti*. Here, and a few lines
below, where we have *in modum diatridis* or *diatriti sculptus*, I
think *diatretos* must be restored. The word is used by Martial and in
the Digest.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[151:3](bap41.htm#fr_104) *as it were marked
with spots*. The variants are *caraxatus stigminis* and *chrysoprassus
stigmatus*. I prefer the first, because it seems clearly right in XXVI.
10. There we have: "The 6th stone was as if it had been a chrysoprase
*chrysoprassus* (*or* marked (*in*) *caraxatus*) . . . and was like a
jasper," and there the chrysoprase is plainly superfluous. *Caraxatus*
is also the harder word.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[152:1](bap41.htm#fr_105) 12. "*was cleansed
with bristles*": *de setis emundabatur* (-*bitur* VR). This looks as if
it must be wrong, but I find in Damigeron, *de labidibus*, 47 (ap.
Pitra, *Spicil. Solesm* III. 335), that the chrysolite "*pertusus et
transiectus cum setis* † *aseminis* † (? *asininis*") and worn on the
left arm, puts demons to flight. This suggests that, though
*emundabatur* is not very clear, de setis is probably correct.

I may remark in passing that the old Latin version of Epiphanius, *de
XII. lapidibus* (ed. Dindorf, *Opp*. IV. 1), has phrases recalling our
text, *e.g.* p. 193: *flauum ostentat colorem*; p. 198: *hyacinthus
tranquilli maris similtudinem refert*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](bap42)
