[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap39) 
[Next](bap41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIV.

XXIV\. And after these days Jesus the son of Naue assembled all the
people yet again, and said unto them: Behold now the Lord hath testified

|                |
|----------------|
| Dt. 4:26, etc. |

unto you this day: I have called heaven and earth to witness to you that
if ye will continue to serve the Lord ye shall be unto him a peculiar
people. But if ye will not serve him and will obey the gods of the
Amorites in whose land ye dwell, say so this day before the Lord and go
forth.

|            |
|------------|
| Jos. 24:15 |

*But I and my house will serve the Lord*. 2. And all the people lifted
up their voice and wept saying: Peradventure the Lord will account us
worthy, and it is better for us to die in the fear of him, than to be
destroyed out of the land.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

3\. And Jesus the son of Naue blessed the people and kissed them and
said unto them: Let your words be for mercy before our Lord, and let him
send his angel, and preserve you: Remember me after my death, and
*remember ye* Moses the friend of the Lord. And let not the words of the
covenant which he hath made with you depart from you all the days of
your life. And he, sent them away and they departed every man to his
inheritance.

4\. But Jesus laid himself upon his bed, and sent and called Phineës the
son of Eleazar the priest and said unto him: Behold now I see with mine
eyes the transgression of this people wherein they will begin to
deceive: but thou, strengthen thy hands in the time that thou art with
them, And he kissed him and his father and his sons and blessed him and
said: The Lord God of your fathers direct your ways and *the ways* of
this people. 5. And when he ceased speaking unto them, *he drew up his
feet into the bed* and slept

|            |
|------------|
| Gen. 49:33 |

with his fathers. And his sons *laid their hands*

|           |
|-----------|
| Gen. 46:4 |

*upon his eyes*.

6\. And then all Israel gathered together to bury him, and they lamented
him with a great lamentation, and thus said they in their
[lamentation](errata.htm#1): Weep ye for the wing of this swift eagle,
for he hath flown away from us. And weep ye for the strength of this
lion's whelp, for he is hidden from us. Who now will go and report unto
Moses the righteous, that we have had forty years a leader like unto
him? And they fulfilled their mourning and *buried him* with their own

|            |
|------------|
| Jos. 24:30 |

hands *in the mount Effraim* and returned every man unto his tent. And
after the death of Jesus the land of Israel was at rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](bap41)
