[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap45) 
[Next](bap47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXX.

XXX Then had the children of Israel no man whom they might appoint as
judge over them: and their heart fell away, and they forgot the promise,
and transgressed the ways which Moses and Jesus the servants of the Lord
had commanded them, and were led away after the daughters of the
Amorites, and served their gods. 2. And the Lord was wroth with them,
and sent his angel and said:

|          |
|----------|
| Jud. 2:1 |

Behold, I chose me one people out of all the tribes of the earth, and I
said that my glory should abide with them in this world, and I sent unto
them Moses my servant, to declare unto them my great majesty and my
judgements, and they have transgressed my ways. Now therefore behold I
will stir up their enemies and they shall rule over them, and then shall
all *the* people\[s\] say: Because we have transgressed the ways of God
and of our fathers, therefore are these things come upon us. Yet there
shall a woman rule over them which shall give them light 40 years.

3\. And after these things the Lord stirred up against them Jabin king
of Asor, and he began to fight against them, and he had as captain of
his might Sisara, who had 8000 chariots of iron. And he came unto the
mount Effrem and fought against the people, and Israel feared him
greatly, and the people could not stand all the days of Sisara.

4\. And when Israel was brought very low, all the children of Israel
gathered together with one accord unto the mount of Juda and said: We
did call ourselves blessed more than *all* people, and now, lo, we are
brought so low, more than all nations, that we cannot dwell in our land,
and our enemies bear rule over us. And now who hath done all this

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

unto us? Is it not our iniquities, because we have forsaken the Lord God
of our fathers, and have walked in those things which could not profit
us? Now therefore come let us fast seven days, both men and women, and
from the least (*sic*) even to the sucking child. Who knoweth whether
God will be reconciled unto his inheritance, that he destroy not the
planting of his vineyard?

5\. And after the people had fasted 7 days, sitting in sackcloth, the
Lord sent unto them on the 7th day Debbora, who said unto them: Can the
sheep <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121) that is appointed to the
slaughter answer before him that slayeth it, when both he that slayeth
&lt; . . . &gt; and he that is slain keepeth silence, when he is
sometimes provoked against it? Now ye were born to be a flock before our
Lord. And he led you into the height of the clouds, and subdued angels
beneath your feet, and appointed unto you a law, and gave you
commandments by prophets, and chastised you by rulers, and shewed you
wonders not a few, and for your sake commanded the luminaries and they
stood still in the places where they were bidden, and when your enemies
came upon you he rained hailstones upon them and destroyed them, and
Moses and Jesus and Cenez and Zebul gave you commandments. And ye have
not obeyed them. 6. For while they lived, ye shewed yourselves as it
were obedient unto your God, but when they died, your heart died also.
And ye became like unto iron that is thrust into the fire, which when it
is melted by the flame becometh as water, but when it is come out of the
fire returneth unto its hardness. So ye also, while they that admonish
you burn you, do show

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

the effect, and when they are dead ye forget all things. 7. And now,
behold, the Lord will have compassion upon you this day, not for your
sakes, but for his covenant's sake which he made with your fathers and
for his oath's sake which he sware, that he would not forsake you for
ever. But know ye that after my decease ye will begin to sin in your
latter days. Wherefore the Lord will perform marvellous things among
you, and will deliver your enemies into your hands. For your fathers are
dead, but God, which made a covenant with them, is life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[170:1](bap46.htm#fr_121) XXX. 5. *Can the
sheep*, etc. Something is wrong with this sentence. I suggest that words
are wanting after occidit. See the App. on Readings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI.](bap47)
