[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap58) 
[Next](bap60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIV.

XLIV\. And in those days there was no

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 17:6 |

prince in Israel: but every man did that which was pleasing in his
sight.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 17:2 |

2\. At that time Michas arose, the son of Dedila the mother of Heliu,
and he had 1000 drachms of gold and four wedges of molten gold, and 40
didrachms of silver. And his mother Dedila said unto him: My son, hear
my voice and thou shalt make thee a name before thy death: take thou
that gold and melt it, and thou shalt make thee idols, and they shall be
to thee gods, and thou shalt become a priest to them. 3. And it shall be
that whoso will inquire by them, they shall come to thee and thou shalt
answer them. And there shall be in thine house an altar and a pillar
built, and of that gold thou hast, thou shalt buy thee incense for
burning and sheep for sacrifices. And it shall be that whoso will offer
sacrifice, he shall give for sheep 7 didrachms, and for incense, if he
will burn it, he shall give one didrachm of silver of *full* weight. And
thy name shall be Priest, and thou shalt be called a worshipper of the
gods. 4. And Michas said unto her: Thou hast well counselled me, my
mother, how I may live: and now shall thy name be greater than my name,
and in the last days these things shall be required of thee. 5. And
Michas went and did all that his mother had commanded him. And he carved
out and made for himself three images of boys, and of calves, and a lion
and an eagle and a dragon and a dove. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) And it was so that all that were led
astray came to him, and if any would ask for wives, they

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

inquired of him by the dove; and if for sons, by the image of the boys:
but he that would ask for riches took counsel by the likeness of the
eagle, and he that asked for strength by the image of the lion: again,
if they asked for men and maidens they inquired by the images of calves,
but if for length of days, they inquired by the image of the dragon. And
his iniquity was of many shapes, and his impiety was full of guile. 6.
Therefore then, when the children of Israel departed from the Lord, the
Lord said: Behold I will root out the earth and destroy all the race of
men, because when I appointed great things upon mount Sina, I showed
myself unto the children of Israel in the tempest and I said that they
should not make idols, and they consented that they should not carve the
likeness of gods. And I appointed to them they should not take my name
in vain, and they chose this, even not to take my name in vain. And I
commanded them to keep the sabbath day, and they consented unto me to
sanctify themselves. And I said to them that they should honour their
father and mother: and they promised that they would so do. And I
appointed unto them not to steal, and they consented. And I bade them do
no murder, and they received it, that they should not. And I commanded
them not to commit adultery, and they refused not. And I appointed unto
them to bear no false witness, and not to covet every man his
neighbour's wife or his house or anything that is his: and they accepted
it. 7. And now, whereas I spake unto them that they should not make
idols, they have made the works of *all* those gods that are born of
corruption by the name of *a* graven *image*. And also of them through
whom all things have been corrupted. For mortal men made them, and the
fire served

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

in the melting of them: the act of men brought them forth, and hands
have wrought them, and understanding contrived them. And whereas they
have received them, they have taken my name in vain, and have given my
name to graven images, and upon the sabbath day which they accepted, to
keep it, they have wrought abominations therefrom. Because I said unto
them that they should love their father and mother, they have
dishonoured me their maker. And for that I said to them they should not
steal, they have dealt thievishly in their understanding with graven
images. And whereas I said they should not kill, they do kill them when
they deceive. And when I had commanded them not to commit adultery, they
have played the adulterer with their jealousy. And where they did choose
not to bear false witness, they have received false witness from them
whom they cast out, and have lusted after strange women. 8. Therefore,
behold, I abhor the race of men, and to the end I may root out my
creation, they that die shall be multiplied above the number of them
that are born. For the house of Jacob is defiled with iniquities and the
impieties of Israel are multiplied and I cannot \[*some words lost*\]
wholly destroy the tribe of Benjamin, because that they first were led
away after Michas. And the people of Israel also shall not be
unpunished, but it shall be to them an offence for ever to the memory of
all generations. 9. But Michas will I deliver unto the fire. And his
mother shall pine away in his sight, living upon the earth, and worms
shall issue forth out of her body. And when they shall speak one to the
other, she shall say as it were a mother rebuking her son: Behold what a
sin hast thou committed. And he shall answer as it were a son obedient
to his mother and dealing craftily: And

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

thou hast wrought yet greater iniquity. And the likeness of the dove
which he made shall be to put out his eyes, and the likeness of the
eagle shall be to shed fire from the wings of it, and the images of the
boys he made shall be to scrape his sides, and for the image of the lion
which he made, it shall be unto him as mighty ones tormenting him. 10.
And thus will I do not only unto Michas but to all them also that sin
against me. And now let the race. of men know that they shall not
provoke me by their own inventions. Neither unto them only that make
idols shall this chastisement come, but it shall be to every man, that
with what sin he hath sinned therewith shall he be judged. Therefore if
they shall speak lies before me, I will command the heaven and it shall
defraud them of rain. And if any will covet the goods of his, neighbour,
I will command death and it shall deny them the fruit of their body. And
if they swear by my name falsely I will not bear their prayer. And when
the soul parteth from the body, then they shall say: Let us not mourn
for the things which we have suffered, but because whatsoever we have
devised, that shall we also receive. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[200:1](bap59.htm#fr_135) XLIV. 4, 5. Images of
boys, calves, lion, eagle, dragon, dove. This recalls the furniture of a
sanctuary of Mithras, in which two torch-bearing youths, Mithras slaying
a bull, a lion, a serpent, and a bird (not, I think, an eagle) commonly
appeared.

The words *ask for* are my rendering of *interrogare pro*: perhaps
*inquire concerning* would be better.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[203:1](bap59.htm#fr_136) 10. The doctrine that
the punishment shall be suited to the offence is perhaps first
enunciated in a crude form in *Jubilees* 4:32. It is a recurrent thought
in the *Wisdom of Solomon*, and runs through many of the Apocalypses
that describe hell. It grows out of the *lex talionis*.

Philo's treatment of the story of Micah is a notewortny example of his
freedom in dealing with the Biblical narrative. Evidently Micah is here
represented as remaining in possession of his idols until his death;
there is no hint that he was deprived of them by the Danites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](bap60)
