[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap60.md) 
[Next](bap62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVI.

XLVI\. And when it was day the people of Israel were greatly moved and
said: Let us go up and search out the sin that is done, that the
iniquity may be taken away from us. And they spake thus, and said: Let
us inquire first of the Lord and learn whether he will deliver our
brethren into

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

our hands. And if not, let us forbear. And Phinees said unto them: Let
us offer the Demonstration and the Truth. And the Lord answered them and
said: Go up, for I will deliver them into your hands. But he deceived
them, that he might accomplish his word.

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:13 |

2\. And they went up to battle and came to the city of Benjamin and sent
messengers saying: Send us the men that have done this wickedness and we
will spare you, but requite to every man his evil doing. And the people
of Benjamin hardened their heart and said unto the people of Israel:
Wherefore should we deliver our brethren unto you? If ye spare *them*
not, we will even fight

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:21 |

against you. And the people of Benjamin came out against the children of
Israel and pursued after them, and the children of Israel fell before
them and they smote of them 45,000 men. 3. And the heart of the people
was very sore vexed, and they came weeping and mourning unto Silo and
said: Behold, the Lord hath delivered us up before the dwellers in Noba.
Now let us inquire of the Lord which among us hath sinned. And they
inquired of the Lord and he said unto them: If ye will, go up and fight,
and they shall be delivered into your hands; and then it shall be told
you wherefore ye fell before them. And they went tip the

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:24 |

second day to fight against them. And the children of Benjamin came out
and pursued after Israel and smote of them 46,000 men. 4. And the heart
of the people was altogether melted and they said: Hath God willed to
deceive his people? or hath he so ordained because of the evil that is
done that as well the innocent should fall as they

|                   |
|-------------------|
| Jud. 20:26, 20:28 |

that do evil? And when they spake thus they fell down before the ark of
the covenant of the Lord and rent their clothes and put ashes upon their

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

heads both they and Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest, which prayed
and said: What is this deceit wherewith thou hast deceived us, O Lord?
If it be righteous before thy face which the children of Benjamin have
done, wherefore didst thou not tell us, that we might consider it? But
if it was not pleasing in thy sight, wherefore didst thou suffer us to
fall before them?

XLVII\. And Phinees added and said: O God of our fathers, hear my voice,
and tell thy servant this day if it is well done in thy sight, or if
peradventure the people have sinned and thou wouldest destroy their
evil, that thou mightest correct among us also them that have sinned
against thee. For I remember in my youth when Jambri sinned in the days
of Moses thy servant, and I verily entered in, and was zealous in my
soul, and lifted up both of them upon my sword, and the remnant would
have risen against me to put me to death, and thou sentest thine angel
and didst smite of them 24,000 men and deliver me out of their hands. 2.
And now thou hast sent the eleven tribes and brought them hither saying:
Go and smite them. And when they went they were delivered up. And now
they say that the declarations of thy truth are lying before thee. And
now, O Lord God of our fathers, hide it not from thy servant, but tell
us wherefore thou hast done this iniquity against us. 3. And when the
Lord saw that Phinees prayed earnestly before him, he said to him: By
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, that had I not sworn, I would not
have remembered thee in that thou hast spoken, neither would I have
answered you this day. And now say unto the people: Stand up and hear
the word of the Lord, 4. Thus saith the Lord: There was a certain mighty
lion in the midst of the forest, and

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

unto him all the beasts committed the forest that he should guard it by
his power, lest perchance other beasts should come and lay it waste. And
while the lion guarded it there came beasts of the field from another
forest and devoured all the young of the beasts and laid waste the fruit
of their body, and the lion saw it and held his peace. Now the beasts
were at peace, because they had entrusted the forest unto the lion, and
perceived not that their young were destroyed. 5. And after a time there
arose a very small beast of those that had committed the forest unto the
lion, and devoured the least of the whelps of another very evil beast.
And lo, the lion cried out and stirred up all the beasts of the forest,
and they fought among themselves, and every one fought against his
neighbour. 6. And when many beasts were destroyed, another whelp out of
another forest like unto it, saw *it*, and said: Hast thou not destroyed
as many beasts? What iniquity is this, that in the beginning when many
beasts and their young were destroyed unjustly by other evil beasts, and
when all the beasts should have been moved to avenge themselves, seeing
the fruit of their body was despoiled to no purpose, then thou didst
keep silence and spakest not, but now one whelp of an evil beast hath
perished, and thou hast stirred up the whole forest that all the beasts
should devour one another without cause, and the forest be diminished.
Now therefore thou oughtest first to be destroyed, and so the remnant be
established. And when the young of the beasts heard that, they slew the
lion first, and put over them the whelp in his stead, and so the rest of
the beasts were subject together.

7\. Michas arose and made you rich by that which he committed, both he
and his mother. And there were evil things and wicked, which none
devised

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

before them, but in his subtlety he made graven images, which had not
been made unto that day, and no man was provoked, but ye were all led
astray, and did see the fruit of your body spoiled, and held your peace
even as that evil lion. 8. And now when ye saw how that this man's
concubine which suffered evil, <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139.md)
died, ye were moved all of you and came unto me saying: Wilt thou
deliver the children of Benjamin into our hands? Therefore did I deceive
you and said: I will deliver them unto you. And now I have destroyed
them which then held their peace, and so will I take vengeance on all
that have done wickedly against me. But you, go ye up now, for I will
deliver them unto you.

9\. And all the people arose with one accord and

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:21 |

went. And the children of Benjamin came out against them and thought
that they would over come them as heretofore. And they knew not that
their wickedness was fulfilled upon them. And when they had come on as
at first, and were pursuing

|                   |
|-------------------|
| Jud. 20:32, 20:36 |

after them, the people fled from the face of them to give them place,
and then they arose out of their ambushes, and the children of Benjamin
were in the midst of them. 10. Then they which were

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:33 |

fleeing turned back, and the men of the city of Noba were slain, both
men and women, even 85,000

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 20:49 |

men, and the children of Israel burned the city and took the spoils and
destroyed all things with the edge of the sword. And no man was left of
the children of Benjamin save only 600 men which fled and were not found
in the battle. And all the people returned unto Silo and Phinees the son
of Eleazar the priest with them.

11\. Now these are they that were left of the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

race of Benjamin, the princes of the tribe, of ten families whose names
are these: of the 1st family: Ezbaile, Zieb, Balac, Reindebac, Belloch;
and of the 2nd family: Nethac, Zenip, Phenoch, Demech, Geresaraz; and of
the 3rd family: Jerimuth, Veloth, Amibel, Genuth, Nephuth, Phienna; and
of the 4th city: Gemuph, Eliel, Gemoth, Soleph, Raphaph, and Doffo; and
of the 5th family: Anuel, Code, Fretan, Remmon, Peccan, Nabath; and of
the 6th family: Rephaz, Sephet, Araphaz, Metach, Adhoc, Balinoc; and of
the 7th family: Benin, Mephiz, Araph, Ruimel, Belon, Iaal, Abac; and
(of) the (8th, 9th and) 10th family: Enophlasa, Melec, Meturia, Meac;
and the rest of the princes of the tribe which were left, in number
threescore. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md)

12\. And at that time did the Lord requite unto Michas and unto his
mother all the things that he had spoken. And Michas was melted with
fire and his mother was pining away, even as the Lord had spoken
concerning them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[209:1](bap61.htm#fr_139.md) XLVII. 8. *which
suffered evil*: *iniqua gerens*: perhaps allowed the evil, as above,
XLV. 6.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[210:1](bap61.htm#fr_140.md) 11. The names of the
Benjamite chiefs are drawn, in part at least, from the list of the
descendants of Benjamin in 1 Chron. 8, but they are so disfigured as to
defy complete identification. The divisions and the orthography are
alike incapable of being settled by the evidence before me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII](bap62.md)
