[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap63.md) 
[Next](bap65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER L.

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:2 |

L. Now \[whereas\] Elchana had two wives, the name of the one was Anna
and the name of the other Phenenna. And because Phenenna had sons, and
Anna had none, Phenenna reproached her, saying:

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:6 |

What profiteth it thee that Elchana thine husband

|           |
|-----------|
| Isa. 56:3 |

loveth thee? but thou art a dry tree. I know moreover that he will love
me, because he delighteth

|           |
|-----------|
| Ps. 128:3 |

to see my sons standing about him like the planting of an oliveyard. 2.
And so it was, when she reproached her every day, and Anna was very sore
at heart, and she feared God from her youth, it came to pass when the
good day of the passover

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

drew on, and her husband went up to do sacrifice, that Phenenna reviled
Anna saying: A woman is not *indeed* beloved even if her husband love
her or her beauty. Let not Anna therefore boast herself of her beauty,
but he that boasteth let him boast when he seeth his seed before his
face; and when it is not so among women, even the fruit of their womb,
then shall love become of no account. For what profit was it unto Rachel
that Jacob loved her? except there had been given her the fruit of her
womb, *surely* his love would have been to no purpose? And when Anna
heard that, her soul was melted within her and *her eyes* ran down with
tears. 3. And her husband saw

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:8 |

her and said: *Wherefore art thou sad, and eatest not, and why is thy
heart within thee cast down*? Is not thy behaviour <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_145.md) better than the ten sons of Phenenna?
And Anna hearkened to him and

|            |
|------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:9 |

arose after she had eaten, and came unto Silo to the house of the Lord
where Heli the priest abode, whom Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest
had presented as it was commanded him. 4. And Anna prayed and said: Hast
not thou, O Lord, examined the heart of all generations before thou
formedst the world? But what is the womb that is born open, or what one
that is shut up dieth, except thou will it? And now let my prayer go up
before thee this day, lest I go down hence empty, for thou knowest my
heart, how I have walked before thee from the days of my youth. 5. And
Anna would not pray aloud as do all men, for she took thought at that
time saying: Lest perchance I be not worthy to be heard, and it shall be
that Phenenna will envy me yet more and reproach me as she daily saith:
Where is thy God in whom thou trustest? And I know that it is not she
that hath

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

many sons that is enriched, neither she that lacketh them is poor, but
whoso aboundeth in the will of God, she is enriched. For they that know
for what I have prayed, if they perceive that I am not heard in my
prayer, will blaspheme. And I shall not only have a witness in mine own
soul, for my tears also are handmaidens of my prayers. 6. And as

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:13 |

she prayed, Heli the priest, seeing that she was afflicted in her mind
and carried herself like one drunken, said unto her: Go, put away thy
wine from thee. And she said: Is my prayer so heard that I am called
drunken? *Verily* I am drunken with sorrow and have drunk the cup of my
weeping. 7. And Heli the priest said unto her: Tell me thy reproach. And
she said unto him: I am the wife of Elchana, and because God hath surely
shut up my womb, therefore I prayed before him that I might not depart
out of this world unto him

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 1:17 |

Without fruit, neither die without leaving mine own image. And Heli the
priest said unto her: Go, for I know wherefore thou hast prayed, and.
thy prayer is heard. 8. But Heli the priest would not tell her that a
prophet was foreordained to be born of her: for he had heard when the
Lord spake concerning him. And Anna came unto her house, and was
consoled of her sorrow, *yet* she told no man of that for which she had
prayed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[215:1](bap64.htm#fr_146.md) L. 3. *thy
behaviour*: *mores lui*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI](bap65.md)
