[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap59) 
[Next](bap61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLV.

XLV\. And it came to pass at that time that

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 19:1 |

a certain man of the tribe of Levi came to Gabaon, and when he desired
to abide there, the sun set.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And when he would enter in there, they that
dwelt there suffered him not. And he said to his lad: Go on, lead the
mule, and we will go to the city of Noba, peradventure they will suffer
us to enter in

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 19:15 |

there. And he came thither and sat in the street of the city. And no man
said unto him: Come into my house. 2. But there was there a certain
Levite whose name was Bethac. <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) The
same saw him and said unto him: Art thou Beel of my tribe? And he said:
I am. And he said to him: Knowest thou not the wickedness of them that
dwell in this city? Who counselled thee to enter in hither? Haste and go
out hence, and come into my house wherein I dwell, and abide there
to-day, and the, Lord shall shut up their heart before us, as he shut up
the men of Sodom before the face of Lot. And he entered into the city
and abode there that night.

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 19:22 |

3\. And all the dwellers in the city came together and said unto Bethac:
Bring forth them that came unto thee this day, and if not we will burn
them and thee with fire. And he went out unto them and said to them: Are
not they our brethren? Let us not deal evilly with them, lest our sins
be multiplied against us. And they answered: It was never so, that
strangers should give commands

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 19:25 |

to the indwellers. And they entered in with violence and took out him
and his concubine and cast them forth, and they, 'Let the man go, but
they abused his concubine until she died; for she had transgressed
against her husband at one time by sinning with the Amalekites, and
therefore did the Lord God deliver her into the hands of sinners.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

4\. And when it was day Beel went out and

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 19:27 |

found his concubine dead. And he laid her upon the mule and hasted and
went out and came to Gades. And he took her body and divided it and

|            |
|------------|
| Jud. 19:29 |

sent it into *all* parts (*or* by portions) throughout the twelve
tribes, saying: These things were done unto me in the city of Noba, for
the dwellers

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 20:5 |

therein rose up against me to slay me and took my concubine and shut me
up and slew her. And if this is pleasing before your face) keep ye
silence, and let the Lord be judge: but if ye will avenge it, the Lord
shall help you. 5. And all

|           |
|-----------|
| Jud. 20:1 |

the men, even the twelve tribes, were confounded. And they gathered
together unto Silo and said every man to his neighbour: Hath such
iniquity been done in Israel?

6\. And the Lord said unto the Adversary: <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) Seest thou how this foolish people is
disturbed? In the hour when they should have died, even when Michas
dealt craftily to deceive the people with these, *that is*, with the
dove and the eagle and with the image of men and calves and of a lion
and of a dragon, then were they not moved. And therefore because they
were not provoked to anger, let their counsel *now* be vain and their
heart moved, that they who allow evil may be consumed as well as the
sinners.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[204:1](bap60.htm#fr_137) XLV. 1, 2. As noted
above, the Benjamites' crime is transferred from Gibeah to Nob.

The name Bethac occurs again in LII. 1. Hophni and Phinehas lived near
the house of Bethac.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[205:1](bap60.htm#fr_138) 6. *The adversary,
Anticiminus*. This sudden introduction of a personage nowhere else named
in the book is very curious. That Satan (probably called Mastema in the
original, as in *Jubilees*) is meant, I do not doubt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI](bap61)
