[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap77) 
[Next](bap79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIV.

LXIV\. Then Saul took thought, saying: I will surely take away the
sorcerers out of the land of Israel. So shall men remember me after my
departure. And Saul scattered all the sorcerers

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:3 |

out of the land. And God said: Behold, Saul hath taken away the
sorcerers out of the land, not because of the fear of me, but that he
might make himself a name. Behold, whom he hath scattered, unto them let
him resort, and get divination from them, because he hath no prophets.

2\. At that time the Philistines said every man to his neighbour:
Behold, Samuel the prophet is dead and there is none that prayeth for
Israel. David, also, which fought for them, is become Saul's adversary
and is not with them. Now, therefore, let us arise and fight mightily
against them, and avenge the blood of our fathers. And the Philistines
assembled themselves and came *up* to battle. 3. And when Saul saw that
Samuel was dead and David was not with him, his hands were loosened. And
he inquired of the Lord, and

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:6 |

he hearkened not unto him. And he sought

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

prophets, and none appeared unto him. And

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:7 |

Saul said unto the people: Let us seek out a diviner and inquire of him
that which I have in mind. And the people answered him: Behold, now
there is a woman named Sedecla, <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_159)
the daughter of Debin (*or* Adod) the Madianite, which deceived the
people of Israel with sorceries: and lo she

|                |
|----------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:8-11 |

dwelleth in Endor. 4. And Saul put on vile raiment and went unto her, he
and two men with him, by night and said unto her: Raise up unto me
Samuel. And she said: I am afraid of the king Saul. And Saul said unto
her: Thou shalt not be harmed of Saul in this matter. And Saul said
within himself: When I was king in Israel, even though the Gentiles saw
me not, yet knew they that I was Saul. And Saul asked the woman, saying:
Hast thou seen Saul at any time? And she said: Oftentimes. And Saul went
out and wept and said: Lo, now I know that my beauty is changed, and
that the glory of my kingdom is passed from me.

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:12 |

5\. And it came to pass, when the woman saw Samuel coming up, and beheld
Saul with him,

|                |
|----------------|
| 1\. Sam. 28:13 |

that she cried out and said: Behold, *thou art Saul, wherefore hast thou
deceived me*? And he said unto her: *Fear not, but tell me what thou
sawest*. And she said: Lo, these 40 years have I raised up the dead for
the Philistines, but this appearance hath not been seen, neither shall
it be seen hereafter. 6. And Saul said unto her: What is his form? And
she said: Thou inquirest of me

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

concerning the gods. For, behold, his form is not the form of a man. For
he is arrayed in a white robe and hath a mantle upon it, and two angels
leading him. <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_160) And Saul remembered
the mantle

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 19:27 |

which Samuel had rent while he lived, and he smote his hands together
and cast himself upon the earth.

7\. *And Samuel said unto him: Why hast thou*

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:16 |

*disquieted me to bring me up*? I thought that the time was come for me
to receive the reward of my deeds. Therefore boast not thyself, O king,
neither thou, O woman. For it is not ye that have brought me up, but the
precept <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_161) which God spake unto me
while I yet lived, that I should come and tell thee that thou hadst
sinned yet the second time in neglecting God. For this cause are my
bones disturbed after that I had rendered up my soul, that I should
speak unto thee, and that being dead I should be heard as one living. 8.
Now

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:1 |

therefore *to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me*, when the
people are delivered into the hands of the Philistines. And because thy
bowels have been moved with jealousy, therefore that that is thine shall
be taken from thee. And Saul heard

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 28:20 |

the words of Samuel, and his soul melted and he said: Behold, I depart
to die with my sons, if perchance my destruction may be an
atonement <span id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_162) for mine iniquities. And
Saul arose and departed thence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[240:1](bap78.htm#fr_160) LXIV. 3. The witch of
Endor, here called Sedecla, daughter of Debin or of Adod (doubtless Aod
of XXXIV.), is in *Pirke R. Eliezer* 33 "the wife of Zephaniah, the
mother of Abner." Kimchi *in loc.*, it seems, calls her Zephaniah. The
*Quaest. Hebr.* agree that she was Abner's mother. Perhaps "the wife of"
in Pirke should go out.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[241:1](bap78.htm#fr_161) 6. *Two angels
leading him*. Compare the *Gospel of Peter*, where two angels lead
Christ out of the sepulchre.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[241:2](bap78.htm#fr_162) 7. The word which I
render *precept* is *traditio*. I cannot cite a parallel to this curious
use of it.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[241:3](bap78.htm#fr_163) 8. *if my destruction
may be an atonement* (*exoratio*) *for mine iniquities*. In *Pirke R.
Eliezer* 33, Samuel says to Saul: If thou wilt hearken to my advice, to
fall by the sword, then shall thy death be an atonement for thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXV](bap79)
