[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap76.md) 
[Next](bap78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIII.

LXIII\. At that time the priests that dwelt in Noba were polluting the
holy things of the Lord and making the firstfruits a reproach unto the
people. And God was wroth and said: Behold, I will wipe out the priests
that dwell in Noba, because they walk in the ways of the sons of Heli.

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 22:9 |

2\. And at that time came Doech the Syrian, which was over Saul's mules,
unto Saul and said unto him: Knowest thou not that Abimelec the priest
taketh counsel with David and hath given him a sword and sent him away
in peace? And Saul sent and called Abimelec and said unto him:

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 22:16 |

Thou shalt surely die, because thou hast taken counsel with mine enemy.
And Saul slew Abimelec and all his father's house, and there was not so
much as one of his tribe delivered save only Abiathar his son. The same
came to David and told him all that had befallen him. 3. And God said:
Behold, in the year when Saul began to reign, when Jonathan had sinned
and he would have put him to death, this people rose up and suffered him
not, and now when the priests were slain, even 385 men, they kept
silence and said

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

nothing. Therefore, lo, the days shall come quickly that I will deliver
them into the hands of their enemies and they shall fall down wounded,
they

|           |
|-----------|
| 1 Sam. 31 |

and their king. 4. And unto Doech the Syrian thus said the Lord: Behold,
the days shall come quickly that the worm shall come up upon his tongue
and shall cause him to pine away, and his dwelling shall be with Jair
for ever in the fire that is not quenched.

5\. Now all that Saul did, and the rest of his words, and how he pursued
after David, are they not written in the book of the kings of Israel? 6.
And after these things Samuel died, and all Israel gathered together and
mourned him, and buried him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV](bap78.md)
