[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap72.md) 
[Next](bap74.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LIX.

LIX\. And the Lord said unto him: Go, anoint him whom I shall tell thee,
for the time is fulfilled wherein his kingdom shall come. And. Samuel
said: Lo, wilt thou now blot out the kingdom of Saul? And he said: I
will blot it out. 2. And Samuel went forth unto Bethel, and sanctified
the

|             |
|-------------|
| Sam. 16:4-7 |

elders, and Jesse, and his sons. And Eliab the firstborn of Jesse came.
And Samuel said: Behold now the holy one, the anointed of the Lord. And
the Lord said unto him: Where is thy vision which thine heart hath seen?
Art not thou he that saidst unto Saul: I am he that seeth? And how
knowest thou not whom thou must anoint? And now let this rebuke suffice
thee, and seek out the shepherd, the least of them all, and anoint him.
3. And Samuel said unto Jesse: Hearken, Jesse, send and bring hither thy
son from the flock, for him hath God chosen. And Jesse sent and brought
David, and Samuel anointed him in the midst of his brethren. And the
Lord was with him from that day *forward*.

4\. Then David began to sing this psalm, and

|          |
|----------|
| Ps. 61:2 |

said: In the ends of the earth will I begin to glorify *him*, and unto
everlasting days will I sing praises. Abel at the first when he fed the
sheep, his sacrifice was acceptable rather than his brother's. And his
brother envied him and slew him. But it is not so with me, for God hath
kept me, and hath delivered me unto his angels and his watchers to keep
me, for my brethren envied me, and my father and my mother made me of no
account, and when

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

the prophet came they called not for me, and when the Lord's anointed
was proclaimed they forgat me. But God came near unto me with his right
hand, and with his mercy: therefore will I not cease to sing praises all
the days of my life.

|              |
|--------------|
| 1 Sam. 17:34 |

5\. And as David yet spake, behold a fierce lion out of the wood and a
she-bear out of the mountain took the bulls of David. And David said:
Lo, this shall be a sign unto me for a mighty beginning of my victory in
the battle. I will go out after them and deliver that which is carried
off and will slay them. And David went out after them and took stones
out of the wood and slew them. And God said unto him: Lo, by stones have
I delivered thee these beasts in thy sight. And this shall be a sign
unto thee that hereafter thou shalt slay with stones the adversary of my
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX](bap74.md)
