[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bap71) 
[Next](bap73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LVIII.

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 15:3 |

LVIII\. And at that time the Lord said unto Samuel: Go and say unto
Saul: Thou art sent to destroy Amalech, that the words may be fulfilled

|           |
|-----------|
| Ex. 17:14 |

which Moses my servant spake saying: I will destroy the name of Amalech
out of the land whereof I spake in mine anger. And forget not to destroy
every soul of them as it is commanded thee. 2. And Saul departed and
fought against Amalech, and

|          |
|----------|
| Ex. 15:1 |

, saved alive Agag the king of Amalech because he said to him: I will
shew thee hidden treasures. Therefore he spared him and saved him alive
and brought him unto Armathem. 3. And God said unto Samuel: Hast thou
seen how the king is corrupted with money even in a moment, and hath
saved alive Agag king of Amalech and his wife? Now therefore suffer Agag
and his wife to come together this night, and to-morrow thou shalt slay
him; but his wife they shall preserve till she bring forth a male child,
and then she also shall die, and he that is born of her shall be an
offence unto Saul. But thou, arise on the morrow and slay Agag: for the
sin of Saul is written before my face alway.

|           |
|-----------|
| Ex. 15:13 |

4 And when Samuel was risen on the morrow, Saul came forth to meet him
and said unto him: The Lord hath delivered our enemies into our hands as
he said. And Samuel said to Saul: Whom hath Israel wronged? for before
the time was come that a king should rule over him, he demanded thee for
his king, and thou, when thou wast sent to do the will of the Lord, hast
transgressed it. Therefore

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

he that was saved alive by thee shall die now, and those hidden
treasures whereof he spake he shall not show thee, and he that is born
of him shall be an offence unto thee. And Samuel came unto Agag with a
sword and slew him, and returned

|             |
|-------------|
| 1 Sam. 15:3 |

unto his house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIX](bap73)
