[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4925)  [Next](sbe4929)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 89">{p. 89}</span>

## THE SMALLER

# SUKHÂVATÎ-VYÛHA.

 

ADORATION TO THE OMNISCIENT!

   § 1. Thus it was heard by me: At one time the Blessed (Bhagavat, i.e.
Buddha) dwelt at *S*râvastî\[1\], in the *G*eta-grove, in the garden of
Anâthapi*nd*aka, together with a large company of Bhikshus (mendicant
friars), viz. with twelve hundred and fifty Bhikshus, all of them
acquainted with the five kinds of knowledge\[2\], elders, great
disciples\[3\], and Arhats\[4\]

\[1. *S*râvastî, capital of the Northern Ko*s*alas, residence of king
Prasena*g*it. It was in ruins when visited by Fa-hian (init. V. Saec.);
not far from the modern Fizabad. Cf. Burnouf, Introduction, p. 22.

2\. Abhi*gñ*ânâbhi*gñ*âtai*h*. The Japanese text reads
abhi*gñ*âtâbhâ*gñ*âtai*h*, i.e. abhi*gñ*âtâbhi*gñ*âtai*h*. If this were
known to be the correct reading, we should translate it by 'known by
known people,' notus a viris notis, i.e. well known, famous. Abhi*gñ*âta
in the sense of known, famous, occurs in Lalitavistara, p. 25, and the
Chinese translators adopted the same meaning here. Again, if we
preferred the reading abhi*gñ*ânâbhi*gñ*âtai*h*, this, too, would admit
of an intelligible rendering, viz. known or distinguished by the marks
or characteristics, i.e. the good qualities which belong to a Bhikshu.
But the technical meaning is 'possessed of a knowledge of the five
abhi*gñ*âs.' It would be better in that case to write
abhi*gñ*âtâbhi*gñ*ânai*h*, but no MSS. seem to support that reading. The
five abhi*gñ*âs or abhi*gñ*ânas which an Arhat ought to possess are the
divine sight, the divine hearing, the knowledge of the thoughts of
others, the remembrance of former existences, and magic power. See
Burnouf, Lotus, Appendice, No. xiv. The larger text of the Sukhâvatî has
abhi*gñ*ânâbhi*gñ*ai*h*, and afterwards abhi*gñ*âtâbhi*gñ*ai*h*. The
position of the participle as the uttara-pada in sueh compounds as
abhi*gñ*ânâbhi*gñ*âtai*h* is common in Buddhist Sanskrit. Mr. Bendall
has called my attention to the Pâli abhi*ññ*âta-abhi*ññ*âta
(Vinaya-pi*t*aka, ed. Oldenberg, vol. i, p. 43), which favours the
Chinese acceptation of the term.

3\. Mahâ*s*râvaka, the great disciples; sometimes the eighty principal
disciples.

4\. Arhadbhi*h*. I have left the correct Sanskrit form, because the
Japanese text gives the termination adbhi*h*. Hôgö's text has the more
usual form arhantai*h*. The change of the old classical arhat into the
Pâli arahan, and then back into Sanskrit arhanta, arahanta, and at last
arihanta, with the meaning of 'destroyer of the enemies,' i e. the
passions, shows very clearly the different stages through which Sanskrit
words passed in the different phases of Buddhist literature. In Tibet,
in Mongolia, and in China, Arhat is translated by 'destroyer of the
enemy,' i.e. ari-hanta. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 287, Introduction, p.
295. Arhat is really the title of the Bhikshu on reaching the fourth
degree of perfection Cf. Sûtra of the 42 Sections, cap. 2. Clemens of
Alexandria (d. 220) speaks of the {Greek *Semnoí*} who worshipped a
pyramid erected over the relics of a god. This may be a translation of
Arhat, as Lassen ('De nom. Ind. philosoph.' in Rhein. Museum, vol. i, p.
187) and Burnouf (Introduction, p. 295) supposed, or a transliteration
of Samana. Clemens also speaks of {Greek *Semnaí*} (Stromat. p. 539,
Potter).\]

<span id="p. 90">{p. 90}</span>

such as *S*âriputra, the elder, Mahâmaudgalyâyana, Mahâkâ*s*yapa,
Mahâkapphi*n*a, Mahâkâtyâyana, Mahâkaush*th*ila, Revata,
*S*uddhipanthaka, Nanda, Ânanda, Râhula, Gavâmpati, Bharadvâ*g*a,
Kâlodayin, Vakkula, and Aniruddha. He dwelt together with these and many
other great disciples, and together with many noble-minded Bodhisattvas,
such as Ma*ñg*usrî, the prince, the Bodhisattva A*g*ita, the Bodhisattva
Gandhahastin, the Bodhisattva Nityodyukta, the Bodhisattva
Anikshiptadhura. He dwelt together with them and many other noble-minded
Bodhisattvas, and with *S*akra, the Indra or King\[5\]

<span class="small">\[5. Indra, the old Vedic god, has come to mean
simply lord, and in the *K*anda Paritta (Journal Asiatique, 1871, p.
220} we actually find Asurinda, the Indra or Lord of the
Asuras.\]</span>

<span id="p. 91">{p. 91}</span>

of the Devas, and with Brahman Sahâmpati. With these and many other
hundred thousand nayutas\[1\] of sons of the gods, Bhagavat dwelt at
*S*râvastî.

   § 2. Then Bhagavat addressed the honoured *S*âriputra and said, 'O
*S*âriputra, after you have passed from here over a hundred thousand
ko*t*îs of Buddha countries there is in the Western part a Buddha
country, a world called Sukhâvatî (the happy country). And there a
Tathâgata, called Amitâyus, an Arhat, fully enlightened, dwells now, and
remains, and supports himself, and teaches the Law\[2\].

   'Now what do you think, *S*âriputra, for what reason is that world
called Sukhâvatî (the happy)? In that world Sukhâvatî O *S*âriputra,
there is neither bodily nor mental pain for living beings. The sources
of happiness are innumerable there. For that reason is that world called
Sukhâvatî (the happy).

   § 3. 'And again, O *S*âriputra, that world Sukhâvatî is adorned with
seven terraces, with seven rows of

\[1. The numbers in Buddhist literature, if they once exceed a ko*t*i or
ko*t*î, i. e. ten millions, become very vague, nor is their value always
the same. Ayuta, i.e. a hundred ko*t*îs; niyuta, i.e. a hundred ayutas;
and nayuta, i.e. 1 with 22 zeros, are often confounded; nor does it
matter much so far as any definite idea is concerned which such numerals
convey to our mind. See Prof. H. Schubert, 'On large numbers,' in Open
Court, Dec. 14, 1893.

2\. Tish*th*ati dhriyate yâpayati dharma*m* *k*a de*s*ayati. This is an
idiomatic phrase, which occurs again and again in the Nepalese text of
the Sukhâvatî (MS. 26 b, ll. 1, 2; 55 a, l. 2, &c.). It seems to mean,
he stands there, holds himself, supports himself, and teaches the law.
Burnouf translates the same phrase by, 'ils se trouvent, vivent,
existent' (Lotus, p. 354). On yâpeti in Pâli, see Fausböll,
Dasaratha-*g*âtaka, pp. 26, 38; and yâpana in Sanskrit.\]

<span id="p. 92">{p. 92}</span>

palm-trees, and with strings of bells\[1\]. It is enclosed on every
side\[2\], beautiful, brilliant with the four gems, viz. gold, silver,
beryl and crystal\[3\]. With

\[1. Kinkinî*g*âla. The texts read kanka*n*a*g*alai*s* *k*a and
kanka*n*î*g*alais *k*a, and again later kanka*n*î*g*alunâm (also lû) and
kanka*n*î*g*alânâm. Mr. Beal translates from Chinese 'seven rows of
exquisite curtains,' and again 'gemmous curtains.' First of all, it
seems clear that we must read *g*âla, net, web, instead of *g*ala.
Secondly, kanka*n*a, bracelet, gives no sense, for what could be the
meaning of nets or strings of bracelets? I prefer to read kinki*n*igâla,
nets or strings or rows of bells. Such rows of bells served for
ornamenting a garden, and it may be said of them that, if moved by the
wind, they give forth certain sounds. In the commentary on Dhammapada
30, p. 191, we meet with kinkinika*g*âla, from which likewise the music
proceeds; see Childers, s.v. *g*âla. In the MSS. of the Nepalese
Sukhâvatî-vyûha (R.A.S.), p. 39 a, l. 4, I likewise find
svar*n*aratnakinki*n*îgâlâni, which settles the matter, and shows how
little confidence we can place in the Japanese texts.

2\. Anuparikshipta, enclosed; see parikkhepo in Childers' Dictionary,
and compare pairidaêza, paradise.

3\. The four and seven precious things in Pâli are (according to
Childers):--

|                               |                                           |                                               |                                   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| <span class="small">1.</span> | <span class="small">suva*nn*a*m*,</span>  | <span class="small">gold.</span>              |                                   |
| <span class="small">2.</span> | <span class="small">ra*g*ata*m*,</span>   | <span class="small">silver.</span>            |                                   |
| <span class="small">3.</span> | <span class="small">muttâ,</span>         | <span class="small">pearls.</span>            |                                   |
| <span class="small">4.</span> | <span class="small">ma*n*i,</span>        | <span class="small">gems (as sapphire,</span> | <span class="small">ruby).</span> |
| <span class="small">5.</span> | <span class="small">ve*l*uriya*m*,</span> | <span class="small">cat's eye.</span>         |                                   |
| <span class="small">6.</span> | <span class="small">va*g*ira*m*,</span>   | <span class="small">diamond.</span>           |                                   |
| <span class="small">7.</span> | <span class="small">pavâ*l*am,</span>     | <span class="small">coral.</span>             |                                   |

Here Childers translates cat's eye; but s.v. ve*l*uriya*m*, he says, a
precious stone, perhaps lapis lazuli.

In Sanskrit (Burnouf, Lotus, p. 320):--

|                               |                                          |                                          |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">1.</span> | <span class="small">suvar*n*a,</span>    | <span class="small">gold.</span>         |
| <span class="small">2.</span> | <span class="small">rûpya,</span>        | <span class="small">silver.</span>       |
| <span class="small">3.</span> | <span class="small">vai*d*ûrya,</span>   | <span class="small">lapis lazuli.</span> |
| <span class="small">4.</span> | <span class="small">spha*t*ika,</span>   | <span class="small">crystal.</span>      |
| <span class="small">5.</span> | <span class="small">lohitamukti,</span>  | <span class="small">red pearls.</span>   |
| <span class="small">6.</span> | <span class="small">a*s*magarbha,</span> | <span class="small">diamond.</span>      |
| <span class="small">7.</span> | <span class="small">musâragalva,</span>  | <span class="small">coral.</span>        |

Julien (Pèlerins Buddhistes, vol. ii, p. 482) gives the following
list:--

|                               |                                          |                                          |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">1.</span> | <span class="small">spha*t*ika,</span>   | <span class="small">rock crystal.</span> |
| <span class="small">2.</span> | <span class="small">vaidûrya,</span>     | <span class="small">lapis lazuli.</span> |
| <span class="small">3.</span> | <span class="small">a*s*magarbha,</span> | <span class="small">comaline.</span>     |
| <span class="small">4.</span> | <span class="small">musâragalva,</span>  | <span class="small">amber.</span>        |
| <span class="small">5.</span> | <span class="small">padmarâga,</span>    | <span class="small">ruby.</span>         |

Vai*d*ûrya (or Vaidûrya) is mentioned in the
Tathâgatagu*n*a*gñ*âna*k*intyavishayâvatâranirde*s*a (Wassilief, p. 161)
as a precious stone which, if placed on green cloth, looks green, if
placed on red cloth, red. The fact that vaidûrya is often compared with
the colour of the eyes of a cat would seem to point to the cat's eye
(see Borooah's Engl.-Sanskrit Dictionary, vol. ii, preface, p. ix),
certainly not to lapis lazuli. Cat's eye is a kind of chalcedony. I see,
however, that vaidûrya has been recognised as the original of the Greek
{Greek *bh'rullos*}, a very ingenious conjecture, either of Weber's or
of Pott's, considering that lingual d has a sound akin to r, and ry may
be changed to ly and ll (Weber, Omina, P.326). The Persian billaur or
ballúr, which Skeat gives as the etymon of {Greek *bh'rullos*}, is of
Arabic origin, means crystal, and could hardly have found its way into
Greek at so early a time. See 'India, what can it teach us?' p. 267.\]

<span id="p. 93">{p. 93}</span>

such arrays of excellences peculiar to a Buddha country is that Buddha
country adorned.

   § 4. 'And again, O *S*âriputra, in that world Sukhâvatî there are
lotus lakes, adorned with the seven gems, viz. gold, silver, beryl,
crystal, red pearls, diamonds, and corals as the seventh. They are full
of water which possesses the eight good qualities\[1\], their waters
rise as high as the fords and bathing-places, so that even crows\[2\]
may drink there; they are

\[1. The eight good qualities of water are limpidity and purity,
refreshing coolness, sweetness, softness, fertilising qualities,
calmness, power of preventing famine, productiveness. See Beal, Catena,
p. 379.

2\. Kâkâpeya. One text reads kâkapeya, the other kâkâpeya. It is
difficult to choose. The more usual word is kâkapeya, which is explained
by Pâ*n*ini, II, 1, 33. It is uncertain, however, whether kâkapeya is
meant as a laudatory or asa depreciatory term. Bohtlingk takes it in the
latter sense, and translates nadî kâkapeyâ, by a shallow river that
could be drunk up by a crow. Târânâtha takes it in the former sense, and
translates nadî kâkapeyâ, as a river so full of water that a crow can
drink it without bending its neck (kâkair anatakandharai*h* pîyate;
pûr*n*odakatvena pra*s*asye kâkai*h* peye nadyâdau). In our passage
kâkapeya must be a term of praise, and we therefore could only render it
by 'ponds so full of water that crows could drink from them.' But why
should so well known a word as kâkapeya have been spelt kâkâpeya, unless
it was done intentionally? And if intentionally, what was it intended
for? We must remember that Pâ*n*ini, II, 1, 42 schol., teaches us how to
form the word tîrthalkâka, a crow at a tîrtha, which means a person in a
wrong place. It would seem therefore that crows were considered out of
place at a tîrtha or bathing-place, either because they were birds of
ill omen, or because they defiled the water. From that point of view,
kâkâpeya would mean a pond not visited by crows, free from crows.
Professor Pischel has called my attention to Mahâparinibbâna Sutta (J.
R. A. S. 1875, p. 67, p. 21), where kâkapeyâ clearly refers to a full
river. Samati*tth*ika, if this is the right reading, occurs in the same
place as an epithet of a river, by the side of kâkapeya, and I think it
most likely that it means rising to a level with the tîrthas, the fords
or bathing-places. Mr. Rhys Davids informs me that the commentary
explains the two words by samatittikâ ti samaharitâ, kâkapeyyâ ti
yatthatattha*k*i tîre *th*itena kâkena sakkâ patum ti.\]

<span id="p. 94">{p. 94}</span>

strewn with golden sand. And in these lotus-lakes there are all around
on the four sides four stairs, beautiful and brilliant with the four
gems, viz. gold, silver, beryl, crystal. And on every side of these
lotus-lakes gem-trees are growing, beautiful and brilliant with the
seven gems, viz. gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearls, diamonds, and
corals as the seventh. And in those lotus-lakes lotus-flowers are
growing, blue, blue-coloured, of blue splendour, blue to behold; yellow,
yellow-coloured, of yellow splendour, yellow to behold; red,
red-coloured, of red splendour, red to behold; white, white-coloured, of
white splendour, white to behold; beautiful, beautifully-coloured, of
beautiful splendour, beautiful to behold, and in circumference as large
as the wheel of a chariot.

<span id="p. 95">{p. 95}</span>

   § 5. 'And again, O *S*âriputra, in that Buddha country there are
heavenly musical instruments always played on, and the earth is lovely
and of golden colour. And in that Buddha countrya flower-rain of
heavenly Mândârava blossoms pours down three times every day, and three
times every night. And the beings who are born there worship before
their morning meal\[1\] a hundred thousand ko*t*îs of Buddhas by going
to other worlds; and having showered a hundred thousand ko*t*îs of
flowers upon each Tathâgata, they return to their own world in time for
the afternoon rest\[2\]. With such arrays of excellences peculiar to a
Buddha country is that Buddha country adorned.

   § 6. 'And again. O *S*âriputra, there are in that Buddha country
swans, curlews\[3\], and peacocks. Three times every night, and three
times every day, they

\[1. Purobhaktena. The text is difficult to read, but it can hardly be
doubtful that purobhaktena corresponds to Pâli purebhatta*m* (i. e.
before the morning meal), opposed to pa*kkh*âbhatta*m*, after the
noonday meal (i. e. in the afternoon). See Childers, s.v. Pûrvabhaktikâ
would be the first repast, as Prof. Cowell informs me.

2\. Divâvihârâya, for the noonday rest, the siesta. See Childers, s.v.
vihâra.

3\. Krau*ñk*a*h*. Snipe, curlew. Is it meant for Kuravîka, or Karavîka,
a fine-voiced bird (according to Kern, the Sk. karâyikâ), or for
Kalavinka, Pâli Kalavîka? See Childers, s.v. opapâtiko; Burnouf, Lotus,
p. 566. I see, however, the same birds mentioned together elsewhere, as
ha*m*sakrau*ñk*amayûra*s*uka*s*âlikakokila, &c. On mayûra see Mahâv.,
Introd. p. xxxix; Rv. I, 19 I, 14.\]

<span id="p. 96">{p. 96}</span>

come together and perform a concert each uttering his own note. And from
them thus uttering proceeds a sound proclaiming the five virtues, the
five powers, and the seven steps leading towards the highest
knowledge\[1\]. When the men there hear that sound, remembrance of
Buddha, remembrance of the Law, remembrance of the Church, rises in
their mind.

   'Now, do you think, O *S*âriputra, that there are beings who have
entered into the nature of animals (birds, &c.)? This is not to be
thought of. The

\[1. Indriyabalabodhyanga*s*abda. These are technical terms, but their
meaning is not quite clear. Spence Hardy, in his Manual, p. 498,
enumerates the five indrayas, viz. (1) sardhâwa, purity (probably
*s*raddhâ, faith); (2) wiraya, persevering exertion (vîrya); (3) sati or
smirti, the ascertainment of truth (sm*ri*ti); (4) samâdhi,
tranquillity; (5) pragnâwa, wisdom (pra*gñ*â).

The five balayas (bala), he adds, are the same as the five indrayas.

The seven bowdyânga (bodhyanga) are according to him: (1) sihi or
smirti, the ascertainment of the truth by mental application; (2)
dharmmawicha, the investigation of causes; (3) wirâya, persevering
exertion; (4) prîti, joy; (5) passadhi, or prasrabdhi, tranquillity; (6)
samâdhi, tranquillity in a higher degree, including freedom from all
that disturbs either body or mind; (7) upekshâ, equanimity.

It will be seen from this that some of these qualities or excellences
occur both as indriyas and bodhyangas, while balas are throughout
identical with indriyas.

Burnouf, however, in his Lotus, gives a list of five balas (from the
Vocabulaire Pentaglotte) which correspond with the five indriyas of
Spence Hardy; viz. *s*raddhâ-bala, power of faith; vîrya-bala, power of
vigour; sm*ri*ti-bala, power of memory; samâdhi-bala, power of
meditation; pra*gñ*â-bala, power of knowledge. They precede the seven
bodhyangas both in the Lotus, the Vocabulaire Pentaglotte, and the
Lalita-vistara.

To these seven bodhyangas Burnouf has assigned a special treatise
(Appendice xii, p. 796). They occur both in Sanskrit and Pâli. See also
Dharmasangraha s.v. in the Anecdota Oxoniensia.\]

<span id="p. 97">{p. 97}</span>

very name of hells is unknown in that Buddha country, and likewise that
of (descent into) animal bodies and of the realm of Yama (the four
apâyas)\[1\]. No, these tribes of birds have been made on purpose by the
Tathâgata Amitâyus, and they utter the sound of the Law. With such
arrays of excellences, &c.

   § 7. 'And again, O *S*âriputra, when those rows of palm-trees and
strings of bells in that Buddha country are moved by the wind, a sweet
and enrapturing sound proceeds from them. Yes, O *S*âriputra, as from a
heavenly musical instrument consisting of a hundred thousand ko*t*îs of
sounds, when played by Âryas, a sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds, a
sweet and enrapturing sound proceeds from those rows of palm-trees and
strings of bells moved by the wind. And when the men hear that sound,
reflection on Buddha arises in them, reflection on the Law, reflection
on the Church. With such arrays of excellences, &c.

   § 8. 'Now what do you think, O *S*âriputra, for what reason is that
Tathâgata called Amitâyus? The length of life (âyus), O *S*âriputra, of
that Tathâgata and of those men there is immeasurable (amita). Therefore
is that Tathâgata called Amitâyus. And ten kalpas have passed, O
*S*âriputra, since that Tathâgata awoke to perfect knowledge.

   § 9. 'And what do you think, O *S*âriputra, for what reason is that
Tathâgata called Amitâbha? The

<span class="small">\[1. Niraya, the hells, also called Naraka.
Yamaloka, the realm of Yama, the judge of the dead, is explained as the
four apâyas, i.e. Naraka, hell; Tiryagyoni, birth as animals; Pretaloka,
realm of the departed; Asuraloka, realm of evil spirits. The three terms
which are here used together occur likewise in a passage translated by
Burnouf, Introduction, p. 544.\]</span>

<span id="p. 98">{p. 98}</span>

splendour (âbhâ), O *S*âriputra, of that Tathâgata is unimpeded over all
Buddha countries. Therefore is that Tathâgata called Amitâbha.

   'And there is, O *S*âriputra, an innumerable assembly of disciples
with that Tathâgata, purified and venerable persons, whose number it is
not easy to count. With such arrays of excellences, &c.

   § 10. 'And again, O *S*âriputra, of those beings also who are born in
the Buddha country of the Tathâgata Amitâyus as purified Bodhisattvas,
never to return again and bound by one birth only, of those Bodhisattvas
also, O *S*âriputra, the number is not easy to count, except they are
reckoned as infinite in number\[1\].

   'Then again all beings, O *S*âriputra, ought to make fervent prayer
for that Buddha country. And why? Because they come together there with
such excellent men. Beings are not born in that Buddha country of the
Tathâgata Amitâyus as a reward and result of good works performed in
this present life\[2\].

\[1. Iti sankhyâ*m* ga*kkh*anti, they are called; cf. Childers, s.v.
sankhyâ. Asankhyeya, even more than aprameya, is the recognised term for
infinity. Burnouf, Lotus, p. 852.

2\. Avaramâtraka. This is the Pâli oramattako, 'belonging merely to the
present life,' and the intention of the writer seems to be to inculcate
the doctrine, that salvation can be obtained by mere repetitions of the
name of Amitâbha, in direct opposition to the original doctrine of
Buddha, that as a man soweth, so he reapeth. Buddha would have taught
that the ku*s*alamûla, the root or the stock of good works performed in
this world (avaramâtraka), will bear fruit in the next, while here 'vain
repetitions' seem all that is enjoyed. The Chinese translators take a
different view of this passage. But from the end of this section, where
we read kulaputre*n*a vâ kuladuhitrâ vâ tatra buddhakshetre
*k*ittaprâ*n*idhâna*m* kartavyam, it seems clear that the locative
(buddhakshetre) forms the object of the pra*n*idhâna, the fervent prayer
or longing. The Satpurushas already in the Buddhakshetra would be the
innumerable men (manushyâs) and Bodhisattvas mentioned before.\]

<span id="p. 99">{p. 99}</span>

No, whatever son or daughter of a family shall hear the name of the
blessed Amitâyus, the Tathâgata, and having heard it, shall keep it in
mind, and with thoughts undisturbed shall keep it in mind for one, two,
three, four, five, six or seven nights,--when that son or daughter of a
family comes to die, then that Amitâyus, the Tathâgata, surrounded by an
assembly of disciples and followed by a host of Bodhisattvas, will stand
before them at their hour of death, and they will depart this life with
tranquil minds. After their death they will be born in the world
Sukhâvatî in the Buddha country of the same Amitâyus, the Tathâgata.
Therefore, then, O *S*âriputra, having perceived this cause and
effect\[1\], I with reverence say thus, Every son and every daughter of
a family ought with their whole mind to make fervent prayer for that
Buddha country.

   § 11. 'And now, O *S*âriputra, as I here at present glorify that
world, thus, in the East, O *S*âriputra, other blessed Buddhas, led by
the Tathâgata Akshobhya, the Tathâgata Merudhva*g*a, the Tathâgata
Mahâmeru, the Tathâgata Meruprabhâsa, and the Tathâgata Ma*ñg*udhva*g*a,
equal in number to the sand of the river Gang*i*, comprehend their own
Buddha countries in their speech, and then reveal them\[2\].

\[1. Arthava*s*a, lit. the power of the thing; cf; Dhammapada, p. 388,
v. 289.

2\. I am not quite certain as to the meaning of this passage, but if we
enter into the bold metaphor of the text, viz. that the Buddhas cover
the Buddha countries with the organ of their tongue and then unrol it,
what is intended can hardly be anything but that they first try to find
words for the excellences of those countries, and then reveal or
proclaim them. Burnouf, however (Lotus, p. 417), takes the expression in
a literal sense, though he is shocked by its grotesqueness. On these
Buddhas and their countries, see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 113.\]

<span id="p. 100">{p. 100}</span>

Accept this repetition of the Law, called the "Favour of all Buddhas,"
which magnifies their inconceivable excellences.

   § 12. 'Thus also in the South do other blessed Buddhas, led by the
Tathâgata *K*andrasûryapradîpa. the Tathâgata Yasa*h*prabha, the
Tathâgata Mahâr*k*iskandha, the Tathâgata Merupradîpa, the Tathâgata
Anantavîrya, equal in number to the sand of the river Gangâ, comprehend
their own Buddha countries in their speech, and then reveal them.
Accept, &c.

   § 13. 'Thus also in the West do other blessed Buddhas, led by the
Tathâgata Amitâyus, the Tathâgata Amitaskandha, the Tathâgata
Amitadhva*g*a, the Tathâgata Mahâprabha, the Tathâgata Mahcâratnaketu,
the Tathâgata *S*uddhara*s*miprabha, equal in number to the sand of the
river Gangâ, comprehend, &c.

   § 14. 'Thus also in the North do other blessed Buddhas, led by the
Tathâgata Mahâr*k*iskandha, the Tathâgata Vai*s*vânaranirghosha, the
Tathâgata Dundubhisvaranirghosha, the Tathâgata Dushpradharsha, the
Tathâgata Âdityasambhava, the Tathâgata *G*aleniprabha
(*G*valanaprabha?), the Tathâgata Prabhâkara, equal in number to the
sand, &c.

   § 15. 'Thus also in the Nadir do other blessed Buddhas, led by the
Tathâgata Si*m*ha, the Tathâgata Ya*s*as, the Tath*ci*gata
Ya*s*a*h*prabhâva, the Tathâgata Dharma, the Tathâgata Dharmadhara, the
Tathâgata Dharmadhva*g*a, equal in number to the sand, &c.

   § 16. 'Thus also in the Zenith do other blessed Buddhas, led by the
Tathâgata Brahmaghosha, the Tathâgata Nakshatrarâ*g*a, the Tathâgata
Indraketudhva*g*arâ*g*a, the Tathâgata Gandhottama, the Tathâgata
Gandhaprabhâsa, the Tathâgata Mahâr*k*iskandha, the Tathâgata
Ratnakusumasampushpitagâtra,

<span id="p. 101">{p. 101}</span>

the Tathâgata Sâlendrarâ*g*a, the Tathâgata Ratnotpala*s*rî, the
Tathâgata Sarvârthadar*s*a, the Tathâgata Sumerukalpa, equal in number
to the sand, &c.\[1\]

   § 17. 'Now what do you think, O *S*âriputra, for what reason is that
repetition (treatise) of the Law called the Favour of all Buddhas? Every
son or daughter of a family who shall hear the name of that repetition
of the Law and retain in their memory the names of those blessed
Buddhas, will be favoured by the Buddhas, and will never return again,
being once in possession of the transcendent true knowledge. Therefore,
then, O *S*âriputra, believe\[2\], accept, and do not doubt of me and
those blessed Buddhas!

   'Whatever sons or daughters of a family shall make mental prayer for
the Buddha country of that blessed Amitâyus, the Tathâgata, or are
making it now or have made it formerly, all these will never return
again, being once in possession of the transcendent true knowledge. They
will be born in that Buddha country, have been born, or are being born

\[1. It should be remarked that the Tathâgatas here assigned to the ten
quarters differ entirely from those assigned to them in the
Lalita-vistara, Book XX. Not even Amitâbha is mentioned there.

2\. Pratîyatha. The texts give again and again pattîyatha, evidently the
Pâli form, instead of pratîyata. I have left tha, the Pâli termination
of the 2 p. pl. in the imperative, instead of ta, because that form was
clearly intended, while pa for pra may be an accident. Yet I have little
doubt that patîyatha was in the original text. That it is meant for the
imperative, we see from *s*raddadhâdhvam, &c., further on. Other traces
of the influence of Pâli or Prâkrit on the Sanskrit of our Sûtra appear
in arhantai*h*, the various reading for arhadbhi*h*, which I preferred;
sambahula for bahula; dhriyate yâpayati; purobhaktena; anyatra;
sailkhyâ*m* ga*kkh*anti; avaramâtraka; ve*th*ana instead of vesh*t*ana,
in nirve*th*ana; dharmaparyâya (Corp. Inscript. plate xv). &c.\]

<span id="p. 102">{p. 102}</span>

now. Therefore, then, O *S*âriputra, mental prayer is to be made for
that Buddha country by faithful sons and daughters of a family.

   § 18. 'And as I at present magnify here the inconceivable excellences
of those blessed Buddhas, thus, O *S*âriputra, do those blessed Buddhas
magnify my own inconceivable excellences.

   'A very difficult work has been done by *S*âkyamuni, the sovereign of
the *S*âkyas. Having obtained the transcendent true knowledge in this
world Sahâ, he taught the Law which all the world is reluctant to
accept, during this corruption of the present kalpa, during this
corruption of mankind, during this corruption of belief, during this
corruption of life, during this corruption of passions.

   § 19. 'This is even for me, O *S*âriputra, an extremely difficult
work that, having obtained the transcendent true knowledge in this world
Sahâ, I taught the Law which all the world is reluctant to accept,
during this corruption of mankind, of belief, of passion, of life, and
of this present kalpa.'

   § 20. Thus spoke Bhagavat joyful in his mind. And the honourable
*S*âriputra, and the Bhikshus and Bodhisattvas, and the whole world with
the gods, men, evil spirits and genii, applauded the speech of Bhagavat.

This is the Mahâyânasûtra\[1\]  
called Sukhâvatî-vyûha.

\[1. The Sukhâvatî even in its shortest text, is called a
Mahâyâna-sûtra, nor is there any reason why a Mahâyâna-sûtra should not
be short. The meaning of Mahâyâna-sûtra is simply a Sûtra belonging to
the Mahâyâna school, the school of the Great Boat. It was Burnouf who,
in his Introduction to the History of Buddhism, tried very hard to
establish a distinction between the Vaipulya or developed Sûtras, and
what he calls the simple Sûtras. Now, the Vaipulya Sûtras may all belong
to the Mahâyâna school, but that would not prove that all the Sûtras of
the Mahâyâna school are Vaipulya or developed Sûtras. The name of simple
Sûtra, in opposition to the Vaipulya or developed Sûtras, is not
recognised by the Buddhists themselves; at least, I know no name for
simple Sûtras. No doubt there is a great difference between a Vaipulya
Sûtra, such as the Lotus of the Good Law, translated by Burnouf, and the
Sûtras which Burnouf translated, for instance, from the Divyâvadâna. But
what Burnouf considers as the distinguishing mark of a Vaipulya Sûtra,
viz. the occurrence of Bodhisattvas, as followers or the Buddha
*s*âkyamuni, would no longer seem to be tenable\[\*\], unless we classed
our short Sukhâvatî-vyûha as a Vaipulya or developed Sûtra. For this
there is no authority. Our Sûtra is a Mahâyâna Sûtra, but never called a
Vaipulya Sûtra, and yet in this Sûtra the Bodhisattvas constitute a very
considerable portion among the followers or Buddha. But more than that,
Amitâbha, the Buddha of Sukhâvatî another personage whom Burnouf looks
upon as peculiar to the Vaipulya Sûtras, who is, in fact, one of the
Dhyâni-buddhas, though not called by that name in our Sûtra, forms the
chief object or its teaching, and is represented as known to Buddha
*S*âkyamuni, nay, as having become a Buddha long before the Buddha
*S*âkyamuni\[+\]. The larger text of the Sukhâvatî-vyûha would
certainly, according to Burnouf's definition, seem to fall into the
category of the Vaipulya Sûtras. But it is not so called in the MSS.
which I have seen, and Burnouf himself gives an analysis of that Sûtra
(Introduction, p. 99) as a specimen of a Mahâyâna, but not of a Vaipulya
Sûtra.

\*. 'La présence des Bodhisattvas ou leur absence intéresse donc le
fonds même des livres où on la remarque, et il est bien évident que ce
seul point trace une ligne de démarcation profonde entre les Sûtras
ordinaires et les Sûtras développés.'--Burnouf, Introduction, p. 112.

+. 'L'idée d'un ou de plusieurs Buddhas surhumains, celle de
Bodhisattvas créés par eux, sont des conceptions aussi étrangères à ces
livres (les Sûtras simples) que celle d'un Âdibuddha ou d'un
Dieu.'--Burnouf, Introduction, p. 120.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Va*g*ra*kkh*edikâ](sbe4929)
