[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4917)  [Next](sbe4919.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 174">{p. 174}</span>

## BOOK XVI.

 

   1. The omniscient lion of the *S*âkyas then caused all the assembly,
headed by those who belonged to the company of Maitrîya\[1\], to turn
the wheel of the Law.

   2. 'Listen, O company belonging to Maitrîya\[1\], ye who form one
vast congregation,--as it was proclaimed by those past arch-saints, so
is it now proclaimed by Me.

   3. 'These are the two extremes, O mendicants, in the self-control of
the religious ascetic,--the one which is devoted to the joys of desire,
vulgar and common,

   4. 'And the other which is tormented by the excessive pursuit of
self-inflicted pain in the mortification of the soul's
corruptions,--these are the two extremes of the religious ascetic, each
devoted to that which is unworthy and useless.

   5. 'These have nothing to do with true asceticism, renunciation of
the world, or self-control, with true indifference or suppression of
pain, or with any of the means of attaining deliverance.

   6. 'They do not tend to the spiritual forms of knowledge, to wisdom,
nor to Nirvâ*n*a; let him who is acquainted with the uselessness of
inflicting pain and weariness on the body,

<span class="small">\[1. The Maitrîya-vargîyâ*h*?\]</span>

<span id="p. 175">{p. 175}</span>

   7. 'Who has lost his interest\[1\] in any pleasure or pain of a
visible nature, or in the future, and who follows this middle Path for
the good of the world,--

   8. 'Let him, the Tathâgata, the teacher of the world, proclaim the
good Law, beginning that manifestation of the good Law which consists of
the (four) noble truths,

   9. 'And let the Buddha proclaim the Path with its eight divisions. I
too who am now the perfectly wise, and the Tathâgata in the world,

   10. 'Will proclaim the noble Law, beginning with those sublime truths
and the eightfold Path which is the means to attain perfect knowledge.

   11. 'Instructing all the world I will show to it Nirvâ*n*a; those
four noble truths must be heard first and comprehended by the soul.

   12. 'That must be understood and thoroughly realised by the true
students of wisdom, which has been known here by me, through the favour
of all the Buddhas.

   13. 'Having known the noble eightfold Path, and embraced it as
realised with joy,--thus I declare to you the first means for the
attainment of liberation.

   14. 'Having thus commenced the noble truths, I will describe the true
self-control; this noble truth is the best of all holy laws.

   15. 'Walk as long as existence lasts, holding fast the noble
eightfold Path,--this noble truth is the highest law for the attainment
of true liberation.

   16. 'Having pondered and held fast the noble

<span class="small">\[1. Nirata seems used here for virata.\]</span>

<span id="p. 176">{p. 176}</span>

eightfold Path, walk in self-control; others, not understanding this,
idle talkers full of self-conceit,

   17. 'Say according to their own will that merit is the cause of
corporeal existence, others maintain that the soul must be preserved
(after death) for its merit is the cause of liberation.

   18. 'Some say that everything comes spontaneously; others that the
consequence was produced before; others talk loudly that all also
depends on a Divine Lord.

   19. 'If merit and demerit are produced by the good and evil fortune
of the soul, how is it that good fortune does not always come to all
embodied beings (at last), even in the absence of merit?

   20. 'How is the difference accounted for, which we see in form,
riches, happiness, and the rest,--if there are no previous actions, how
do good and evil arise here?

   21. 'If karman is said to be the cause of our actions, who would
imagine cogency in this assumption? If all the world is produced
spontaneously, who then would talk of the ownership of actions?

   22. 'If good is caused by good, then evil will be the cause of
evil,--how then could liberation from existence be produced by difficult
penances\[1\]?

   23. 'Others unwisely talk of Î*s*vara as a cause, how then is there
not uniformity in the world if Î*s*vara be the uniformly acting cause?

   24. 'Thus certain ignorant people, talking loudly "he is," "he is
not,"--through the demerits of their false theories, are at last born
wretched in the different hells.

<span class="small">\[1. I.e. viewed as an evil in themselves.\]</span>

<span id="p. 177">{p. 177}</span>

   25. 'Through the merits of good theories virtuous men, who understand
noble knowledge, go to heavenly worlds, from their self-restraint as
regards body, speech, and thought.

   26. 'All those who are devoted to existence are tormented with the
swarms of its evils, and being consumed by old age, diseases, and death,
each one dies and is born again.

   27. 'There are many wise men here who can discourse on the laws of
coming into being; but there is not even one who knows how the cessation
of being is produced.

   28. 'This body composed of the five skandhas, and produced from the
five elements, is all empty and without soul, and arises from the action
of the chain of causation,

   29. 'This chain of causation is the cause of coming into existence,
and the cessation of the series thereof is the cause of the state of
cessation.

   30. 'He who knowing this desires to promote the good of the world,
let him hold fast the chain of causation, with his mind fixed on wisdom;

   31. 'Let him embrace the vow of self-denial for the sake of wisdom,
and practise the four perfections\[1\], and go through existence always
doing good to all beings.

   32. 'Then having become an Arhat and conquered all the wicked, even
the hosts of Mâra, and attained the threefold wisdom, he shall enter
Nirvâ*n*a.

   33. 'Whosoever therefore has his mind indifferent

<span class="small">\[1. The four brahmavihârâ*h*, sc. charity,
compassion, sympathy with others' joy, and stoicism.\]</span>

<span id="p. 178">{p. 178}</span>

and is void of all desire for any further form of existence, let him
abolish one by one the several steps of the chain of causation\[1\].

   34. 'When these effects of the chain of causation are thus one by one
put an end to, he at last, being free from all stain and substratum,
will pass into a blissful Nirvâ*n*a.

   35. 'Listen all of you for your own happiness, with your minds free
from stain,--I will declare to you step by step this chain of causation.

   36. 'The idea of ignorance is what gives the root to the huge
poison-tree of mundane existence with its trunk of pain.

   37. 'The impressions\[2\] are caused by this, which produce \[the
acts of\] the body, voice, and mind; and consciousness arises from these
impressions, which produces as its development the five senses and the
mind (or internal sense).

   38. 'The organism\[3\] which is sometimes called sa*mgñ*â or
sa*m*dar*s*ana\[4\], springs from this; and from this arises the six
organs of the senses, including mind.

   39. 'The association of the six organs with their objects is called
"contact;" and the consciousness of these different contacts is called
"sensation\[5\];"

   40. 'By this is produced thirst, which is the desire

\[1. Cf. Childers in Colebrooke's Essays, I, p. 453.

2\. These sa*m*skârâ*h* constitute predispositions or tendencies.

3\. Literally 'the name and the form,' the individual, consisting of
mind and body.

4\. The Nâmarûpa is properly the organised body (rûpa) and the three
mental skandhas, vedanâ, sa*mgñ*â, and the sa*m*skârâ*h*, which are
together caled nâma.

5\. Vedanâ.\]

<span id="p. 179">{p. 179}</span>

of being troubled\[1\] by worldly objects; "attachment to continued
existence," arising from this, sets itself in action towards pleasure
and the rest;

   41. 'From attachment springs continued existence, which is sensual,
possessing form, or formless\[2\]; and from existence arises birth
through a returning to various wombs.

   42. 'On birth is dependent the series of old age, death, sorrow and
the like; by putting a stop to ignorance and what follows from it, all
these successively surcease.

   43. 'This is the chain of causation, having many turns, and whose
sphere of action is created by ignorance,--this is to be meditated upon
by you who enjoy the calm of dwelling tranquilly in lonely woods\[3\];

'He who knows it thoroughly reaches at last to absolute tenuity; and
having become thus attenuated he becomes blissfully extinct.

   44. 'When you have thus learned this, in order to be freed from the
bond of existence, you must cut down with all your efforts the root of
pain, ignorance.

   45. 'Then, being set free from the bonds of the prison-house of
existence, as Arhats, possessing natures perfectly pure, you shall
attain Nirvâ*n*a.'

   46. Having heard this lesson preached by the chief of saints, all the
mendicants comprehended the course and the cessation of embodied
existence.

\[1. Sa*m*kle*s*a,--should we read sa*ms*lesha?

2\. I.e. in the eleven kâmalokas, the sixteen rûpabrahmalokas, and the
four arûpabrahmalokas.

3\. The metre shows that two short syllables are wanting in the line,
vi*g*ana (vana) vi*s*râma*s*amibhi*h*.\]

<span id="p. 180">{p. 180}</span>

   47. As these five ascetics listened to his words, their intellectual
eye was purified for the attainment of perfect wisdom:

   48. The eye of dharma\[1\] was purified in six hundred millions of
gods, and the eye of wisdom in eight hundred millions of Brahmans\[2\].

   49. The eye of dharma was purified in eighty thousand men, and even
in all beings an ardour for the Law was made visible.

   50. Everywhere all kinds of evil became tranquillised, and on every
side an ardour for all that helps on the good Law manifested itself.

   51. In the heavens everywhere the heavenly beings with troops of
Apsarases uttered forth great shouts, Even so, O noble being of
boundless energy!'

   52. Then Maitreya addressed the holy one, 'O great mendicant, in what
form has the wheel been turned by thee?'

   53. Having heard this question asked by the great-souled Maitreya,
the holy one looked at him and thus addressed him:

   54. 'The profound subtil wheel of the Law, so hard to be seen, has
been turned by me, into which the disputatious Tîrthikas cannot
penetrate.

   55. 'The wheel of the Law has been turned, which has no extension, no
origin, no birth, no home, isolated, and free from matter;

   56. 'Having many divisions, and not being without divisions\[3\],
having no cause, and susceptible of no definition,--that wheel, which is
described as

\[1. Dharma*k*akshu*h*, the eye to discern the Law?

2\. The divine inhabitants of the Brahmalokas.

3\. Anirvyûha*m*?\]

<span id="p. 181">{p. 181}</span>

possessing perfect equilibrium, has been proclaimed by the Buddha.

   57. 'Everything subject to successive causation is like a delusion, a
mirage, or a dream like the moon seen in water or an echo,--it lies
stretched out on the surface, not to be extirpated, but not eternal.

   58. 'The wheel of the Law has been described as that in which all
false doctrines are extirpated; it is always like the pure ether,
involving no doubts, ever bright.

   59. 'The wheel of the Law is described as without end or middle,
existing apart from "it is" or "it is not," separated from soul or
soullessness.

   60. 'The wheel of the Law has been here set forth, with a description
according to its real nature,--as it has a limit and as it has not a
limit, in its actual quantity and quality.

   61. 'The wheel of the Law has been here set forth, described as
possessing unique attributes, apart from the power of the eye and so too
as regards the sense of hearing or smell;

   62. 'Apart from the tongue, the touch, or the mind,--without soul or
exertion;

   'Such is this wheel of the Law which has been turned by me;

   63. 'He makes wise all the ignorant,--therefore is he called the
Buddha\[1\]; this knowledge of the laws of reality has been ascertained
by me of myself,

   64. 'Apart from all teaching by another, therefore is he called the
self-existent,--having, all laws under his control, therefore is he
called the lord of Law.

   65. 'He knows what is right (naya) and wrong (anaya) in laws,
therefore is he called Nâyaka; he

<span class="small">\[1. Buddha seems here to identify himself with his
Law.\]</span>

<span id="p. 182">{p. 182}</span>

teaches unnumbered beings as they become fit to be taught.

   66. 'He has reached the furthest limit of instruction, therefore is
he called Vinâyaka, from his pointing out the best of good paths to
beings who have lost their way.

   67. 'He has reached the furthest limit of good teaching, he is the
guide to all the Law,--attracting all beings by his knowledge of all the
means of conciliation;

   68. 'He has passed through the forest of mundane existence, therefore
is he called the Leader of the Caravan; the absolute ruler over all law,
therefore he is the *G*ina, the lord of Law.

   69. 'From his turning the wheel of the Law he is the lord of all the
sovereigns of Law; the master-giver of the Law, the teacher, the master
of the Law, the lord of the world;

   70. 'He who has offered the sacrifice, accomplished his end,
fulfilled his hope, achieved his success, the consoler, the loving
regarder, the hero, the champion, the victorious one in conflict;

   71. 'He has come out from all conflict, released himself and the
releaser of all,--he is become the light of the world, the illuminator
of the knowledge of true wisdom;

   72. 'The dispeller of the darkness of ignorance, the illuminer of the
great torch, the great physician, the great seer, the healer of all
evils,

   73. 'The extractor of the barb of evil from all those who are wounded
by evil,--he who is possessed of all distinctive marks and adorned with
all signs,

   74. 'With his body and limbs every way perfect,

<span id="p. 183">{p. 183}</span>

of pure conduct and perfectly clear mind, possessed of the ten powers,
having great fortitude, learned with all learning,

   75. 'Endowed with all the independent states\[1\], he who has
attained the great Yâna, the lord of all Dharma, the ruler, the monarch
of all worlds, the sovereign,

   76. 'The lord of all wisdom, the wise, the destroyer of the pride of
all disputers, the omniscient, the Arhat, possessed of the perfect
knowledge, the great Buddha, the lord of saints;

   77. 'The victorious triumphant overthrower of the insolence and pride
of the evil Mâra, the perfect Buddha, the Sugata, the wise one, he who
brings the desired end to all beings,

   78. 'Ever cognisant of past acts, never speaking falsely, a mine of
perfect excellence and of all good qualities, the destroyer of all evil
ways, the guide in all good ways\[2\],

   79. 'The ruler of the world, the bearer of the world, the master of
the world, the sovereign of the world, the teacher of the world, the
preceptor of the world, he who brings to the world the Law, virtue, and
its true end,

   80. 'The fount of an ambrosia which quenches the scorching of the
flame of all pain, and the powerful luminary which dries up the great
ocean of all pain,

   81. 'He who brings all virtue and all true wealth, the possessor of
perfect excellence and all good qualities, the guide on the road of
wisdom, he who shows the way to Nirvâ*n*a,

\[1. Eighteen in all. See Burnouf, Lotus, pp. 648 &c.

2\. Query sadv*ri*tti for sa*m*v*ri*tti?\]

<span id="p. 184">{p. 184}</span>

   82. 'The Tathâgata, without stain, without attachment, without
uncertainty.--This is the compendious declaration in the turning of the
wheel of the Law.

   83. 'A concise manifestation of a Tathâgata's qualities is now
declared by me; for a Buddha's knowledge is endless, unlimited like the
ether;

   84. 'A narrator might spend a Kalpa, but the virtues of the Buddha
would not come to an end,--thus by me has the multitude of the virtues
of the Buddha been described.

   85. 'Having heard this and welcomed it with joy go on ever in
happiness; this, Sirs, is the Mahâyâna, the instrument of the Law of the
perfect Buddha, which is the establisher of the welfare of all beings,
set forth by all the Buddhas.

   86. 'In order that this methodical arrangement of the Law may be
always spread abroad, do you yourselves always proclaim it and hand it
on.

   87. 'Whosoever, Sirs, hears, sees, and welcomes with joy this
methodical arrangement of the Law, which is a mine of happiness and
prosperity, and honours it with folded hands,

   88. 'Shall attain pre-eminent strength with a glorious form and
limbs, and a retinue of the holy, and an intelligence of the highest
reach,

   89. 'And the happiness of perfect contemplation, with a deep
calm\[1\] of uninterrupted bliss, with his senses in their highest
perfection, and illuminated by unclouded knowledge.

   90. 'He shall assuredly attain these eight preeminent perfections,
who hears and sees this Law

<span class="small">\[1. I read naishkarmya for naishkramya.\]</span>

<span id="p. 185">{p. 185}</span>

with a serene soul and worships it with folded hands.

   91. 'Whosoever in the midst of the assembly shall gladly offer a
pulpit to the high-minded teacher of the great Law,

   92. 'That virtuous man shall assuredly attain the seat of the most
excellent, and also the seat of a householder, and the throne of a
universal monarch;

   93. 'He shall also attain the throne of one of the guardian-spirits
of the world, and also the firm throne of *S*akra, and also the throne
of the Va*s*avartina*h* gods, aye, and the supreme throne of Brahman;

   94. 'And also with the permission of the Bodhisattva who is seated on
the Bodhi throne he shall obtain the throne of a teacher of the good Law
who has risen to perfect knowledge.

   95. 'These eight seats shall the pure-souled one attain who offers
joyfully a seat to him who proclaims the Law.

   96. 'Whosoever with a believing heart, after examination, shall utter
applause to the pious man who proclaims this carefully arranged Law;

   97. 'Shall become a truthful and pure speaker, and one whose words
are to be accepted,--one whose utterances are welcome and delightful,
whose voice is sweet and gentle;

   98. 'Having a voice like a Kalavinka bird\[1\], with a deep and sweet
tone, having also a pure voice like Brahman's\[2\], and a loud voice
with a lion's sound.

   99. 'He as an all-wise and truthful speaker shall

\[1. A kind of sparrow.

2\. Or 'having a voice of pure spiritual truth?\]

<span id="p. 186">{p. 186}</span>

obtain these eight excellences of speech, who utters applause to one who
proclaims the good Law.

   100. 'And whosoever, after writing this method of the Law in a book,
shall set it in his house and always worship it and honour it with all
reverential observances,

   101. 'And uttering its praises shall hand the doctrine onward on
every side, he, the very pious man, shall obtain a most excellent
treasure of memory,

   102. 'And a treasure of insight\[1\], and a treasure of
prudence\[2\], and a treasure of good spells, and a treasure full of
intelligence,

   103. 'And a treasure of the highest wisdom, and the most excellent
treasure of the Law, and a treasure of knowledge, the means to attain
the excellences of the good Law,--

   104. 'These eight treasures shall that high-minded man attain who
joyfully writes this down and sets it in a sure place and always
worships it.

   105. 'And he who, himself holding this method of the Law in his mind,
sets it going around him, shall obtain a complete supply for liberality
for the good of the world,

   106. 'Next, a complete supply of virtuous dispositions, a most
excellent supply of sacred knowledge, a supply of perfect calmness, and
that which is called spiritual insight,

   107. A supply of the merit caused by the good Law, a most excellent
supply of knowledge, a supply of boundless compassion, which is the
means to attain the virtues of the perfect Buddha.

\[1. I read mahâmatinidhânam for mahâprati-.

2\. Gati? 'resources?'\]

<span id="p. 187">{p. 187}</span>

   108. 'He, full of joy, shall obtain these eight supplies who himself
holds this method of the Law in his mind and sets it going abroad.

   109. 'And he who shall declare this method of the Law to others,
shall have himself purified by great merit and shall be prosperous and
possessed of supernatural powers.

   110. 'He shall become a universal monarch, a king of kings, and even
a ruler among the guardians of the world\[1\], an Indra ruler of the
gods\[2\], and even the ruler of the Yâma heaven\[3\],

   111. 'Yea, the ruler of the Tushita heaven, and the ruler of the
Sunirmitâ*h*, and the king of the Vasavartina*h*\[4\], and the lord of
the Brahmaloka;

   112. 'Yea, Mahâbrahman, the highest of Sages, and in the end he shall
even become a Buddha,--he, possessing a thoroughly pure intelligence,
shall obtain these eight sublime rewards of merit.

   113. 'And he who, thoroughly intent, with a believing heart, and
filled with faith and devotion, shall hear this method of the Law as it
is preached,

   114. 'He shall have his intellect made perfectly pure, his mind
calmed with boundless charity, and his soul happy with boundless
compassion, and he shall be filled with boundless joy;

   115. 'His soul constantly calm with universal indifference, rejoicing
in the four contemplations, having reached the ecstatic state of
absolute indifference\[5\], and with his senses abolished,

   116. 'With the five transcendent faculties attained,

\[1. Sc. the Mahârâ*g*as of the first heaven.

2\. In the second Devaloka.

3\. The third Devaloka.

4\. These are the fourth, fifth and sixth Devalokas.

5\. Samârûpya?\]

<span id="p. 188">{p. 188}</span>

and destroying the aggregate of latent impressions, he, endowed with
supernatural powers, will attain the samadhi called *S*ûra*m*gama.

   117. 'He, having his soul pure, will attain these eight forms of
absolute spotlessness; yea, wherever this method of the Law will prevail
universally,

   118. 'There will be no fear of any disturbance in the kingdom, no
fear of evil-minded thieves, nor fear of evil beasts;

   119. 'There will be no fear of plagues, famines, or wildernesses; and
no alarm shall spread, caused by quarrel or war;

   120. 'There shall be no fear from the gods nor from Nâgas, Yakshas,
and the like, nor shall there be anywhere any fear of any misfortune.

   121. 'These eight fears shall not be found there where this Law
extends; it is all briefly explained, my friends,--all that arises from
holding it stedfastly.

   122. 'A yet higher and most excellent merit is declared by all the
Buddhas, even although all living beings were to practise complete
self-restraint.

   123. 'Let a man worship the Buddhas, honouring them always with
faith; from that comes this preeminent merit, as is declared by the
*G*inas.

   124. 'And whosoever joyfully worships a Pratyeka-Buddha, they shall
become themselves Pratyeka-Buddhas; therefore let every one worship
them.

   125. 'There is pre-eminent merit from the worship of one Bodhisattva,
and they shall all themselves become Bodhisattvas, let every one worship
them;

   126. 'Therefore there is pre-eminent merit from the worship of one
Buddha,--they shall all themselves

<span id="p. 189">{p. 189}</span>

become *G*inas, let every one devoutly worship them; and he too shall
obtain this pre-eminent merit who hears this or causes others to hear
it.

   127. 'And whosoever in days when the good Law is abolished abandons
love for his own body and life and proclaims day and night these good
words,--pre-eminent is his merit from this.

   128. 'He who wishes to worship constantly the lords of saints, the
Pratyeka-Buddhas and the Arhats, let him resolutely produce in his mind
the idea of true wisdom and proclaim these good words and the Law.

   129. 'This jewel of all good doctrines, which is uttered by the
Buddhas for the good of all beings,--even one who lives in a house will
be a Tathâgata for it, where this good doctrine prevails.

   130. 'He obtains a glorious and endless splendour who teaches even
one word thereof; he will not miss one consonant nor the meaning who
gives this Sûtra to others.

   131. 'He is the best of all guides of men, no other being is like
unto him; he is like a jewel, of imperishable glory, who hears this Law
with a pure heart.

   132. 'Therefore let those who are endowed with lofty ambitions,
always hear this Law which causes transcendent merit; let them hear it
and gladly welcome it and lay it up in their minds and continually
worship the three jewels with faith.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVII of the Buddha-*k*arita](sbe4919.md)
