[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4914)  [Next](sbe4916)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 137">{p. 137}</span>

## BOOK XIII.

 

   1. When the great sage, sprung from a line of royal sages, sat down
there with his soul fully resolved to obtain the highest knowledge, the
whole world rejoiced; but Mâra, the enemy of the good law, was afraid.

   2. He whom they call in the world Kâmadeva, the owner of the various
weapons, the flower-arrowed, the lord of the course of desire,--it is he
whom they also style Mâra the enemy of liberation.

   3. His three sons, Confusion, Gaiety, and Pride, and his three
daughters, Lust, Delight, and Thirst\[1\], asked of him the reason of
his despondency, and he thus made answer unto them:

   4. 'This sage, wearing the armour of resolution, and having drawn the
arrow of wisdom with the barb of truth, sits yonder intending to conquer
my realms,--hence is this despondency of my mind.

   5. 'If he succeeds in overcoming me and proclaims to the world the
path of final bliss, all this my realm will to-day become empty, as did
that of the disembodied lord when he violated the rules of his
station\[2\].

   6. 'While, therefore, he stands within my reach

\[1. For these cf. also ver. 14, and XV, 13.

2\. This probably refers to the legend of Nimi-videha, see Vish*n*u Pur.
IV. 5; it might be 'the king of the Videhas.' There may be also a
secondary allusion to the legend of Ananga and Siva.\]

<span id="p. 138">{p. 138}</span>

and while his spiritual eyesight is not yet attained, I will assail him
to break his vow as the swollen might of a river assails a dam.'

   7. Then having seized his flower-made bow and his five infatuating
arrows, he drew near to the root of the A*s*vattha tree with his
children, he the great disturber of the minds of living beings.

   8. Having fixed his left hand on the end of the barb and playing with
the arrow, Mâra thus addressed the calm seer as he sat on his seat,
preparing to cross to the further side of the ocean of existence:

   9. 'Up, up, O thou Kshatriya, afraid of death! follow thine own duty
and abandon this law of liberation! and having conquered the lower
worlds by thy arrows, proceed to gain the higher worlds of Indra.

   10. 'That is a glorious path to travel, which has been followed by
former leaders of men; this mendicant life is ill-suited for one born in
the noble family of a royal sage to follow.

   11. 'But if thou wilt not rise, strong in thy purpose,--then be firm
if thou wilt and quit not thy resolve,--this arrow is uplifted by
me,--it is the very one which was shot against Sûryaka\[1\], the enemy
of the fish.

   12. 'So too, I think, when somewhat probed by this weapon, even the
son of I*d*â\[2\], the grandson of the moon, became mad; and
Sâ*m*tanu\[3\] also lost

\[1. The sun, alluding to his amour with Va*d*avâ. (The lake is caled
vipannamînam in *Ri*tusa*m*hâra I, 20.)

2\. Purûravas (Professor Bühler suggests sp*ri*sh*t*a*h*.)

3\. Does this mean Vi*k*itravîrya the grandson of *S*a*m*tanu, see
Vishnu Pur. IV, 20?\]

<span id="p. 139">{p. 139}</span>

his self-control,--how much more then one of feebler powers now that the
age has grown degenerate?

   13. 'Therefore quickly rise up and come to thyself,--for this arrow
is ready, darting out its tongue, which I do not launch even against the
*k*akravâka birds, tenderly attached as they are and well deserving the
name of lovers.'

   14. But when, even though thus addressed, the *S*âkya saint unheeding
did not change his posture, then Mâra discharged his arrow at him,
setting in front of him his daughters and his sons\[1\].

   15. But even when that arrow was shot he gave no heed and swerved not
from his firmness; and Mâra, beholding him thus, sank down, and slowly
thus spoke, full of thought:

   16. 'He does not even notice that arrow by which the god *S*ambhu was
pierced with love for the daughter of the mountain\[2\] and shaken in
his vow; can he be destitute of all feeling? is not this that very
arrow?

   17. 'He is not worthy of my flower-shaft, nor my arrow "gladdener,"
nor the sending of my daughter Rati (to tempt him); he deserves the
alarms and rebukes and blows from all the gathered hosts of the demons.'

   18 Then Mâra called to mind his own army, wishing to work the
overthrow of the *S*âkya saint; and his followers swarmed round, wearing
different forms and carrying arrows, trees, darts, clubs, and swords in
their hands;

   19. Having the faces of boars, fishes, horses, asses,

\[1. See ver. 3.

2\. Umâ.\]

<span id="p. 140">{p. 140}</span>

and camels, of tigers, bears, lions, and elephants,--one-eyed,
many-faced, three-headed,--with protuberant bellies and speckled
bellies;

   20. Blended with goats, with knees swollen like pots, armed with
tusks and with claws, carrying headless trunks in their hands, and
assuming many forms, with half-mutilated faces, and with monstrous
mouths;

   21. Copper-red, covered with red spots, bearing clubs in their hands,
with yellow or smoke-coloured hair, with wreaths dangling down, with
long pendulous ears like elephants, clothed in leather or wearing no
clothes at all;

   22. Having half their faces white or half their bodies green,--red
and smoke-coloured, yellow and black,--with arms reaching out longer
than a serpent, and with girdles jingling with rattling bells.

   23. Some were as tall as palm-trees, carrying spears,--others were of
the size of children with projecting teeth, others birds with the faces
of rams, others with men's bodies and cats' faces;

   24. With dishevelled hair, or with topknots, or half-bald, with
rope-garments or with head-dress all in confusion,--with triumphant
faces or frowning faces,--wasting the strength or fascinating the mind.

   25. Some as they went leaped about wildly, others danced upon one
another, some sported about in the sky, others went along on the tops of
the trees.

   26. One danced, shaking a trident, another made a crash, dragging a
club, another bounded for joy like a bull, another blazed out flames
from every hair.

   27. Such were the troops of demons who encircled the root of the
Bodhi tree on every side, eager to

<span id="p. 141">{p. 141}</span>

seize it and to destroy it, awaiting the command of their lord.

   28. Beholding in the first half of the night that battle of Mâra and
the bull of the *S*âkya race, the heavens did not shine and the earth
shook and the (ten) regions of space flashed flame and roared.

   29. A wind of intense violence blew in all directions\[1\], the stars
did not shine, the moon gave no light, and a deeper darkness of night
spread around, and all the oceans were agitated.

   30. The mountain deities\[2\] and the Nâgas who honoured the Law,
indignant at the attack on the saint, rolling their eyes in anger
against Mâra, heaved deep sighs and opened their mouths wide.

   31. But the god-sages, the *S*uddhâdhivâsas\[3\], being as it were
absorbed in the perfect accomplishment of the good Law, felt only a pity
for Mâra in their minds and through their absolute passionlessness were
unruffled by anger.

   32. When they saw the foot of the Bodhi tree crowded with that host
of Mâra, intent on doing harm,--the sky was filled with the cry raised
by all the virtuous beings who desired the world's liberation.

   33. But the great sage\[4\] having beheld that army of Mâra thus
engaged in an attack on the knower of the Law\[5\], remained untroubled
and suffered no perturbation, like a lion seated in the midst of oxen.

\[1. Vi*s*vak should be corrected vishvak.

2\. Mahîbh*ri*ta*h*. This might mean simply 'the rulers of the earth.'

3\. In Pâli Suddhâvâsâ. Cf. III, 26.

4\. Buddha himself, viewing all this ab extra.

5\. The Tibetan seems to read dharmavidhe*h* for dharmavida*h*, as it
has chos·kyi cho·ga de·ni, '(injurer) of that law of dharma.'\]

<span id="p. 142">{p. 142}</span>

   34. Then Mâra commanded his excited army of demons to terrify him;
and forthwith that host resolved to break down his determination with
their various powers.

   35. Some with many tongues hanging out and shaking, with
sharp-pointed savage teeth and eyes like the disk of the sun, with
wide-yawning mouths and upright ears like spikes,--they stood round
trying to frighten him.

   36. Before these monsters standing there, so dreadful in form and
disposition, the great sage remained unalarmed and untroubled, sporting
with them as if they had been only rude children\[1\].

   37. Then one of them, with his eyes rolling wildly, lifted up a club
against him; but his arm with the club was instantly paralysed, as was
Indra's of old with its thunderbolt\[2\].

   38. Some, having lifted up stones and trees, found themselves unable
to throw them against the sage; down they fell, with their trees and
their stones, like the roots of the Vindhya shattered by the
thunderbolt.

   39. Others, leaping up into the sky, flung rocks, trees, and axes;
these remained in the sky and did not fall down, like the many-coloured
rays of the evening clouds.

   40. Another hurled upon him a mass of blazing straw as big as a
mountain-peak, which, as soon as it was thrown, while it hung poised in
the sky, was shattered into a hundred fragments by the sage's power.

   41. One, rising up like the sun in full splendour, rained down from
the sky a great shower of live

<span id="p. 143">{p. 143}</span>

embers, as at the end of an aeon blazing Meru showers down the
pulverised scoriae of the golden valleys.

   42. But that shower of embers full of sparks, when scattered at the
foot of the Bodhi tree, became a shower of red lotus-petals through the
operation of the great saint's boundless charity.

   43. But with all these various scorching assaults on his body and his
mind, and all these missiles showered down upon him, the *S*âkya saint
did not in the least degree move from his posture, clasping firmly his
resolution as a kinsman.

   44. Then others spat out serpents from their mouths as from old
decayed trunks of trees; but, as if held fast by a charm, near him they
neither breathed nor discharged venom nor moved.

   45. Others, having become great clouds, emitting lightning and
uttering the fierce roar of thunderbolts, poured a shower of stones upon
that tree,--but it turned to a pleasant shower of flowers.

   46. Another set an arrow in his bow,--there it gleamed but it did not
issue forth, like the anger which falls slack\[1\] in the soul of an
ill-tempered impotent man.

   47. But five arrows shot by another stood motionless and fell not,
through the saint's ruling guidance,--like the five senses of him who is
well experienced in the course of worldly objects and is afraid of
embodied existence.

   48. Another, full of anger, rushed towards the great saint, having
seized a club with a desire to

<span class="small">\[1. Dhûryamâ*n*o is a difficult word, connected
with dhv*ri* or dhûrv.\]</span>

<span id="p. 144">{p. 144}</span>

smite him; but he fell powerless without finding an opportunity, like
mankind in the presence of faults which cause failure\[1\].

   49. But a woman named Meghakâlî, bearing a skull in her hand, in
order to infatuate the mind of the sage, flitted about unsettled and
stayed not in one spot, like the mind of the fickle student over the
sacred texts.

   50. Another, fixing a kindling eye, wished to burn him with the fire
of his glance like a poisonous serpent; but he saw the sage and lo! he
was not there, like the votary of pleasure when true happiness is
pointed out to him\[2\].

   51. Another, lifting up a heavy rock, wearied himself to no purpose,
having his efforts baffled,--like one who wishes to obtain by bodily
fatigue that condition of supreme happiness which is only to be reached
by meditation and knowledge.

   52. Others, wearing the forms of hyenas and lions, uttered loudly
fierce howls, which caused all beings round to quail with terror, as
thinking that the heavens were smitten with a thunderbolt and were
bursting.

   53. Deer and elephants uttering cries of pain ran about or lay
down,--in that night as if it were day screaming birds flew around
disturbed in all directions.

   54. But amidst all these various sounds which they made, although all
living creatures were shaken, the saint trembled not nor quailed, like
Garuda at the noise of crows.

\[1. Cf. randhropanipâtino\*narthâ*h*, *S*akunt. VI.

2\. He had not eyes to see the object which he looked for.\]

<span id="p. 145">{p. 145}</span>

   55. The less the saint feared the frightful hosts of that multitude,
the more did Mâra, the enemy of the righteous, continue his attacks in
grief and anger.

   56. Then some being of invisible shape, but of preeminent glory,
standing in the heavens,--beholding Mâra thus malevolent against the
seer,--addressed him in a loud voice, unruffled by enmity:

   57. 'Take not on thyself, O Mâra, this vain fatigue,--throw aside thy
malevolence and retire to peace\[1\]; this sage cannot be shaken by thee
any more than the mighty mountain Meru by the wind.

   58. 'Even fire might lose its hot nature, water its fluidity, earth
its steadiness, but never will he abandon his resolution, who has
acquired his merit by a long course of actions through unnumbered aeons.

   59. 'Such is that purpose of his, that heroic effort, that glorious
strength, that compassion for all beings,--until he attains the highest
wisdom, he will never rise from his seat, just as the sun does not rise,
without dispelling the darkness.

   60. 'One who rubs the two pieces of wood obtains the fire, one who
digs the earth finds at last the water,--and to him in his perseverance
there is nothing unattainable,--all things to him are reasonable and
possible.

   61. 'Pitying the world lying distressed amidst diseases and passions,
he, the great physician, ought not to be hindered, who undergoes all his
labours for the sake of the remedy knowledge.

   62. 'He who toilsomely pursues the one good path, when all the world
is carried away in devious

<span class="small">\[1. Or 'go to thy home.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 146">{p. 146}</span>

tracks,--he the guide should not be disturbed, like a right informant
when the caravan has lost its way.

   63. 'He who is made a lamp of knowledge when all beings are lost in
the great darkness,--it is not for a right-minded soul to try to quench
him,--like a lamp kindled in the gloom of night.

   64. 'He who, when he beholds the world drowned in the great flood of
existence and unable to reach the further shore, strives to bring them
safely across,--would any right-minded soul offer him wrong?

   65. 'The tree of knowledge, whose roots go deep in firmness, and
whose fibres are patience,--whose flowers are moral actions and whose
branches are memory and thought,--and which gives out the law as its
fruit,--surely when it is growing it should not be cut down.

   66. 'Him whose one desire is to deliver mankind bound in soul by the
fast snares of illusion,--thy wish to overthrow him is not worthy,
wearied as he is for the sake of unloosing the bonds of the world.

   67. 'To-day is the appointed period of all those actions which have
been performed by him for the sake of knowledge,--he is now seated on
this seat just as all the previous saints have sat.

   68. 'This is the navel of the earth's surface, endued with all the
highest glory; there is no other spot of the earth than this,--the home
of contemplation, the realm of well-being.

   69. 'Give not way, then, to grief but put on calm; let not thy
greatness, O Mâra, be mixed with pride; it is not well to be
confident,--fortune

<span id="p. 147">{p. 147}</span>

is unstable,--why dost thou accept a position on a tottering base?'

   70. Having listened to his words, and having seen the unshaken
firmness of the great saint, Mâra departed dispirited and broken in
purpose\[1\] with those very arrows by which, O world, thou art smitten
in thy heart.

   71. With their triumph at an end, their labour all fruitless, and all
their stones, straw, and trees thrown away, that host of his fled in all
directions, like some hostile army when its camp has been destroyed by
the enemy.

   72. When the flower-armed god\[2\] thus fled away vanquished with his
hostile forces and the passionless sage remained victorious, having
conquered all the power of darkness, the heavens shone out with the moon
like a maiden with a smile, and a sweet-smelling shower of flowers fell
down wet with dew.

   73. \[3\]When the wicked one thus fled vanquished, the different
regions of the sky grew clear, the moon shone forth, showers of flowers
fell down from the sky upon the earth, and the night gleamed out like a
spotless maiden\[4\].

\[1. I read hatodyamo.

2\. Mâra as identified with Kâmadeva, cf. ver. 2.

3\. Should we read tathâ hi for tathâpi?

4\. Here the original work of Asvaghosha ends according to the gloss at
the close of the Cambridge MS. C; the four remaining books were added,
to supply an old lacuna, by Amritânanda, a modern Nepalese author. The
Chinese and Tibetan translations seem to agree with the Sanskrit for
part of the fourteenth book, but they soon diverge widely from it. The
four books are included in the translation as a literary curiosity.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV of the Buddha-*k*arita](sbe4916)
