[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4915)  [Next](sbe4917)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 148">{p. 148}</span>

## BOOK XIV.

 

   1. Then, having conquered the hosts of Mâra by his firmness and
calmness, he the great master of meditation set himself to meditate,
longing to know the supreme end.

   2. And having attained the highest mastery in all kinds of
meditation, he remembered in the first watch the continuous series of
all his former births.

   3. 'In such a place I was so and so by name, and from thence I passed
and came hither,' thus he remembered his thousands of births,
experiencing each as it were over again.

   4. And having remembered each birth and each death in all those
various transmigrations, the compassionate one then felt compassion for
all living beings.

   5. Having wilfully rejected the good guides in this life and done all
kinds of actions in various lives, this world of living beings rolls on
helplessly, like a wheel.

   6. As he thus remembered, to him in his strong self-control came the
conviction, 'All existence is insubstantial, like the fruit of a
plantain.'

   7. When the second watch came, he, possessed of unequalled energy,
received a pre-eminent divine sight, he the highest of all sight-gifted
beings.

<span id="p. 149">{p. 149}</span>

   8. Then by that divine perfectly pure sight he beheld the whole world
as in a spotless mirror.

   9. As he saw the various transmigrations and rebirths of the various
beings with their several lower or higher merits from their actions,
compassion grew up more within him.

   10. 'These living beings, under the influence of evil actions, pass
into wretched worlds,--these others, under the influence of good
actions, go forward in heaven.

   11. 'The one, being born in a dreadful hell full of terrors, are
miserably tortured, alas! by many kinds of suffering;

   12. 'Some are made to drink molten iron of the colour of fire, others
are lifted aloft screaming on a red-hot iron pillar;

   13. 'Others are baked like flour, thrown with their heads downwards
into iron jars; others are miserably burned in heaps of heated charcoal;

   14. 'Some are devoured by fierce dreadful dogs with iron teeth,
others by gloating crows with iron beaks and all made as it were of
iron;

   15. 'Some, wearied of being burned, long for cold shade; these enter
like bound captives into a dark blue wood with swords for leaves.

   16. 'Others having many arms are split like timber with axes, but
even in that agony they do not die, being supported in their vital
powers by their previous actions.

   17. 'Whatever deed was done only to hinder pain with the hope that it
might bring pleasure, its result is now experienced by these helpless
victims as simple pain.

   18. These who did something evil for the sake

<span id="p. 150">{p. 150}</span>

of pleasure and are now grievously pained,--does that old taste produce
even an atom of pleasure to them now?

   19. 'The wicked deed which was done by the wicked-hearted in
glee,--its consequences are reaped by them in the fulness of time with
cries.

   20. 'If only evil doers could see the fruits of their actions, they
would vomit hot blood as if they were smitten in a vital part.

   21. 'And worse still than all these bodily tortures in hell seems to
me the association of an intelligent man with the base.

   22. 'Others also, through various actions arising from the spasmodic
violence of their minds, are born miserable in the wombs of various
beasts.

   23. 'There the poor wretches are killed even in the sight of their
kindred, for the sake of their flesh, their skin, their hair, or their
teeth, or through hatred or for mere pleasure.

   24. 'Even though powerless and helpless, oppressed by hunger, thirst,
and fatigue, they are driven along as oxen and horses, their bodies
wounded with goads.

   25. 'They are driven along, when born as elephants, by weaker
creatures than themselves for all their strength,--their heads tormented
by the hook and their bodies kicked by foot and heel.

   26. 'And with all these other miseries there is an especial misery
arising from mutual enmity and from subjection to a master.

   27. 'Air-dwellers are oppressed by air-dwellers, the denizens of
water by the denizens of water, those that dwell on dry land are made to
suffer by the dwellers on dry land in mutual hostility.

<span id="p. 151">{p. 151}</span>

   28. 'And others there are who, when born again, with their minds
filled with envy, reap the miserable fruit of their actions in a world
of the Pit*ri*s destitute of all light;

   29. 'Having mouths as small as the eye of a needle and bellies as big
as a mountain, these miserable wretches are tortured with the pains of
hunger and thirst.

   30. 'If a man only knew that such was the consequence of selfishness,
he would always give to others even pieces of his own body like *S*ibi.

   31. 'Rushing up filled with hope but held back by their former deeds,
they try in vain to eat anything large, however impure.

   32. 'Others, having found a hell in an impure lake called the womb,
are born amongst men and there suffer anguish.

   33. 'Others, ascetics, who have performed meritorious actions go to
heaven; others, having attained widely extended empire, wander about on
the earth\[1\];

   34. 'Others as Nâgas in the subterranean regions become the guardians
of treasures,--they wander in the ocean of existence, receiving the
fruits of their deeds.'

   35. Having pondered all this, in the last watch he thus reflected,
'Alas for this whole world of living beings doomed to misery, all alike
wandering astray!

   36. 'They know not that all this universe, destitute of any real
refuge, is born and decays through that existence which is the site of
the skandhas and pain;

<span class="small">\[1. Heaven and earthly empire are alike
transient.\]</span>

<span id="p. 152">{p. 152}</span>

   37. 'It dies and passes into a new state and then is born anew.' Then
he reflected, 'What is that which is the necessary condition for old age
and death?'

   38. He saw that when there is birth, there is old age and death, then
he pondered, 'What is that which is the necessary condition for a new
birth\[1\]?'

   40. He perceived that where there has been the attachment to
existence\[2\] there arises a (previous) existence; then he pondered,
'What is that which is the necessary condition for the attachment to
existence?'

   41. Having ascertained this to be desire, he again meditated, and he
next pondered, 'What is that which is the necessary condition for
desire?'

   42. He saw that desire arises where there is sensation, and he next
pondered, 'What is that which is the necessary condition for sensation?'

   43. He saw that sensation arises where there is contact\[3\], and he
next pondered, 'What is that which is the necessary condition for
contact?'

   44. He saw that contact arises through the six organs of sense; he
then pondered, 'Where do the six organs of sense arise?'

   45. He reflected that these arise in the organism\[4\], he then
pondered, 'Where does the organism arise?'

\[1. A verse (39) is omitted here containing the third step bhava (cf.
Chinese translation, 1150, 1151), 'He perceived that when there has been
a (previous) existence \[involving previous actions\] there is a new
birth; then he pondered, "What is that which is the necessary condition
for a previous existence arising?"' (Cf. Burnouf, Introd. pp. 485-506;
Childers in Colbrooke's Essays, vol. i, 1873.)

2\. Upâdânam.

3\. Sc. between the senses and their objects.

4\. Nâmarûpa, sc. 'name and form,' i.e. the individual consisting of
mind and body, as the embryo in the womb.\]

<span id="p. 153">{p. 153}</span>

   46. He saw that the organism arises where there is incipient
consciousness; he then pondered, 'Where does incipient consciousness
arise?'

   47. He reflected that incipient consciousness arises where there are
the latent impressions left by former actions; and he next pondered,
'Where do the latent impressions arise?'

   48. He reflected exhaustively that they arise in ignorance; thus did
the great seer, the Bodhisattva, the lord of saints,

   49. After reflecting, pondering, and meditating, finally determine,
'The latent impressions start into activity after they are once
developed from ignorance.

   50. 'Produced from the activity of the latent impressions incipient
consciousness starts into action; (the activity) of the organism starts
into action on having an experience\[1\] of incipient consciousness;

   51. 'The six organs of sense become active when produced in the
organism; sensation is produced from the contact of the six organs (with
their objects);

   52. 'Desire starts into activity when produced from sensation; the
attachment to existence springs from desire; from this attachment arises
a (continued) existence;

   53. 'Birth is produced where there has been a (continued) existence;
and from birth arise old age, disease, and the rest; and scorched by the
flame of old age and disease the world is devoured by death;

   54. 'When it is thus scorched by the fire of

<span class="small">\[1. Sa*m*parîkshya is a doubtful reading; I supply
v*ri*tti*h* with nâmarûpasya.\]</span>

<span id="p. 154">{p. 154}</span>

death's anguish great pain arises; such verily is the origin of this
great trunk of pain.'

   55. Thus having ascertained it all, the great Being was perfectly
illuminated; and having again meditated and pondered, he thus reflected,

   56. 'When old age and disease are stopped, death also is stopped; and
when birth is stopped, old age and disease are stopped;

   57. 'When the action of existence is stopped, birth also is stopped;
when the attachment to existence is stopped, the action of existence is
stopped;

   58. 'So too when desire is stopped, the attachment to existence is
stopped; and with the stopping of sensation desire is no longer
produced;

   59. 'And when the contact of the six organs is stopped, sensation is
no longer produced; and with the stopping of the six organs their
contact (with their objects) is stopped;

   60. 'And with the stopping of the organism the six organs are
stopped; and with the stopping of incipient consciousness the organism
is stopped;

   61. 'And with the stopping of the latent impressions incipient
consciousness is stopped; and with the stopping of ignorance the latent
impressions have no longer any power.

   62. 'Thus ignorance is declared to be the root of this great trunk of
pain by all the wise; therefore it is to be stopped by those who seek
liberation.

   63. 'Therefore by the stopping of ignorance all the pains also of all
existing beings are at once stopped and cease to act.'

   64. The all-knowing Bodhisattva, the illuminated one, having thus
determined, after again pondering and meditating thus came to his
conclusion:

<span id="p. 155">{p. 155}</span>

   65. 'This is pain, this also is the origin of pain in the world of
living beings; this also is the stopping of pain; this is that course
which leads to its stopping.' So having determined he knew all as it
really was.

   66. Thus he, the holy one, sitting there on his seat of grass at the
root of the tree, pondering by his own efforts attained at last perfect
knowledge.

   67. Then bursting the shell of ignorance, having gained all the
various kinds of perfect intuition, he attained all the partial
knowledge of alternatives which is included in perfect knowledge\[1\].

   68. He became the perfectly wise, the Bhagavat, the Arhat, the king
of the Law, the Tathâgata, He who has attained the knowledge of all
forms, the Lord of all science.

   69. Having beheld all this, the spirits standing in heaven spoke one
to another, 'Strew flowers on this All-wise Monarch of Saints.'

   70. While other immortals exclaimed, who knew the course of action of
the greatest among the former saints, 'Do not now strew flowers--no
reason for it has been shown.'

   71. Then the Buddha, mounted on a throne, up in the air to the height
of seven palm-trees, addressed all those Nirmithâ Bodhisattvâ*h*\[2\],
illumining their minds,

   72. 'Ho! ho! listen ye to the words of me who have now attained
perfect knowledge; everything is achieved by meritorious works,
therefore as long as existence lasts\[3\] acquire merit.

\[1. Doubtful. I suppose it means that he knew all hypothetical as well
as categorical propositions.

2\. These Nirmithâ Bodhisattvâ*h* seem to be the nimmâ*n*aratî devâ of
the southern Buddhists with their nimmitâ kâmâ or self-created pleasure.

3\. Âbhavam.\]

<span id="p. 156">{p. 156}</span>

   73. 'Since I ever acted as liberal, pure-hearted, patient, skilful,
devoted to meditation and wisdom,--by these meritorious works I became a
Bodhisattva.

   74. 'After accomplishing in due order the entire round of the
preliminaries of perfect wisdom,--I have now attained that highest
wisdom and I am become the All-wise Arhat and *G*ina.

   75. 'My aspiration is thus fulfilled; this birth of mine has borne
its fruit; the blessed and immortal knowledge which was attained by
former Buddhas, is now mine.

   76. 'As they through the good Law achieved the welfare of all beings,
so also have I; all my sins are abolished, I am the destroyer of all
pains.

   77. 'Possessing a soul now of perfect purity, I urge all living
beings to seek the abolition of worldly existence through the lamps of
the Law.' Having worshipped him as he thus addressed them, those sons of
the *G*inas disappeared.

   78. The gods then with exultation paid him worship and adoration with
divine flowers; and all the world, when the great saint had become
all-wise, was full of brightness.

   79. Then the holy one descended and stood on his throne under the
tree; there he passed seven days filled with the thought, 'I have here
attained perfect wisdom.'

   80. When the Bodhisattva had thus attained perfect knowledge, all
beings became full of great happiness; and all the different universes
were illumined by a great light.

   81. The happy earth shook in six different ways like an overjoyed
woman, and the Bodhisattvas, each

<span id="p. 157">{p. 157}</span>

dwelling in his own special abode, assembled and praised him.

   82. 'There has arisen the greatest of all beings, the Omniscient
All-wise Arhat--a lotus, unsoiled by the dust of passion, sprung up from
the lake of knowledge;

   83. 'A cloud bearing the water of patience, pouring forth the
ambrosia of the good Law, fostering all the seeds of merit, and causing
all the shoots of healing to grow;

   84. 'A thunderbolt with a hundred edges, the vanquisher of Mâra,
armed only with the weapon of patience; a gem fulfilling all desires, a
tree of paradise, a jar of true good fortune\[1\], a cow that yields all
that heart can wish;

   85. 'A sun that destroys the darkness of delusion, a moon that takes
away the scorching heat of the inherent sins of existence,--glory to
thee, glory to thee, glory to thee, O Tathâgata;

   86. 'Glory to thee, O Lord of the whole world, glory to thee, who
hast gone through the ten (Balas\[2\]); glory to thee, O true hero
amongst men, O Lord of righteousness, glory to thee!'

   87. Thus having praised, honoured, and adored him, they each returned
to their several homes, after making repeated reverential
circumambulations, and recounting his eulogy.

   88. Then the beings of the Kâmâva*k*ara worlds, and the brilliant
inhabitants of the Pure Abodes, the

\[1. The bhadrakumbha was the golden jar filled with consecrated water,
used especially at the inauguration of a king.

2\. The ten balas are ten kinds of spiritual knowledge peculiar to a
Buddha; but 'the ten' may be the ten dharmas, see Childers.\]

<span id="p. 158">{p. 158}</span>

Brahmakâyika gods, and those sons of Mâra who favoured the side of
truth\[1\],

   89. The Paranirmitava*s*avarti beings, and the Nirmâ*n*arataya*h*;
the Tushita beings, the Yâmas, the Trayastri*m*sad Devas, and the other
rulers of worlds,

   90. The deities who roam in the sky, those who roam on the earth or
in forests, accompanying each their own king, came to the pavilion of
the Bodhi tree,

   91. And having worshipped the *G*ina with forms of homage suitable to
their respective positions, and having praised him with hymns adapted to
their respective degrees of knowledge, they returned to their own homes.

<span class="small">\[1. These terms are al explained in Childers' Dict.
sattaloko. For the better-inclined sons of Mâra, cf. the dialogue
between those of the right side and the left side before Mâra in the
Lalitav. XXI, cf. also XXIII.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XV of the Buddha-*k*arita](sbe4917)
