[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4930)  [Next](sbe4933)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 153">{p. 153}</span>

### THE SMALLER

# PRA*GÑ*Â-PÂRAMITÂ-

# H*RI*DAYA-SÛTRA.

 

ADORATION TO THE OMNISCIENT!

   The venerable Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, performing his study in
the deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ (perfection of wisdom), thought thus: 'There
are the five Skandhas, and these he considered as by their nature empty
(phenomenal).'

   'O *S*âriputra,' he said, 'form here is emptiness, and emptiness
indeed is form. Emptiness is not different from form, form is not
different from emptiness. What is form that is emptiness, what is
emptiness that is form.'

   'The same applies to perception, name, conception, and knowledge.'

   'Here, O *S*âriputra, all things have the character of emptiness,
they have no beginning, no end, they are faultless and not faultless,
they are not imperfect and not perfect. Therefore, O *S*âriputra, in
this emptiness there is no form, no perception, no name, no concepts, no
knowledge. No eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. No form, sound, smell,
taste, touch, objects.'

   'There is no eye,' &c., till we come to 'there is no mind.'

<span id="p. 154">{p. 154}</span>

   (What is left out here are the eighteen Dhâtus or aggregates, viz.
eye, form, vision; ear, sound, hearing; nose, odour, smelling; tongue,
flavour, tasting; body, touch, feeling; mind, objects, thought.)

   'There is no knowledge, no ignorance, no destruction of knowledge, no
destruction of ignorance,' &c., till we come to 'there is no decay and
death, no destruction of decay and death; there are not (the four
truths, viz. that there) is pain, origin of pain, stoppage of pain, and
the path to it. There is no knowledge, no obtaining (of Nirvâ*n*a).'

   'A man who has approached the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ of the Bodhisattva
dwells enveloped in consciousness\[1\]. But when the envelopment of
consciousness has been annihilated, then he becomes free of all fear,
beyond the reach of change, enjoying final Nirvâ*n*a.'

   'All Buddhas of the past, present, and future, after approaching the
Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, have awoke to the highest perfect knowledge.'

   'Therefore one ought to know the great verse of the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ,
the verse of the great wisdom, the unsurpassed verse, the peerless
verse, which appeases all pain--it is truth, because it is not false-the
verse proclaimed in the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ: "O wisdom, gone, gone, gone to
the other shore. landed at the other shore, Svâhâ!"'

   Thus ends the heart of the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ.

<span class="small">\[1. See Childers, s.v. *k*ittam.\]</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Amitâyur-dhyâna-sûtra](sbe4933)
