[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4923)  [Next](sbe4925.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 1">{p. 1}</span>

## THE LARGER

# SUKHÂVATÎ-VYÛHA.

 

## DESCRIPTION OF SUKHÂVATÎ,

### THE LAND OF BLISS.

 

   OM. Adoration to the Three Treasures! Om. Adoration to all the
glorious Buddhas and Bodhisattvas! Adoration to all Buddhas,
Bodhisattvas, Âryas, *S*râvakas, and Pratyekabuddhas, past, present, and
to come, who dwell in the unlimited and endless Lokâdhatus of the ten
quarters! Adoration to Amitâbha! Adoration to him whose soul is endowed
with incomprehensible virtues!

   Adoration to Amitâbha, to the *G*ina, to thee, O Muni!

   I go to Sukhâvatî through thy compassion also;

   To Sukhâvatî, with its groves, resplendent with gold,

   The delightful, adorned with the sons of Sugata,--

   I go to it, which is full of many jewels and treasures;

   And the refuge of thee, the famous and wise.

------------------

   § 1. Thus it was heard by me. At one time the Bhagavat\[1\] dwelt in
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, on the mountain G*ri*dhrakû*t*a, with a large assembly of
Bhikshus,

<span class="small">\[1. The Blessed, i.e. Buddha *S*âkyamuni.\]</span>

<span id="p. 2">{p. 2}</span>

with thirty-two thousands of Bhikshus, all holy (arhat), free from
frailties and cares, who had performed their religious duties, whose
thoughts had been thoroughly freed through perfect knowledge, with
inquiring thoughts, who had broken the fetters of existence, who had
obtained their desires, who had conquered, who had achieved the highest
self-restraint, whose thoughts and whose knowledge were unfettered,
Mahânâgas (great heroes), possessed of the six kinds of knowledge,
self-controlled, meditating on the eight kinds of salvation, possessed
of the powers, wise in wisdom, elders, great disciples, viz. 1.
Â*gñ*âtakau*nd*inya, 2. A*s*va*g*it, 3. Vâshpa, 4. Mahânâman, 5.
Bhadra*g*it, 6.Ya*s*odeva, 7. Vimala, 8. Subâhu, 9. Pûr*n*a
Maitrâya*n*îputra\[1\], 10. Uruvilvâ-kâ*s*yapa, 11. Nadî-kâ*s*yapa, 12.
Gayâ-kâ*s*yapa, 13. Kumâra-kâ*s*yapa, 14. Mahâ-kâ*s*yapa, 15.
*S*âriputra\[2\], 16. Mahâmaudgalyâyana, 17. Mahâkaush*th*ilya, 18.
Mahâkaphila, 19. Mahâ*k*unda, 20. Aniruddha\[3\], 21. Nandika, 22.
Kampila\[4\], 23. Subhûti, 24. Revata, 25. Khadirava*n*ika, 26. Vakula,
27. Svâgata, 28. Amogharâ*g*a, 29. Pârâya*n*ika, 30. Patka, 31.
*K*ullapatka, 32. Nanda, 33. Râhula, and 34. the blessed Ânanda,--with
these and with other elders, and great disciples, who were wise in
wisdom, with the exception of one person who had still to be advanced on
the path of the disciples, viz. the blessed Ânanda;--and with many
noble-minded Bodhisattvas, led by Maitreya.

\[1. These two names refer to one and the same person.

2\. Nos. 15 and 16 are taken as one in the MSS. A B.

3\. Frequently called Anuruddha.

4\. Kimbila is mentioned with Anuruddha and Nandiya in the Mahâvagga X,
4, 2.

5\. See Pâ*n*. VIII, 4, 5.\]

<span id="p. 3">{p. 3}</span>

   § 2. Then the blessed Ânanda, having risen from his seat, having put
his cloak on one shoulder, and knelt on the earth with his right knee,
making obeisance with folded hands in the direction of the Bhagavat,
spoke thus to the Bhagavat: 'Thy organs of sense, O Bhagavat, are
serene, the colour of thy skin is clear, the colour of thy face bright
and yellowish. As an autumn cloud is pale, clear, bright and yellowish,
thus the organs of sense of the Bhagavat are serene, the colour of his
face is clear, the colour of his skin bright and yellowish. And as, O
Bhagavat, a piece of gold coming from the *G*âmbû river, having been
thrown into a furnace by a clever smith or by his apprentice, and well
fashioned, when thrown on a pale cloth, looks extremely clear, bright
and yellowish, thus the organs of sense of the Bhagavat are serene, the
colour of his face is clear, and the colour of his skin bright and
yellowish. Moreover, I do not know, O Bhagavat, that I have ever seen
the organs of sense of the Tathâgata so serene, the colour of his face
so clear, and the colour of his skin so bright and yellowish before now.
This thought occurs to me, O Bhagavat: probably, the Tathâgata\[1\]
dwells today in the state of a Buddha, probably the Tathâgata dwells
to-day in the state of a *G*ina, in the state of omniscience, in the
state of a Mahânâga; and he contemplates the holy and fully enlightened
Tathâgatas of the past, future, and present.'

   After these words, the Bhagavat thus spoke to the blessed Ânanda:
'Well said! well said! Ânanda. Did the gods suggest this matter to you?
or the

<span class="small">\[1. That is, Buddha *S*âkyamuni.\]</span>

<span id="p. 4">{p. 4}</span>

blessed Buddhas? Or do you know this through the philosophical knowledge
which you possess?

   After these words the blessed Ânanda spoke thus to the Bhagavat: 'The
gods, O Bhagavat, do not suggest this matter to me, nor the blessed
Buddhas, but this thought occurs to me by my own philosophy alone, viz.
that probably the Tathâgata dwells to-day in the state of a Buddha,
probably the Tathâgata dwells to-day in the state of a *G*ina, in the
state of omniscience, \[in the state of a Mahânâga\]\[1\]; or he
contemplates \[the venerable Buddhas\] of the past, future, and
present.'

   After these words the Bhagavat spoke thus to the blessed Ânanda:
'Well said! well said! Ânanda; excellent indeed is your question\[2\],
good your philosophy, and beautiful your understanding! You, O Ânanda,
have arrived for the benefit and happiness of many people, out of
compassion for the world, for the sake of the great body of men, for the
benefit and happiness of gods and men, as you think it right to ask the
Tathâgata this matter\[3\]: Thus, indeed, Ânanda might pile up\[4\]
intellectual knowledge under immeasurable and innumerable blessed, holy,
and fully enlightened Tathâgatas, and yet the knowledge of the Tathâgata
would not be exceeded thereby. And why? Because, O Ânanda, one who
possesses the knowledge of a Tathâgata possesses an intellectual
knowledge of causes that cannot be

\[1. This is left out here. Mahânâga, technical term for greatness.

2\. Unmi*ñg*a, all the Chinese translators translate as question.

3\. One expects tathâgatam etam artham.

4\. I have adopted the reading of B, in order to have a subject for
upasa*m*haret, but A C P read ânanda\]

<span id="p. 5">{p. 5}</span>

exceeded\[1\]. If\[2\] the Tathâgata wished, O Ânanda, he could live for
a whole kalpa (age) on one alms-gift, or for a hundred kalpas, or for a
thousand kalpas, or for a hundred thousand kalpas, to a hundred thousand
niyutas of ko*t*îs of kalpas\[3\], nay, he could live beyond, and yet
the organs of nature of the Tathâgata would not perish, the colour of
his face would not be altered, nor would the colour of his skin be
injured. And why? Because, O Ânanda, the Tathâgata has so fully obtained
the Pâramitâs\[4\] which arise from Samâdhi\[5\]. The appearance of
fully enlightened Buddhas is very difficult to be obtained in this
world, O Ânanda. As the appearance of Audumbara-flowers is very
difficult to be obtained in this world; thus, O Ânanda, the appearance
of Tathâgatas who desire welfare, wish for what is beneficial, are
compassionate, and have arrived at the highest compassion, is very
difficult to be obtained. But, O Ânanda, it is (owing to) the grace of
the Tathâgata himself that you think that the Tathâgata should be asked
this question, so that there may arise in this world beings who can be
teachers of all the world, for the sake of noble-minded Bodhisattvas.
Therefore, O Ânanda, listen, and take it well and rightly to heart! I
shall tell you.'

\[1. I am not satisfied with this translation, but I do not think that
*gñ*âna, even in Buddhist Sanskrit, could ever be used as a masculine,
and I therefore take tathâgata*gñ*âna*h* as a Bahuvrîhi.

2\. Read *gñ*ânah. Âkânkshan.

3\. Large numbers, constantly recurring in the text. Niputa is explained
as a million, ko*t*î as ten milions.

4\. The highest perfection.

5\. Deep meditation.\]

<span id="p. 6">{p. 6}</span>

   'Yes, O Bhagavat,' so did the blessed Ânanda answer the Bhagavat.

   § 3. The Bhagavat then spoke to Ânanda: 'At the time, O Ânanda, which
was long ago in the past, in an innumerable and more than innumerable,
enormous, immeasurable, and incomprehensible kalpa before now,--at that
time, and at that moment, there arose in the world a holy and fully
enlightened Tathâgata called 1. Dîpankara. Following after Dîpankara, O
Ânanda, there was a Tathâgata 2. Pratâpavat, and after him, 3.
Prabhâkara, 4. *K*andanagandha, 5. Sumerukalpa, 6. *K*andana, 7.
Vimalânana, 8. Anupalipta, 9. Vimalaprabha, 10. Nâgâbhibhû, 11.
Sûryodana, 12. Girirâ*g*aghosha, 13. Merukû*t*a, 14. Suvar*n*aprabha,
15. *G*yotishprabha, 16. Vai*d*ûtryanirbhâsa, 17. Brahmaghosha, 18.
*K*andâbhibhû, 19. Tûryaghosha, 20. Muktakusumapratima*nd*itaprabha, 21.
*S*rîkû*t*a, 22. Sâgaravarabuddhivikrî*d*itâbhi*gñ*a, 23. Varaprabha,
24. Mahâgandharâ*g*anirbhâsa, 25. Vyapagatakhilamalapratighosha, 26.
*S*ûrakû*t*a, 27. Ra*n*a*ñg*aha, 28.
Mahâgu*n*adharabuddhiprâptâbhi*gñ*a, 29. *K*andrasûrya*g*ihmîkara*n*a,
30. Uttaptavai*d*ûryanirbhâsa, 31.
*K*ittadhârâbuddhisankusumitâbhyudgata, 32.
Pushpâvatîvanarâ*g*asankusumitâbhi*gñ*a, 33. Pushpâkara, 34.
Udaka*k*andra, 35. Avidyândhakâravidhva*m*sanakara, 36. Lokendra, 37.
Mukta*kkh*atrapravâtasad*ris*a, 38. Tishya, 39.
Dharmamativinanditarâ*g*a, 40. Si*m*hasâgarakû*t*avinanditarâ*g*a, 41.
Sâgarameru*k*andra, 42. Brahmasvaranâdâbhinandita, 43. Kusumasambhava,
44. Prâptasena, 45. *K*andrabhânu, 46. Merukû*t*a, 47. *K*andraprabha,
48. Vimalanetra, 49. Girirâ*g*aghoshe*s*vara, 50. Kusumaprabha, 51.
Kusumav*ri*sh*t*yabhiprakîr*n*a, 52. Ratna*k*andra, 53.
Padmabimbyupa*s*obhita, 54.

<span id="p. 7">{p. 7}</span>

*K*andanagandha, 55. Ratnâbhibhâsa, 56. Nimi, 57. Mahâvyûha,
58.Vyapagatakhiladosha, 59. Brahmaghosha, 60. Saptaratnâbhiv*ri*sh*t*a,
61. Mahâ*g*u*n*adhara, 62. Mahâtamâlapatra*k*andanakardama, 63.
Kusumâbhi*gñ*a, 64. A*gñ*ânavidhva*m*sana, 65. Ke*s*arin, 66.
Mukta*kkh*atra, 67. Suvar*n*agarbha, 68. Vai*d*ûryagarbha, 69. Mahâketu,
70. Dharmaketu, 71. Ratnaketu, 72. Ratna*s*rî, 73. Lokendra, 74.
Narendra, 75. Kâru*n*ika, 76. Lokasundara, 77. Brahmaketu, 78.
Dharmamati, 79. Si*m*ha, 80. Si*m*hamati. After Si*m*hamati, a holy and
fully enlightened Tathâgata arose in the world, Loke*s*vararâ*g*a by
name, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a Sugata, knowing the world,
without a superior, charioteer of men whose passions have to be tamed,
teacher of gods and men, a Buddha, a Bhagavat. And again during the time
of the preaching of this holy and fully enlightened Tathâgata
Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, O Ânanda, there was a Bhikshu, Dharmâkara by name,
richly endowed with memory, with understanding, prudence, and
wisdom,--richly endowed with vigour, and of noble character.

   § 4. 'Then, O Ânanda, that Bhikshu Dharmâkara, having risen from his
seat, having put his cloak on one shoulder, and knelt on the earth with
his right knee, stretching forth his folded hands to where the Bhagavat
Tathâgata Loke*s*vararâ*g*a was, and, after worshipping the Bhagavat,
he, at thar very time, praised him in his presence with these
Gâthâs\[1\]:

   "O thou of immeasurable light, whose knowledge

<span class="small">\[1. As the text of these Gâthâs is far from
satisfactory, I have given a translation of the Chinese translation by
Sanghavarman at the end of my edition, Anecdota Oxoniensia, I, part ii,
p. 79.\]</span>

<span id="p. 8">{p. 8}</span>

is endless and incomparable; not any other light can shine here (where
thou art)! The rays of the moon of *S*iva and of the jewel of the sun,
were not bright here in the whole world. (1)

   "The form also is infinite in the best of beings\[1\]; thus also the
voice of Buddha is of infinite sound; his virtue likewise, with
meditation, knowledge\[2\], strength; like unto thee there is no one in
this world. (2)

   "The Law (dharma) is deep, wide, and subtle; the best of Buddhas is
incomprehensible, like the ocean; therefore there is no further
exaltation of the teacher; having left all faults, he is gone to the
other shore\[3\]. (3)

   "Then the best of Buddhas\[4\], of endless light, lights up all
regions, he the king of kings; and I, having become Buddha, and a master
of the Law, may I deliver mankind from old age and death! (4)

   "And I, on the strength of generosity, equanimity, virtue,
forbearance, power, meditation and absorption, undertake here the first
and best duties, and shall become a Buddha, the saviour of all beings.
(5)

   "And I, seeking for the knowledge of the best of the Blessed Ones,
shall always worship many hundred thousands of ko*t*îs of Buddhas,
endless like the sand of the Gangâ, the incomparable lords. (6)

\[1. It would be better to read sattvasâra as a vocative. See p. 22, l.
5.

2\. I have translated as if the reading were pra*gñ*â, which would,
however, have spoiled the metre.

3\. The text has \*dhikâlam, and \*bhhipâram is suggested as a
conjecture only.

4\. I translate buddhavara.\]

<span id="p. 9">{p. 9}</span>

   "Whatever worlds there are, similar (in number) to the sand of the
Gangâ, and the endless countries which exist besides, there everywhere I
shall send out light, because I have attained such power\[1\]. (7)

   "My land is (to be) noble, the first and the best; the Bodhi-tree
excellent in this world\[2\]. There is incomparable happiness arising
from Nirvâ*n*a, and this also I shall explain as vain. (8)

   "Beings\[3\] come hither from the ten quarters; having arrived there
they quickly show my happiness. May Buddha there teach me the truth,--I
form a desire full of true strength and vigour. (9)

   "I, knowing the worlds of the ten quarters, possessed of absolute
knowledge they also always proclaim my thought! May I, gone to Avi*k*i
hell, always abide there, but I shall never cease to practise the power
of prayer! \[i.e. May I remain in hell, if I cease to pray.\]" (10)

   § 5. 'Then, O Ânanda, that Bhikshu Dharmâkara, having praised the
Bhagavat, the Tathâgata Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, in his presence, with those
Gâthâs, spoke thus: "O Bhagavat, I wish to know the highest perfect
knowledge. Again and again I raise and incline my thoughts towards the
highest perfect knowledge. May therefore the Bhagavat, as a teacher,
thus teach me the Law, that I may quickly know the highest perfect
knowledge. May I become in the world a Tathâgata, equal to the

\[1. The text is obscure, Sanghavarman translates: 'My light will shine
over all these countries, thus my strength and power will be
immeasurable.'

2\. According to the Chinese translationp

3\. Should it be sattvâ?\]

<span id="p. 10">{p. 10}</span>

unequalled. And may the Bhagavat proclaim those signs by which I may
comprehend the perfection of all good qualities of a Buddha country."

   'After this, O Ânanda, the Bhagavat Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, the Tathâgata,
thus spoke to that Bhikshu:

   "Do you by yourself, O Bhikshu, know the perfection of all
excellences and good qualities of a Buddha country?"

   'He said: "O Bhagavat, I could not do this, but the Bhagavat alone.
Explain the perfection of the excellences and all the good qualities of
Buddha countries of the other Tathâgatas, after hearing which we may
fulfil every one of their signs."

   'Then, O Ânanda, the Tathâgata Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, holy and fully
enlightened, knowing the good disposition of that Bhikshu, taught for a
full ko*t*î of years the perfection of all the excellences and good
qualities of Buddha countries belonging to eighty-one hundred thousand
niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas, together with the signs, indication, and
description, desiring welfare, wishing for benefits, compassionate, full
of compassion, so that there might never be an end of Buddha countries,
having conceived great pity for all beings. The measure of life of that
Tathâgata was full forty kalpas.

   § 6. 'Then, O Ânanda, that Bhikshu Dharmâkara, taking the perfections
of all the excellences and good qualities of those Buddha countries, of
those eighty-one hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas, and
concentrating them all on one Buddha country, worshipped with his head
the feet of the Bhagavat Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, the Tathâgata, turned
respectfully round him to the right, and walked away from the presence
of this Bhagavat. And

<span id="p. 11">{p. 11}</span>

afterwards, for the space of five kalpas, he thus concentrated the
perfection of all the excellences and good qualities of the Buddha
countries, such as had never been known before in the ten quarters of
the whole world, more excellent, and more perfect than any, and composed
the most excellent prayer.

   § 7. 'Thus, O Ânanda, that Bhikshu concentrated in his mind a
perfection of a Buddha country eighty-one times more immeasurable,
noble, and excellent than the perfection of the eighty-one hundred
thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddha countries that had been told him
by the Bhagavat Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, the Tathâgata. And then, proceeding
to where the Tathâgata was, he worshipped the feet of the Bhagavat with
his head, and said: "O Bhagavat, the perfection of all the excellences
and good qualities of the Buddha countries has been concentrated by me."

   'After this, O Ânanda, the Tathâgata Loke*s*vararâ*g*a thus spoke to
the Bhikshu: "Preach then, O Bhikshu;--the Tathâgata allows it. Now is
the proper time, O Bhikshu. Delight the assembly, produce joy, let the
lion's voice be heard, so that now and hereafter, noble-minded
Bodhisattvas, hearing it, may comprehend the different subjects (or
occasions) of the prayers for the perfection of the good qualities of a
Buddha country."

   'Then, O Ânanda, that Bhikshu Dharmâkara thus spoke at that time to
the Bhagavat: "May the Bhagavat thus listen to me, to what my own
prayers are, and how, after I shall have obtained the highest perfect
knowledge, my own Buddha country will then be endowed with all
inconceivable excellences and good qualities.

<span id="p. 12">{p. 12}</span>

   § 8. 1. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine there should
be either hell, brute-creation\[1\], the realm of departed spirits, or
the body of Asuras, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   2. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should fall away (die), and fall into hell, the
brute-creation, the realm of departed spirits, or into the body of
Asuras, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   3. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not all be of one colour, viz. a golden colour, then
may I not obtain the hignest perfect knowledge.

   4. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine there should be
perceived any difference between gods and men, except when people count
and tell, saying: 'These are gods and men, but only in ordinary and
imperfect parlance,' then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   5. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not be possessed of the highest Pâramitâs of
miraculous power and self-control, so that they could at least in the
shortest moment of one thought step over a hundred thousand niyutas of
ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   6. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not all be possessed of the recollection of their
former births, so as at least to remember a hundred thousand

<span class="small">\[1. Birth as an animal.\]</span>

<span id="p. 13">{p. 13}</span>

niyutas of ko*t*îs of kalpas, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   7. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not all acquire the divine eye, so as at least to be
able to see a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of worlds, then may I
not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   8. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who art
born there should not all acquire the divine ear, so as at least to be
able to hear at the same time the good Law from a hundred thousand
niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, then may I not obtain the
highest perfect knowledge.

   9. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not all be skilled in the knowledge of the thoughts of
other people, so as at least to be able to know the deeds and thoughts
of beings belonging to a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddha
countries, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   10. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should form any idea of property, even with regard to their
own body, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   11. 'O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine the beings who are
born there should not all be firmly established, viz. in absolute truth,
till they have reached Mahâparinirvâ*n*a, then may I not obtain the
highest perfect knowledge.

   12. "O Bhagavat, if any being should be able to count the pupils
belonging to me after I have

<span id="p. 14">{p. 14}</span>

obtained the highest perfect knowledge in that Buddha country of mine,
even if all beings who are contained in those three millions of spheres
of worlds\[1\], after having become Pratyekabuddhas\[2\], should be
counting for a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of kalpas, then may I
not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   13. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained the highest perfect
knowledge, my light should be liable to be measured in this Buddha
country of mine, even by the measure of a hundred thousand niyutas of
ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   14. "O Bhagavat, if the measure of the life of the beings in that
Buddha country of mine, after I have obtained the highest perfect
knowledge, should be liable to be measured, excepting always by their
own power of prayer, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   15. "O Bhagavat, if the measure of my life after I have obtained
Bodhi (Buddha knowledge) should be limited, even by numbering a hundred
thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of kalpas, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   16. "O Bhagavat, if, for the beings in this Buddha country of mine,
after I have obtained Bodhi, even the name of sin should exist, then may
I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   17. "O Bhagavat, if immeasurable and innumerable blessed Buddhas in
immeasurable Buddha

\[1. Trisâhasra mahâsâhasra.

2\. Men ready for Buddhaship, but who decline to preach or communicate
their knowledge.\]

<span id="p. 15">{p. 15}</span>

countries do not glorify my name, after I have obtained the Bodhi
(knowledge); if they do not preach my fame and proclaim my praise, and
utter it together, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   18\[1\]. "O Bhagavat, if those beings who have directed their thought
towards the highest perfect knowledge in other worlds, and who, after
having heard my name, when I have obtained the Bodhi (knowledge), have
meditated on me with serene thoughts; if at the moment of their death,
after having approached them, surrounded by an assembly of Bhikshus, I
should not stand before them, worshipped by them, that is, so that their
thoughts should not be troubled, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   19. "O Bhagavat, if those beings who in immeasurable and innumerable
Buddha countries, after they have heard my name, when I shall have
obtained Bodhi, should direct their thought to be born in that Buddha
country of mine, and should for that purpose bring their stock of merit
to maturity, if these should not be born in that Buddha country, even
those who have only ten times repeated the thought (of that Buddha
country), barring always those beings who have committed the (five)
Ânantarya sins\[2\], and who have caused an obstruction and abuse of the
good Law, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   20. "O Bhagavat, if those beings, who have been

\[1. On Pra*n*idhânas 18 to 21, see note at the end.

2\. The five sins which bring immediate retribution. Cf. Childers,
s.v.\]

<span id="p. 16">{p. 16}</span>

born in that Buddha country of mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should
not all be bound to one birth only, before reaching the highest perfect
knowledge, barring always the special prayers of those very noble-minded
Bodhisattvas who have put on the whole armour (of the Law), who
understand the welfare of all beings, who are devoted to all beings, who
work for the attainment of Nirvâ*n*a of all beings, who wish to perform
the duty of a Bodhisattva in all worlds, who wish to serve all Buddhas,
and to bring beings, in number like grains of sand of the river Gangâ,
to the highest perfect knowledge, and who besides are turned towards the
higher practice\[1\], and perfect in the practice of the
Samantabhadra\[2\] discipline, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   21. "O Bhagavat, if the Bodhisattvas who are born in that Buddha
country of mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not all be able,
after having gone to other Buddha countries, after their one
morning-meal, to worship many hundreds of Buddhas, many thousands of
Buddhas, many hundred thousands of Buddhas, many ko*t*îs of Buddhas,
&c., till up to many hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas,
with objects which give every kind of pleasure, and this through the
grace of the Buddha, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   22. "O Bhagavat, if those Bodhisattvas in that Buddha country of
mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should wish their stock of merit to
grow

\[1.Possibly the same as the uttarimagga, Arhatship.

2\. See note at the end.\]

<span id="p. 17">{p. 17}</span>

in the following shapes, viz. either in gold, in silver, in jewels, in
pearls, in beryls, in shells, in stones, in corals, in crystal, in
amber, in red pearls, in diamond, &c., or in any one of the other
jewels; or in all kinds of perfumes, in flowers, in garlands, in
ointment, in incense-powder, in cloaks, in umbrellas, in flags, in
banners, or in lamps; or in all kinds of dancing, singing, and
music;--and if such gifts should not appear for them, from being
produced as soon as thought of, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   23. "O Bhagavat, if those beings who are born in that Buddha country
of mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not all recite the story of
the Law which is accompanied by omniscience, then may I not obtain the
highest perfect knowledge.

   24. "O Bhagavat, if the Bodhisattvas in that Buddha country of mine,
after I have obtained Bodhi, should think thus: May we, remaining in
this world, honour revere, esteem, and worship the blessed Buddhas in
immeasurable and innumerable Buddha countries, viz. with cloaks,
alms-bowls, beds, stools, refreshments, medicines, utensils, with
flowers, incense, lamps, perfumes, garlands, ointment, powder, cloaks,
umbrellas, flags, banners, with different kinds of dancing, singing, and
music, and with showers of jewels,--and if the blessed Buddhas should
not accept them, when they are produced as soon as thought of, viz. from
compassion, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   25. "O Bhagavat, if the Bodhisattvas who are born in that Buddha
country of mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not all be in
possession of strength of body as strong as the diamond (or
thunderbolt?) of

<span id="p. 18">{p. 18}</span>

Nârâya*n*a, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   26. "O Bhagavat, if any being in that Buddha country of mine, after I
have obtained Bodhi, should learn the limit of the beauty of (its)
ornament, even if he be possessed of the divine eye, and should know
(its) various beauty, saying: 'That Buddha country possesses so much
beauty and so much magnificence,' then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   27. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine, after I have
obtained Bodhi, a Bodhisattva possessed even of a very small stock of
merit, should not perceive the Bodhi-tree of noble beauty, at least a
hundred yo*g*anas in height, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   28. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine, after I have
obtained Bodhi, either teaching or learning should have to be made by
any being, and they should not all be in possession of the perfect
knowledge, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   29. "O Bhagavat, if that Buddha country of mine, after I have
obtained Bodhi, should not be so brilliant, that in it could be seen on
all sides immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable,
immense Buddha countries, as a round face is seen in a highly burnished
round mirror, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   30. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine, after I have
obtained Bodhi, there should not be a hundred thousand of vases full of
different sweet perfumes, made of all kinds of jewels, always smoking
with incense, fit for the worship of Bodhisattvas

<span id="p. 19">{p. 19}</span>

and Tathâgatas, rising into the sky beyond gods, men, and all things,
then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   31. "O Bhagavat, if in that Buddha country of mine, after I have
obtained Bodhi, there should not be showers of sweet jewel-flowers,
always pouring down, and if there should not be sweet-sounding
music-clouds, always playing, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   32. "O Bhagavat, if the beings belonging to me, after I have obtained
Bodhi, who are visible by their splendour, in immeasurable, innumerable,
inconceivable, incomparable worlds, should not all be filled with
pleasure, far beyond gods and men, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   33. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the noble-minded
Bodhisattvas in immeasurable, inconceivable, incomparable, immense
Buddha countries on all sides, after having heard my name, should not be
delivered from birth, through the merit arising from that hearing, and
should not be strong in the knowledge of Dhâra*n*îs, until they have
obtained the very throne of Bodhi, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   34. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, women in
immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable, immense Buddha
countries on all sides, after having heard my name, should allow
carelessness to arise, should not turn their thoughts towards Bodhi,
should, when they are free from birth, not despise their female nature;
and if they, being born again, should assume a second female nature,
then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

<span id="p. 20">{p. 20}</span>

   35. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the Bodhisattvas
who in immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable, immense
Buddha countries round about in the ten quarters having heard my name,
and having fallen down, shall worship me with prostrate reverence,
should not, when performing the duty of Bodhisattvas, be honoured by the
world and by the gods, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   36. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the work of dyeing,
sewing, drying, washing of his cloaks should have to be performed by any
Bodhisattva, and they should not perceive themselves, as quick as
thought, covered by newly-produced excellent cloaks, granted to them by
the Tathâgata, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   37. "O Bhagavat, if the beings who are born at the same time in that
Buddha country, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not obtain such
happiness as that of the holy Bhikshu who is free from pain and has
obtained the third meditation, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge.

   38. "O Bhagavat, if those Bodhisattvas who are born in that Buddha
country of mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not produce from
different jewel-trees such a mass of excellent ornaments in that Buddha
country, as they should wish for, then may I not obtain the highest
perfect knowledge.

   39. "O Bhagavat, if the Bodhisattvas who are born in other Buddha
countries, when they have heard my name, after I shall have obtained
Bodhi, should suffer any diminution in the strength of their senses,
then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

<span id="p. 21">{p. 21}</span>

   40. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the Bodhisattvas,
from hearing my name in a place of a different Buddha country, should
not obtain the Samâdhi (ecstacy) called Suvibhaktavatî, in which Samâdhi
the Bodhisattvas will see immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable,
incomparable, immense, blessed Buddhas one moment after another; and if
that Samâdhi of theirs should come to an end meanwhile, then may I not
obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   41. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, beings, having
heard my name in Buddha countries different from this, should not,
through the stock of merit which follows on that hearing, obtain birth
in a noble family, till they arrive at Bodhi, then may I not obtain the
highest perfect knowledge.

   42. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the Bodhisattvas
who live in other Buddha countries, after hearing my name, till they
have reached Bodhi by the stock of merit which follows on that hearing,
should not all obtain a combination of their stock of merit with the joy
and gladness of their Bodhisattva life, then may I not obtain the
highest perfect knowledge.

   43. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the Bodhisattvas,
as soon as they have heard my name, in other worlds, should not obtain
the Samâdhi called Samantânugata, in which Bodhisattvas honour one
moment after another immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable,
incomparable, immense, blessed Buddhas, and if that Samâdhi of theirs
should come to an end before they have reached the throne of Bodhi, then
may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

<span id="p. 22">{p. 22}</span>

   44. "O Bhagavat, if the beings who are born in that Buddha country of
mine, after I have obtained Bodhi, should not hear, as quick as thought,
such a teaching of the Law as they wish to hear, then may I not obtain
the highest perfect knowledge.

   45. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, the Bodhisattvas in
this and other Buddha countries, as soon as they have heard my name,
should ever turn back from the highest perfect knowledge, then may I not
obtain the highest perfect knowledge.

   46. "O Bhagavat, if, after I have obtained Bodhi, and have become a
Buddha-teacher, the Bodhisattvas who hear my name in Buddha countries,
and obtain the first, the second, and the third degrees of endurance, as
soon as they have heard my name, should turn away again from Buddha, the
Law, and the Church, then may I not obtain the highest perfect
knowledge."

   § 9. 'And again, O Ânanda, when he had spoken such prayers, that
Bhikshu Dharmâkara, at that time, through the grace of Buddha spoke
these verses\[1\]:

   1. "If, when I have obtained Bodhi, there should not be for me an
excellent Pra*n*idhâna of such a character, then, O Prince, O Best of
beings, may I not be endowed with the ten powers, incomparable, worthy
of offerings\[2\].

   2. "If there should not be for me such a country, endowed with many
and various mighty and divine

\[1. The translation of these verses, owing to the imperfect state of
the text, is in many places tenative only.

2\. See verse 10.\]

<span id="p. 23">{p. 23}</span>

endowments, I should gladly go to hell, suffering pain, and not be a
King of treasures\[1\].

   3. "If, when I have approached the Bodhi throne, my name should not
quickly reach the ten quarters, the broad and many endless Buddha
countries, may I not be a lord of the world, endowed with power.

   4. "If indeed I should delight in the enjoyments of love, being
deprived of zeal, understanding and prudence, even after having reached
the incomparable and blessed Bodhi, may I not be a teacher in the world,
endowed with power.

   5. "The lord of vast light, incomparable and infinite, has
illuminated all Buddha countries in all the quarters, he has quieted
passions, all sins and errors, he has quieted the fire in the walk of
hell.

   6. "After making his broad eye lustrous, after driving away the
darkness from all men, after removing all untimely misfortunes, he led
hither those who dwell in Svarga (heaven) and who shine with endless
light.

   7. "The splendour of sun and moon does not shine in heaven, nor the
fiery splendour of the maze of jewels of the gods; the Lord overcomes
all splendour, he, the bright one, who has performed his former
discipline.

   8. "He is the best of men, the treasure of all who suffer; there is
no one like him in all the quarters. Having completed a hundred thousand
of good works, he, in his assembly, raised the lion-voice of Buddha.

   9. "After having worshipped former self-existing *G*inas, after
having performed immeasurable ko*t*îs

<span class="small">\[1. A Nâga king?\]</span>

<span id="p. 24">{p. 24}</span>

of vows and penances, he became in this, his best of spiritual
existences, the best of beings, possessed of the full power of prayers.

   10. "As the Bhagavat, the Lord, who is possessed of unlimited light
of knowledge, knows the three kinds of knowledge in the world, may I
also be worthy of equal offerings\[1\], the best of sages, the leader of
men.

   11. "If, O Lord, this my prayer succeeds, after I have obtained
Bodhi, may this sphere of a thousand worlds tremble, and may a shower of
flowers descend on the hosts of gods."

   12. 'Then the earth trembled, flowers were showered down, hundreds of
instruments resounded in the sky, powder of heavenly sweet sandal-wood
was scattered, and there was a voice saying: "Thou wilt be a Buddha in
the world."

   § 10. 'That Bhikshu Dharmâkara, the noble-minded Bodhisattva, O
Ânanda, was possessed of this perfection of prayers. And a few
Bodhisattvas only, O Ânanda, are possessed of such a perfection of
prayers. There is on this earth an appearance of a few only of such
prayers. Of a few, however, existence cannot be denied.

   'Then again, O Ânanda, this Bhikshu Dharmâkara having recited these
peculiar prayers before the Bhagavat Loke*s*vararâ*g*a, the Tathâgata,
and before the world including gods, Mâra, and Brahman, and before
people consisting of *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as with gods, men, and
Asuras, was established in the attainment of the true promise. And
proclaiming this purity of the Buddha country, this

<span class="small">\[1. See verse 1.\]</span>

<span id="p. 25">{p. 25}</span>

greatness and excellency of the Buddha country, and performing the duty
of a Bodhisattva, he never conceived the remotest thoughts of lust,
malevolence, and cruelty, during a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs
of years, immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable,
measureless, immense, inexpressible; and he never conceived the idea of
lust, malevolence, and cruelty, nay, he never conceived the idea of
form, sound, smell, taste, and touch. He was gentle, charming indeed,
and compassionate; pleasant to live with, agreeable, amiable, content,
of few wishes, satisfied, retired, not evil, not foolish, not
suspicious, not crooked, not wicked, not deceitful, tender\[1\], kindly
speaking, always zealous, docile in the searching after the pure Law.
And for the good of all beings, he recited the great prayer, showing
respect to friends, teachers, masters, the Church, the Law, and Buddha,
always girded for the performance of the duties of the Bodhisattva,
righteous, gentle, not deceitful, not flattering, virtuous, a leader for
the sake of rousing others to perform all good laws, producing by his
activity the ideas of emptiness, causelessness, and purposelessness, and
he was well guarded in his speech. Then, performing the duties of a
Bodhisattva, after having given up all speaking which, when spoken,
serves to injure one's self or others or both, he employed only such
speech as served the pleasure and benefit of himself, others, or both.
And he was so wise that, when entering into capitals, kingdoms,
countries, towns, cities, and villages, he was always perfectly
restrained with regard to all objects of sense. Performing

<span class="small">\[1. Sukhiloma, for sukhulâma or sukhumâla (i.e.
sukumâra).\]</span>

<span id="p. 26">{p. 26}</span>

himself the duties of the Bodhisattva without interruption, he walked
himself in the highest perfection (pâramitâ) of liberality, and he also
roused others to walk in the same. And himself walking in the highest
perfections of knowledge, meditation, strength, patience, and virtue, he
roused others also to walk in the same. And he has collected so large a
stock of merit that, wherever he is born, there arise for him many
hundreds of thousands of niyutas of ko*t*îs of treasures from out the
earth.

   'By him, while he was thus performing the duties of a Bodhisattva,
immeasurable and innumerable hundreds of thousands of niyutas of ko*t*îs
of beings were established in perfect enlightenment, of whom it is not
easy to know the limit by means of speech. So many immeasurable and
innumerable holy Buddhas were honoured, revered, esteemed, and
worshipped, and enabled to touch whatever causes pleasure, such as
cloaks, alms-bowls, couches, seats, refreshments, medicines, and other
furniture. It is not easy to know the limit by pointing it out in words
as to how many beings were established by him in the noble families of
Brâhma*n*as, Kshatriyas, ministers, householders, and merchants. In the
same manner they were established in the sovereignty of *G*ambûdvîpa
(India), and they were established in the character of *K*akravartins,
Lokapâlas, *S*akras, Suyâmas, Sutushitas, Sunirmitas, Va*s*avartins,
Devarâ*g*as, and Mahâbrahmans. So many immeasurable and innumerable
Buddhas were honoured, revered, esteemed, and worshipped, and requested
to turn the wheel of the Law, of whom it is not easy to know the limit
by means of words.

   'And he collected such virtue, that out of his

<span id="p. 27">{p. 27}</span>

mouth, while performing the duties of a Bodhisattva, during
immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable, immense,
measureless, inexpressible ko*t*îs of kalpas, there breathed a sweet and
more than heavenly smell of sandal-wood. From all the pores of his hair
there arose the smell of lotus, and he was pleasing to everybody,
gracious and beautiful, endowed with the fulness of the best bright
colour. As his body was adorned with all the good signs and marks, there
arose from the pores (of his hair) and from the palms of his hands all
sorts of precious ornaments in the shape of all kinds of cloaks and
vestments, in the shape of all kinds of flowers, incense, scents,
garlands, ointments, umbrellas, flags, and banners, and in the shape of
all kinds of instrumental music. And there appeared also, streaming
forth from the palms of his hands, all kinds of viands and drink, food,
hard and soft, and sweetmeats, and all kinds of enjoyments and
pleasures. Thus then that Bhikshu Dharmâkara, O Ânanda, had obtained the
command of all necessaries, after performing the duties of a
Bodhisattva.'

   § 11. After this, the blessed Ânanda thus spoke to the Bhagavat: 'O
Bhagavat, has that Bhikshu Dharmâkara, the noble-minded Bodhisattva,
after having obtained the highest perfect knowledge, passed away, having
entered Nirvâ*n*a, or has he not yet been enlightened, or is he now
living and enlightened, and does he dwell now, remain, support himself,
and teach the Law?'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Not indeed, O Ânanda, has

<span id="p. 28">{p. 28}</span>

that Tathâgata passed away, nor has he not yet come, but the Tathâgata,
the holy, after having obtained the highest perfect knowledge, dwells
now, remains, supports himself, and teaches the Law, in the western
quarter, in the Buddha country, distant from this world by a hundred
thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, in the world which is
called Sukhâvatî, being called Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully
enlightened. He is surrounded by innumerable Bodhisattvas, and
worshipped by endless *S*râvakas, and in possession of the endless
perfection of his Buddha country.

   § 12. 'And his light is immeasurable, so that it is not easy to know
the limit of its measure, saying, he stands illuminating so many
hundreds of Buddha countries, so many thousands of Buddha countries, so
many hundred thousands of Buddha countries, so many ko*t*îs of Buddha
countries, so many hundred ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, so many thousand
ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, so many hundred thousands of ko*t*îs of
Buddha countries, so many hundred thousands of niyutas of ko*t*îs of
Buddha countries. But indeed, O Ânanda, to put it briefly, a hundred
thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddha countries, equal to the sands of
the river Gangâ, are always lighted up in the eastern quarter, by the
light of that Bhagavat Amitâbha. Thus on every side in the southern,
western, northern quarter, in the zenith and nadir, in every one of
these quarters, there are a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of
Buddha countries, like the sands of the river Gangâ, always lighted up
by the light of that Bhagavat Amitâbha, excepting the Buddhas, the
Bhagavats, who, through the practice of their former

<span id="p. 29">{p. 29}</span>

prayers, have lighted up the world by their own light, which is a fathom
in length, or by their light which is one, two, three, four, five, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty yo*g*anas in length, or a hundred or
thousand or hundred thousand yo*g*anas in length, until their brightness
reaches many hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of yo*g*anas in length.
There is not, O Ânanda, any case of likeness, by which the extent of the
light of that Tathâgata Amitâbha could be understood. Hence, O Ânanda,
for that reason that Tathâgata is called Amitâbha (possessed of infinite
light), and he is called Amitaprabha (possessed of infinite splendour),
Amitaprabhâsa (possessed of infinite brilliancy), Asamâptaprabha (whose
light is never finished), Asangataprabha (whose light is not
conditioned), Prabhâ*s*ikhots*ri*sh*t*aprabha (whose light proceeds from
flames of light), Sadivyama*n*iprabha, (whose light is that of heavenly
jewels), Apratihatara*s*mirâgaprabha (whose light has the colour of
unimpeded rays), Râ*g*anîyaprabha (possessed of beautiful light),
Prema*n*îyaprabha, (possessed of lovely light), Pramodanîyaprabha
(possessed of delightful light), Sangamanîyaprabha (possessed of
attractive light), Uposha*n*îyaprabha (possessed of pleasant light),
Anibandhanîyaprabha\[1\] (possessed of light that cannot be stopped),
Ativîryaprabha, (possessed of extremely powerful light), Atulyaprabha,
(possessed of incomparable light),
Abhibhûyanarendrâbhûtrayendraprabha\[2\] (possessed of light greater
than that of

\[1. This seems better than nibandhanîyaprabha, as printed in the text.

2\. This reading is conjectural and the translation doubtful. Perhaps
the texts was anabhibhûyanarendrâbhûtrayendra-prabha*h*\]

<span id="p. 30">{p. 30}</span>

the lords of men, nay, the lords of the three worlds),
*S*rântasa*ñk*ayendusûrya*g*ihmîkara*n*aprabha (possessed of light which
bends the full moon and the sun),
Abhibhûyalokapâla*s*akrabrahma*s*uddhâvâsamahe*s*varasarvadeva*g*ihmîkara*n*aprabha
(possessed of light which bends all the conquered gods, Mahe*s*vara, the
*S*uddhâvâsas, Brahman, *S*akra, and the Lokapâlas).

   'This splendour of the Ârya (noble) is pure, great, producing bodily
pleasure, happiness of mind, producing happiness, delight, and joy for
men and not-men, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, Garu*d*as, Gandharvas, Yakshas,
Nâgas, Asuras, and Devas; and producing the pleasure of beings of good
disposition\[1\].

   'And in this manner, O Ânanda, the Tathâgata\[2\] might speak for a
whole kalpa on the work of the Tathâgata Amitâbha, beginning with his
light, and yet he would not be able to reach the end of the virtues of
that light of that Tathâgata, neither would there be any failure of the
self-confidence in the Tathâgata himself. And why? Because, O Ânanda,
both these things are immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, and
endless, viz. first, the greatness of the excellence of the light of
that Tathâgata Amitâbha, the Bhagavat, and secondly, the unsurpassed
light of the knowledge possessed by the Tathâgata (by myself).

\[1. Here the text adds (p. 30, l. 4),
kalyaku*s*alamimi*n*evadviprâmodyakara*n*î. The whole sentence in
unintelligible.

2\. This refers to the Bhagavat *S*âkyamuni himself, who speaks of
himself as the Tathâgata. What he means to say is that the light of
Amitâbha is infinite and that therefore even the Tathâgata could not
finish the description of it. Yet this would not detract from the
infinite power of the Tathâgata or diminish his vai*s*âradya because
that power too is infinite.\]

<span id="p. 31">{p. 31}</span>

   § 13. 'And, O Ânanda, the assembly of the hearers of that Tathâgata
Amitâbha is immeasurable, so that it is not easy to learn its measure,
so as to be able to say, there are so many ko*t*îs of the hearers, so
many hundreds, thousands, hundred-thousands, kankaras, vimbaras, nayutas
(niyutas?), ayutas, akshobhyas, vivâhas (masc.), srotas (?),
o*g*as\[1\], so many periods, called immeasurable, innumerable,
countless, incomparable, inconceivable. Now, for instance, O Ânanda, the
Bhikshu Maudgalyâyana having obtained miraculous power, might, if he
wished, count\[2\] in one day and night, how many kinds of stars there
are in the universal world. Then, let there be a hundred thousand
niyutas of ko*t*îs of such men, endowed with miraculous powers, and let
them do nothing else but count the first company (only) of the hearers
of the Tathâgata Amitâbha, during a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs
of years, and yet by them thus counting even the hundredth part would
not be counted, even the thousandth, even the hundred thousandth, nay,
not even so far as the minutest part, or likeness, or approach\[3\]
towards it would have been counted.

   'Thus, for instance, O Ânanda, a man might throw out from the great
ocean, which is not to be measured across by less than eighty-four
thousand yo*g*anas, one single drop of water by the sharp end of hair,
which is divided a hundred times. What do you think then, Ânanda,--which
would be greater, one drop of water which has been thrown up by the

\[1. All these are names of fanciful measure.

2\. Nâgare*n*a, 'with an instrument' or 'by some clever contrivance.'

3\. See Kern's translation of the Saddharmapu*nd*arîka, p. 317, note
2.\]

<span id="p. 32">{p. 32}</span>

sharp pointed hair divided a hundred times, or the mass of water left in
the great ocean?'

   Ânanda said: 'Even a thousand yo*g*anas, O Bhagavat, would be a small
portion of the great ocean, how much more then one drop of water thrown
out by the sharp pointed hair divided a hundred times!'

   Bhagavat said: 'As that one drop of water, exactly so large (so small
in proportion) was the first company of the hearers. And let there be
reckoning made by those Bhikshus, who are like Maudgalyâyana, counting
for a hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of years, and yet, as to the
mass of water left in the great ocean, it would even then have to be
considered as not counted. How much more with regard to the second,
third, and the rest of the companies of the hearers! Therefore the mass
of hearers of the Bhagavat is endless and boundless, and receives the
name of "immeasurable and innumerable."

   § 14. 'And, O Ânanda, the length of the life of that Bhagavat
Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, is immeasurable, so that it is not easy to know
its length, so as to be able to say (that it comprises) so many hundreds
of kalpas, so many thousands of kalpas, so many hundred thousands of
kalpas, so many ko*t*îs of kalpas, so many hundreds of ko*t*îs of
kalpas, so many thousands of ko*t*îs of kalpas, so many hundred
thousands of ko*t*îs of kalpas, so many hundred thousands of niyutas of
ko*t*îs of kalpas. Therefore, O Ânanda, the limit of the measure of the
life of that Bhagavat is immeasurable indeed. Therefore that Tathâgata
is called Amitâyus.

   'And as, O Ânanda, the rule of making known the reckoning of kalpas
exists here in this world, ten kalpas have passed now since Bhagavat
Amitâyus,

<span id="p. 33">{p. 33}</span>

the Tathâgata, arose and awoke to the highest perfect knowledge.

   § 15. 'And, O Ânanda, the world called Sukhâvatî belonging to that
Bhagavat Amitâbha is prosperous, rich, good to live in, fertile, lovely,
and filled with many gods and men. Then, O Ânanda, in that world there
are neither hells, nor the brute creation, nor the realm of departed
spirits, nor bodies of Asuras, nor untimely births\[1\]. And there do
not appear in this world such gems as are known in the world Sukhâvatî.

   § 16. 'Now, O Ânanda, that world Sukhâvatî is fragrant with several
sweet-smelling scents, rich in manifold flowers and fruits, adorned with
gem trees, and frequented by tribes of manifold sweet-voiced birds,
which have been made by the Tathâgata (on purpose\[2\]). And, O Ânanda,
those gem trees are of several colours, of many colours, and of many
hundred thousand colours. There are gem trees there of golden-colour,
and made of gold. There are those of silver-colour, and made of silver.
There are those of beryl-colour, and made of beryl. There are those of
crystal-colour, and made of crystal. There are those of coral-colour,
and made of coral. There are those of red pearl-colour, and made of red
pearls. There are those of diamond-colour, and made of diamonds.

   'There are some trees of two gems, viz. gold and silver. There are
some of three gems, viz. gold, silver, and beryl. There are some of four
gems,

\[1. These untimely births, i.e. being born out of time, when there are
no Buddhas to listen to, are not mentioned in the first Pra*n*idhâna;
not the jewels.

2\. Cf. the eighth paragraph in the Smaller Sukhâvatî-vyûha.\]

<span id="p. 34">{p. 34}</span>

viz. gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. There are some of five gems, viz.
gold, silver, beryl, crystal, and coral. There are some of six gems,
viz. gold, silver, beryl, crystal, coral, and red pearls. There are some
of seven gems, viz. gold, silver, beryl, crystal, coral, red pearls, and
diamonds as the seventh.

   'And there, O Ânanda, of the trees made of gold, the flowers, leaves,
small branches, branches, trunks, and roots are made of gold, and the
fruits are made of silver. Of trees made of silver, the flowers, leaves,
small branches, branches, trunks, and roots are made of silver only, and
the fruits are made of beryl. Of trees made of beryl, the flowers,
leaves, small branches, branches, trunks, and roots are made of beryl,
and the fruits are made of crystal. Of trees made of crystal, the
flowers, leaves, small branches, branches, trunks, and roots are made of
crystal only, and the fruits are made of coral. Of trees made of coral,
the flowers, leaves, small branches, branches, trunks, and roots are
made of coral only, and the fruits are made of red pearls. Of trees made
of red pearls, the flowers, leaves, small branches, branches, trunks,
and roots are made of red pearls only, and the fruits are made of
diamonds. Of trees made of diamonds, the flowers, leaves, small
branches, branches, trunks, and roots are made of diamonds only, and the
fruits are made of gold.

   'Of some trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of gold, the trunks of
silver, the branches of beryl, the small branches of crystal, the leaves
of coral, the flowers of red pearls, and the fruits of diamonds. Of some
trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of

<span id="p. 35">{p. 35}</span>

silver, the trunks of beryl, the branches of crystal, the small branches
of coral, the leaves of red pearls, the flowers of diamonds, and the
fruits of gold. Of some trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of beryl,
the trunks of crystal, the branches of coral, the small branches of red
pearls, the leaves of diamonds, the flowers of gold, and the fruits of
silver. Of some trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of crystal, the
trunks of coral, the branches of red pearls, the small branches of
diamonds, the leaves of gold, the flowers of silver, and the fruits of
beryl. Of some trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of coral, the trunks
of red pearls, the branches of diamonds, the small branches of gold, the
leaves of silver, the flowers of beryl, and the fruits of crystal. Of
some trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of red pearls, the trunks of
diamonds, the branches of gold, the small branches of silver, the leaves
of beryl, the flowers of crystal, and the fruits of coral. Of some
trees, O Ânanda, the roots are made of diamonds, the trunks of gold, the
branches of silver, the small branches of beryl, the leaves of crystal,
the flowers of coral, and the fruits of red pearls. Of some trees, O
Ânanda, the roots are made of the seven gems, the trunks of the seven
gems, the branches of the seven gems, the small branches of the seven
gems, the leaves of the seven gems, the flowers of the seven gems, and
the fruits of the seven gems.

   'And, O Ânanda, the roots, trunks, branches, small branches, leaves,
flowers, and fruits of all those trees are pleasant to touch, and
fragrant. And, when those (trees) are moved by the wind, a sweet and
delightful sound proceeds from them, never

<span id="p. 36">{p. 36}</span>

tiring, and never disagreeable to hear. That Buddha country, O Ânanda,
is always on every side surrounded by such trees made of the seven gems,
by masses of Kadalî (banana) trees, and rows of palm-trees made of the
seven gems, and entirely surrounded with golden nets, and wholly covered
with lotus flowers, made of all kinds of gems.

   'There are lotus flowers there, half a yo*g*ana in circumference.
There are others, one yo*g*ana in circumference; and others, two, three,
four, or five yo*g*anas in circumference; nay, there are some, as much
as ten yo*g*anas in circumference. And from each gem-lotus there proceed
thirty-six hundred thousand ko*t*îs of rays of light. And from each ray
of light there proceed thirty-six hundred thousand ko*t*îs of Buddhas,
with bodies of golden-colour, possessed of the thirty-two marks of great
men, who go and teach the Law to beings in the immeasurable and
innumerable worlds in the eastern quarter. Thus also in the southern,
western, and northern quarters, above and below, in the cardinal and
intermediate points, they go their way to the immeasurable and
innumerable worlds and teach the Law to beings in the whole world.

   § 17. 'And again, O Ânanda, there are no black mountains anywhere in
that Buddha country, nor anywhere jewel mountains, nor anywhere Sumerus,
kings of mountains, nor anywhere *K*akravâ*d*as, great *K*akravâ*d*as,
kings of mountains. And that Buddha country is level on every side,
lovely, like the palm of the hand, with districts full of jewels and
treasures of every kind.'

   After this, the blessed Ânanda spoke thus to the Bhagavat: 'But in
that case, O Bhagavat, where

<span id="p. 37">{p. 37}</span>

do the gods consisting of the companies of the four Mahârâ*g*as who
dwell on the side of the Sumeru, and where do the Trâyastri*ms*a gods
who dwell on the top of the Sumeru, find their place?'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Ânanda, where do these other
beings find their place, who in this world dwell above the king of
mountains, Sumeru, namely, the Yâmadevas, Tushitas, Nirmâ*n*aratis,
Paranirmitava*s*avartins, Brahmakâyikas, Brahmapurohitas, Mahâbrahmans,
as far as the Akanish*th*as?'

   Ânanda replied: 'O Bhagavat, the result of works and the outcome of
works are inconceivable' (i.e. I do not understand it).

   Bhagavat said: 'Here, you see, the result of works and the outcome of
works are inconceivable. But to the blessed Buddhas the position of
Buddhas is not inconceivable, while to thee the holy and miraculous
power of virtuous beings, whose stock of merit has become ripened, seems
inconceivable.'

   Ânanda said: 'I had no doubt on this, no difference of opinion, or
hesitation; on the contrary, I ask only the Tathâgata about this matter
in order to destroy the doubts, the differences of opinion, and the
hesitations of future beings.

   Bhagavat said: 'All right, Ânanda, this is what you ought to do.

   § 18. 'In that world Sukhâvatî, O Ânanda, there flow different kinds
of rivers; there are great rivers there, one yo*g*ana in breadth; there
are rivers up to twenty, thirty, forty, fifty yo*g*anas in breadth, and
up to twelve yo*g*anas in depth. All these rivers are delightful,
carrying water of different sweet odour, carrying bunches of flowers
adorned with various

<span id="p. 38">{p. 38}</span>

gems, resounding with sweet voices. \[1\]And, O Ânanda, there proceeds
from an instrument which consists of hundred thousand ko*t*îs of parts,
which embodies heavenly music and is played by clever people, the same
delightful sound which proceeds from those great rivers, the sound which
is deep, unknown, incomprehensible, clear, pleasant to the ear, touching
the heart, beloved, sweet, delightful, never tiring, never disagreeable,
pleasant to hear, as if it always said, "Non-eternal, peaceful, unreal."
Such a sound comes to be heard by these beings.

   'And again, O Ânanda, the borders of those great rivers on both sides
are filled with jewel trees of various scents, from which bunches of
flowers, leaves, and branches of all kinds hang down. And if the beings,
who are on the borders of those rivers, wish to enjoy sport full of
heavenly delights, the water rises to the ankle only after they have
stepped into the rivers, if they wish it to be so; or if they wish it,
the water rises to their knees, to their hips, to their sides, and to
their ears. And heavenly pleasures arise. Again, if the beings then wish
the water to be cold, it is cold; if they wish it to be hot, it is hot;
if they wish it to be hot and cold, it is hot and cold, according to
their pleasure.

   'And those great rivers flow along, full of water scented with the
best perfumes of the Uragasâra sandal-wood, of Tagaras, Kâlânusârin
(dark, fragrant sandal-wood) trees, Agarus, and heavenly Tamâlapattras;
covered with flowers of the white water-lilies, and heavenly Utpalas,
Padmas, Kumudas, and Pu*nd*arikas; full of delightful sounds of
peacocks,

<span class="small">\[1. Instead of tâsâm, it is better to read
tathâ.\]</span>

<span id="p. 39">{p. 39}</span>

sparrows, ku*n*âlas, cuckoos, *s*ârikas, parrots, ducks, geese, herons,
cranes, swans\[1\] and others; with small islands inhabited by flocks of
birds, created by the Tathâgata; adorned with fields, full of metals;
with fords on which it is easy to drink, free from mud, and covered with
gold dust. And when these beings there desire, thinking what kind of
wishes should be fulfilled for them, then exactly such wishes are
fulfilled for them according to the Law\[2\].

   'And, O Ânanda, the sound which rises from that water is delightful,
and the whole Buddha country is aroused by it. And if beings, who stand
on the borders of the river, wish that the sound should not come within
their ear-shot, then it does not come within their ear-shot, even if
they are possessed of the heavenly ear. And whatever sound a man wishes
to hear, exactly that delightful sound he hears, as for instance, the
sound "Buddha, Dharma (the Law), Sangha (the Church), the Pâramitâs
(highest perfections), the Bhûmis (stages), the Balas (powers),
Vai*s*âradya (perfections), Âve*n*ikabuddhadharma (freedom from
attachment), Pratisa*m*vit (consciousness); *S*ûnyatâ (emptiness),
Animitta (unconditioned), Apra*n*ihita (free from desire),
Anabhisa*m*skâra (not made), A*g*âta (not born), Anutpâda (without
origin), Abhâva (not being), and Nirodha (cessation); *S*ânta,
pra*s*ânta, and upa*s*ânta (peace); Mahâmaitrî (great love),
Mahâkaru*n*â (great pity), Mahâmuditâ (great rejoicing), and Mahopekshâ
(great forgiveness); Anutpattikadharmakshânti

\[1. The Tibetan translation puts these birds as follows: geese, swans,
cranes, ducks, kâra*nd*avas, parrots, *grouse* (kokilas), ku*n*âlas,
kalavinkas, and peacocks.

2\. Instead of Dharmâ*h*, the Tibetan translator seems to have read
Dharmavat.\]

<span id="p. 40">{p. 40}</span>

(resignation to consequences which have not yet arisen), and
Abhishekabhûmipratilambha (attainment of the royal stage)."

   'And having heard these sounds, everybody feels the highest delight
and pleasure accompanied by retirement, passionlessness, quiet,
cessation, law, and a stock of merit leading to the perfect knowledge.

   'And, O Ânanda, there is nowhere in that Sukhâvatî world any sound of
sin, obstacle, misfortune, distress, and destruction; there is nowhere
any sound of pain, even the sound of perceiving what is neither pain nor
pleasure is not there, O Ânanda, how much less the sound of pain. For
that reason, O Ânanda, that world is called Sukhâvatî, shortly, but not
in full. For, O Ânanda, the whole kalpa would come to an end, while the
different causes of the pleasure of the world Sukhâvatî are being
praised, and even then the end of those causes of happiness could not be
reached.

   § 19. 'And again, O Ânanda, the beings, who have been and will be
born in that world Sukhâvatî, will be endowed with such colour,
strength, vigour, height and breadth, dominion, accumulation of
virtue\[1\]; with such enjoyments of dress, ornaments, gardens, palaces,
and pavilions; and such enjoyments of touch, taste, smell, and sound; in
fact with all enjoyments and pleasures, exactly like the
Paranirmitava*s*avartin gods.

   'And again, O Ânanda, in that world Sukhâvatî, beings do not take
food consisting of gross materials of gravy or molasses; but whatever
food they desire, such food they perceive, as if it were taken,

<span class="small">\[1. Here the text seems corrupt.\]</span>

<span id="p. 41">{p. 41}</span>

and become delighted in body and mind. Yet they need not put it into
their mouth.

   'And if, after they are satisfied, they wish different kinds of
perfumes, then with these very heavenly kinds of perfumes the whole
Buddha country is scented. And whosoever wishes to perceive there such
perfume, every perfume of every scent of the Gandharvarâ*g*a does always
reach his nose\[1\].

   'And in the same manner, if they desire musical instruments, banners,
flags, umbrellas, cloaks, powders, ointments, garlands, and scents, then
the whole Buddha country shines with such things. If they desire cloaks
of different colours and many hundred thousand colours, then with these
very best cloaks the whole Buddha country shines. And the people feel
themselves covered with them.

   'And if they desire such ornaments, as for instance, head-ornaments,
ear-ornaments, neck-ornaments, hand and foot ornaments, namely, diadems,
earrings, bracelets, armlets, necklaces, chains, ear-jewels, seals, gold
strings, girdles, gold nets\[2\], pearl nets, jewel nets, nets of bells
made of gold and jewels, then they see that Buddha country shining with
such ornaments adorned with many hundred thousand jewels, that are
fastened to ornament-trees. And they perceive themselves to be adorned
with these ornaments.

   'And if they desire a palace, with colours and emblems of such and
such height and width, adorned with hundred thousand gates made with
different

\[1. The Tibetan translator seems to have read: tatra yas ta*m* gandham
âghrâtukâmo na bhavati, tasya sarva*s*o gandhasa*ñgñ*â vâsanâ *k*a na
samudâkarati.

2\. The Tibetan translation suggests the reading svar*n*a*g*âlâ.\]

<span id="p. 42">{p. 42}</span>

jewels, covered with different heavenly flowers\[1\], full of couches
strewn with beautiful cushions, then exactly such a palace appears
before them. And in these delightful palaces they dwell, play, sport,
walk about, being honoured, and surrounded by seven times seven
thousands of Apsarases.

   § 20. 'And in that world, there is no difference between gods and
men, except when they are spoken of in ordinary and imperfect parlance
as gods and men. And, O Ânanda, as a low man and impotent man, before
the face of the mighty king, is neither bright, nor warm, nor brilliant,
nor is he self-confident and radiant,--thus *S*akra, king of the Devas,
if before the face of the Paranirmitava*s*avartin gods, is neither
bright, nor warm, nor brilliant, namely, with regard to his gardens,
palaces, dresses, ornaments, his dominion, his perfection, his
miraculous power, or his supremacy, his comprehension of the Law, and
his full enjoyment of the Law. And, O Ânanda, as the
Paranirmitava*s*avartin gods are there, thus men must be considered in
the world Sukhâvatî.

   § 21. 'And again, O Ânanda, in that world Sukhâvatî, when the time of
forenoon has come, the winds are greatly agitated and blowing everywhere
in the four quarters. And they shake and drive many beautiful, graceful,
and many-coloured stalks of the gem trees, which are perfumed with sweet
heavenly scents, so that many hundred beautiful flowers of delightful
scent fall down on the great earth, which is all full of jewels. And
with these flowers that

<span class="small">\[1. Instead of pushpa the Tibetan translator seems
to have read dûshya, 'garment.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 43">{p. 43}</span>

Buddha country is adorned on every side seven fathoms deep. As a clever
man might spread out a flower-bed on the earth and make it even with
both his hands, beautiful and charming, even thus with those flowers of
various scents and colours that Buddha country is shining on every side
seven fathoms deep. And these many flowers are soft, pleasant to touch,
if one may use a comparison, like Kâ*k*ilindika (some kind of soft
substance). If one puts one's foot on them, they sink down four inches;
if one raises one's foot, they rise again four inches. When the time of
the forenoon has gone again, those flowers vanish without leaving
anything behind. Then that Buddha country is again clean, pleasant,
beautiful, and without fading flowers. The winds blow again everywhere
in the four quarters, and scatter down fresh flowers as before. And as
it is in the forenoon, so it is at noon, at twilight, in the first,
middle, and last watch of the night. And the beings, if touched by those
winds which blow perfume with various scents, are as full of happiness
as a Bhikshu (mendicant) who has obtained Nirvâ*n*a.

   § 22. 'And in that Buddha country, O Ânanda, no mention is ever made
of the names of fire, sun, moon, planets, Nakshatras (constellations),
and stars, or of blinding darkness. There is no mention even of day and
night, except in the conversation of the Tathâgata. Nor is there any
idea of predial property belonging to monasteries.

   § 23. 'And again, O Ânanda, in that world Sukhâvatî at the proper
time clouds full of heavenly perfumed water pour down heavenly flowers
of all colours; heavenly seven jewels, heavenly sandalwood-powder, and
heavenly umbrellas, flags, and

<span id="p. 44">{p. 44}</span>

banners are poured down. And in the sky, the heavenly flowers of all
colours, and heavenly canopies are held, likewise heavenly excellent
umbrellas and all kinds of ornaments, heavenly musical instruments are
played, and heavenly Apsarases dance.

   § 24. 'And again, O Ânanda, in that Buddha country whatever beings
have been born, and are being born, and will be born, are always
constant in absolute truth, till they have reached Nirvâ*n*a. And why is
that? Because there is no room or mention there of the other two
divisions (râ*s*is), such as beings not constant or constant in
falsehood.

   'On this wise, O Ânanda, that world is briefly called Sukhâvatî, not
at full length. Even a kalpa, O Ânanda, would come to an end, while the
causes of happiness which exist in that world Sukhâvatî are being
praised, and yet it would be impossible to reach the end of them.'

   § 25. Then the Bhagavat at that time spoke the following verses\[1\]:

   'Thus, O Ânanda, the world Sukhâvatî is endowed with immeasurable
good qualities and excellences.

   § 26. 'And again, O Ânanda, in the ten quarters, and in each of them,
in all the Buddha countries equal in number to the sand of the Gangâ,
the

<span class="small">\[1. The text of these verses is so corrupt that I
thought it best to follow the example of the five Chinese translators,
all of whom leave them out. They only repeat what was said before, that
people might go on for ever praising the excellences of Sukhâvatî, yet
they would never reach the end of them, and that the merit of hearing
even the name of Sukhâvatî is greater that all other blessings on earth.
The best thing, however, is to have faith in *G*ina, and to drive away
all doubt. The Tibetan translator gives a translation of seven verses,
but his translation also seems as obscure as the original.\]</span>

<span id="p. 45">{p. 45}</span>

blessed Buddhas equal in number to the sand of the Gangâ, glorify the
name of the blessed Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, they preach his fame, they
proclaim his glory, they extol his virtue. And why? Because all beings
who hear the name of the blessed Amitâbha, and having heard it, raise
their thought with joyful longing, even for once only, will not turn
away again from the highest perfect knowledge.

   § 27. 'And before the eyes of those beings, O Ânanda, who again and
again think of the Tathâgata reverently, and who make the great and
unmeasured stock of good works grow, turning their thought towards Bodhi
(knowledge), and who pray to be born in that world, Amitâbha, the
Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened, when the time of their death has
approached, will appear, surrounded by many companies of Bhikshus and
honoured by them. And then these beings, having seen the Bhagavat, their
thoughts filled with joy, will, when they have died, be born in that
world of Sukhâvatî. And if, O Ânanda, any son or daughter of a good
family should wish--What?--How then may I see that Tathâgata Amitâbha
visibly, then he must raise his thought on to the highest perfect
knowledge, he must direct his thought with perseverance and excessive
desire towards that Buddha country, and direct the stock of his good
works towards being born there.

   § 28. 'But before the eyes of those who do not care much about the
Tathâgata Amitâbha, and who do not vigorously increase the great and
unmeasured stock of their good works, the Tathâgata Amitâbha, holy and
fully enlightened, will appear, at the time of death, with the company
of Bhikshus, in breadth

<span id="p. 46">{p. 46}</span>

and height and form and beauty, very like (the former), and very like
(the real Tathâgata), but only created by thought. And they, through
their meditation that dwells on perceiving the sight of the Tathâgata,
and with unfailing memory, will, when they have died, be born in the
same Buddha country.

   § 29. 'And again, O Ânanda, those beings who meditate on the
Tathâgata by giving him the ten thoughts, and who will direct their
desire towards that Buddha country, and who will feel satisfaction when
the profound doctrines are being preached, and who will not fall off,
nor despair, nor fail, but will meditate on that Tathâgata, if it were
by one thought only, and will direct their desire toward that Buddha
country, they also will see the Tathâgata Amitâbha, while they are in a
dream, they will be born in the world Sukhâvatî, and will never turn
away from the highest perfect knowledge.

   § 30. 'And, O Ânanda, after thus seeing the cause and effect, the
Tathâgatas of the ten quarters, in immeasurable and innumerable worlds,
glorify the name of the Tathâgata Amitâbha, preach his fame, and
proclaim his praise. And again, O Ânanda, in that Buddha country,
Bodhisattvas equal in number to the sand of the Gangâ approach, from the
ten quarters, and in each quarter towards that Tathâgata Amitâbha, in
order to see him, to bow before him, to worship him, to consult him, and
likewise in order to see that company of Bodhisattvas, and the different
kinds of perfection in the multitude of ornaments and excellences
belonging to that Buddha country.'

   31. Then at that time, the Bhagavat, in order

<span id="p. 47">{p. 47}</span>

to illustrate this matter in fuller measure, recited these verses\[1\]:

   1. 'As there are Buddha countries equal to the sand of the river
Gangâ in the eastern quarter, whence all the Bodhisattvas come to
worship the Buddha, the lord Amitâyu;

   2. 'And they having taken many bunches of flowers of different
colours, sweetly-scented and delightful, shower them down on the best
leader of men, on Amitâyu, worshipped by gods and men;--

   3. 'In the same manner there are as many Buddha countries in the
southern, western, and northern quarters, whence they come with the
Bodhisattvas to worship the Buddha, the lord Amitâyu.

   4. 'And they having taken many handfulls of scents of different
colours, sweetly-scented and delightful, shower them down on the best
leader of men, on Amitâyu, worshipped by gods and men.

   5. 'These many Bodhisattvas having worshipped and revered the feet of
Amitaprabha, and having walked round him respectfully, speak thus: "Oh,
the country of Buddha shines wonderfully!"

   6. 'And they cover him again with handfulls of flowers, with thoughts
jubilant, with incomparable joy, and proclaim their wish before that
lord: "May our country also be such as this."

   7. 'And what was thrown there as handfulls of flowers arose in the
form of an umbrella extending over a hundred yo*g*anas, and the
beautiful country shines and is well adorned, and flowers cover the
whole body of Buddha.

<span class="small">\[1. In these verses there are again many doubtful
passages which could be rendered tenatively only.\]</span>

<span id="p. 48">{p. 48}</span>

   8. 'These Bodhisattvas having thus honoured him, how do they
act?--Delighted they pronounce this speech: "Gains by those people are
well gained, by whom the name of the best man has been heard.

   9. '"By us also all the gain has been well gained, because we have
come to this Buddha country. See this dream-like country\[1\] how
beautiful it is, which was made by the teacher during a hundred thousand
kalpas.

   10. '"Look, the Buddha possessed of a mass of the best virtues
shines, surrounded by Bodhisattvas. Endless is his splendour\[2\], and
endless the light, and endless the life, and endless the assembly."

   11. 'And the lord Amitâyu makes a smile of thirty-six niyutas of
ko*t*îs of rays, which rays having issued from the circle of his mouth
light up the thousand ko*t*îs of Buddha countries.

   12. 'And all these rays having returned there again settle on the
head of the lord; gods and men produce (perceive) the delight, because
they have seen there this light of him.

   13. 'There rises the Buddha-son, glorious, he indeed the mighty
Avalokite*s*vara, and says: "What is the reason there, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause, that thou smilest, O lord of the world?

   14. '"Explain this, for thou knowest the sense, and art full of kind
compassion, the deliverer of many living beings. All beings will be
filled with joyful thoughts, when they have thus heard this excellent
and delightful speech.

   15. '"And the Bodhisattvas who have come from

\[1. Maitra, 'love,' possibly 'kindness,' or was it kshetra?

2\. Amitâ asyâbhâ?\]

<span id="p. 49">{p. 49}</span>

many worlds to Sukhâvatî in order to see the Buddha, having heard it and
having perceived the great joy, will quickly inspect this country.

   16. '"And beings, come to this noble country, (quickly) obtain
miraculous power, divine eye and divine ear, they remember their former
births, and know the highest wisdom."

   17. 'Then Buddha Amitâyu preaches: "This prayer was mine formerly, so
that beings having in any way whatever heard my name should for ever go
to my country.

   18. '"And this my excellent prayer has been fulfilled, and beings
having quickly come here from many worlds into my presence, never return
from here, not even for one birth."

   19. 'If a Bodhisattva wishes here that his country should be such as
this, and that he also should deliver many beings, through his name,
through his preaching, and through his sight,

   20. 'Let him quickly and with speed go to the world Sukhâvatî, and
having gone near Amitaprabha, let him worship a thousand ko*t*îs of
Buddhas.

   21. 'Having worshipped many ko*t*îs of Buddhas, and having gone to
many countries by means of their miraculous power, and having performed
adoration in the presence of the Sugatas, they will go to Sukhâvatî with
devotion\[1\].

   § 32. 'And again, O Ânanda, there is a Bodhi-tree belonging to
Amitâyus, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened. That Bodhi-tree is
ten hundred

<span class="small">\[1. The Tibetan translation has 'in the morning,'
as if the text had been pûrvabhakta.\]</span>

<span id="p. 50">{p. 50}</span>

yo*g*anas in height, having petals, leaves, and branches spread over
eight hundred yo*g*anas, having a circumference near the base of the
root of five hundred yo*g*anas, always in leaf, always in flower, always
in fruit, of different colours, of many hundred thousand colours, of
different leaves, of different flowers, of different fruits, adorned
with many beautiful ornaments, shining with precious jewels, bright like
the moon, beautified with precious jewels (such as are) fastened on
*S*akra's head, strewn with *K*intâma*n*i\[1\] jewels, well adorned with
the best jewels of the sea, more than heavenly, hung with golden
strings, adorned with hundreds of gold chains, jewel-garlands,
necklaces, bracelets, strings of red pearls and blue pearls, lion twists
(Si*m*halatâ), girdles, bunches, strings of jewels, and all kinds of
jewels, covered with nets of bells, nets of all kinds of jewels, nets of
pearls, and nets of gold, adorned with the emblems of the dolphin, the
Svastika, the Nandyâvarta, and the moon, adorned with nets of jewels and
of bells, and with ornaments of gold and of all kinds of jewels, in fact
adorned according to the desires of beings whatever their wishes may be.

   'And again, O Ânanda, the sound and noise of that Bodhi-tree, when it
is moved by the wind, reaches immeasurable worlds. And, O Ânanda, for
those beings whose hearing that Bodhi-tree reaches, no disease of the
ear is to be feared until they reach Bodhi (highest knowledge). And for
those immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, incomparable,
measureless, immense, and inexpressible beings, whose sight that
Bodhi-tree reaches, no disease of the eye

<span class="small">\[1. Jewels yielding every wish.\]</span>

<span id="p. 51">{p. 51}</span>

is to be feared until they reach Bodhi. And again, O Ânanda, for those
beings who smell the scent of that Bodhi-tree, no disease of the nose is
to be feared until they reach Bodhi. For those beings who taste the
fruits of that Bodhi-tree, no disease of the tongue is to be feared
until they reach Bodhi. For those beings who are lighted up by the light
of that Bodhi-tree, no disease of the body is to be feared until they
reach Bodhi. And again, O Ânanda, for those beings who meditate on that
Bodhi-tree according to the Law, henceforward until they reach the
Bodhi, no perplexity of their thought is to be feared. And all those
beings, through the seeing of that Bodhi-tree, never turn away, namely,
from the highest perfect knowledge. And they obtain three kinds of
kshânti or resignation, namely, Ghoshânugâ, Anulomikî (resignation to
natural consequences), and Anutpattika-dharma-kshânti (resignation to
consequences which have not yet arisen), through the power of the former
prayers of that same Tathâgata Amitâyus, through the service rendered by
them to the former *G*inas, and through the performance of the former
prayers, to be well accomplished, and to be well conceived, without
failure or without flaw.

   § 33. 'And again, O Ânanda, those Bodhisattvas who have been born,
are being born, or will be born there, are all bound to one birth
only\[1\], and will thence indeed obtain the highest perfect knowledge;
barring always the power of prayers, as in the case of those
Bodhisattvas who are preaching with the voice of lions, who are girded
with the noble armour

<span class="small">\[1. Their present birth.\]</span>

<span id="p. 52">{p. 52}</span>

(of the Law), and who are devoted to the work of helping all people to
attain Parinirvâ*n*a.

   § 34. 'And again, O Ânanda, in that Buddha country, those who are
*S*râvakas are possessed of the light of a fathom, and those who are
Bodhisattvas are possessed of the light of a hundred thousand ko*t*îs of
yo*g*anas; barring always the two Bodhisattvas, by whose light that
world is everywhere shining with eternal splendour.'

   Then the blessed Ânanda said this to the Bhagavat: 'What are the
names, O Bhagavat, of those two noble-minded Bodhisattvas?'

   The Bhagavat said: 'One of them, O Ânanda, is the noble-minded
Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, and the second is Mahâsthâmaprâpta by
name. And, O Ânanda, these two were born there, having left this Buddha
country here\[1\].

   § 35. 'And, O Ânanda, those Bodhisattvas who have been born in that
Buddha country are all endowed with the thirty-two marks of a great man,
possessed of perfect members, skilled in meditation and wisdom, clever
in all kinds of wisdom, having sharp organs, having well-restrained
organs, having organs of sense capable of thorough knowledge, not mean,
possessed of the five kinds of strength, of patience under censure, and
of endless and boundless good qualities.

<span class="small">\[1. Sanghavarman translates this passage: 'These
two Bodhisattvas practised the discipline of Bodhisattva in this
country, and after death they were miraculously born in that Buddha
country.' Bodhiru*k*i translates: 'O Ânanda, these two Bodhisattvas went
to be born in that country from the world Sahâ, when they had exhausted
the measure of their life (here).' The world Sahâ belongs to the Buddha
*S*âkyamuni.\]</span>

<span id="p. 53">{p. 53}</span>

   § 36. 'And again, O Ânanda, all those Bodhisattvas who have been born
in that Buddha country are not deprived of the sight of Buddha, nor
liable to fall down (to the evil states), until they reach the Bodhi.
Henceforward they all will never be forgetful of their former
births\[1\]; barring always those who are devoted to their former place,
during the disturbances of the kalpas, and while the five kinds of
corruption prevail, when there is the appearance of blessed Buddhas in
the world, as for instance, that of me at present.

   § 37. 'And again, O Ânanda, all the Bodhisattvas who have been born
in that Buddha country, having gone during one morning meal to the other
world, worship many hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas, as
many as they like, through the favour of Buddha. They consider in many
ways that they should worship (Buddhas) with such and such flowers,
incense, lamps, scents, garlands, ointments, powder, cloaks, umbrellas,
flags, banners, ensigns, music, concerts, and musical instruments; and,
as soon as they have considered this, there arise also on their hands
exactly such materials for every kind of worship. And while performing
worship for those blessed Buddhas with those materials, beginning with
flowers and ending with musical instruments, they lay up for themselves
much immeasurable and innumerable merit. Again, if they wish that such
handfulls of flowers should be produced on their hands, then such
handfulls of heavenly flowers, of different colours, of many colours, of
different scents, are produced on their hands as soon as thought of.
They shower

<span class="small">\[1. 'Na' must be left out, or we must read
na*g*âtva*g*âtismarâ.\]</span>

<span id="p. 54">{p. 54}</span>

again and again such handfulls of flowers upon those blessed Buddhas.
And the very smallest handfull of flowers, being thrown on high, appears
above in the sky as an umbrella of flowers ten yo*g*anas in
circumference. And when the second has been thrown after it, the first
does not fall down on the earth. There are handfulls of flowers there,
which having been thrown up, appear in the sky as umbrellas of flowers
twenty yo*g*anas in circumference. There appear in the sky some
flower-umbrellas, thirty, forty, or fifty yo*g*anas in circumference, as
far as a hundred thousand yo*g*anas in circumference. Those
(Bodhisattvas) there who perceive the noble pleasure and joy, and obtain
the noble strength of thought, having caused a great and immeasurable
and innumerable stock of good works to ripen, and having worshipped many
hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas, turn again to the world
Sukhâvatî in one morning, through the favour of practising the former
prayers of the same Tathâgata Amitâyus, owing to the hearing of the Law
formerly given, owing to the stock of good works produced under former
*G*inas, owing to the perfect completion in the success of former
prayers, owing to the well-ordered state of mind\[1\].

   § 38. 'And again, O Ânanda, all those beings who have been born in
that Buddha country recite the story of the Law, which is accompanied by
omniscience\[2\]. And for the beings in that Buddha

\[1. The text of this passage is very imperfect in all the MSS.
Comparing the sentence with the last sentence of Chapter XXXII, it might
seem possible to read paripûr*n*ânûnatayâ, or paripûryatayânûnatayâ, for
paripûryâtmabhûtayâ. On suvibhakta, see Childers, S.V. vibha*g*ati.

2\. See the twenty-third Pra*n*idhâna.\]

<span id="p. 55">{p. 55}</span>

country there exists no idea of property whatever\[1\]. And all those
going and walking through that Buddha country feel neither pleasure nor
pain; stepping forward they have no desire, and with desire they do not
step forward. They give no thought to any beings. And again, O Ânanda,
for those beings who have been born in that world Sukhâvatî, there is no
idea of others, no idea of self, no idea of inequality, no strife, no
dispute, no opposition. Full of equanimity, of benevolent thought, of
tender thought, of affectionate thought, of useful thought, of serene
thought, of firm thought, of unbiassed thought, of undisturbed thought,
of unagitated thought, of thought (fixed on) the practice of discipline
and transcendent wisdom, having entered on knowledge which is a firm
support to all thoughts, equal to the ocean in wisdom, equal to the
mountain Meru in knowledge, rich in many good qualities, delighting in
the music of the Bodhyangas\[2\], devoted to the music of Buddha, they
discard the eye of flesh, and assume the heavenly eye. And having
approached the eye of wisdom, having reached the eye of the Law,
producing the eye of Buddha, showing it, lighting it, and fully
exhibiting it, they attain perfect wisdom. And being bent on the
equilibrium of the three elements\[3\], having subdued and calmed their
thoughts, endowed with a perception of the causes of all

\[1. See the tenth Pra*n*idhâna.

2\. 'Requisites for attaining the supreme knowledge of a
Buddha.'--Childers, Pâli Dictionary, p. 93 b.

3\. Probably the three dhâtus, Kâmadhâtu, Rûpadhâtu, and Arûpadhâtu; see
Childers, s.v. dhâtu.\]

<span id="p. 56">{p. 56}</span>

things, clever in explanation of causes, endowed with the power of
explaining the Law (or things such as they really are), clever in taking
and refusing, clever in leading and not leading, clever in resting\[1\],
they, being regardless of worldly stories, derive true pleasures from
stories transcending the world. They are clever in examining all things,
familiar with the knowledge of the cessation of the working of all
things, perceiving even what cannot be seen, caring for nothing,
attached to nothing, without cares, without pain, free without clinging
to anything, free from impurity\[2\], of blameless behaviour, not
clinging to anything, intent on the deep or profound laws, they do not
sink, elevated to the entrance into the knowledge of Buddha difficult to
comprehend, having obtained the path of one vehicle\[3\], free from
doubt, beyond the reach of questionings, knowing the thoughts of others,
free from self-confidence. Being elevated in knowledge, they are like
the Sumeru; being imperturbable in thought, they are like the ocean;
they surpass the light of the sun and moon, by the light of wisdom, and
by the whiteness, brilliancy, purity, and beauty of their knowledge; by
their light and splendour, they are like the colour of molten gold; by
their patiently bearing the good and evil deeds of all beings, they are
like the earth; by their cleaning and carrying off the taint\[4\] of all
sins, they are

\[1. The text may originally have been sthânâsthânaku*s*alâ*h*.

2\. The next words aparyasthâyina*h* and abhi*gñ*âsvamûlasthâyina*h*
seem to have a technical meaning, but neither the Tibetan nor the
Chinese translators give an intelligible rendering.

3\. Sanghavarman translates 'one vehicle.'

4\. The Tibetan translation presupposes mala instead of mûla.\]

<span id="p. 57">{p. 57}</span>

like water; by their burning the evil of pride\[1\] in anything, they
are like the king of fire; by not clinging to anything, they are like
the wind; by pervading all things and yet not caring for anything, they
are like the ether; by not being tainted by the whole world, they are
like lotuses; by their shouting forth the Law, they are like the great
cloud at the rainy season; by showering down the whole ocean of the Law,
they are like the great rain; by overpowering great troops, they are
like bulls; by the highest restraint of their thoughts, they are like
great elephants; by being well trained, they are like noble horses; by
their fearlessness, confidence, and heroism, they are like the lion, the
king of beasts; by affording protection to all beings, they are like the
Nyagrodha (fig-tree), the king of trees; by not being shaken by any
calumniators, they are like the (Sumeru), the king of mountains; by
their feeling of unlimited love, they are like the sky; by their
precedence, owing to their command of the Law, and their stock of all
merit, they are like the great Brahman; by their not dwelling in what
they have accumulated, they are like birds; by their scattering all
calumniators, they are like Garu*d*a, king of birds; by their not being
averse to our obtaining difficult things, they are like the Udumbara
flowers; calm like elephants\[2\], because their senses are neither
crooked nor shaken; clever in decision, full of the sweet flavour of
patience; without envy, because they do not hanker after the happiness
of others; wise, because in their search after the Law, never

\[1. Mâna, 'pride,' is one of the Kle*s*as.

2\. The Tibetan translator seems to have read sagaravat, instead of
nâgavat.\]

<span id="p. 58">{p. 58}</span>

tired of discussions on the Law; like the precious beryl, through their
value; (like) jewel-mines\[1\], by their sacred knowledge;
sweet-sounding by the noise of the great drum of the Law, striking the
great kettledrum of the Law, blowing the great trumpet-shell of the Law,
raising the great banner of the Law, lighting the torch of the Law,
looking for wisdom, not foolish, faultless, passionless, pure, refined,
not greedy, fond of distributing, generous, open-handed, fond of
distributing gifts, not stingy in giving instruction and food, not
attached, without fear, without desires, wise, patient, energetic,
bashful, orderly, fearless\[2\], full of knowledge, happy, pleasant to
live with, obliging, enlightening the world\[3\], free from sorrow, free
from taint, having left off the winking of the eye, possessing lightly
acquired knowledge, strong in reasoning, strong in prayer, not crooked,
not perverse; then, having accumulated a hundred thousand niyutas of
ko*t*îs of lakshas\[4\] of virtue, delivered from the thorns of pride,
free from illusion, hatred, and passion; pure, devoted to what is pure,
famous by the *G*ina-power, learned in the world, elevated by their
purified knowledge, sons of the *G*ina, endowed with the vigour of
thought, heroes, firm, unselfish\[5\], free from faults, unequalled,
free from anger, collected, noble, heroes, bashful, energetic, possessed
of memory, understanding, and prudence;

\[1. The Tibetan translation seems to have read ratnâkarasad*ris*â*h*.

2\. If the same as nirgahana.

3\. The next world are unintelligible in their present form.

4\. The Tibetan translation has Buddha for laksha.

5\. Asamâ*h* in the Tibetan translation.\]

<span id="p. 59">{p. 59}</span>

sending forth the weapons of knowledge, possessed of purity, shining,
free from faults and taints, endowed with memory, resting on serene
knowledge. And such, O Ânanda, are the beings in that Buddha country,
stated briefly. But if the Tathâgatas should describe them fully, even
in a length of life that should last for a hundred thousand niyutas of
ko*t*îs of kalpas, yet the end of the virtues of those good people would
not be reached, and yet there would be no failure of the self-confidence
of the Tathâgata. And why? Because, O Ânanda, both are indeed
inconceivable and incomparable, viz. first, the virtues of those
Bodhisattvas, and secondly, the unsurpassed light of knowledge of the
Tathâgata\[1\].

   § 39. 'And now, O Ânanda, stand up, facing westward, and having taken
a handful of flowers, fall down. This is the quarter where that Bhagavat
Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened, dwells, remains,
supports himself, and teaches the Law, whose spotless and pure name,
famed in every quarter of the whole world with its ten quarters, the
blessed Buddhas, equal to (the grains of) the sand of the river Gangâ,
speaking and answering again and again without stopping, extol, praise,
and eulogize.'

   After this, the blessed Ânanda said this to the Bhagavat: 'I wish, O
Bhagavat, to see that Amitâbha, Amitaprabha, Amitâyus, the Tathâgata,
holy and fully enlightened, and those noble-minded Bodhisattvas, who are
possessed of a stock of merit amassed under many hundred thousand
niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas.'

<span class="small">\[1. For these passages, see the end of Chapter
XII.\]</span>

<span id="p. 60">{p. 60}</span>

   At that moment this speech was spoken by the blessed Ânanda, and
immediately that Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened,
let such a ray of light go out of the palm of his own hand, that even
the most distant Buddha country was shining with the great splendour.
And again at that time, whatever black mountains, or jewel-mountains, or
Merus, great Merus, Mu*k*ilindas, great Mu*k*ilindas, *K*akravâ*d*as,
great *K*akravâ*d*as, or erections, or pillars, trees, woods, gardens,
palaces, belonging to the gods and men, exist everywhere in hundred
thousand ko*t*îs of Buddha countries; all these were pervaded and
overcome by the light of that Tathâgata. And as a man, followed by
another at a distance of a fathom only, would see the other man, when
the sun has risen, exactly in the same manner the Bhikshus,
Bhikshu*n*îs, Upâsakas (laymen), Upâsikâs (laywomen), gods, Nâgas,
Yakshas, Râkshasas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garu*d*as, Kinnaras, Mahoragas,
men and not-men, in this Buddha country, saw at that time that Amitâbha,
the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened, like the Sumeru, the king of
mountains, elevated above all countries, surpassing all quarters,
shining, warming, glittering, blazing; and they saw that great mass of
Bodhisattvas, and that company of Bhikshus, viz. by the grace of Buddha,
from the pureness of that light. And as this great earth might be, when
all covered with water, so that no trees, no mountains, no islands, no
grasses, bushes, herbs, large trees, no rivers, chasms, water-falls,
would be seen, but only the one great earth which had all become an
ocean, in exactly the same manner there is neither mark nor sign
whatever to be seen in that Buddha courtry, except *S*râvakas,

<span id="p. 61">{p. 61}</span>

spreading their light over a fathom, and those Bodhisattvas, spreading
their light over a hundred thousand ko*t*îs of yo*g*anas. And that
Bhagavat Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened,
overshadowing that mass of *S*râvakas and that mass of Bodhisattvas, is
seen, illuminating all quarters. Again at that time all those
Bodhisattvas, *S*râvakas, gods and men in that world Sukhâvatî, saw this
world Sahâ and *S*âkyamuni, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened,
surrounded by a holy company of Bhikshus, teaching the Law.

   § 40. Then, the Bhagavat addressed the noble-minded Bodhisattva
A*g*ita, and said: 'Do you see, O A*g*ita, the perfection of the array
of ornaments and good qualities in that Buddha country; and above in the
sky (places) with charming parks\[1\], charming gardens, charming rivers
and lotus lakes, scattered with many precious Padmas, Utpalas, Kumudas,
and Pu*nd*arîkas; and below, from the earth to the abode of the
Akanish*th*as, the surface of the sky, covered with flowers, ornamented
with wreaths of flowers, shining on the rows of many precious columns,
frequented by flocks of all kinds of birds created by the Tathâgata?'

   The Bodhisattva A*g*ita said: 'I see, O Bhagavat.'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Do you see again, O A*g*ita, those flocks of
immortal birds, making the whole Buddha country resound with the voice
of Buddha, so that those Bodhisattvas are never without meditating on
Buddha?'

   A*g*ita said: 'I see, O Bhagavat.'

<span class="small">\[1. A substantive seems to be wanting to which all
these adjectives would refer.\]</span>

<span id="p. 62">{p. 62}</span>

   The Bhagavat said: 'Do you see again, O A*g*ita, those beings, who
have ascended to the palaces which extend over a hundred thousand
yo*g*anas in the sky, walking about respectfully

   A*g*ita said: 'I see, O Bhagavat.'

   The Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O A*g*ita, is there any
difference between the gods called Paranirmitava*s*avartins, and men in
the world Sukhâvatî?'

   A*g*ita said: 'I do not, O Bhagavat, perceive even one difference, so
far as the men in that world of Sukhâvatî are endowed with great
supernatural powers.'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Do you see again, O A*g*ita, those men dwelling
within the calyx of excellent lotus-flowers in that world Sukhâvatî?'

   He said: 'As gods called Trâyastri*m*sas or Yâmas, having entered
into palaces of fifty or hundred or five hundred yo*g*anas in extent,
are playing, sporting, walking about, exactly in the same manner I see,
O Bhagavat, these men dwelling within the calyx of excellent
lotus-flowers in the world Sukhâvatî.

   § 41. 'Again there are, O Bhagavat, beings who, being born
miraculously, appear sitting cross-legged in the lotus-flowers. What is
there, O Bhagavat, the cause, what the reason, that some dwell within
the calyx, while others, being born miraculously, appear sitting
cross-legged in the lotus-flowers?'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Those Bodhisattvas, O A*g*ita, who, living in
other Buddha countries, entertain doubt about being born in the world
Sukhâvatî, and with that thought amass a stock of merit, for them there
is the dwelling within the calyx. Those, on the contrary, who are filled
with faith, and being

<span id="p. 63">{p. 63}</span>

free from doubt, amass a stock of merit in order to be born in the world
Sukhâvatî, and conceive, believe, and trust in the perfect knowledge of
the blessed Buddhas, they, being born miraculously, appear sitting
cross-legged in the flowers of the lotus. And those noble-minded
Bodhisattvas, O A*g*ita, who, living in other Buddha countries, raise
their thought in order to see Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully
enlightened, who never entertain a doubt, believe in the perfect
knowledge of Buddha and in their own stock of merit, for them, being
born miraculously, and appearing cross-legged, there is, in one minute,
such a body as that of other beings who have been born there long
before. See, O A*g*ita, the excellent, immeasurable, unfailing,
unlimited wisdom, that namely for their own benefit they are deprived
during five hundred years of seeing Buddhas, seeing Bodhisattvas,
hearing the Law, speaking about the Law (with others), and thus
collecting a stock of merit; they are indeed deprived of the successful
attainment of every stock of merit, and that through their forming ideas
tainted with doubt.

   'And, O A*g*ita, there might be a dungeon belonging to an anointed
Kshatriya king, inlaid entirely with gold and beryl, in which cushions,
garlands, wreaths and strings are fixed, having canopies of different
colours and kind, covered with silk cushions, scattered over with
various flowers and blossoms, scented with excellent scents, adorned
with arches, courts, windows, pinnacles, fire-places, and terraces,
covered with nets of bells of the seven kinds of gems, having four
angles, four pillars, four doors, four stairs; and the son of that king
having been

<span id="p. 64">{p. 64}</span>

thrown into the dungeon for some misdeed is there, bound with a chain
made of the *G*âmbûnada gold. And suppose there is a couch prepared for
him, covered with many woollen cloths, spread over with cotton and
feather cushions, having Kâlinga coverings, and carpets, together with
coverlids\[1\], red on both sides, beautiful and charming. There he
might be then either sitting or resting. And there might be brought to
him much food and drink, of various kinds, pure and well prepared. What
do you think, O A*g*ita, would the enjoyment be great for that prince?'

   A*g*ita said: 'Yes\[2\], it would be great, O Bhagavat.'

   The Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O A*g*ita, would he even taste
it there, and notice it, or would he feel any satisfaction from it?'

   He said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagavat; but on the contrary, when he had
been led away by the king and thrown into the dungeon, he would only
wish for deliverance from there. He would seek for the nobles, princes,
ministers, women\[3\], elders (rich merchants), householders, and lords
of castles, who might deliver him from that dungeon. Moreover, O
Bhagavat, there is no pleasure for that prince in that dungeon, nor is
he liberated, until the king shows him favour.'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Thus, O A*g*ita, it is with those Bodhisattvas
who, having fallen into doubt, amass a stock of merit, but doubt the
knowledge of Buddha. They are born in that world Sukhâvatî,

\[1. The text is corrupt. One might begin a new word with
sottarapada*kkh*ada*h*.

2\. One expects, No.

3\. Stryâgâra, like the German Frauenzimmer.\]

<span id="p. 65">{p. 65}</span>

through the hearing of Buddha's name, and through the serenity of
thought only; they do not, however, appear sitting cross-legged in the
flowers of the lotus, being born miraculously, but dwell only in the
calyx of the lotus-flowers. Moreover for them there exist ideas of
palaces and gardens\[1\]. There is no discharge, there is no phlegm or
mucus, there is nothing disagreeable to the mind. But they are deprived
of seeing Buddhas, hearing the Law, seeing Bodhisattvas, speaking about
and ascertaining the Law, (gathering) any (new) stock of merit, and
practising the Law, during five hundred years. Moreover they do not
rejoice there or perceive satisfaction. But they wish to remove one
another, and then they step out behind. And it is not known whether
their exit takes place above, below, or across. See, O A*g*ita, there
might be worshippings of many hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of
Buddhas during those five hundred years, and also many, immense,
innumerable, immeasurable stocks of merit to be amassed. But all this
they destroy by the fault of doubt. See, O A*g*ita, to how great an
injury the doubt of the Bodhisattvas leads. Therefore now, O A*g*ita,
after the Bodhisattvas without doubting have quickly raised their
thoughts towards the Bodhi, in order to obtain power of conferring
happiness for the benefit of all creatures, their stock of merit should
be turned towards their being born in the world Sukhâvatî, where the
blessed Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, holy and fully enlightened, dwells.'

   § 42. After these words, the Bodhisattva A*g*ita

<span class="small">\[1. They imagine they are living in palaces and
gardens.\]</span>

<span id="p. 66">{p. 66}</span>

thus spoke to the Bhagavat: 'O Bhagavat, will the Bodhisattvas, who have
gone away from this Buddha country, or from the side of other blessed
Buddhas, be born in the world Sukhâvatî?'

   The Bhagavat said: 'Indeed, O A*g*ita, seventy-two niyutas of ko*t*îs
of Bodhisattvas are gone away from this Buddha country, who will be born
in the world Sukbavatt; Bodhisattvas, who will never return, thanks to
the stock of merit, which they have accumulated under many hundred
thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of Buddhas. What then shall be said of those
with smaller stocks of merit\[1\]? 1. Eighteen hundred niyutas of
ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the
place of the Tathâgata Dushprasaha. 2. There lives in the Eastern
quarter the Tathâgata named Ratnâkara. From his place ninety ko*t*îs of
Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî. 3. Twenty-two ko*t*îs
of Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of
the Tathâgata *G*yotishprabha. 4. Twenty-five ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas
will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata
Amitaprabha. 5. Sixty ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be born in the world
Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata Lokapradîpa. 6. Sixty-four
ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the
place of the Tathâgata Nâgâbhibhû. 7. Twenty-five ko*t*îs of
Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the
Tathâgata Vira*g*a*h*prabha. 8. Sixteen ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be
born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata Si*m*ha. 9.
Eighteen thousand

<span class="small">\[1. What is meant is that their number is much
larger.\]</span>

<span id="p. 67">{p. 67}</span>

Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the
Tathâgata Si*m*ha (sic). 10. Eighty-one niyutas of ko*t*îs of
Bodhisattvas will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the
Tathâgata *S*rîkû*t*a. 11. Ten niyutas of ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will
be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata
Narendrarâ*g*a. 12. Twelve thousand Bodhisattvas will be born in the
world Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata Balâbhi*gñ*a. 13.
Twenty-five ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas\[1\], who have obtained strength,
having gone to one place in one week of eight days, and having turned to
the West during ninety hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of
kalpas\[2\], will be born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the
Tathâgata Pushpadhva*g*a. 14. Twelve ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be
born in the world Sukhâvatî from the place of the Tathâgata
*G*valanâdhipati. 15. From the place of the Tathâgata
Vai*s*âradyaprâpta, sixty-nine ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas will be born in
the world Sukhâvatî, in order to see the Tathâgata Amitâbha, to bow
before him, to worship him, to ask questions of him, and to consult him.
For this reason, O A*g*ita, I might proclaim during a full niyuta of
ko*t*îs of kalpas the names of those Tathâgatas, from whom the
Bodhisattvas proceed in order to see that Tathâgata Amitâbha in the
world Sukhâvatî, to

\[1. it should be pa*ñk*avi*ms*atir.

2\. Sanghavarman's translation of this pasage is: 'Within seven days
they can take hold of the firm conditions (dharmas) practised by a
noble-minded one during hundred thousand of ko*t*îs of kalpas.'
Bodhiruki's is: 'Within seven days they can cause beings to separate
from their state of transmigration during hundred thousands of niyutas
of ko*t*îs.\]

<span id="p. 68">{p. 68}</span>

bow before him, and to worship him, and yet the end could not be
reached.

   § 43. 'See, O A*g*ita, what easy gains are gained by those beings who
will hear the name of the Tathâgata Amitâbha, holy and fully
enlightened. Nor will those beings be of little faith\[1\], who will
obtain at least one joyful thought of that Tathâgata and of this
treatise of the Law. Therefore now, O A*g*ita, I invite you, and command
you to proclaim this treatise of the Law, before the world together with
the gods. Having plunged into the vast universe full of fire, no one
ought to turn back, if he has but once conceived the thought of going
across. And why? Because ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas indeed, O A*g*ita,
return from the highest perfect knowledge, on account of not hearing
such treatises of the Law as this. Therefore, from a wish for this
treatise of the Law, a great effort should be made to hear, learn, and
remember it, and to study it for the sake of fully grasping it and
widely making it known. A good copy of it should be kept, after it has
been copied in a book, if only during one night and day, or even during
the time necessary for milking a cow. The name of Master should be given
to a teacher who desires to conduct quickly innumerable beings to the
state of never returning from the highest perfect knowledge, namely, in
order that they may see the Buddha country of that blessed Amitâbha, the
Tathâgata, and to acquire the excellent perfection of the array of good
qualities peculiar to his own Buddha country.

<span class="small">\[1. Hînâdhimuktika, see Va*g*ra*kkh*edikâ XV; or
'following the lower Law.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 69">{p. 69}</span>

   'And, O A*g*ita, such beings will have easily gained their gains who,
having amassed a stock of merit, having performed service under former
*G*inas, and having been guided by Buddhas, shall hear in future, until
the destruction of the good Law, such-like excellent treatises of the
Law, treatises which are praised, eulogized, and approved of by all
Buddhas, and convey quickly the great knowledge of omniscience. And
those also who, when they have heard it, shall obtain excellent delight
and pleasure, and will learn, retain, recite and grasp, and wisely
preach it to others, and be delighted by its study, or, having copied it
at least, will worship it, will certainly produce much good work, so
that it is difficult to count it.

   'Thus indeed, O A*g*ita, I have done what a Tathâgata ought to do. It
is now for you to devote yourself to it without any doubt. Do not doubt
the perfect and unfailing knowledge of Buddha. Do not enter into the
dungeon made of gems built up in every way. For indeed, the birth of a
Buddha, O A*g*ita, is difficult to be met with, so is the instruction in
the Law, and also a timely birth\[1\]. O A*g*ita, the way to gain the
perfection (pâramitâ) of all stocks of merit has been proclaimed by me.
Do now exert yourselves and move forward. O A*g*ita, I grant indeed a
great favour to this treatise of the Law. Be valiant so that the laws of
Buddhas may not perish or disappear. Do not break the command of the
Tathâgata.'

   § 44. Then at that time, the Bhagavat spoke these verses:

<span class="small">\[1. Of the hearer; so that the student should be
born at a time when there is a Buddha on earth.\]</span>

<span id="p. 70">{p. 70}</span>

   1. 'Such hearings of me will not be for people who have not done
good; but those who are heroes and perfect, they will hear this speech.

   2. 'And those by whom the Lord of the world, the enlightened and the
light-giver, has been seen, and the law been heard reverentially, will
obtain the highest joy.

   3. 'Low people of slothful minds cannot find any delight in the laws
of Buddha; those who have worshipped in the Buddha countries learn the
service of the Lords of the three worlds.

   4. 'As a blind man in darkness does not know the way, and much less
can show it, so also he who is (only) a *S*râvaka\[1\] in the knowledge
of Buddha; how then should beings who are ignorant!

   5. 'The Buddha only knows the virtues of a Buddha; but not gods,
Nâgas, Asuras, Yakshas, and *S*râvakas (disciples); even for
Anekabuddhas\[2\] there is no such way, as when the knowledge of a
Buddha is being manifested.

   6. 'If all beings had attained bliss, knowing the highest meaning in
pure wisdom, they would not in ko*t*îs of kalpas or even in a longer
time tell all the virtues of one Buddha.

   7. 'Thereupon they would attain Nirvâ*n*a, preaching for many ko*t*îs
of kalpas, and yet the measure of the knowledge of a Buddha would not be
reached, for such is the wonderfulness of the knowledge of the *G*inas.

   8. 'Therefore a learned man of an intelligent race\[3\] who believes
my words, after having perceived

\[1. Those who are as yet hearers only of the Law.

2\. Should it be Pratyekabuddhas?

3\. The text is evidently corrupt, and the translation conjectural.\]

<span id="p. 71">{p. 71}</span>

all paths of the knowledge of the *G*inas, should utter speech, saying,
"Buddha is wise."

   9. 'Now and then a man is found, now and then a Buddha appears,
knowledge of the object of faith is acquired after a long
time,--therefore one should strive to acquire (the knowledge of) the
object (of faith)\[1\].'

   § 45. And while this treatise of the Law was being delivered, twelve
ko*t*îs of niyutas of beings obtained the pure and spotless eye of the
Law with regard to Laws. Twenty-four hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs
of beings obtained the Anâgâmin\[2\] reward. Eight hundred Bhikshus had
their thoughts delivered from faults so as to cling no more to anything.
Twenty-five ko*t*îs of Bodhisattvas obtained resignation to things to
come. And by forty hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of the human and
divine race, thoughts such as had never risen before were turned toward
the highest perfect knowledge, and their stocks of merit were made to
grow toward their being born in the world Sukhâvatî, from a desire to
see the Tathâgata, the blessed Amitâbha. And all of them having been
born thcre, will in proper order be born in other worlds, as Tathâgatas,
called Ma*ñg*usvara (sweet-voiced). And eighty ko*t*îs of niyutas having
acquired resignation under the Tathâgata Dîpankara, never turning back
again from the highest perfect knowledge, rendered perfect by the

\[1. The tenth verse is again unintelligible, but may have meant
something like tha 'those who having heard the best Laws, are joyful in
remembering Sugata, are our friends in time past, and they also who wish
for enlightenment.'

2\. One who is not born again, except in the Brahma world, and then may
obtain Nirvâ*n*a.\]

<span id="p. 72">{p. 72}</span>

Tathâgata Amitâyus, practising the duties of former Bodhisattvas, will
carry out, after they are born in the world Sukhâvatî, the duties
enjoined in the former Pra*n*idhânas (prayers).

   § 46. At that time this universe (the three millions of worlds)
trembled in six ways. And various miracles were seen. On earth
everything was perfect, and human and divine instruments were played,
and the shout of joy was heard as far as the world of the Akanish*th*as.

   § 47. Thus spoke the Bhagavat enraptured, and the noble-minded
Bodhisattva A*g*ita, and the blessed Ânanda, the whole Assembly, and the
world, with gods, men, spirits, mighty birds, and fairies, applauded the
speech of the Bhagavat.

   The praise of the beauty of the excellences of Sukhâvatî, the country
of the blessed Amitâbha, the Tathâgata, the entry of the Bodhisattva on
the stage of 'never returning,' the story of Amitâbha, the Mahâyânasûtra
of the Description of Sukhâvatî is finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note to The Larger Sukhâvatî-vyûha](sbe4925.md)
