[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4901)  [Next](sbe4903.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. vi">{p. vi}</span>

## INTRODUCTION.

 

   THE Sanskrit text of the Buddha-*k*arita was published at the
beginning of last year in the 'Anecdota Oxoniensia,' and the following
English translation is now included in the series of 'Sacred Books of
the East.' It is an early Sanskrit poem written in India on the
legendary history of Buddha, and therefore contains much that is of
interest for the history of Buddhism, beside its special importance as
illustrating the early history of classical Sanskrit literature.

   It is ascribed to A*s*vaghosha; and, although there were several
writers who bore that name, it seems most probable that our author was
the contemporary and spiritual adviser of Kanishka in the first century
of our era. Hiouen Thsang, who left India in A. D. 645, mentions him
with Deva, Nâgâr*g*una, and Kumarâlabdha, 'as the four suns which
illumine the world\[1\];' but our fullest account is given by I-tsing,
who visited India in 673. He states that A*s*vaghosha was an ancient
author who composed the Ala*m*kâra-*s*âstra and the
Buddha-*k*arita-kâvya,--the latter work being of course the present
poem. Beside these two works he also composed the hymns in honour of
Buddha and the three holy beings Amitâbha, Avalokite*s*vara, and
Mahâsthâma, which were chanted at the evening service of the
monasteries. 'In the five countries of India and in the countries of the
Southern ocean they recite these poems, because they express a store of
ideas and meaning in a few words\[2\].' A solitary stanza (VIII, 13) is

\[1. Julien's Translation, vol. ii, p. 214.

2\. See M. Fujishama, Journal Asiatique, 1888, p. 425.\]

<span id="p. vii">{p. vii}</span>

quoted from the Buddha-*k*arita in Râyamuku*t*a's commentary on the
Amarakosha I, I. I, 2, and also by U*gg*valadatta in his commentary on
the U*n*âdi-sûtras I, 156; and five stanzas are quoted as from
A*s*vaghosha in Vallabhadeva's Subhâshitâvali, which bear a great
resemblance to his style, though they are not found in the extant
portion of this poem\[1\].

   The Buddha-*k*arita was translated into Chinese\[2\] by Dharmaraksha
in the fifth century, and a translation of this was published by the
Rev. S. Beal in the present series; it was also translated into Tibetan
in the seventh or eighth century. The Tibetan as well as the Chinese
version consists of twenty-eight chapters, and carries down the life of
Buddha to his entrance into Nirvâ*n*a and the subsequent division of the
sacred relics. The Tibetan version appears to be much closer to the
original Sanskrit than the Chinese; in fact from its verbal accuracy we
can often reproduce the exact words of the original, since certain
Sanskrit words are always represented by the same Tibetan equivalents,
as for instance the prepositions prefixed to verbal roots. I may here
express an earnest hope that we may still ere long have an edition and
translation of the Tibetan version, if some scholar can be found to
complete Dr. Wenzel's unfinished labour. He had devoted much time and
thought to the work; I consulted him in several of my difficulties, and
it is from him that I derived all my information about the Tibetan
renderings. This Tibetan version promises to be of great help in
restoring the many corrupt readings which still remain in our faulty
Nepalese MSS.

   Only thirteen books of the Sanskrit poem claim to be A*s*vaghosha's
composition; the last four books are an attempt by a modern Nepalese
author to supply the loss of the original. He tells us this honestly in
the colophon,

\[1. Professor Peterson has remarked that two stanzas out of the five
occur in Bhart*ri*hari's Nîti-*s*ataka.

2\. We have for the present classed the Buddha-*k*arita with the
Mahâyâna Sûtras in default of more exact information.\]

<span id="p. viii">{p. viii}</span>

--'having searched for them everywhere and not found them, four cantos
have been made by me, Am*ri*tânanda,--the fourteenth, fifteenth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth.' He adds the date 950 of the Nepalese era,
corresponding to 1830 A. D.; and we have no difficulty in identifying
the author. Râ*g*endralâl Mitra in his 'Nepalese Buddhist Literature'
mentions Am*ri*tânanda as the author of two Sanskrit treatises and one
in Newârî; he was probably the father of the old pa*nd*it of the
Residency at Kâ*t*mâ*nd*u, Gu*n*ânanda, whose son Indrânanda holds the
office at present. Dr. D. Wright informs me that the family seem to have
been the recognised historians of the country, and keepers of the MS.
treasures of sundry temples. The four books are included in this
translation as an interesting literary curiosity. The first portion of
the fourteenth book agrees partly with the Tibetan and Chinese, and
Am*ri*tânanda may have had access to some imperfect copy of this portion
of the original; but after that his account is quite independent, and
has no relation to the two versions.

   In my preface to the edition of the Sanskrit text I have tried to
show that A*s*vaghosha's poem appears to have exercised an important
influence on the succeeding poets of the classical period in India. When
we compare the description in the seventh book of the Raghuva*m*sa of
the ladies of the city crowding to see prince A*g*a as he passes by from
the Svaya*m*vara where the princess Bho*g*yâ has chosen him as her
husband, with the episode in the third book of the Buddha-*k*arita
(*s*lokas 13-24); or the description of Kâma's assault on *S*iva in the
Kumârasa*m*bhava with that of Mâra's temptation of Buddha in the
thirteenth book, we can hardly fail to trace some connection. There is a
similar resemblance between the description in the fifth book of the
Râmâya*n*a; where the monkey Hanumat enters Râva*n*a's palace by night,
and sees his wives asleep in the seraglio and their various unconscious
attitudes, and the description in the fifth book of the present poem
where Buddha on the night of his leaving his home for ever sees the same
unconscious sight in his own palace. Nor may

<span id="p. ix">{p. ix}</span>

we forget that in the Râmâya*n*a the description is merely introduced as
an ornamental episode; in the Buddhist poem it is an essential element
in the story, as it supplies the final impulse which stirs the
Bodhisattva to make his escape from the world, These different
descriptions became afterwards commonplaces in Sanskrit poetry, like the
catalogue of the ships in Greek or Roman epics; but they may very well
have originated in connection with definite incidents in the Buddhist
sacred legend.

   The Sanskrit MSS. of Nepal are always negligently transcribed and
abound with corrupt passages, which it is often very difficult to detect
and restore. My printed text leaves many obscure lines which will have
to be cleared up hereafter by more skilful emendations. I have given in
the notes to the translation some further emendations of my own, and I
have also added several happy conjectures which continental scholars
have kindly suggested to me by letter; and I gladly take this
opportunity of adding in a foot-note some which I received too late to
insert in their proper places\[1\].

   I have endeavoured to make my translation intelligible to the English
reader, but many of the verses in the original are very obscure.
A*s*vaghosha employs all the resources of Hindu rhetoric (as we might
well expect if I-tsing is right in ascribing to him an
'ala*m*kâra-*s*âstra'), and it is often difficult to follow his subtil
turns of thought and remote allusions; but many passages no doubt owe
their present obscurity to undetected mistakes in the text of our MSS,
In the absence of any Commentary (except so far as the diffuse Chinese
translation and occasional reference to the Tibetan have supplied the
want) I have been necessarily left to my own resources, and I cannot
fail to have sometimes missed my author's meaning.

   Prâ*ms*ulabhye phale mohâd udbâhur iva vâmana*h*;

<span class="small">\[1. Dr. von Boehtlingk suggests 'sau*g*â
vi*k*a*k*âra' in VIII, 3, and 'vila*m*bake*s*yo' in VIII, 21,--two
certain emendations. Professor Kielhorn would read 'nabhasy eva' in
XIII, 47 for 'nayaty eva,' and 'tatraiva nâsînam *ri*shim' in XIII, 50.
Professor Bühler would read 'priyatanayas tanayasya' in I, 87, and 'na
tatyâ*g*a *k*a' in IV, 80.\]</span>

<span id="p. x">{p. x}</span>

but I have tried to do my best, and no one will welcome more cordially
any light which others may throw on the passages which I have
misunderstood.

   The edition of the original text was dedicated to my old friend
Professor F. Max Müller, and it is a sincere gratification to me that
this translation will appear in the same volume with similar
translations from his pen.

E. B. C.       

     <span class="small">CAMBRIDGE:</span>  
          <span class="small">Feb. 1, 1894.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I of the Buddha-*k*arita](sbe4903.md)
