[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4929)  [Next](sbe4931)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 147">{p. 147}</span>

### THE LARGER

# PRA*GÑ*Â-PÂRAMITÂ-

# H*RI*DAYA-SÛTRA.

 

ADORATION TO THE OMNISCIENT!

   This I heard: At one time the Bhagavat dwelt at Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, on the
hill G*ri*dhrakû*t*a, together with a large number of Bhikshus and a
large number of Bodhisattvas.

   At that time the Bhagavat was absorbed in a meditation, called
Gambhîrâvasambodha. And at the same time the great Bodhisattva
Âryâvalokite*s*vara, performing his study in the deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ,
thought thus: 'There are the five Skandhas, and those he (the Buddha?)
considered as something by nature empty.'

   Then the venerable *S*âriputra, through Buddha's power, thus spoke to
the Bodhisattva Âryâvalokite*s*vara: 'If the son or daughter of a family
wishes to perform the study in the deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, how is he to
be taught?'

   On this the great Bodhisattva Âryâvalokite*s*vara thus spoke to the
venerable *S*âriputra: 'If the son or daughter of a family wishes to
perform the study in the deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, he must think thus:

   'There are five Skandhas, and these he considered as by their nature
empty. Form is emptiness, and

<span id="p. 148">{p. 148}</span>

emptiness indeed is form. Emptiness is not different from form, form is
not different from emptiness. What is form that is emptiness, what is
emptiness that is form. Thus perception, name, conception, and knowledge
also are emptiness. Thus, O *S*âriputra, all things have the character
of emptiness, they have no beginning, no end, they are faultless and not
faultless, they are not imperfect and not perfect. Therefore, O
*S*âriputra, here in this emptiness there is no form, no perception, no
name, no concept, no knowledge. No eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind. No form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and objects. There is no
eye,' &c., till we come to 'there is no mind, no objects, no
mind-knowledge. There is no knowledge, no ignorance, no destruction (of
ignorance),' till we come to 'there is no decay and death, no
destruction of decay and death; there are not (the Four Truths, viz.)
that there is pain, origin of pain, stoppage of pain, and the path to
it. There is no knowledge, no obtaining, no not-obtaining of Nirvâ*n*a.
Therefore, O *S*âriputra, as there is no obtaining (of Nirvâ*n*a), a man
who has approached the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ of the Bodhisattvas, dwells (for
a time) enveloped in consciousness. But when the envelopment of
consciousness has been annihilated, then he becomes free of all fear,
beyond the reach of change, enjoying final Nirvâ*n*a.

   'All Buddhas of the past, present, and future, after approaching the
Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, have awoke to the highest perfect knowledge.

   'Therefore we ought to know the great verse of the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ,
the verse of the great wisdom, the unsurpassed verse, the verse which
appeases

<span id="p. 149">{p. 149}</span>

all pain--it is truth, because it is not false\[1\]--the verse
proclaimed in the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ\[2\]: "O wisdom, gone, gone, gone to
the other shore, landed at the other shore, Svâhâ!"

   'Thus, O Sâriputra, should a Bodhisattva teach in the study of the
deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ.'

   Then when the Bhagavat had risen from that meditation, he gave his
approval to the venerable Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, saying: 'Well
done, well done, noble son! So it is, noble son. So indeed must this
study of the deep Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ be performed. As it has been
described by thee, it is applauded by Arhat Tathâgatas.' Thus spoke
Bhagavat with joyful mind. And the venerable Sâriputra, and the
honourable Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, and the whole assembly, and the
world of gods, men, demons, and fairies praised the speech of the
Bhagavat.

Here ends the Pra*gñ*âpâramitâh*ri*dayasûtra.

\[1. It is truth, not falsehood, W text.

2\. Fit for obtaining Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, W text.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Smaller Pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ-h*ri*daya-sûtra](sbe4931)
