[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4911)  [Next](sbe4913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 104">{p. 104}</span>

## BOOK X.

 

   1. The prince, he of the broad and lusty chest, having thus dismissed
the minister and the priest, crossed the Ganges with its speeding waves
and went to Râ*g*ag*ri*ha with its beautiful palaces.

   2. He reached the city distinguished by the five hills, well guarded
and adorned with mountains, and supported and hallowed by auspicious
sacred places\[1\],--like Brahman\[2\] in a holy calm going to the
uppermost heaven.

   3. Having heard of his majesty and strength, and his splendid beauty,
surpassing all other men, the people of that region were all astonished
as at him who has a bull for his sign and is immovable in his vow\[3\].

   4. On seeing him, he who was going elsewhere stood still, and he who
was standing there followed him in the way; he who was walking gently
and gravely ran quickly, and he who was sitting at once sprang up.

   5. Some people reverenced him with their hands, others in worship
saluted him with their heads, some addressed him with affectionate
words,--not one went on without paying him homage.

   6. Those who were wearing gay-coloured dresses were ashamed when they
saw him, those who were talking on random subjects fell to silence on
the

\[1. Tapoda is the name of a tîrtha in Magadha.

2\. Svaya*m*bhû.

3\. *S*iva.\]

<span id="p. 105">{p. 105}</span>

road; no one indulged in an improper thought, as at the presence of
Religion herself embodied.

   7. In the men and the women on the highway, even though they were
intent on other business, that conduct alone with the profoundest
reverence seemed proper which is enjoined by the rules of royal homage;
but his eyes never looked upon them.

   8. His brows, his forehead, his mouth, or his eyes,--his body, his
hands, his feet, or his gait,--whatever part of him any one beheld, that
at once riveted his eyes.

   9. Having beheld him with the beautiful circle of hair between his
brows\[1\] and with long eyes, with his radiant body and his hands
showing a graceful membrane between the fingers,--so worthy of ruling
the earth and yet wearing a mendicant's dress,--the Goddess of
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha was herself perturbed.

   10. Then *S*re*n*ya\[2\], the lord of the court of the Magadhas,
beheld from the outside of his palace the immense concourse of people,
and asked the reason of it; and thus did a man recount it to him:

   11. 'He who was thus foretold by the Brâmans, "he will either attain
supreme wisdom or the empire of the earth,"--it is he, the son of the
king of the *S*âkyas, who is the ascetic whom the people are gazing at.'

   12. The king, having heard this and perceived its meaning with his
mind, thus at once spoke to that man: 'Let it be known whither he is
going;' and the man, receiving the command, followed the prince.

\[1. So the Tibetan. The Sanskrit text seems corrupt here. Cf. I, 65
*c*.

2\. A name of Bimbisâra, see Burnouf, Introd. p. 165.\]

<span id="p. 106">{p. 106}</span>

   13. With unrestless eyes, seeing only a yoke's length before
him\[1\], with his voice hushed, and his walk slow and measured, he, the
noblest of mendicants, went begging alms, keeping his limbs and his
wandering thoughts under control.

   14. Having received such alms as were offered, he retired to a lonely
cascade of the mountain; and having eaten it there in the fitting
manner, he ascended the mountain Pâ*md*ava.

   15. In that wood, thickly filled with lodhra trees, having its
thickets resonant with the notes of the peacocks, he the sun of mankind
shone, wearing his red dress, like the morning sun above the eastern
mountain.

   16. That royal attendant, having thus watched him there, related it
all to the king *S*re*n*ya; and the king, when he heard it, in his deep
veneration, started himself to go thither with a modest retinue.

   17. He who was like the Pâ*md*avas in heroism, and like a mountain in
stature, ascended Pâ*md*ava, that noblest of mountains,--a crown-wearer,
of lion-like gait, a lion among men, as a maned lion ascends a mountain.

   18. There he beheld the Bodhisattva, resplendent as he sat on his
hams, with subdued senses, as if the mountain were moving, and he
himself were a peak thereof,--like the moon rising from the top of a
cloud.

   19. Him, distinguished by his beauty of form and perfect tranquillity
as the very creation of Religion

\[1. Hardy explains this 'he does not look before him further than the
distance of a plough or nine spans' (Manual of Buddhism, p. 371.

2\. Cf. Lalitavistara.

3\. I.e. as if he, not the mountain, were entitled to the name
a*k*ala.\]

<span id="p. 107">{p. 107}</span>

herself,--filled with astonishment and affectionate regard the king of
men approached, as Indra the self-existent (Brahman).

   20. He, the chief of the courteous, having courteously drawn nigh to
him, inquired as to the equilibrium of his bodily humours; and the other
with equal gentleness assured the king of his health of mind and freedom
from all ailments.

   21. Then the king sat down on the clean surface of the rock, dark
blue like an elephant's ear; and being seated\[1\], with the other's
assent, he thus spoke, desiring to know his state of mind:

   22. 'I have a strong friendship with thy family, come down by
inheritance and well proved; since from this a desire to speak to thee,
my son, has arisen in me, therefore listen to my words of affection.

   23. 'When I consider thy widespread race, beginning with the sun, thy
fresh youth, and thy conspicuous beauty,--whence comes this resolve of
thine so out of all harmony with the rest, set wholly on a mendicant's
life, not on a kingdom?

   24. 'Thy limbs are worthy of red sandal-wood\[2\] perfumes,--they do
not deserve the rough contact of red cloth; this hand is fit to protect
subjects, it deserves not to hold food given by another.

   25. 'If therefore, gentle youth, through thy love for thy father thou
desirest not thy paternal kingdom in thy generosity,--then at any rate
thy choice must not be excused,--accepting forthwith one half of my
kingdom.

   26. 'If thou actest thus there will be no violence

\[1. N*ri*popavi*s*ya? with ârsha Sandhi.

2\. Lohita*k*andana may mean 'saffron.'\]

<span id="p. 108">{p. 108}</span>

shown to thine own people, and by the mere lapse of time imperial power
at last flies for refuge to the tranquil mind; therefore be pleased to
do me a kindness,--the prosperity of the good becomes very powerful,
when aided by the good\[1\].

   27. 'But if from thy pride of race thou dost not now feel confidence
in me, then plunge with thy arrows into countless armies, and with me as
thy ally seek to conquer thy foes.

   28. 'Choose thou therefore one of these ends, pursue according to
rule religious merit, wealth, and pleasure; for these, love and the
rest, in reverse order, are the three objects in life; when men die they
pass into dissolution as far as regards this world.

   29. 'That which is pleasure when it has overpowered wealth and merit,
is wealth when it has conquered merit and pleasure; so too it is merit,
when pleasure and wealth fall into abeyance; but all would have to be
alike abandoned, if thy desired end were obtained.

   30. 'Do thou therefore by pursuing the three objects of life, cause
this beauty of thine to bear its fruit; they say that when the
attainment of religion, wealth, and pleasure is complete in all its
parts, then the end of man is complete.

   31. 'Do not thou let these two brawny arms lie useless which are
worthy to draw the bow; they are well fitted like Mândhât*ri*'s to
conquer the three worlds, much more the earth.

\[1. \[The Tibetan translates the fourth line, dam·pa·rnams dan bcas·pas
dam·pai dpal <sub>°</sub>phel-lo, 'by being with the good the prosperity
of the good increases.' H.W.\]

2\. Nirvâ*n*a.\]

<span id="p. 109">{p. 109}</span>

   32. 'I speak this to you out of affection,--not through love of
dominion or through astonishment; beholding this mendicant-dress of
thine, I am filled with compassion and I shed tears.

   33. 'O thou who desirest the mendicant's stage of life. enjoy
pleasures now; in due time, O thou lover of religion, thou shalt
practise religion;--ere old age comes on and overcomes this thy beauty,
well worthy of thy illustrious race.

   34. 'The old man can obtain merit by religion; old age is helpless
for the enjoyment of pleasures; therefore they say that pleasures belong
to the young man, wealth to the middle-aged, and religion to the old.

   35. 'Youth in this present world is the enemy of religion and
wealth,--since pleasures, however we guard them, are hard to hold,
therefore, wherever pleasures are to be found, there they seize them.

   36. 'Old age is prone to reflection\[1\], it is grave and intent on
remaining quiet; it attains unimpassionedness with but little effort,
unavoidably, and for very shame.

   37. 'Therefore having passed through the deceptive period of youth,
fickle, intent on external objects, heedless, impatient, not looking at
the distance, they take breath like men who have escaped safe through a
forest.

   38. 'Let therefore this fickle time of youth first pass by, reckless
and giddy,--our early years are the mark for pleasure, they cannot be
kept from the power of the senses.

   39. Or if religion is really thy one aim, then offer

<span class="small">\[1. Vimar*s*ayanti?\]</span>

<span id="p. 110">{p. 110}</span>

sacrifices,--this is thy family's immemorial custom,--climbing to
highest heaven by sacrifices, even Indra, the lord of the winds, went
thus to highest heaven.

   40. 'With their arms pressed\[1\] by golden bracelets, and their
variegated diadems resplendent with the light of gems, royal sages have
reached the same goal by sacrifices which great sages reached by
self-mortification.'

   41. Thus spoke the monarch of the Magadhas, who spoke well and
strongly like Indra\[2\]; but having heard it, the prince did not
falter, (firm) like the mountain Kailâsa, having its many summits
variegated (with lines of metals).

\[1. Vidash*t*a; cf. sa*m*dash*t*a in Raghuv, XVI, 65.

2\. Valabhid, 'the smiter of the demon Vala.'\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI of the Buddha-*k*arita](sbe4913)
