[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4918)  [Next](sbe4921.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 190">{p. 190}</span>

## BOOK XVII.

 

   \[1\[1\]. When the heavenly beings with Brahman at their head and the
Bodhisattvas intent on self-mortification\[2\] heard this glorification
of the Law uttered by the lion of the *S*âkyas, they were desirous to
hear again this which is so difficult to find, and they went to the city
and worshipped him, propitiating his favour; in the dark fortnight of
the month Âsha*dh*a on the lunar day sacred to Agni, with the moon in
the constellation called Kar*n*a (?) and on an auspicious day,--he,
remembering the Buddha worlds and being desirous to save all creatures,
set off on his journey, longing for disciples with his father at their
head.\]

   2. The associated Brâmans, accompanied by the inhabitants of Kâ*s*î
who had gone to the Deer Park, and the mendicants to the number of
thirty, were rendered resplendent by the chief of saints; Kâ*s*îkâ the
harlot of Kâ*s*î went to the heaven of the gods, after she had
worshipped the *G*ina and attached her sons to the service of the
glorious one; the conqueror of the world then made thirty rejoicing
officiating priests of Kâ*s*î his disciples, initiating them in the
course of perfect wisdom; and the son of Maitrâya*n*î\[3\] and Maitra,
the preceptor of hosts of the twice-born, named Pûr*n*a, obtained true
wisdom from the chief of saints and became a noble mendicant.

   3. The priest of the lord of the city Mârakata, a

\[1. This is a doubtful verse, the metre is faulty.

2\. I read tapasyâpare.

3\. Burnouf, Lotus, p. 489.\]

<span id="p. 191">{p. 191}</span>

Brâhman named A*g*aya, and his son Nâlaka, well versed in sacred
learning and full of answers to questions, and an ascetic named
Dh*ri*ti, dwelling in the Vindhya, and an invincible Brâhman ascetic
Sa*mg*ayin with his disciples,--these all, dwellers in the
Vindhya,--when they came to him for refuge, the chief of saints
initiated as mendicants, touching them with his hand bearing the mark of
a wheel; moreover the Nâga Elapatra came to the abode of the best of
saints, and stood resplendent there, perfectly calm in his demeanour and
worshipping him with his rosaries.

   4. There was also a female ascetic of Mathurâ named Trikavya*m*gikâ,
and a Brâhman named Vidyâkara,--their son was named Sabhya, a dweller in
the district called *S*vetabâlârka, a wise ascetic, proud of his
wisdom,--he went into the Deer Park, wearing the aspect of one perfectly
illumined, and desiring the highest wisdom from the chief of mendicants;
seeking from the omniscient admission to the noble life, he became
renowned as the mendicant Sabhya in all assemblies.

   5. The son of Lalitâprabudhâ, born after worship paid to the best of
trees on the bank of the stream Vara*n*â,--renowned in the world as
Ya*s*oda,--wise from the besprinkling of the ambrosia of the words of
the king of heaven,--remembering all former discourses which he had
heard, came with his friends to the wood in the Deer Park, accompanied
by his glory; and the holy one, touching his head with his hand, made
him the guru of the chief Bhikshus.

   6. The glorious one, named the great Buddha, proceeded with the
mendicants in an auspicious company, and having manifested his triumphal
march for the salvation of the world, entered the city of Kâ*s*î.

<span id="p. 192">{p. 192}</span>

A poor Brâhman, named Svastika, a native of Vârâ*n*asî, obtained riches
from heaven through the favour of the glorious one, and having received
adoption as a slave in the *G*ina faith, became a mendicant and an Arhat
at the hands of the great teacher.

   7. Blessing the king of Kâ*s*î\[1\] Divodâsa and the citizens with
gold, corn, and other riches,--taking up his abode in different places
in forests, caves, mountains, he at last came in his rambles to the
river *G*âhnavî. The boatman who conveyed the *G*ina across the Ganges
worshipped him and offered him milk with due services of reverence, and
became a mendicant through his favour and by the *G*ina's command found
a dwelling in the Buddha's hermitage in the grove.

   8. The glorious one, after he had crossed the Ganges, went to the
hermitage of Kâ*s*yapa at Gayâ, called Uruvilva; there, having shown his
supernatural power, he received as Bhikshus the Kâ*s*yapas, Uruvilva,
and others, with more than a thousand of their disciples, having endued
them forthwith with all kinds of spiritual knowledge and with the power
to abandon all worldly action; then accompanied by three hundred
disciples Upasena at the command of his maternal uncle became an
ascetic.

   9. The glorious one made seven hundred ascetics enter Nirvâ*n*a who
dwelt in the wood Dharma; and the lord of the Law also caused the
daughters of Na*m*dika, Su*g*âtâ and others, who dwelt in the village,
to become the first female ascetics; and in the city of Râ*g*ageha,
having enlightened in right action and in activity the king Bimbisâra,

<span class="small">\[1. Kâ*s*ikâ.\]</span>

<span id="p. 193">{p. 193}</span>

the monarch, who is to be considered as the elder-born in perfect
knowledge, he made him who was the devoted follower of the Buddha, a
Bodhisattva and a Sak*ri*dâgâmin.

   10. In another village named Nâradya there was a Brâhman Dharmapâlin
and a Brâhman woman named *S*âlyâ; their seventh son named
Upatishya\[1\], who had studied the entire Veda, became a Buddhist
mendicant; so too there was a great pa*nd*it, a Brâhman named
Dhânyâyana, who dwelt in the village Kolata, and his son;-him and the
son of *S*âlî named Maudgalya the great saint received as the best of
Bhikshus, pre-eminent disciples.

   11. Next he ordained as a mendicant the keen-witted maternal uncle of
*S*âliputra\[1\], Dîrghânakha by name; then travelling in the realm of
Magadha, the glorious one, being honoured by the inhabitants with alms
and other signs of devotion, and delivering them from evil, dwelt in the
convent given by the seer *G*eta, attracting to himself many of the
monks; and after ordaining as a mendicant a native of Mithilâ, named
Ânanda, with his companions, he dwelt there a year.

   12. The Brâhman named Kâ*s*yapa, a very Kuvera for wealth, and a
master in all the sciences connected with the Veda, an inhabitant of
Râ*g*ageha, being pure-minded and wearing only one garment, left all his
kindred and came seeking wisdom in asceticism;--when this noble youth
came to the Bodhi tree and practised for six years a penance hard to
carry out, then he paid worship to the chief of saints who had attained
perfect knowledge, and he became the well-known

<span class="small">\[1. Sc. *S*âriputra.\]</span>

<span id="p. 194">{p. 194}</span>

Kâ*s*yapa, the chief of ascetics, the foremost of the Arhats.

   13. The saint Naradatta, dwelling on Mount Himavat, remembering the
wholesome words of his maternal uncle, came to the Sugata with his
disciples, and the holy one admitted them all into the order of the
*G*ina; then a woman named *S*akti, and another named Kamalâ,
pre-eminent in Brâhmanical power, came to the Sugata and fell down at
his feet, and then standing before him they were received by the saint,
and made happy with the staff and begging-bowl.

   14. Seven hundred disciples of the ascetic Rudraka, remembering the
noble words of their teacher, becoming mendicants according to the
doctrine of the *G*ina, flocked round him paying him their homage and
carrying their staves; next a seer, named Raivata, joyfully uttering his
praises, having finished his course of discipline, became a mendicant,
full of devotion to the guru, counting gold and clay as the same, well
versed in sacred spells and meditation, and able to counteract the three
kinds of poisons and other fatal harms.

   15. Having received as followers and disciples certain householders
of *S*râvastî, Pûr*n*a and others, and given them alms-vessels,--and
having made many poor wretches as rich as Kuvera, and maimed persons
with all their limbs perfect, and paupers and orphans affluent,--and
having proclaimed the Law, and dwelt two years in the forest *G*etaka
delivering the suppliants, the glorious one, having taught again the
saint *G*eta, and established the Bhikshu Pûr*n*a, once more proceeded
on his way.

   16. Then the glorious one went on, protecting

<span id="p. 195">{p. 195}</span>

the merchant-caravans by the stores of his own treasures from the troops
of robbers, next he went into the neighbourhood of Râ*g*ageha wandering
with his begging-vessel which had been given by the merchants. In the
wood called Ve*n*u, filled with *S*âl trees, he ate an offering of food
prepared by the enriched robbers, and he received as mendicants five
hundred of them and gave them their begging-vessels and the other
requisites.

   17. At the invitation of Buddha's son, *S*uddhodana gave this message
to his envoys *Kh*andaka and Udâyin, 'Thy father and mother, some noble
ladies, headed by Ya*s*od*ri*h, and this my young son have come in the
hope of seeing thee, under the idea that thou art devoted to the world's
salvation; what shall I tell them?' They two went, and reverentially
saluting the Buddha in the vihâra called Ve*n*u, they told him the
message with their eyes filled with tears.

   18. *Kh*andaka and Udâyin accepted his counsel, and, being delighted
at the mighty power of Buddha, became great ascetics; and the great
*G*ina took them with him and proceeded from that wood with the
disciples, the mendicants, and the saints. Going on from place to place,
and dwelling in each for a while and conferring deliverance and
confirming the disciples, the mendicants, and the Arhats, he at last
reached the wood Nigrodha, illuminating the district by his glory,
shaking the earth and putting an end to misery.

   19. \[1\]He again stirred up his followers in the doctrine of the
Buddha, and then went on with the

<span class="small">\[1. Several phrases are obscure in this
verse.\]</span>

<span id="p. 196">{p. 196}</span>

crowds of inhabitants gathered round him, instructing his shaven
mendicant-followers, as they begged alms, while the gods brought his
precepts to their minds\[1\]. He forbade the mendicants to enter the
city and went to Râ*g*ageha himself with his own followers; and then the
king who dwells apart from all doubt\[2\], the *G*ina, who knows at once
all the history of every Bhikshu, instructed the ascetic (Udâyin) in
proclaiming wisdom to others.

   20. In accordance with the *G*ina's command that prince of ascetics,
Udâyin, went to the city of Kapila; there he, the lord of all possessors
of supernatural powers, instructed the king as he stood in the assembly
in the boon of the eight hundred powers; and coming down from heaven he
uttered to the king and his court a discourse on the four sublime
truths, and the king, with his mind enlightened, having worshipped him,
held intercourse with him, attended by his courtiers, offering every
form of homage.

   21. The monarch, rejoiced at the sight of the *G*ina, praised his
feet, worshipping them with eight hundred presents; and the Sugata
departed, and made manifest in the sky in his one person a form
comprehending the universe; first as fire, then ambrosia, then the king
of beasts, an elephant, the king of horses, the king of peacocks\[3\],
the king of birds, Maghavan, the ten rulers of the world headed by Yama,
the sun, the moon, the hosts of stars, Brâhman, Vish*n*u, and *S*iva.

   22. The sons of Diti, the four (Mahârâ*g*as) with

\[1. Obscure.

2\. Dvâpare\*stha?

3\. *S*ikhirât might mean 'the king of flames,' &c.\]

<span id="p. 197">{p. 197}</span>

Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra at their head, the hosts of Yogins with the king
Drumasiddha, the (heavenly) ascetics, the Vasus, the Manus; the sons of
the forest, the creatures of the waters headed by the makara, the birds
headed by Garu*d*a, and all the kings in the different worlds with the
lord of the Tushita heaven at their head, and those in the world of the
dead\[1\] the domain of Bali,--whatever is conspicuous in the universe
the holy one created it all, becoming the universal one.

   23. When the king had thus been instructed, the lord of saints went
to the Satya heaven, and then from the sky, seated on his own
throne\[2\], he proclaimed the twelvefold Law; then he restored Gautamî
and Anugopâ and many other women to sight, and filled all the assembled
people with joy; and established others in Nirvâ*n*a and in the Law.
Then *S*uddhodana full of joy invited him to a feast given to the whole
assembly, and he accepted it by his silence.

   24. The lion of the *S*âkyas, having been thus invited, went with the
congregation of his followers to the place, after having shown a mighty
miracle. Then the earth shook, a shower of flowers fell, the various
quarters of space became illumined and a wind blew; and the heavenly
beings, Brahman, *S*iva, Vish*n*u, Indra, Yama, Varu*n*a, Kuvera, the
lord of Bhûtas, the lord of the winds, Nir*ri*ti, Fire with his seven
flames, and the rest, stood resting their feet on the serpent *S*esha,
and followed leading the gods and gandharvas in their dance in the sky.

   25. Making millions of ascetics, disciples, Arhats,

\[1. Martya seems here to be used for m*ri*ta.

2\. Or must we take sva as put for svar, 'in heaven?'\]

<span id="p. 198">{p. 198}</span>

sages, mendicants, and fasters,--and delivering from their ills the
blind, the humpbacked, the lame, the insane, the maimed as well as the
destitute,--and having established many persons of the fourth caste in
the true activity and inaction and in the three yânas\[1\], with the
four sa*m*grahas\[2\] and the eight a*m*gas\[3\],--going on from place
to place, delivering, and confirming the Bhikshus, in the twelfth year
he went to his own city.

   26. Day by day confirming the Bhikshus, and providing food for the
congregation, in an auspicious moment he made a journey to Lumbinî with
the Bhikshus and the citizens, Brahman and Rudra being at their head,
with great triumph and noise of musical instruments. There he saw the
holy fig-tree and he stood by it remembering his birth, with a smile;
and rays of light streamed from his mouth and went forth illumining the
earth; and he uttered a discourse to the goddess of the wood, giving her
the serenity of faith.

   27. \[4\]Having come to the Lumbinî fig-tree he spoke to Paurvikâ the
daughter of Râhula, and Gopikâ the daughter of Maitra, and his own
Saudhanî Kau*s*ikâ; and he uttered an affectionate discourse honouring
his mother by the tank Vasatya; then speaking with Eka*s*â*m*gî the
daughter of Mahâkautuka and Sautasomî in the wood Nigrodha, he received
into the community some members of his own family, headed by
Sundarânanda, and one hundred and seven citizens.

\[1. Burnouf, Lotus, p. 315.

2\. Apparently the four means of conciliating dependents.

3\. The eightfold path of Buddhhist morality.

4\. Much of this stanza is obscure.\]

<span id="p. 199">{p. 199}</span>

   28. Having declared the glory of the Law of Buddha, he built a round
Stûpa and gave a royal coronation to Saunu\[1\], sending him into the
wood pre-eminent with the holiest saints and *K*aityas, and bidding him
worship the sacred relics; and having commanded Râhula, Gautamî, and the
other women led by Gopikâ, with staves in their hands, as shaven
ascetics, to practise the vow of fasting called ahoratra\[2\], and after
that the Laksha*k*aitya ceremony\[3\] and then the rite called
*Sri*ngabheri\[4\], and that called Vasu*m*dhârikâ\[5\].

   29. The Ash*t*asâhasrikâ of sacred authority\[6\],--the Geya\[7\] and
the Gâthâ, the Nidâna and the Avadâna, and that which is called the
Sûtra of the great Yâna, the Vyâkara\[8\] and the Ityukta, the *G*âtaka,
the work called Vaipulya, the Adbhuta\[9\] and the Upade*s*a, and also
the Udânaka\[10\] as the twelfth.--Teaching (these sacred texts) and
making current the Yâna for common disciples, that for Pratyeka Buddhas,
and the Mahâyâna, and proclaiming them all around, accompanied by
thirteen and a half bodies of mendicants, the conqueror of the world
went out of the city of Kapila.

   30. After displaying miracles in the city of Kapila,

\[1. Or the grandson of the king?

2\. See Râ*g*endralâl Mitra, Nepalese Buddhist Literature, p. 221.

3\. Ibid. p. 275.

4\. Ibid. p. 230.

5\. Ibid. p. 271.

6\. Naigamâ? The Ash*t*asâhasrikâ seems not to be reckoned here among
the following twelve texts of peculiar authority with the Northern
Buddhistsut Burnouf's authorities include it in that called 'Sûtra.'

7\. For the following twelve names see Burnouf, Introd. pp. 51-66.

8\. Mor properly Vyâkara*n*a.

9\. Burnouf calls it adbhutadharma.

10\. Burnouf, Introd. p. 58.\]

<span id="p. 200">{p. 200}</span>

and having paid honour to his father, and having made Râhula and his
companions Arhats, and also the Bhikshu*n*îs with Gautamî and Gopikâ at
their head, and various women of all the four castes; and having
established Saunu\[1\] on his imperial throne, and the people in the
*G*ina doctrine, and having abolished poverty and darkness, and then
remembering his mother, he set forth, ever worshipping Svaya*m*bhû,
towards the northern region with Brahman, Vish*n*u, and *S*iva as
mendicants in his train.

   31. The glory of the Avadâna of the birth of the lion of the *S*âkyas
has thus been described by me at length and yet very concisely; it must
be corrected by pa*nd*its wherever anything is omitted,--my childish
speech is not to be laughed at, but to be listened to with pleasure.

   Whatever virtue may have acquired from describing the king of the
Law, the deliverer from mundane existence, who assumes all forms,--may
it become a store of merit for the production of right activity and
inactivity in others, and for the diffusion of delight among the six
orders of beings\[2\].

   Thus ends the seventeenth sarga, called the Progress to Lumbinî, in
the great poem made by A*s*vaghosha, the Buddha-*k*arita\[3\].

\[1. Or Saunava, see *s*loka 28.

2\. Sc. the sha*d g*atayas, the 'six paths,' are gods, men, Asuras, &c.,
Pretas, brutes, and the inhabitants of the different hells.

3\. C adds here on the last page the following lines: 'The poem about
Buddha, very difficult to obtain, was written by Am*ri*tânanda in the
year indicated by a cipher, the arrows (of Kâma), and a nine \[=Newâr
Sa*m*vat 950, or A.D. 1830\], in the dark fortnight of the month
Mârga*s*îrsha (Nov.-Dec.) and on the day ruled by the seventh
astrological house Smara. Having searched for them everywhere and not
found them, four sargas have been made by me,--the fourteenth,
fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth.' The beginning of another version
of these lines is given in P, but D omits them. The name of
Am*ri*tânanda occurs in Râ*g*endralâl Mitra's Nepalese Buddhist
Literature as the author of three,--two in Sanskrit, the
*Kh*ando\*m*ri*talatâ (p. 79), the Kalyâ*n*apa*mk*avi*ms*atikâ (p. 99),
translated in Wilson's Works, vol. ii, and the Vîraku*s*âvadâna (p. 274)
in Newârî. Compare Cowell and Eggeling's Catalogue, pp. 18, 24; in p. 18
he is associated with the date N.S. 916 (A.D. 1796).\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page of Part II](sbe4921.md)
