[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo11) 
[Next](theo13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

### CHAPTER III

### THE THREE WORLDS

#### 1. THE SOUL WORLD

<span class="smallcaps">Our</span> study of man has shown that he
belongs to three worlds. From the world of physical corporality are
taken the materials and forces building up his body. He has knowledge of
this world through the perceptions of his external physical senses.
Anyone trusting to <span class="smallcaps">these</span> senses <span
class="smallcaps">alone</span>, and developing his perceptive abilities
alone, can gain for himself no enlightenment concerning the two other
worlds, the <span class="smallcaps">soul</span> and the <span
class="smallcaps">spiritual</span>. A man's ability to convince himself
of the reality of a thing or a being depends on whether he has an organ
of perception, a sense for it. It may, of course, easily lead to
misunderstandings if one call the higher organs of perception spiritual
<span class="smallcaps">senses</span>, as is done here, for in speaking
of "<span class="smallcaps">senses</span>" one involuntarily connects
with

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

them the thought "physical." The physical world is in fact designated
the "sensible," in contradistinction to the "spiritual." In order to
avoid this misunderstanding, one must take into account that "higher
senses" are spoken of here only in a comparative or metaphorical sense.
As the physical senses perceive the physical world, the soul and
spiritual senses perceive the soul and spiritual worlds. The expression
"sense" will be used as meaning simply "organ of perception." Man would
have no knowledge of light and color had he not an eye able to sense
light; he would know nothing of sound had he not an ear able to sense
sound. In this connection the German philosopher Lotze rightly says,
"Without a light-sensing eye, and a sound-sensing ear, the whole world
would be dark and silent. There would be in it just as little light or
sound as there could be toothache without the pain-feeling nerve of the
tooth." In order to see what is said here in the right light, one need
only think how entirely different the world must reveal itself to man on
the one hand, and on the other to the lower forms of animal life that
have only a kind of touch sense or sense of

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

feeling spread over the whole surface of their bodies. Light, color, and
sound certainly cannot exist for them in the same way as for beings
gifted with ears and eyes. The vibrations which the firing of a gun
causes may Wave an effect on them also if they reach them. But in order
that these vibrations of the air should present themselves as a report
an ear is necessary. And an eye is necessary in order that certain
processes in the fine matter that one calls ether should reveal
themselves as light and color. Man knows something about a being or
thing only because through one of his organs he receives its <span
class="smallcaps">effects</span>.

This relationship of man with the world of realities is excellently
brought out by Goethe when he says: "It is really in vain that we try to
express the nature of a thing. We become aware of <span
class="smallcaps">effects</span>, and a complete history of them would
indeed embrace the nature of that thing. We endeavor in vain to describe
the character of a man, but if instead we systematically correlate his
actions and deeds, a picture of his character will present itself to us.
Colors are the actions of light, actions and suffering … colors and
light are indeed

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

linked in closest relationship, but we must think of them both as
belonging to the whole of nature; for through them the whole of nature
is engaged in revealing herself to the sense of the eye especially. In
like manner nature reveals herself to another sense … nature thus speaks
downward to <span class="smallcaps">other senses</span>, to known, <span
class="smallcaps">misunderstood</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">unknown</span> senses; she thus speaks with herself
and to us through a thousand phenomena. <span class="smallcaps">To the
attentive she is nowhere either dead or silent</span>." It would not be
correct were one to interpret this saying of Goethe's as though by it
the possibility of knowing the <span class="smallcaps">essential
nature</span> of a thing were being denied. Goethe does not mean that
one perceives only the effects of a thing, and that the being hides
itself behind them. He means rather that one should not speak at all of
a "hidden being." The being is not behind its revelation; it comes, on
the contrary, into view through the revelation. But this being is in
many respects so <span class="smallcaps">rich</span> that it can reveal
itself to other senses in yet other forms. <span
class="smallcaps">That</span> which reveals itself belongs to the being
<span class="smallcaps">only</span>—on account of the limitations of the
senses—it is not the <span class="smallcaps">whole</span> being. This

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

point of view of Goethe's is entirely the theosophical one.

As in the body, eye and ear develop into organs of perception, into
senses for corporal occurrences, so is man able to develop in himself
soul and spiritual organs of perception, through which the soul and
spiritual worlds will be opened to him. For those who have not such
higher senses, these worlds are "dead and silent," just as for a being
without eyes and ears the corporal world is "dark and silent." It is
true that the relation of man to these higher senses is rather different
from his relations to the corporal senses. It is good Mother Nature who
sees to it as a rule that these latter are developed in him. They come
into existence without his help. But on the development of his higher
senses he must work himself. If he wishes to perceive the soul and
spirit worlds, he must develop soul and spirit as nature has developed
his body so that he might perceive the corporal world around him and
guide himself in it. Such a development of the higher organs not yet
developed for us by nature herself is not unnatural; for in the <span
class="smallcaps">higher sense</span> all that man accomplishes

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

belongs <span class="smallcaps">also</span> to nature. Only he who
wishes to maintain that man should remain standing at the stage at which
he left the hand of nature could call the development of the higher
senses unnatural. By him the significance of these organs is
misunderstood, as indicated in the quotation from Goethe. Such a one
might just as well oppose all education of man, for it also develops
further the work of nature. And he would have to oppose especially
operations upon those born blind. For almost the same thing happens to
him who awakens his higher senses in himself as to the person born blind
and operated upon. The world appears to him with new qualities, events,
and facts, of which the physical senses reveal nothing to him. It is
clear to him that through these higher organs he adds nothing
arbitrarily to the reality, but that without them the essential part of
this reality would have remained <span class="smallcaps">hidden</span>
from him. The soul and spirit worlds are nothing <span
class="smallcaps">alongside</span> or <span
class="smallcaps">outside</span> the physical world; they are not
separated in space from it. Just as for persons born blind and operated
upon, the previously dark world rays out light and colors, so the things
which

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

previously were only corporal phenomena reveal their soul and spirit
qualities to him who is, soul and spirit, <span
class="smallcaps">awakened</span>. In addition to this, however, this
world then becomes filled with still other occurrences and beings that
remain completely unknown to him whose soul and spirit senses are not
awakened. The development of the soul and spirit senses will be spoken
of in a more detailed way further on in this book. Here these higher
worlds themselves will be described. Anyone who denies the existence of
these worlds says nothing more than that he has not yet developed his
higher organs. This is still the case with the greater part of mankind
at the present stage of the world's evolution. But the evolution of man
is not terminated at any one stage; it must always progress. What will
be here called the <span class="smallcaps">soul world</span>, is called
in current theosophical literature the "astral," the spirit world is
called in it the "mental" world.

One often involuntarily pictures the "higher organs" as too similar to
the physical ones. One should understand quite clearly that in these
organs one has to do with spiritual

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

or soul formations. One ought not to expect, therefore, that what one
perceives in the higher worlds is only a vaporous, rarefied matter. So
long as one <span class="smallcaps">expects</span> something of this
kind, one can come to no clear idea as to what is exactly meant by
"higher worlds." For many persons it would not be at all as difficult as
it actually is to know something about these higher worlds, the
elementary part, that is to say, if they did not form the idea that what
they are to see is again merely physical matter rarefied. Because they
presuppose something of this kind they, as a rule, do not at all wish to
acknowledge the reality of that which is the essential part. They look
upon it as unreal, refuse to acknowledge it as something that satisfies
them, and so on. The higher stages of spiritual development are
certainly not easily accessible; but the lower, and that is already a
great deal, would not be at all so difficult to reach if people would
from the first free themselves from the prejudice which consists in
picturing to themselves the soul and spiritual merely as a finer
physical.

Just as we do not wholly know a man when

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

we have formed a picture of his physical exterior only, so also we do
not know the world around us if we only know in it what the physical
senses reveal to us. And just as a photograph becomes intelligible and
living to us when we have become so intimately acquainted with the
person photographed as to know his soul, so we can really understand the
corporal world only if we learn to know its soul and spiritual basis.
For this reason it is advisable to speak here, first about the higher,
the soul and spirit worlds, and only then judge of the physical from the
theosophical standpoint.

Certain difficulties are met with at this present stage of civilization
by anyone speaking about the higher worlds. For this age is great above
all things in the knowledge and conquest of the physical world. Our
words have, in fact, received their stamp and significance through being
applied to this physical world. Nevertheless we have to make use of
these current words so as to form a link with something known. This
opens the door to many [misunderstandings](errata.htm#3) on the part of
those who wish to trust to their external senses

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

only. Much also can be expressed and indicated only by means of similes
and resemblances. This must be so, for such similes are a means by which
a man is at first directed to these higher worlds, and through which his
own ascent to them is furthered. (This will become evident in a later
chapter, in which the development of the soul and spiritual organs of
perception will be spoken of. To begin with, one <span
class="smallcaps">must</span> gain knowledge of the higher worlds by
means of similes. Only then is man ready to acquire for himself the
power to see into them.)

As the matter and forces which compose and govern our stomach, our
heart, our brain, our lungs, etc., come from the physical world, so do
our soul qualities, our impulses, desires, feelings, passions, wishes,
sensations, etc., come from the soul world. The soul of the human being
is a member of this world, just as his body is part of the physical
world of bodies. Should one wish to begin by pointing out a difference
between the corporal and soul worlds, one would say that the latter is
in all its objects and entities much finer, more mobile, and plastic
than the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

former. But it must be kept clearly in mind that on entering the soul
world one enters a world entirely different from the physical. If,
therefore, "coarser" and "finer" be spoken of in this respect, readers
must be fully aware that one <span class="smallcaps">suggests</span> by
means of a comparison what is fundamentally different. It is the same
with all that is said about the soul world in words borrowed from the
world of physical corporality. Taking this into account, one can say
that the formations and beings of the soul world consist in the same way
of soul materials, and are directed in the same way by soul forces, as
is the case in the physical world with physical materials and physical
forces.

Just as spacial extension and spacial movement are peculiar to corporal
formations, so are excitability and impelling desire peculiar to the
things and beings of the soul world. For this reason one describes the
soul world as the world of desires or wishes, or as the world of
longing. These expressions are borrowed from the human soul world. One
must therefore hold clearly in view that the things in those parts of
the soul world which lie outside the human soul are just as different
from

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

the soul forces within it as the physical matter and forces of the
external corporal world are different from the parts which compose the
physical human body. (Impulse, wish, longing are names for the material
of the soul world. To this matter theosophical literature gives the name
of "astral." If one wishes to refer specifically to the <span
class="smallcaps">forces</span> of the soul world, one speaks in
Theosophy of "kama." But it must not be forgotten that the distinction
between "matter" and "force" cannot be as sharply drawn as in the
physical world. An instinct, an impulse, can be called "force" just as
well as "matter.")

On him who obtains a view of the soul world for the first time, the
differences between it and the physical have a bewildering effect. But
that is also the case when a previously inactive physical sense is being
opened. The man born blind, when operated upon, has first to learn to
guide himself through the world which he has previously known only by
means of the sense of touch. Such a one, for example, sees the objects
at first <span class="smallcaps">in</span> his own eyes, then he sees
them outside himself, but at first they appear to him as if painted on a
flat

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

surface. Only gradually does he grasp perspective and the spacial
distance between things. In the soul world entirely different laws
prevail from those in the physical. Now there are many soul formations
bound to those of the other worlds. The soul of man, for instance, is
bound to the human body and to the human spirit. The occurrences one can
observe in it are therefore influenced at the same time by the bodily
and the spiritual worlds. One has to take this into account in observing
the soul world, and one must take care not to ascribe to a law of the
soul world occurrences due to the influence of another world. When, for
example, a man sends out a wish, it is produced by a thought, a
conception of the spirit whose laws it accordingly follows. One can
formulate the laws of the physical world while ignoring, for example,
the influence of man on its occurrences, and the same thing is possible
with regard to the soul world.

An important difference between soul and physical occurrences can be
expressed by saying that the interaction in the former is much more
<span class="smallcaps">inward</span> than in the latter. In physical

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

space there reigns, for example, the law of "impact." When an ivory ball
strikes another which is at rest, the latter moves in a direction which
can be calculated from the motion and elasticity of the first. In the
soul space the interaction of two forms which meet depends on their
inner qualities. If they are in affinity they mutually interpenetrate
each other and, as it were, grow together. They repel each other if
their beings conflict. In physical space there are, for example,
definite laws of vision. One sees distant objects perspectively
diminishing. When one looks down an avenue, the distant trees appear,
according to the laws of perspective, to stand at shorter distances from
each other than the near ones. In the soul space, on the contrary, all
objects near and far appear to the clairvoyant at those distances from
each other which are due to their inner nature. This is naturally a
source of the most varied mistakes for those who enter the soul world,
and wish to become at home there by the help of the rules which they
bring with them from the physical world.

One of the first things that a man must do in order to make his way
about the soul world

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

is to realize that one distinguishes the various kinds of its forms in a
similar manner to that in which one distinguishes solid, liquid, air, or
gaseous bodies in the physical world. In order to be able to do that it
is necessary to know the two basic forces which are the most important
in it. They may be called <span class="smallcaps">sympathy</span> and
<span class="smallcaps">antipathy</span>. The order to which a soul
formation belongs is decided by the manner in which these basic forces
work in it. The force with which one soul formation attracts others,
seeks to fuse with them, to make its affinity with them effectual, must
be designated as <span class="smallcaps">sympathy</span>. <span
class="smallcaps">Antipathy</span>, on the other hand, is the force with
which soul formations repel, exclude each other in the soul world, with
which they assert their separate identity. The part played in the soul
world by a soul formation depends upon the proportions in which these
basic forces are present in it. One has to distinguish, in the first
place, between three kinds of soul formations according to the manner in
which sympathy and antipathy work in them. These kinds differ from each
other in that sympathy and antipathy have in them definitely fixed
mutual relationships.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In all three <span
class="smallcaps">both</span> basic forces are present. Let us take, to
begin with, a formation of the first kind. It attracts other formations
in its neighborhood by means of the sympathy ruling in it; but, besides
this sympathy, there is at the same time present in it antipathy,
through which it repels certain things in its surroundings. From the
outside such a formation appears to be endowed with the forces of
antipathy <span class="smallcaps">only</span>. This, however, is not the
case. There is sympathy and antipathy in it, but the latter
predominates. It has the upper hand over the former. Such formations
play a <span class="smallcaps">self-seeking</span> rôle in the soul
space. They repel much that is around them, and lovingly attract but
little to themselves. They therefore move through the soul space as
unchangeable forms. The force of sympathy which is in them appears <span
class="smallcaps">greedy</span>. This <span
class="smallcaps">greed</span> appears at the same time insatiable, as
if it could not be satisfied, because the predominating antipathy repels
so much of what approaches that no satisfaction is possible. (Here we
have to do with what is described in theosophical literature as the
lowest part of the astral world.) Should one wish to

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

compare this kind of soul formation with something in the physical
world, one can say that it corresponds with the solid physical bodies.
This region of soul matter may be called <span class="smallcaps">burning
desire</span>. The manner in which this Burning Desire is mingled in the
souls of animals and men determines in them what one calls the lower
sensual impulses, their dominating selfish instincts.

The second kind of soul formations is that in which the two basic forces
preserve a balance, in which, accordingly, antipathy and sympathy act
with equal strength. They approach other formations with a certain
neutrality and act on them as if related, but without especially
attracting or repelling. They, as it were, erect no solid barrier
between themselves and their surroundings. They constantly allow other
formations in their surroundings to act on them; one can therefore
compare them with the liquids of the physical world. And there is
nothing of greed in the way in which such formations attract others to
themselves. The activity meant here is in process, for example, when the
human soul receives the sensation of a certain color.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If I have the
sensation of a red color, I receive to begin with a <span
class="smallcaps">neutral excitation</span> from my surroundings. Only
when there is added to this excitation pleasure in the red color does
another soul activity come into play. That which effects the <span
class="smallcaps">neutral excitation</span> is the action of soul
formations standing in such mutual relationship that sympathy and
antipathy preserve an equal balance. One will have to describe the soul
matter which comes under observation here as perfectly plastic and
flowing. Not self-seeking like the first does it move about the soul
space, but in such a way that its being receives impressions from all
directions, and that it shows itself to have affinity with much that
approaches it. An expression that may be used to designate it is <span
class="smallcaps">flowing excitability</span>.

The third stage of soul formations is that in which sympathy has the
upper hand over antipathy. Antipathy produces the self-seeking
self-assertion; this, however, retires in face of the liking for the
things in the surroundings. Let us picture such a formation within the
soul space. It appears as the center point of an attracting sphere which
spreads

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

over the objects in its surroundings. Such formations one must designate
in a special sense as <span class="smallcaps">wish substance</span>.
This designation appears to be the right one, because the attraction so
acts, even through the existing antipathy, as to bring the attracted
objects within the soul formation's own sphere. The sympathy thus
receives a tone of selfishness. This wish substance may be likened to
the air or gaseous bodies of the physical world. As a gas strives to
expand on all sides, so does the wish substance spread itself out in all
directions.

Higher grades of soul substance render themselves distinguishable by the
fact that in them one of the basic forces, namely antipathy, retires
completely, and sympathy alone shows itself as the one really effective.
Now this is able to make its power felt within the parts of soul
formation itself. These parts mutually attract each other. The force of
sympathy within a soul formation comes to expression in what one calls
<span class="smallcaps">liking</span>. And each lessening of this
sympathy is <span class="smallcaps">disliking</span>. Disliking is only
a lessened liking, as cold is only a lessened warmth. Liking and
disliking compose what lives in man as the world of <span
class="smallcaps">emotions</span> in

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the narrow sense of the word. <span class="smallcaps">Feeling</span> is
the life and activity of the soul within itself. What one calls the
<span class="smallcaps">comfort</span> of the soul depends on the way in
which the feelings of liking and disliking—attraction and
repulsion—interact within the soul.

A still higher grade is occupied by those soul formations whose sympathy
does not remain enclosed within the region of their own life. They
differ from the three lower grades, as does in fact the fourth also, in
that in them the force of sympathy has no antipathy opposing it to
overcome. It is only through these higher orders of soul substance that
the manifold variety of soul formations can unite and form a common soul
world. In cases where antipathy comes into play, the soul formation
strives toward another thing for sake of its own life, and in order to
strengthen and enrich itself by means of the other. Where antipathy is
silent the other thing is received as revelation, as information. This
higher form of soul substance plays in the soul space a similar rôle to
that played by light in physical space. It causes a soul formation to
suck in, as it were, the being or essence of others for

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

their sakes; one could also say to let itself be rayed upon by them.
Only by drawing upon these higher regions are the soul beings awakened
to the true soul life. Their dull life in the darkness opens outward,
and begins itself to shine and ray out into the soul space; the
sluggish, dull movement of the inner life which wishes to shut itself
off through antipathy when the substances of the lower regions only are
present, becomes force and mobility which arises from within, and,
streaming, pours itself outward. The Flowing Excitability of the second
region is only effective when formations meet each other. Then, indeed,
the one streams over into the other. But <span
class="smallcaps">contact</span> is here necessary. In the higher
regions there prevails a free out-raying and out-pouring. (Rightly does
one describe the essential nature of this region as an "out-raying," for
the sympathy which is developed acts in such a way that one can use as
symbol for it the expression taken from the action of light.) The soul
pines from lack of the soul substances of the higher regions which give
it life, as a plant degenerates in a dark cellar.

<span class="smallcaps">Soul Light</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Active Soul Force</span> and the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

true <span class="smallcaps">Soul Life</span> in the narrower sense
belong to these regions, and thence pour themselves out to the soul
beings.

One has therefore to distinguish between three lower and three higher
regions of the soul world. These are linked by a fourth, so that there
results the following division of the soul world:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Region of Burning Desire.

2.      "    "  Flowing Excitability.

3.      "    "  Wishes.

4.      "    "  Attraction and Repulsion.

5.      "    "  Soul Light.

6.      "    "  Active Soul Force.

7.      "    "  Soul Life.

</div>

Through the first three regions the soul formations receive their
qualities according to the proportion of sympathy and antipathy in them;
through the fourth region sympathy is prevailingly active within the
soul formations themselves; through the three highest, the power of
sympathy becomes ever more and more free; illumining and quickening, the
soul substances of this region waft through the soul space, awakening
that which, if left to itself, would lose itself in its own separate
existence.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

For the sake of clearness it is here emphasized, though it should be
superfluous, that these seven divisions of the soul world do not
represent regions separated from one another. Just as in the physical
regions solid, liquid, and air or gaseous substances interpenetrate, so
do Burning Desire, Flowing Excitability, and the forces of the World of
Wishes in the soul world. And as in the physical world, warmth
penetrates bodies and light illumines them, so is it the case in the
soul world with desire and aversion, and with the Soul Light. Something
similar takes place with regard to the Active Soul Force and the true
Soul Life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Soul in the Soul World after Death](theo13)
