[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo08) 
[Next](theo10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 3. THE SPIRITUAL BEING OF MAN

The soul being of man is not determined by the body alone. Man does not
wander aimlessly and without a goal from one sensation to another;
neither does he act under the influence of every casual incitement
directed on him either from without or through the processes of his
body. He <span class="smallcaps">thinks</span> about his perceptions and
his acts. By thinking about his perceptions he gains knowledge of
things; by thinking about his acts he introduces a reasonable coherence
into his life. He knows also that he will fulfill his duty as a human
being only when he lets himself be guided by <span
class="smallcaps">correct thinking</span> in knowledge as well as in
acts. The soul of man, therefore, faces a twofold necessity. The laws of
the body govern it in accordance with the necessities of nature, but it
allows itself to be governed by

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the laws which guide it to exact thinking because it voluntarily
acknowledges their necessity. Nature subjects man to the laws of the
change of matter, but he subjects himself to the laws of thought. By
this means he makes himself a member of a higher order than that to
which he belongs through his body. And this order is the <span
class="smallcaps">spiritual</span>. The soul is as different from the
body as the body is different from the soul. So long as one speaks only
of the particles of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen which stir in
the body, one has not the soul in view. The soul life begins only when
within the motion of these particles sensation arises, and one can say:
"I taste sweetness" or "I feel pleasure." Just as little has one the
<span class="smallcaps">spiritual</span> in view when one considers
merely the soul experiences which course through a man who gives himself
over entirely to the outer world and his bodily life. Rather is this
soul life merely the basis for the spiritual, just as the body is the
basis of the soul life. The naturalist, or investigator of nature, has
to do with the body, the investigator of the soul (the psychologist)
with the soul, and the investigator of the spirit with the <span
class="smallcaps">spirit</span>. To

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

realize what one is in oneself, and thus become clear as to the
difference between body, soul, and spirit, is a requirement which must
be demanded from those who wish by thinking to enlighten themselves
regarding the constitution of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Body, Soul, and Spirit](theo10)
