[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc19008)  [Next](cc19010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 27

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, came this word unto Jeremiah
from the LORD, saying,

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Principio regni Jehoiakim filii Josiae
regis Jehudah fuit sermo hic ad jeremiam a Jehova, dicendo,

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** Thus saith the LORD to me; Make thee
bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Sic dicit jehova ad me (mihi,) fac tibi
vincula et juga, et pone ea super collum tuum;

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** And send them to the king of Edom, and
to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king
of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which
come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah;

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et mitte ad regem Edom, et ad regem
Moab, et ad regem filiorum Ammon, et ad regem Tyri, et ad regem Sidonis,
per manum nuntiorum, qui venient Jerusalem ad Zedechiam regem Jehudah;

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4.** And command them to say unto their
masters, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye
say unto your masters;

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et mandata dabis illis ad dominos suos,
dicendo, Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus Israel, Sic dicetis ad
dominos vestros,

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5.** I have made the earth, the man and the
beast that *are* upon the ground, by my great power and by my
outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ego feci terram, hominem et jumentum
quod super faciem terrae est, in virtute mea magna, et brachio meo
extento; et dedi eam illi qui placeret in oculis meis.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p13"></span><span id="x.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>Jeremiah prefaces this prediction by saying,
that it was delivered to him at the beginning of Jehoiakim’s reign. But
this beginning, as we have said, extended to the whole of his reign
while it was prosperous and entire. While, then, Jehoiakim enjoyed a
quiet possession of the kingdom, Jeremiah was bidden to make known what
had been committed to him, not to Jehoiakim himself, but, as we learn
from the third verse, to Zedekiah who had not immediately succeeded him,
but became at last king after various changes. God, then, committed this
prophecy to his servant, but did not design it to be immediately
promulgated. If it be asked, why God designed what he purposed to be
made known to be concealed for so long a time? the answer is this, —
that it was done for the sake of the Prophet himself, in order that he
might with more alacrity perform his office, knowing of a certainty that
no one thought that it could ever happen, and certainly the thing was
incredible.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>God’s design then was to communicate this to
his Prophet himself, that he might see afar off what no one, as I have
just said, had thought could ever come to pass. This is the reason, as I
think, why this prophecy was not immediately published, but was like a
treasure deposited in the Prophet’s bosom, until the ripened time came.
I shall defer till tomorrow the explanation of this prophecy.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that when at any time
thou grievously threatenest us, we may not, on that account, become
angry, but learn to acknowledge our sins, and truly to humble ourselves
under thy mighty hand, and also to deprecate thy wrath, and to prove by
true repentance, that we profit by thy word, and believe thy
denunciations, so that we may become partakers of that mercy, through
which thou promisest to be propitious to all who turn to thee: and may
we thus advance more and more, and persevere in the right course of
repentance, until having at length put off all the vices of the flesh,
we shall attain to a perfection of righteousness and the fruition of
that glory which has been laid up for us in heaven by Jesus Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span>Lecture one Hundred and Third

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>We explained yesterday why this command was
given to Jeremiah at the beginning of Jehoiakim’s reign, which was not
yet to be executed until the time of Zedekiah: it was God’s design to
strengthen him in the meantime, lest he should faint in his course. Let
us now see what was the object of this prophecy and what is its meaning.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span><span id="x.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>The Prophet seems to have addressed the
ambassadors who were sent by neighboring kings to King Zedekiah; and he
was bidden to command them to declare each to his master, that they were
all to come under the yoke of the king of Babylon. There is, moreover,
no doubt but that God designed especially and chiefly to give a lesson
to Zedekiah and to the Jews; for these legations mentioned here might
have so emboldened them as to despise all prophecies, and to think
themselves beyond all danger. For the purpose for which these legations
were sent by the king of Sidon, by the king of Tyrus, by the king of
Moab and Ammon, ought to be particularly observed: when they saw that
the king of Babylon would not spare them, they began to join their
forces. Every one at first consulted his own advantage, and saw no need
of mutual help; and so it was that the Chaldeans easily overcame them
while they were disunited. Experience at length taught them, that
neither the king of Judah nor ally of the neighboring kings could
sustain the contest unless they formed a confederacy. Thus, then, it
happened that the king of Tyrus, the king of Sidon, the king of Moab,
and the king of Ammon, offered their forces and their money to the king
of Judah, and that he also promised to help them in return, if the
Chaldean attacked them. It was therefore a new occasion for confidence
to the Jews, so that they gathered courage, and thus were emboldened to
resist, relying on so many neighboring kings.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>The Chaldeans had been hitherto successful,
for they had assailed each by himself; but when all of them were ready
by their united forces to oppose and restrain their attacks, it was
hardly credible that they could be conquered. It was therefore God’s
purpose to remove this false confidence, and to warn Zedekiah and the
whole people, lest they should be deceived by such allurements, but that
they might know that they were patiently to endure the punishment
inflicted on them by God. This therefore was the reason why the Prophet
was sent to the ambassadors who had come to Jerusalem. He was not set a
teacher over them; but this was done with reference to Zedekiah and the
people. It is yet probable that these commands were set forth before the
king, that the king might know that he had been wholly deceived, and
that he still foolishly trusted to the subsidies which had been offered.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>We may easily imagine how grievous it must
have been to the king and to the people to hear this prophecy. The
ambassadors were in a manner dishonored; the kings, by whom they had
been sent, might have complained that they were treated with great
indignity. Hence the king and the people must have been very incensed
against Jeremiah. But the Prophet boldly performed what God commanded
him, as it behoved him. And we shall hereafter see, that his words were
addressed to King Zedekiah rather than to these heathens.

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>We now understand the reason why God would
have his Prophet to give these commands to the ambassadors, who had been
sent by heathen kings to King Zedekiah: it was that the king might know
that it was wholly useless for these kings to promise their assistance;
for he had to do, not with the Chaldean king, but rather with the
judgment of God, which is irresistible, and which men in vain struggle
with.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span><span id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>Though the Prophet was bidden to command the
ambassadors to say to the kings by whom they had been sent, *Thus saith
Jehovah, of hosts,*  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) they yet
might have refused to do so, and that with indignation: “What! Are we
come here to be ambassadors to thee? and who indeed art thou who
commandest us? besides, dost thou think that we are so mad as to
threaten for thy sake, our kings and masters, and to declare to them
what thou biddest, that they are shortly to become the servants of the
Chaldean king?” The ambassadors then might have thus treated the holy
Prophet with derision and laughter: but, as we have said, the whole was
done for the sake of Zedekiah and the people, in order that the Prophet
might dissipate that vain splendor and pomp, by which he saw that
Zedekiah and all the Jews were deceived; for they thought that they had
as it were high and large mountains to be set in opposition to the
Chaldean king and his army: “On what part can they assail us, since the
king of Tyrus is on our side, and also the king of Sidon, the king of
Moab, and the king of Ammon? these rule widely, and their cities are
impregnable.” Thus, then, the Jews were convinced that they would be
exempt from every trouble and molestation; but in order that they might
not deceive themselves with that vain display, Jeremiah said,

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>“Declare, ye ambassadors, to your masters
what God has spoken, even that ye must submit to the yoke of the king of
Babylon.”

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>And a visible symbol was added in order to
confirm the prediction: the Prophet was bidden to put a yoke on his
neck, or yokes, for he speaks in the plural number. <span
id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>טומ *muth,* means a pole, a yoke, a transverse
piece of wood: and no doubt he applied some pieces of wood to his neck,
like the yoke laid on oxen; and then he tied this yoke or crossbar; for
<span id="x.iii-p12.2"></span>רסי, *isar,* means to bind or tie, and so
<span id="x.iii-p12.3"></span>תורסומ, *musarut,* are bands; <span
id="x.iii-p12.4"></span>רסומ, *musar,* also means sometimes a girdle;
but here it is to be taken for bands or ligaments. It was a sad
spectacle to see on the neck of Jeremiah, when he went forth, the symbol
of the bondage of all kings and nations: he was as it were in the place
of all a captive before the time: but when God laid a yoke on the Jews
and on all other nations, Jeremiah was then a free man; for though he
bore this mark of bondage, he yet expected God’s judgment with a
resigned mind, while others disregarded it. But this confirmation
rendered them more inexcusable, as the case is, when God, to strengthen
faith, adds sacraments or other helps to his word, by which means he
impresses us the more, for he thus teaches not only our ears, but also
our eyes and all our senses: when God thus omits nothing that may tend
to strengthen our faith in his word, a heavier condemnation awaits us,
if such signs avail not.

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>We then perceive the reason why the Prophet
applied to his neck the symbol of future bondage: were there any
teachable among the people, to see such a sign with their eyes must have
been useful to them. But as the greater part had hardened themselves in
their obstinacy, what ought to have done them good, by humbling them in
time before God, so as to anticipate his judgment, had no other effect
but to render their punishment more grievous.

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span><span id="x.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span>Then follow these words, *I have made the
earth, the man and the beast, which are on the face of the earth, by my
great power, and by mine extended arm.*  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) The spectacle would have been
unmeaning and to no purpose, had Jeremiah only put the yoke on his neck,
and added no instruction; for we know that all signs are as it were
dead, except life is given them by the word. As then an image avails not
much, so whatever signs may be set before our eyes, they would be
frivolous and without meaning, were no doctrine added as the life. And
hence also is condemned the madness of the Papists, who amuse the minds
of the people with many signs, while no doctrine is conveyed. It
therefore follows that they are mere figments, and attended with no
profit. God, then, has ever added to signs his doctrine, which may
therefore be truly compared to the soul, which gives life to the body,
that would otherwise be without motion or strength. On this account
Jeremiah shews what the yoke meant. He also speaks of the power and
sovereign authority of God; for kings, though they confess that God
holds the government of the world, cannot yet entertain the idea that
they can be in a moment overwhelmed and cast down from their dignity.
For they seem to themselves to be fixed in their nests, and so they
promise to themselves a permanent condition, and imagine that they are
not subject to the common lot of mortals.

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span>As, then, kings are so inflated with pride,
the Lord used this preface, that he *made the earth* and all living
beings. He speaks not of heaven, but mentions only that he made the
earth, *and man, and the animals which are on the face of the earth;*
and adds, *by my great power and extended arm* Why was this said, except
that men might be awakened on hearing that the earth continues not as it
is, but as it is sustained by God’s power by which it was once created?
The same power preserves men and animals; for nothing can remain safe
except God exercises from heaven his hidden power. This, then, was the
reason why these words were introduced. God set his own arm and power in
opposition to the pride of those who thought that they stood by their
own power, and did not acknowledge that they were dependent on the nod
of God alone, who sustained them as long as he pleased, and then
overthrew and reduced them to nothing when it seemed good to him.

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span>This doctrine, then, ought to be applied to
ourselves: for Jeremiah did not speak generally and indiscriminately of
God’s power, but accommodated to the subject in hand what he said of
God’s power, that men might, know that there is nothing fixed or
permanent in this world, but that God preserves men and animals, and yet
in such a way, that at any moment he can by a single breath reduce to
nothing all those who exist and all that they have. It follows —

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**6.** And now have I given all these lands
into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the
beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**6.** Et nunc ego dedi omnes terras istas in
manum Nebuchadnezer regis abylonis servi mei, atque etiam bestiam agri
(hoc est, bestias agrestes) dedi illi ad serviendum ei:

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span>**7.** And all nations shall serve him, and
his son, and his son’s son, until the very time of his land come: and
then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span>**7.** Et servient ei omnes gentes et filio
ejus, et filio filii ejus usque dum venerit temput terrae ejus, atque
etiam ipsius; et servient ei gentes multae (vel, magnae) et reges magni.

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span><span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span>God, after having claimed to himself the
government of the whole earth, and shewn that it is in his power to
transfer kingdoms to whom he pleases, now declares his decree — that he
would subject to the king of Babylon all the neighboring lands, even
Tyrus and Sidon, the country of Moab, the country of Ammon, the country
of Edom, and even Judea itself. If Jeremiah had begun by saying, that
God had given to King Nebuchadnezzar these lands, the prediction would
not have been so easily received, for pride would have been as it were
an obstacle to bolt up their minds and hearts. But the preface, as it
has been stated, served to shew that they were not to think that they
could stand against the will of God. After having then brought down the
great height which seemed fixed in their hearts, he now declares that
King Nebuchadnezzar would be the lord over Judah as well as over all the
countries around, for God had set him over these lands.

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>He extends also this subjection, of which he
speaks, over the very beasts, and not without reason; for he thus
indirectly condemns the hardness of men, if they resisted, as though he
had said, “What will it avail you to attempt with refractory hearts to
shake off the yoke? for the very beasts, tigers, wolves, lions, and
every fierce and savage animal in the land, even all these beasts shall
know that the King Nebuchadnezzar is their master, even by a hidden
instinct. Since, then, these beasts shall obey King Nebuchadnezzar,
because he has been raised by God to that dignity, how great must be the
stupidity of men in not acknowledging what the very beasts understand?”
We hence see the design of mentioning the beasts; the Prophet upbraided
men with their madness, if they ferociously resisted the King
Nebuchadnezzar; for in that, case the beasts of the field were endued
with more intelligence than they. For whence is it that beasts have
fear, except that God has imprinted certain marks of dignity on kings,
according to what is said by Daniel. (<span id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>[Da
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038)<span id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>.) As,
then, the majesty of God appears in kings, the very beasts, though void
of reason and judgment, yet willingly obey through a hidden impulse of
nature. Hence inexcusable is the pride of men, if at least they do not
imitate the example of the very beasts.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span>Nebuchadnezzar is afterwards called *the
servant* of God, not that he was worthy of such an honor, as it had
never been his purpose to labor for God; but he was called a servant,
because God designed to employ him in his service, as those are called
in the Psalm the sons of God, to whom the word of God was addressed,
that is, to whom he gave authority to rule. (<span
id="x.iv-p11.1"></span>[Ps 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span
id="x.iv-p11.1"></span>; <span id="x.iv-p11.2"></span>[Joh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035)<span id="x.iv-p11.2"></span>.)
So also Nebuchadnezzar was God’s servant, because he was divinely endued
with sovereign power. This he did not know, nor was this said for his
sake, nor was he honored with such a name, as though God regarded him as
one of his own people; but this had a reference to the Jews and to all
the other nations, in order that they might be fully persuaded that they
were obeying God in humbling themselves and in undertaking the yoke of
the king of Babylon, for this pleased God. There is no power, says Paul,
but from God, (<span id="x.iv-p11.3"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="x.iv-p11.3"></span>,)
and that sentence is derived from this principle, that all power is from
God; for he gives the power to rule and to govern to whom he pleases.
Whosoever, then, are endued with the power of the sword and public
authority, are God’s servants, though they exercise tyranny and be
robbers. They are servants, not with respect to themselves, but because
God would have them to be acknowledged as his ministers until their time
shall come, according to what follows —

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span><span id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span>*Serve him shall all nations, and his son,
and the son of his son* The greater part think that Nebuchadnezzar had
only two successors of his own posterity, Evil-merodach and Belshazar;
others name five, and two of them between Evil-merodach and Belshazar.
Those who think that there were no more than three, quote this testimony
of the Prophet, for he names only the king’s son and his grandson; but
this would be no sufficient reason. I am, however, disposed to follow
what has been more commonly received, that Belshazar, the last king of
Babylon, who was slain by Cyrus, was the third from Nebuchadnezzar.
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180)

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span>But this is not the main thing; for the
Prophet speaks of the time of the Chaldean monarchy as well as of the
king, *until the time of his land shall come.* The time of the land was
that determined by heaven; for as to every one of us there is a limit
fixed beyond which no one can pass, so we ought to judge of kingdoms.
As, then, the life of every individual has its fixed limits, so God has
determined with regard to the empires of the whole earth; thus the life
and death of every kingdom and nation are in the hand and at the will of
God. For this reason it is now said, that the *time* of Chaldea would
*come,* and then it is added, *and of the king himself.*  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) This ought not to be confined to
Nebuchadnezzar himself; but as his grandson represented him, the time,
though not strictly, may yet be aptly said to have been that, when God
had put an end to him and to his power when Babylon was taken by the
Medes and Persians. This was, however, at the same time for the comfort
of the godly; for it was not God’s design to leave the faithful without
some alleviation in their trouble, lest grief should overpower them;
when they found themselves oppressed by the Chaldeans, and in a manner
overwhelmed, doubtless despair might have crept in, and hence murmurings
and blasphemies might have followed. It was, therefore, God’s purpose to
mitigate in some measure their bitterness when he added, that the *time*
of Nebuchadnezzar himself *would come,* that is, the time in which he
was to perish. When, therefore, the faithful saw him taking possession
of all lands, and dreaded by all nations, they were not to despond, but
rather to extend their thoughts to that time of which Jeremiah had
predicted, that they might receive some alleviation to their grief, and
be enabled to bear with more resignation the cross laid on them. In this
expression, then, is included a promise; for the hope of deliverance was
set before them, when they understood that reverses would soon happen to
King Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *serve him shall great,*
or many *nations* (for the word <span id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>םיבר,
*rebim,* means both) *and great kings*  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) This was distinctly expressed, that no
conspiracy might deceive the Jews and other nations; for they thought
that when united together they could offer an effectual resistance:
“Accumulate your forces and your efforts,” says God; “yet all these
shall be dissipated; for my decree is, that great kings and many nations
shall serve the Chaldeans.” It follows —

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#008)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**8.** And it shall come to pass, *that* the
nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king
of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king
of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword,
and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them
by his hand.

<span id="x.v-p3"></span>**8.** Erit autem ut gens et regnum, quae non
servierint ei, nempe Nebuchadnezer regi Babylonis, et qui non posuerit
collum suum sub jugo regis Babylonis, gladio et fame et peste visitabo
super gentem illam, dicit Jehova, donec interfecero ipsos in manu ejus.

<span id="x.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p5"></span><span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p6"></span>After having promulgated his decree by the
mouth of Jeremiah, God now adds a threatening, in order that the Jews as
well as others might willingly, and with resigned and humble minds,
undertake the yoke laid on them. The Prophet, indeed, as we have said,
had the Jews more especially in view; but he extended, as it were by
accident, his prediction to aliens. We hence see why this denunciation
of punishment was added. It ought, indeed, to have been enough to say,
that Nebuchadnezzar was God’s servant to subdue Judea; but as it was a
hard thing for the Jews to receive that enemy, nor could they be induced
to submit to him, it became necessary to add this threatening, “See what
ye do, for ye cannot be stronger than God.” This threatening is indeed
included in the former verse; but we know how tardy men are to learn,
especially when any false impression has preoccupied their minds. As,
then, the Jews refused the authority of Nebuchadnezzar, though the
Prophet had testified to them that he was God’s servant, they would not
have hesitated still to evade and to be refractory, had not their
hardness and obduracy been broken by this commination.

<span id="x.v-p7"></span>*And it shall be, that the nation and kingdom,
which will not serve him,* even *Nebuchadnezzar, and not put their neck
under his yoke,* it shall be, *that I shall visit that nation,* etc. God
speaks without distinction of all nations; but the Jews ought to have
reasoned from the less to the greater; for if God would so severely
punish the pride of the Gentiles, in case they withdrew themselves from
under the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, how much heavier and more dreadful
vengeance ought the Jews to have dreaded, who had been warned by the
Prophet, and who doubtless knew that this happened not to them by
chance, but that it was God’s righteous judgment, by which their sins
were punished? Were they obstinately to attempt to shake off the yoke
from their neck, would not this have been to fight against God? We now,
then, perceive that the Prophet spoke thus indiscriminately of all
nations, that he might sharply rebuke the Jews; and he showed that their
ferocity would be inexcusable were they not willingly to humble
themselves.

<span id="x.v-p8"></span>By mentioning twice, *Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon,* he seems to imply something important; for they might have
objected and said, “What have we to do with a king so distant? and by
what right does he now invade our countries? why is he not content with
his own burdens? why does he not abide in his own city and in his own
land?” And the name of Babylon was at the same time hateful, for they
had carried on war with many nations, and reduced the Assyrians under
their yoke, who were neighbors to the Jews, and the Assyrians were also
in a manner connected with them; and their name was no doubt abhorred by
the Jews, on account of the wars perpetually carried on by them. Hence
God meets here these objections, and shows that however odious Babylon
might be to the Jews, and that however remote Nebuchadnezzar might be
from Judea, yet his yoke was to be borne, as it had been so appointed by
God. This seems to me to be the reason why Jeremiah repeated the words,
*Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon*

<span id="x.v-p9"></span>There is also a denunciation of punishment,
that God would *visit with pestilence, famine, and the sword* We know
that these words are commonly mentioned in Scripture, when it is God’s
purpose to set forth the signs of his wrath. He has indeed various and
innumerable ways by which he chastises us; but these are his most
remarkable and most known scourges, the pestilence, the sword, and the
famine. He then says, that he would visit the nations who would not obey
King Nebuchadnezzar with these three scourges; and at the same time he
shews what the end would be, *until I slay,* or consume *them by his
hand* He not only threatens them with pestilence, famine, and the sword,
but he also shows that the end would be such, that the nations who might
at first obstinately resist, would yet be constrained to undertake the
yoke, and to acknowledge Nebuchadnezzar as their king and master. This
is the reason why he says, *by his hand*

<span id="x.v-p10"></span>Death might have seemed lighter, if only they
could have escaped the tyranny of Nebuchadnezzar; but since both would
happen to them, even to be consumed by famine, the sword, and the
pestilence, and yet not to be able to escape bondage, it was a miserable
prospect indeed. We now then perceive why God speaks of the hand of the
King Nebuchadnezzar; it was, that the Jews might know that they could
effect nothing by seeking means to escape, for they would at length,
willing or unwilling, be brought under the hand and under the yoke of
this king.

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not in
various ways to arm thine hand against us, we may, being at least
touched by thy holy admonitions, humble ourselves under thy mighty hand,
and thus anticipate thy judgment, so that thou mayest meet us as a
merciful and gracious God, and not only remit to us the punishments
which we have deserved, but also shew and perpetuate to us thy paternal
favor, until, having been led by thine hand, we shall come unto that
celestial kingdom which thou hast prepared for us, and which has been
obtained for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.vii"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fourth

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span><span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009)<span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Therefore hearken not ye to your
prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your
enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye
shall not serve the king of Babylon:

<span id="x.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Et vos ne audiatis prophetas vestros,
et divinos vestros, et somniatores vestros, et augures vestros, et
incantatores vestros, qui dicunt vobis (loquuntur vobiscum dicendo*; est
quidem idem verbum, sed repetitio esset nimis dura,*) Non servietis
(*vel,* ne serviatis) regi Babylonis (est verbum futuri temporis, sed
quidam accipiunt in modo hortandi, ut satis tritum est in lingua
Hebraica.)

<span id="x.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.viii-p5"></span><span id="x.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p6"></span>As Jeremiah had declared to the king, as
well as to the citizens, that they could not escape the punishment that
was at hand, he now shakes off from them that vain confidence, which was
as an obstacle in the way, so that they were not touched by
threatenings, nor received wholesome warnings. For the false prophets
deceived them by their flatteries, and promised that all things would
happen prosperously to them. As then the Prophet saw that the ears both
of the king and of the people were closed against him, so that he could
do little or nothing by exhorting and threatening them, he added what he
deemed necessary, even that all the things which the false prophets
vainly said were altogether fallacious.

<span id="x.viii-p7"></span>He therefore said, *Hear ye not your
prophets and your diviners;* for <span id="x.viii-p7.1"></span>םסק,
*kosam,* is to divine; then he adds, *your dreamers;* in the fourth
place, *your augurs;* in the fifth place, *your sorcerers,* or charmers.
Some indeed regard <span id="x.viii-p7.2"></span>םיננע, *onnim,* as
observers of time, for <span id="x.viii-p7.3"></span>הנוע, *oune,* is a
stated time, hence they who imagine that a thing is to be done on this
or that day, and promise a happy issue, were called, as they think,
<span id="x.viii-p7.4"></span>םיננע *onnim,* because they
superstitiously observed hours and periods of time. But as <span
id="x.viii-p7.5"></span>ןנע, *onen,* means a cloud, they may also be
called <span id="x.viii-p7.6"></span>םיננע, *onnim,* who divined by the
stars, and hence took counsel as to what was to be done.  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="x.viii-p15"></span>But let us now inquire, whether Jeremiah
speaks of such dreamers, and others as were among the Jews, or whether
he includes also such as were found among the neighboring nations. It
seems probable to me, that what he says ought to be confined to the
Jews; for I take the word *ye,* as emphatical, *Hear ye not, etc.* There
follows afterwards an explanation, *According to these words have I
spoken to the king;* and then he adds, that he spoke to the priests and
to the people. Hence then we conclude, that the whole of this part was
probably addressed to the Jews alone. Divinations,

<span id="x.viii-p16"></span>auguries, and incantations, were indeed
prohibited in the Law; but we well know how often the Jews gave up
themselves to these tricks of the devil, the Law of God being wholly
despised by them. It is then no wonder if at this time there were among
them magicians, as well as augurs and diviners, notwithstanding the
manifest prohibition of the Law. We may, however, so understand these
words, as that the Prophet compared these false prophets to diviners, as
well as to augurs and sorcerers. He sets, in the first place, the
prophets, but in mentioning them, he seems to mark them with disgrace,
because they had departed from their own office, and had assumed another
character, for they deceived the people, as augurs, diviners, and
magicians were wont to deceive the nations.

<span id="x.viii-p17"></span>It is indeed certain, as I have before
reminded you, that the Prophet spoke, not for the sake of other nations,
but that the *Jews* might be rendered inexcusable, or, if there was any
hope of repentance, that they might be reminded not to proceed in their
usual course. We hence see the meaning of the words, and at the same
time perceive the design of the Prophet, or rather of the Holy Spirit,
who spoke by his mouth.

<span id="x.viii-p18"></span>I said at first that the Prophet met an
objection, which might have lessened or taken away the authority of his
doctrine; for it was not a small trial, that the prophets denied that
any evil was at hand. For the prophetic name was ever held in great
repute and respect among the Jews. But we see also at this day, and
experience sufficiently teaches us, that men are more ready to receive
error and vanity, than to receive the word of God; and so it was then,
and the Jews imagined that they honored God, because they regarded his
Prophets. But when any one faithfully performed the prophetic office, he
was often despised. The Jews therefore were taken up only with a mere
name, and thought that they did all that was required by saying that
they attended to the prophets, while at the same time they boldly
despised the true servants of God. It is so at this day; while the name
of the Catholic Church is boasted of under the Papacy, it seems that a
regard is had for God; but when the word of God is brought forward, when
what has been spoken by apostles and prophets is adduced, it is regarded
almost as nothing. We hence see that the Papists separate God as it were
from himself, as the Jews formerly did.

<span id="x.viii-p19"></span>And hence also we see how necessary it was
for Jeremiah to remove such a stumblingblock; for the Jews might have
pertinaciously insisted on this objection, — “Thou alone threatenest us
with exile; but we have many who glory in being prophets, and who
promise safety to us: wouldest thou have us to believe thee alone rather
than these who are many?” Thus the Prophet, being alone, had to contend
with the false prophets, who were many. And we have now a similar
contest with the Papists; for they boast, of their number; and then they
object, that nothing would be certain, if it was allowed to every one to
appeal to the word of God. They hence conclude that we ought simply to
believe the Church, and to receive whatever is brought under the
pretense of being Scripture. But Jeremiah had confidence in his own
vocation, and had really proved his divine mission, and also that he
proclaimed the messages which he had received from the mouth of God. As
then he had given certain proofs of his vocation, he had a right to
oppose all those false prophets, and not only to disregard their lies,
but also in a manner to tread them under his feet, as he seems to have
done, *Hear ye not,* he says, *your prophets*

<span id="x.viii-p20"></span>He concedes to them an honorable name, but
improperly. It is therefore a catachristic way of speaking, when he
names them prophets; but he leaves them their title, as it was not
necessary to contend about words. Yet he shews at the same time that
they were wholly unworthy of being heard. Hence no authority was left
them, though a mere empty name was conceded to them. It is the same at
this day, when we call those priests, bishops, and presbyters, who cover
themselves with these masks, and yet shew that there is in them nothing
episcopal, nothing ecclesiastical, and, in short, nothing that belongs
to the doctrine of Christ, or to any lawful order.

<span id="x.viii-p21"></span>He afterwards adds, *Who say to yote,
saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon* We have said that the
last clause is rendered by some as an exhortation, *Serve ye not the
king of Babylon,* as though the false prophets stimulated the Jews to
shake off the yoke.: But the proper meaning of the verb may be still
retained, *Ye shall not serve;* for we know that the false prophets,
when they came forth, pretended to be God’s ambassadors, sent to promise
tranquillity, peace, and prosperity to the Jews. Thus they reigned to
do, when yet God, as it has been stated, and as we shall again see
presently, had testified that there was no other remedy for the people
but by submitting to the king of Babylon. It follows —

<span id="x.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p1"></span><span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#010)<span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p2"></span>**10.** For they prophesy a lie unto you, to
remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye
should perish.

<span id="x.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Quia mendacium ipsi prophetant vobis,
ut procul abducant vos e terra vestra, et ejiciam vos, et pereatis.

<span id="x.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.ix-p5"></span><span id="x.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p6"></span>This verse also confirms what I have said, —
that this discourse was designed for the Jews, and that it was
peculiarly for them; for what is said here could not be applied to
heathen nations. What then had been lately said of augurs, magicians,
and diviners, ought no doubt to be understood of those impostors who,
under the name of prophets, deceived that miserable people.

<span id="x.ix-p7"></span>He says that they *prophesied falsehood* Many,
no doubt, adduced, for the purpose of opposing him, their own evasions:
“Art thou alone to be believed? dost thou alone tell the truth? how dost
thou prove that what thou teachest is an oracle from heaven, and that
these deceive us?” For so do the ungodly usually clamor, as we see to be
the case at this day with the Papists, who cover themselves with a
pretense of this kind: for whatever abomination there may be, they cover
it over by means of this sophistry alone — that the Scripture is
obscure, and that controversy is uncertain, and that therefore nothing
is to be believed but what the Church has decreed: so with them the
definition of men, as they say, is the only rule of faith; and hence,
also, the whole authority of Scripture is by them trodden under foot, as
though God had in vain spoken by his own prophets and apostles. There is
no doubt but the doctrine of Jeremiah was opposed by such clamors: he
however persevered in the course of his office, and boldly condemned the
prophets, that they only deceived the Jews by their lies.

<span id="x.ix-p8"></span>He adds, *that they may remove you far from
your land* I have said that this cannot be applied to other nations: but
God gave a hope of mercy to his people, provided they willingly obeyed
the king of Babylon. It was not indeed a full pardon; yet it was owing
to his kindness that God did not treat the Jews with strict justice, but
chastised them with gentleness and paternal moderation: for it was an
endurable punishment, to remain in their own country and to pay tribute
to the king of Babylon. God then would have mitigated the punishment of
the people, if only they had willingly undertaken the yoke., This is
what Jeremiah now says: “The false prophets seek only this, to drive you
far from your country; for they would have you to think that you shall
be free from all punishment: but God is prepared to deal gently with
you; though he will not wholly pass by your vices, yet your chastisement
will be one easily borne, for ye shall remain in your own country. But
if ye will believe these impostors, they will lead you away into distant
exile; for God says, I *will cast you away, and ye shall perish.”*
 <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="x.ix-p12"></span>If it be objected again that the Jews could
not form a certain opinion, whether Jeremiah was to be believed rather
than the others who were many, the answer is at hand: they were
themselves conscious of being wicked, and there was no need of long
debates to ascertain what was true; for every one found God’s judgment
to be against himself, as they had departed from the pure worship of
God, and had polluted themselves with many ungodly superstitions, and a
license in all kinds of sins had also prevailed among them: they had
been warned, not once, nor for one day, but by many prophets, and also
continually and for a long time. As then they had thus provoked God’s
vengeance by their obstinate wickedness, how could they be in doubt
respecting Jeremiah, whether he had, as from the mouth of God, and as a
celestial herald declared to them what they deserved? And surely
whenever men pretend that they have fallen through error or ignorance,
they can always be deprived of this evasion; for their own conscience
convicts them, and is sufficient to condemn them.

<span id="x.ix-p13"></span>God adds, that the Jews would *perish,*
except they anticipated extreme judgment, that is, except they submitted
to paternal chastisement. This passage deserves to be specially noticed,
as we shall presently see again; for we are here taught that whenever
God shews some signs of displeasure, there is nothing better for us than
to prepare ourselves for patience; for we shall thus ever give place and
a free passage to his mercy: but by pertinacity we gain nothing, and do
nothing but kindle his wrath more and more. This then is what Jeremiah
means when he declares, that they who submitted not to the king of
Babylon would perish. It follows —

<span id="x.x"></span>

<span id="x.x-p1"></span><span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#011)<span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p2"></span>**11.** But the nations that bring their neck
under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let
remain still in their own land, saith the LORD; and they shall till it,
and dwell therein.

<span id="x.x-p3"></span>**11.** Gens autem quae adduxerit cervicem suam
sub jugum regis Babyonis, et servierit ei, relinquam eam in terra sua,
dicit Jehova, et colet eam et habitabit in ea.

<span id="x.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.x-p5"></span><span id="x.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p6"></span>He seems indeed to speak here indiscriminately
of all nations; but the admonition belongs to the Jews alone, as we have
said, and as it appears from the context. He seems however to mention
the nations, that he might more sharply touch the Jews, as though he had
said, “Though God’s promises are not to be extended to heathen nations,
yet God will spare the Tyrians and the Moabites, if they submit quietly
to the king of Babylon, and take upon them his yoke. If God will spare
heathen nations, when yet he has promised them nothing, what may his
chosen people expect? But if he will punish nations who err in darkness,
what will become of a people who knowingly and wilfully resist God and
his judgments?” For obstinacy in the Jews was mad impiety, as though
they avowedly designed to carry on war with God; for they knew that
Nebuchadnezzar was the executioner of God’s vengeance. When therefore
they ferociously attempted to exempt themselves from his power, it was
to fight with God, as though they would not submit to his scourges.

<span id="x.x-p7"></span>We now then perceive why Jeremiah spoke what we
here read, not only of the Jews, but also generally of all nations, *The
nation that brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and
serves him, I will leave it in its own land* We must yet bear in mind
what I have before said, that the Jews were the people especially
regarded. If, then, they had given place to God’s kindness, he would
have graciously spared them, and they would have perpetually enjoyed
their own inheritance; but it was their obstinacy that drove them far
into exile. And hence he adds, *I will leave it in its land; and it
shall cultivate it and dwell in it*

<span id="x.x-p8"></span>There is a striking allusion in the word <span
id="x.x-p8.1"></span>דבע, *obed,* for it means to serve, and also to
cultivate; but there is to be understood a contrast between cultivating
the land and that subjection, to which he exhorted the Jews, as though
he had said, — “Serve the king of Babylon, that the land may serve you;
it will be the reward of your obedience, if you will submit yourselves
to the power of the king of Babylon, that the land will submit, to you,
and you will compel it to serve you, so that it will bring forth food
for you.” We hence see that God promised that the land would serve the
people, if they refused not to serve the king of Babylon.

<span id="x.x-p9"></span>And hence also we may gather useful
instruction, — that all the elements would be serviceable to us, were we
willingly to obey God, but that on the contrary, the heaven, and the
earth, and all the elements will be opposed to us, if we pertinaciously
resist God. But Jeremiah speaks here more expressly of the submission
which men render to God, when they calmly receive his correction, and
acknowledge, while he inflicts punishment, that they justly deserve it,
and do not refuse to be chastised by his hand. When, therefore, men thus
submit to God’s judgment, they obtain his favor, so that the earth, and
heaven, and all the elements will serve them. But the more perversely
men exalt themselves and raise their horns against God, the more bondage
shall they feel; for their own chains bind them stronger than anything
else, when they thus struggle with God and do not humble themselves
under his mighty hand. The same thing the Prophet still more clearly
confirms when he says, —

<span id="x.xi"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p1"></span><span id="x.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012)<span id="x.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p2"></span>**12.** I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah
according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of
the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.

<span id="x.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Ad Zedekiam ergo regem Jehudah
loquutus sum secundum conctos sermones istos, dicendo, Adducite colla
vestra ad jugum regis Babylonis et servite ei et populo ejus, et
vivetis.

<span id="x.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xi-p5"></span><span id="x.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p6"></span>This verse proves with sufficient clearness
that what we have hitherto explained was spoken especially to the chosen
people; for Jeremiah tells us here, that he spoke to the King Zedekiah,
and in the sixteenth verse he adds that he spoke to the priests and to
the people. He was not then sent as a teacher to the Moabites, the
Tyrians, and other foreign nations; but God had prescribed to him his
limits, within which he was to keep. He therefore says, that he *spoke
to the king*

<span id="x.xi-p7"></span>We hence learn what he had before said, that
he was set over kingdoms and nations; for the doctrine taught by the
prophets is higher than all earthly elevations. Jeremiah was, indeed,
one of the people, and did not exempt himself from the authority of the
king, nor did he pretend that he was released from the laws, because he
possessed that high dignity by which he was superior to kings, as the
Papal clergy do, who vauntingly boast of their immunity, which is
nothing else but a license to live in wickedness. The Prophet then kept
himself in his own rank like others; and yet when he had to exercise his
spiritual jurisdiction in God’s name, he spared not the king nor his
counsellors; for he knew that his doctrine was above all kings; the
prophetic office, then, is eminent above all the elevations of kings.

<span id="x.xi-p8"></span>And skilfully no less than wisely did the
Prophet exercise his office by first assailing the king, as he had been
sent to him. At the same time he addressed him in the plural number,
*Bring ye your neck,* he says; and he did so, because the greater part
of the people depended on the will of their king. Then he adds, *Serve
ye his people* It was, indeed, a thing very unpleasant to be heard, when
the Prophet commanded the Jews to submit, not only to the king of
Babylon, but also to all his subjects; it was an indignity that must
have greatly exasperated them. But he added this designedly, because he
saw that he had to do with men refractory and untamable. As, then, they
were not pliant, he dealt the more sharply with them, as though he
wished to break down their foolish pride. It was not therefore a
superfluous expression, when he bade the Jews to obey all the Chaldeans;
for they had been so blinded by perverse haughtiness, that for a long
time they had resisted God and his prophets, and continued untamable.

<span id="x.xi-p9"></span>There is afterwards added a promise, *and ye
shall live,*  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) which confirms the
truth to which I have referred, — that it is the best remedy for
alleviating evils, to acknowledge that we are justly smitten, and to
humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God; for thus it happens, that
evils are turned into medicines, and thus become salutary to us.
Whatever punishment is inflicted on us for our sins, as it is a sign of
God’s wrath, so in a manner it places death before our eyes. Punishment,
then, in itself can do nothing but fill us with dread, nay, overwhelm us
with despair; and I speak of punishment even the slightest; for we
suffer nothing which does not remind us of our sin and guilt, as though
God summoned us to his tribunal. How dreadful surely it must be to
sustain this, and to fall into the hands of the living God? Hence, when
God touches us as it were with his little finger, we cannot but fall
down through fear. But this comfort is given to us, that punishment,
though in itself grievous and as it were fatal, becomes profitable to
us, when we allow God to be our judge, and are prepared to endure
whatever seems good to him.

<span id="x.xi-p11"></span>This is what the Prophet means, when he
promises that the Jews would *live,* if they submitted to the king of
Babylon; not that they could merit life by their obedience; but the only
way by which we can obtain God’s favor and be reconciled to him, is
willingly to condemn ourselves; for we anticipate extreme judgment, as
Paul says, when we condemn ourselves; and then we shall not be condemned
by God. (<span id="x.xi-p11.1"></span>[1Co
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span id="x.xi-p11.1"></span>.)
For how is it, that God is so angry with the wicked, except that they
wish to be forgiven while in their sins? But this is to pull him down
from his throne, for he is not the judge of the world, if the ungodly
escape unpunished and laugh at all his threatenings. So also on the
other hand, when in true humility we suffer ourselves to be chastised by
God, he becomes immediately reconciled to us. This, then, is the life
mentioned here.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) It follows, —

<span id="x.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p1"></span><span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#013)<span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p2"></span>**13.** Why will ye die, thou and thy people,
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath
spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

<span id="x.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Quare peribitis tu et ppopulus tuus
gladio, fame et peste, quemadmodum loquutus est Jehjova super gentem
quae non servierit regi Babylonis?

<span id="x.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xii-p5"></span><span id="x.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p6"></span>Here is a threatening added; for all means
were used not only to invite the Jews, but also to stimulate them to
repent. The Prophet offered them pardon, if they quietly submitted to be
chastised by God. It was to be their life, he said, when the Lord
punished them according to his will. As they could not be sufficiently
moved by this kindness, he now adds, “See ye to it, for except ye
receive the life offered to you, you must inevitably perish. Therefore
thou, Zedekiah, wilt precipitate thyself with all thy people into
eternal destruction, if ye continue to be perverse and obstinate against
God.”

<span id="x.xii-p7"></span>We hence see that nothing was left undone by
the Prophet to bend the Jews to obedience and to lead them to
repentance. By speaking of the *sword, famine, and pestilence,* he
intimates that there would be no end, until they were consumed by God’s
vengeance, except they suffered themselves, as we have said, to be thus
chastised by his paternal kindness, for this would be salutary to them.

<span id="x.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not
often and continually to provoke thy wrath against us, we may of our own
accord anticipate thy judgment, and not harden ourselves in our sins,
having been especially warned by thy word, but in due time repent, and
so submit ourselves to thee, that whatever thou mayest appoint for us,
we may not doubt but thou wilt be propitious to us; and while fleeing to
thy mercy, may we not refuse the punishment thou deemest expedient to
bring us to the right way, until having at length put off all our
corruptions, we shall enjoy that eternal inheritance, which is laid up
for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="x.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifth

<span id="x.xiv-p2"></span>We said yesterday, that as the Prophet saw
that there was great insensibility in the Jews, so that they disregarded
all God’s promises, he added terror to the hope of mercy. Hence he said,
“Ye shall perish, thou and thy people.” He was, no doubt, constrained by
necessity to speak in this severe way; for the kind exhortation which he
had used availed nothing; and yet God shewed at the same time by his
threatening how much he loved the people; for he had a sympathy for
them, and as it is said elsewhere, he willed not the death of the
sinner, but sought to induce those who were not wholly irreclaimable to
repent that they might live. The same thing we now from these words of
the Prophet; for God assumes the character of a man ready to give help,
and sympathizes with the miseries of a people whom he saw rushing
headlong into destruction. It now follows, —

<span id="x.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p1"></span><span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#014)<span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p2"></span>**14.** Therefore hearken not unto the words
of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king
of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.

<span id="x.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Et ne audiatis verba prophetarum, qui
dicunt vobis (qui loquutur vobiscum, dicendo,) Non servietis regi
Babylonis; quia mendacium ipsi prophetant vobis.

<span id="x.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xv-p5"></span><span id="x.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p6"></span>He repeats the same words which we have met
with before; there is therefore no need of dwelling long on them here.
Yet the repetition was not superfluous; for he had a hard contest with
the false prophets, who had attained great authority. As Jeremiah alone
made an onset on the whole multitude, the greater part of them might
have objected and said, that in matters of such perplexity there was
nothing certain or clear. As therefore it was not easy to convince the
Jews who were disposed to believe the false prophets, it was necessary
to say the same thing often, as we shall also see hereafter. He adds, —

<span id="x.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p1"></span><span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#015)<span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p2"></span>**15.** For I have not sent them, saith the
LORD, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out,
and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.

<span id="x.xvi-p3"></span>**15.** Quia non misi eos, dicit Jehova, et
ipsi prophetant in nomine meo ad mendacium (id est, fallacium) ut vos
ejiciam, et pereatis vos et prophetae, qui prophetant vobis.

<span id="x.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xvi-p5"></span><span id="x.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p6"></span>He confirms what he had said, that they had
not been sent by God. The object is to shew the Jews, that they were not
to receive thoughtlessly everything presented to them under God’s name,
but that they were to exercise discrimination and judgment. This is a
passage worthy of special notice, for the devil has ever falsely assumed
God’s name; and for all the errors and delusions which have ever
prevailed in the world, he has not obtained credit otherwise than by
this false pretense. And at this day we see that many are wilfully
blind, because they think they are excused before God if they can
pretend ignorance, and they say that they are not wickedly credulous,
but they dare not make curious inquiries. As then there are many who
wilfully put on nooses and also wish to be deceived, we ought to notice
what the Prophet says here, that we ought to distinguish the true from
false prophets; for what purpose? even that we may receive them only,
and depend on their words who have been sent by the Lord.

<span id="x.xvi-p7"></span>It may be here asked, how comes this
difference? It was formerly necessary for prophets to be raised in a
special manner, for it was a special gift to predict future and hidden
events, hence the prophetic was not an ordinary office like the
sacerdotal. That promise indeed ever continued in force,

<span id="x.xvi-p8"></span>“A prophet will I raise to thee from the
midst of thy brethren.” (<span id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>[De
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018)<span id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.xvi-p9"></span>But though this was a perpetual favor
conferred by God on the Israelites, yet the prophets were ever called in
a special manner; no one was to take this office except endued with an
extraordinary gift. Though Jeremiah was a priest, yet he was not on that
account a prophet; but God, as we have seen, made him a prophet. But
with regard to us, the matter is different, for God does not at this day
predict hidden events; but he would have us to be satisfied with his
Gospel, for in it is made known to us the perfection of wisdom. As then
we live in “the fullness of time,” God does not reveal prophecies so as
to point out this or that thing to us in particular. We may now obtain
certainty as to the truth, if we form our judgment according to the Law,
and the Prophets, and the Gospel. There is indeed need of the spirit of
discernment; but we shall never go astray, if we depend on the mouth of
God, and follow the example of the Bereans, of whom Luke speaks in the
Acts, who says, that they carefully read the Scriptures, and searched
whether things were as they were taught by Paul. (<span
id="x.xvi-p9.1"></span>[Ac 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011)<span
id="x.xvi-p9.1"></span>.) No wrong was done to Paul, when the disciples,
in order to confirm their faith, inquired whether his preaching was
agreeable to the Law and to the Prophets. So also now, all doctrines
ought to be examined by us; and if we follow this rule, we shall never
go astray.

<span id="x.xvi-p10"></span>As to the ancient people, they could not, as
it was said yesterday, be deceived, for the prophets were only
interpreters of the Law. With regard to future things, this or that was
never predicted by the prophets, unless connected with doctrine, which
was as it were the seasoning, and gave a relish to the prophecies; for
when they promised what was cheering, it was founded on the eternal
covenant of God; and when they threatened the people, they pointed out
their sins, so that it was necessary for God to execute his vengeance
when their wickedness was incurable. Ever to be borne in mind then is
that which is said in Deuteronomy, that God tried his people whenever he
gave loose reins to false prophets, (<span id="x.xvi-p10.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="x.xvi-p10.1"></span>,)
for every one who sincerely and undissemblingly loves him shall be
guided by his Spirit. This then is the sure trial which God makes as to
his faithful people, according to what Paul also says, who refers to
this testimony of Moses, that heresies arise in order that they who are
the faithful and sincere servants of God, might thereby shew what they
really are, (<span id="x.xvi-p10.2"></span>[1Co
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span id="x.xvi-p10.2"></span>;)
for they do not fluctuate at every wind of doctrine, but remain firm and
constant in the pure obedience of faith. Rightly then does Jeremiah say,
that they who gave hope of impunity to the people, had not been sent by
the Lord; for every one had his own conscience as his judge.

<span id="x.xvi-p11"></span>He adds, *They prophesy falsely in my name*
We see how sedulously and prudently we ought to take heed lest the devil
should fascinate us by his charms, especially when the name of God is
pretended. It is then not enough for us to hear, “Thus has God spoken,”
unless we are fully persuaded that those who use such a preface have
been called by him, and that they also afford a sure evidence of their
call, so that we may be certain that they are as it were the instruments
of the Spirit. Ungodly men will find here an occasion for clamoring,
because God does in a manner make a mock of the anxiety of men, for he
might send angels from heaven, he might himself speak; but when he
employs men, and permits false prophets to boast of this word and of
that, while they wholly dissemble, he seems in this way as though he
designedly bewildered miserable men. But there is nothing better for us
than to acknowledge that our obedience is tried by God, when he
addresses us by men; for we know that nothing is more contrary to faith
than pride, as also humility is the true principle of faith and the real
entrance into God’s kingdom. This then is the reason why God makes use
of men.

<span id="x.xvi-p12"></span>In the meantime, when impostors creep in and
boast that they are true legitimate prophets, it is indeed a grievous
trial, and much to be feared; yet. God, as I have said, will ever
relieve us, provided we trust not to our own judgment, and assume not to
ourselves more than what is just and right, but look to him as the
judge, and submit ourselves to his word; and further, if we suffer
ourselves to be ruled by his Spirit, he will ever give us wisdom, which
will enable us to distinguish between true and false prophets. However
this may be, we clearly see that it is no new thing for Satan’s
ministers to prophesy in God’s name, that is, falsely to assume his
name, when in reality and truth they are vain pretenders.

<span id="x.xvi-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *that I might drive you
out, and that ye might perish,* as well as they. Here Jeremiah reminded
them, that the prophets who promised impunity could not at length
escape, but that they would have to suffer punishment not only for their
presumption, but also for those sins by which they, together with the
whole people, had already provoked the wrath of God; for their crime was
twofold: despising God, they had promised all liberty to indulge in sin;
and they had also dared to come forth and to pretend God’s name, though
they had not been called, nor did they bring, as we have said, any
message from God. But the Prophet again repeated, that such prophets
were instigated by the devil’s artifice, in order to aggravate God’s
judgment; for the people, inebriated with joy, added sins to sins, as
security is wont to lead men to all kinds of wickedness. There is
therefore nothing more ruinous than for false teachers to flatter
sinners, and so to cajole and wheedle them as to make them to think that
they have nothing to do with God; for the devil rules then indeed, when
men’s consciences are thus asleep in a deadly lethargy. He afterwards
adds, —

<span id="x.xvii"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p1"></span><span id="x.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#016)<span id="x.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p2"></span>**16.** Also I spake to the priests, and to
all this people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Hearken not to the words
of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of
the LORD’S house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for
they prophesy a lie unto you.

<span id="x.xvii-p3"></span>**16.** Et ad sacerdotes et ad populum hunc
loquutus sum, dicendo, Sic dicit Jehova, Ne audiatis sermones
prophetarum vestrorum, qui prophetant vobis, dicendo, Ecce vasa domus
Jehovae reducentur e Babylone nunc cito; mendacium ipsi prophetant
vobis.

<span id="x.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xvii-p5"></span><span id="x.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p6"></span>Jeremiah, as we have seen, did not deal
privately with the king alone, for he did not separate him from the
people; but as he had directed his words chiefly to him, he therefore
expresses now what might have seemed obscure, that though he had begun
with the king, he yet included all the Jews. It was indeed necessary to
begin with the king, for we know that earthly kings think much of their
own dignity, and that the whole people are dependent on their will.
Hence Hosea condemned them, because they rendered a too willing
obedience to royal edicts, and worshipped God according to what it
pleased the king and his counsellors to dictate. (<span
id="x.xvii-p6.1"></span>[Ho 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)<span
id="x.xvii-p6.1"></span>: <span id="x.xvii-p6.2"></span>[Mic
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016)<span id="x.xvii-p6.2"></span>.)
As then the royal name served to dazzle the eyes of the simple, Jeremiah
was bidden to address first the king himself; but he now shews that the
priests and the people were included.

<span id="x.xvii-p7"></span>It was indeed like something monstrous, that
the priests, whom God had designed to be the interpreters of his Law,
should have become so stupid as thoughtlessly to receive, together with
the common people, what they had heard from the false prophets. This
surely was by no means compatible with that high encomium by which they
are honored by Malachi, that the priest’s lips should keep knowledge,
and that from him the Law is to be sought, because he is the messenger
of the God of hosts. (<span id="x.xvii-p7.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="x.xvii-p7.1"></span>.) As
then they were the guardians of the Law and of knowledge, as they were
messengers from God himself to the people, how was it that their
stupidity was so monstrous, that they did not distinguish between truth
and falsehood, but were led astray, together with the most ignorant, by
what the false prophets delivered!

<span id="x.xvii-p8"></span>This ought to be carefully noticed, that we
may not at this day be too much disturbed, when we see the pastoral
office assumed by ignorant asses, and that those who are called, and
wish to be thought ministers, are so inexperienced in Scripture that
they are deficient as to the first elements of religion. And we see the
very thing happening at this day especially under the Papacy, as existed
among the ancient people; for the Papal bishops are for the most part
extremely stupid and presumptuous. There are to be found many husbandmen
and artisans, who know nothing of learning, but have only heard what is
obscure and indistinct, and yet they can speak better on the general
principles of faith than these haughty prelates in all their splendor.
How is this? even because the just reward for their sloth is rendered to
them. They are verily ignorant of what should qualify them to be
bishops, and yet they glory in the name! Yea, though they do not think
that Episcopacy consists in anything but in revenues, and also in vain
symbols, such as to be mitred, to wear an episcopal ring, and to exhibit
other like trumperies, they yet suppose themselves to be a sort of
half-gods. Hence it is, that God exposes them to the utmost reproach.
The same was the case with the priests under the Law, as Jeremiah now
shews; for they were not ashamed of their ignorance, but encouraged the
people to believe the false prophets; so at this day do the bishops;
they scud forth their monks and such like brawlers, who run here and
there to deceive the ignorant people, and they secure a hearing to them.
And what is the burden of their message? to bid men to attend to the
holy Catholic Church; and what is the Catholic Church? The Synod which
the Pope assembles, where the mitred bishops sit; for what purpose? That
they may know what pleases these brawlers, to whom is committed the
office of disputing. We hence see that all things under the Papacy are
at this day in great disorder; and yet this horrible disorder differs
nothing from that of old. And it is, as I have said, what ought to be
particularly noticed, that our faith may not fail, when we see all
things in a confusion and hardly any order remaining.

<span id="x.xvii-p9"></span>Now also is added a clearer explanation, —
that the Jews were warned, lest they should receive the false prophecy
respecting the restoration of the vessels of the Temple; for in order to
render the people secure as to the future, the false prophets boasted in
this manner, “The splendor of the Temple shall shortly be restored; for
the vessels, which Nebuchadnezzar has taken away, shall return together
with the captives, and everything decayed shall be repaired.” But
Jeremiah said, that what they promised was false; “Believe them not,” he
says, “when they say to you, *Behold, the vessels of Jehovah’s house
shall be brought back,* (or restored, that is, shall return hither;) for
the king of Babylon shall either be constrained to restore what he has
taken away, or he will of his own accord restore it.” And they also
added, *Now soon,* in order that the shortness of time might be all
additional chain to captivate the minds of the people; for had a long
time been mentioned, the prophecy would have been less plausible and by
no means acceptable to them; but they said, “Almost within a day the
vessels of the Temple shall be brought back here.” And Jeremiah also, as
we have already seen, and shall presently see again, did not deprive the
people of every hope, but had assigned seventy years for their exile.
Now these prophets, in order to dissipate this fear, said, — “Shortly
shall the vessels be restored;” but he declared that they prophesied
falsely to them. It follows —

<span id="x.xviii"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p1"></span><span id="x.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#017)<span id="x.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p2"></span>**17.** Hearken not unto them; serve the
king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste?

<span id="x.xviii-p3"></span>**17.** Ne audiatis ipsos, servite regi
Babylonis, et vivetis: ut quid erit urbs haec desolatio (*hoc est,* in
vastitatem?)

<span id="x.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xviii-p5"></span><span id="x.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p6"></span>It is not to be wondered at that Jeremiah
said the same things so often, for, as we have seen, he had to contend
with false prophets. When any one speaks, and there be no dispute and no
adversary opposing him, he may calmly deal with the teachable and
confine himself to a few words; but when contention arises, and
opponents appear, who may seek to subvert what we say, then we must
exercise more care, for they who are thus driven different ways, will
not be satisfied with a few words. As, then, Jeremiah saw that the
people were fluctuating, he found it necessary, in order to confirm
them, to use many words; not that prolixity is in itself sufficient to
produce conviction; yet there is no doubt but that Jeremiah spoke
efficiently so as to influence at least some portion of the people.
Besides, it was necessary to dwell more expressly on a subject not very
plausible; the false prophets were heard with favor, and the greater
part greedily devoured what was set forth by them; for the hope of
impunity is always pleasing and sought after by the world.

<span id="x.xviii-p7"></span>But what did Jeremiah say? *Serve ye the
king of Babylon;* that is, “No better condition awaits you than to pay
tribute to the king of Babylon; be subject to his authority, and
patiently endure whatever he may prescribe to you.” This was indeed a
very hard speech; for subjection was not unaccompanied with reproach;
besides, he bade them to surrender themselves to a most cruel enemy, as
though they were to expose their life to him; and lastly, they were to
risk the danger of being spoiled of all that they had. What Jeremiah
taught then was very much disliked, as he thus exhorted the people to
endure all things. This was, then, the reason why he had not declared in
a few and plain words what God had committed to him; it was difficult to
persuade the people to undergo the yoke of the king of Babylon, and to
submit to his tyranny.

<span id="x.xviii-p8"></span>We hence see that there were two very just
reasons why the Prophet insisted so much on this one subject, and
confirmed what he might have briefly said without any prolixity;
*Hearken, ye to them,* he says; *serve ye the king of Babylon and ye
shall live*  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) We must again bear
in mind what we said yesterday, that patiently to humble ourselves under
God’s mighty hand is the best remedy for mitigating punishment, and that
in this way punishment is turned into medicine; so on the other hand,
when we are like refractory and ferocious horses, whatever punishment
God inflicts on us, is only a prelude to endless destruction. Let us
then lay hold on this truth and constantly meditate on it, — that our
punishment becomes vivifying to us, when we acknowledge God to be a
righteous judge and suffer ourselves to be corrected by him. But I refer
only briefly to this subject now, for I spoke of it more at large
yesterday.

<span id="x.xviii-p10"></span>He adds, *Why should this city be a
desolation?* He set before them the city in which God’s sanctuary was,
and by the sight of it he tried to turn them to repentance; for it was
extremely base to harden themselves against the warnings of the
prophets, so as to cause the Temple of God to be demolished, and also
the holy city to be reduced to a waste, in which God designed to have
his dwelling, as he had said,

<span id="x.xviii-p11"></span>“This is my rest for ever.” (<span
id="x.xviii-p11.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="x.xviii-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="x.xviii-p12"></span>In short, he declared to the Jews that a
most awful condemnation awaited them, if they suffered the city to
perish through their own fault, and that they would be the authors of
their own ruin, if they undertook not the yoke of the king of Babylon.
It follows —

<span id="x.xix"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p1"></span><span id="x.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018)<span id="x.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p2"></span>**18.** But if they *be* prophets, and if the
word of the LORD be with them, let them now make intercession to the
LORD of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the LORD,
and *in* the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to
Babylon.

<span id="x.xix-p3"></span>**18.** Qued si Prophetae sunt, et si est
sermo Jehovae cum ipsis *(id est,* apud ipsos,) intercedant ipsi apud
Jehovam exercituum, ne veniant vasa, quae supersunt in Temple Jehovae,
et in dome regis Jehudah et Jerosolymae Babylonem.

<span id="x.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xix-p5"></span><span id="x.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p6"></span>Here the Prophet laughs to scorn the foolish
confidence with which the false prophets were swollen, when they
promised all happiness in time to come. He hence says, that they were
not to be believed as to the prosperity of which they prophesied, but
that on the contrary they ought to have dreaded a most grievous
punishment.

<span id="x.xix-p7"></span>He then says, *If they are prophets, let them
intercede with Jehovah,* that what still remains may not be taken away
from Jerusalem. They promised the return of the vessels, which had been
already carried away to Babylon; and yet what still remained in the
Temple and in the palace of the king and in the whole city, was to be
removed to Babylon. We now perceive the Prophet’s design; he compares
the future with the past, and shews that these impostors foolishly
promised some better state of things, even when God’s heavy judgment was
impending over them; for the city and the Temple were doomed to entire
ruin. The verb <span id="x.xix-p7.1"></span>עגפ*, pego,* means to meet,
to go to meet, and is taken metaphorically in the sense of interceding;
for he who meets one as an intercessor, in a manner restrains the
opponent; and the Scripture uses this word, when it speaks of the saints
as supplicating God; the proper word is interceding.  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)

<span id="x.xix-p9"></span>From this passage we learn that these two
things are united — teaching and praying. Then God would have him whom
he has set a teacher in his Church, to be assiduous in prayer. And so
the Apostles said, when they spoke of appointing deacons, that they
could not attend to tables; for they said that they were sufficiently
engaged in teaching, and they mentioned also prayers. (<span
id="x.xix-p9.1"></span>[Ac 6:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)<span
id="x.xix-p9.1"></span>.) The same also we learn from this place, where
Jeremiah ascribes the office of interceding to God’s true and faithful
servants who conscientiously discharged the office of teaching; *If they
be prophets,* he says, *let them intercede with Jehovah,* that the
remaining vessels be not taken away. Let us at the same time notice the
definition he gives; for by this he also shews who are to be counted
true prophets, even those who have the word of God, as we have found
elsewhere,

<span id="x.xix-p10"></span>“The Prophet who has a dream, and who has my
true word, let him speak my word.” (<span id="x.xix-p10.1"></span>[Jer
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028)<span id="x.xix-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="x.xix-p11"></span>We said by these words of the Prophet it may
be determined who they are who deserve to be called prophets, even those
who have the word of God. Jeremiah confirms the same here when he says,
*If they are prophets, and if the word of Jehovah is with them* These
two clauses ought to be read together, for the latter is exegetic, or
explanatory of the former. But I cannot now finish the whole, I must
therefore defer the rest till to-morrow.

<span id="x.xx"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="x.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we continually by
our many vices draw on ourselves new punishment, we may strive to be
reconciled to thee, and thus anticipate thy judgment, and so submit to
thee in true humility, that we may not by struggling against thee be
untamable, but confess our guilt, obtain thy favor, and find
reconciliation with thee, until having at length put off all our vices,
we shall come to that blessed rest, which thine only-begotten Son has
procured for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="x.xx-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.xxi"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixth

<span id="x.xxii"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p1"></span><span id="x.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
27:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019)<span id="x.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p2"></span>**19.** For thus saith the LORD of hosts
concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this
city,

<span id="x.xxii-p3"></span>**19.** Quia sic dicit Jehova exercituum de
columnis et de mari, et de basibus, et de residuo vasorum quae supersunt
in urbe hac,

<span id="x.xxii-p4"></span>**20.** Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim
king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and
Jerusalem;

<span id="x.xxii-p5"></span>**20.** Quae non abstulit Nebuchadnezer rex
Babylonia, cum adduxit captivum Jechaniam filium Jehoiakim regem Jehudah
e Jerusalem, Babylonem, et omnes proceres Jehudah et Jerusalem;

<span id="x.xxii-p6"></span>**21.** Yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain *in* the house of
the LORD, and *in* the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem;

<span id="x.xxii-p7"></span>**21.** Certe sic dicit Jehovah exercituum,
Deus Israel, de vasis quae supersunt in domo Jehovae et in domo regis et
in Jerusalem;

<span id="x.xxii-p8"></span>**22.** They shall be carried to Babylon,
and there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith the LORD;
then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.

<span id="x.xxii-p9"></span>**22.** Babylonem transferentur, et illic
erunt usque ad diem quo visitabo ea *(vel,* cos, *quod mihi magis
placet,)* dieit Jehova; et ascendere faciam eos et reducam cos ad locum
hunc.

<span id="x.xxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="x.xxii-p11"></span><span id="x.xxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p12"></span>Jeremiah said, in the passage we considered
yesterday, that it was more to be desired that God should keep what
remained at Jerusalem, than that what had been taken away should be
restored, for the time of punishment had not yet passed away; and thus
he condemned the false teachers, because they had presumptuously and
boldly promised a quick return as to the king as well as to those who
had been led with him into exile, he now confirms the same thing, and
says that what remained as yet at Jerusalem was already destined for
their enemies the Babylonians, and would become their prey.
Nebuchadnezzar had in part spared the Temple and the city; he had taken
away chiefly the precious vessels, but had not entirely spoiled the
Temple of its ornaments. As, then, some splendor was still to be seen
there, the Jews ought to have learned that he had acted kindly towards
them. He now says, that the Temple and the city would be destroyed; and
this may be gathered from his words when he says, that there would be
nothing remaining.

<span id="x.xxii-p13"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah concerning the pillars,
etc*. There is no doubt but that Solomon spent much money on the
pillars, as the Scripture commends the work. He adds, *concerning the
sea,* which was a very large vessel, for from it the priests took water
to wash themselves whenever they entered the Temple to perform their
sacred duties. And though it was made of brass, it was yet of no small
value on account of its largeness; and for this reason it was called
sea. He mentions, in the third place, *the bases*  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) *Jerome* reads, “To the bases,” for
the preposition is <span id="x.xxii-p14.2"></span>לא, but it means often
*of*, or concerning, as it is well known. He then declares what God had
determined as to the pillars as well as the sea and the bases. There
were, indeed, other vessels besides; but he specified these in order
that the king, and also the people, might know that nothing would be
left remaining in the Temple.

<span id="x.xxii-p15"></span><span id="x.xxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p16"></span>And he also adds, *The residue of the
vessels which remains, in this city* By adding, *which Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon took not away,* he indirectly condemned the Jews,
because they did not acknowledge that the cruelty of their enemy had
been moderated by divine power. For we know how cruel were Babylonians,
and how insatiable was their avarice, and that nothing would have been
left in the Temple had not their hands been in a manner restrained by
the hidden power of God. The Jews ought to have duly considered this,
and therefore the Prophet alludes to their ingratitude when he says,
that Nebuchadnezzar had not taken away the vessels when yet he led
captive the king and all the chief men, both of the city and the whole
land. There is, indeed, to be understood here a comparison between the
less and the greater, as though he had said, “Nebuchadnezzar would not
have been so gentle had not God moderated his spirit, for he spared not
your king, he led into exile all your chief men; how, then, was it that
he left anything to remain in your city, and that the pillars were not
taken away? Did he despise them? They have been polished with exquisite
skill, and the materials are very costly. Ye hence see that God gave you
a proof of his mercy, for some things still remain safe in the city as
well as in the Temple; yet ye disregard this so great a benefit bestowed
on you by God; what, then, will at length happen to you?” We now
perceive the Prophet’s design in these words when he says, that the
vessels were not taken away, even when the king was taken captive, and
when the chief men of the land were led into exile.

<span id="x.xxii-p17"></span>Useful instruction may also be hence
gathered. Whenever God chastises us, let us ever consider that he does
not proceed to extremities; for the cause of murmuring, and often of
despair, is this, — because we think that he deals with us with extreme
rigor. But this happens through our sinful and perverted judgment; for
God never afflicts us so severely but that some portion of kindness and
of moderation ever appears; in a word, his judgments are always founded
on his goodness. Were any one, therefore, rightly to call to mind how
far he is from suffering extreme evils, it would conduce much to
alleviate his sorrows. But when we reject every knowledge of God’s
goodness, and only consider his severity, we either murmur or in a
manner become furious against him. But this passage teaches us, that
when God leaves some residue to us, it is an evidence of his paternal
favor, and that therefore something more may be hoped for, provided we
from the heart repent.

<span id="x.xxii-p18"></span>The design, then, of the Prophet’s warning
was, that the Jews might receive this remaining favor of God, and not
proceed in their obstinacy until God again stretched forth his hand to
destroy them.

<span id="x.xxii-p19"></span><span id="x.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p20"></span>He repeats again the same words, *Yea, thus
saith Jehovah,* etc.; for so ought the particle <span
id="x.xxii-p20.1"></span>יכ, *ki, to* be rendered in this place.  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) And he emphatically expresses what was
of itself sufficiently clear, that he might deeply imprint on their
minds this declaration of God, and that thus some terror might penetrate
into the hearts of those who were so obdurate that it was not easy to
effect anything by a simple statement of the truth. *Thus,* then, *saith
Jehovah of the vessels which yet remain in the Temple of Jehovah and in,
the palace of the king, They shall be carried to Babylon, and there they
shall be, etc.* Jeremiah intimates that the Jews had no hope, as they
were perversely resisting God and refusing to be chastised by his hand.
And he says, *until the day in which I shall visit them,* the vessels;
for so the reference may suitably be made; but as it is often the case
in Hebrew to put a pronoun when anything remarkable is spoken without
any noun, or a subject, as they say, preceding it, I am inclined to
refer it to the Jews themselves; for the restoration of the vessels
depended on that of the people. He means, then, that the vessels would
be held captive until God allowed a free return to the people, which
happened through the edict of Cyrus, after he had obtained power in
Chaldea and Assyria.

<span id="x.xxii-p22"></span>It was the same thing as though the Jews
were reminded that the exile which had been predicted would be long, and
that they foolishly hoped for what the false prophets had promised as to
the vessels; for God had no greater care for the vessels than for his
chosen people, as the vessels were acceptable to God for the people’s
sake. Here, then, Jeremiah confirms what he has said elsewhere, and that
often, that the people would be captives until the day of visitation,
that is, till the end of seventy years. *When,* therefore, says God, *I
shall visit* the Jews themselves, I will then bring back also the
vessels; and so it was permitted by the command of Cyrus. We now
understand the simple meaning of the words. Another narrative follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc19009.htm#fr_176) <span
id="x.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p15"></span> The manner in which Calvin accounts for this
prophecy being so long kept hid is ingenious; but modern authors are not
satisfied. Lightfoot says, that Jeremiah was ordered to make these yokes
in Jehoiakim’s time to signify the subjection of Judah to the king of
Babylon, but that he was ordered to send them to foreign kings in the
reign of Zedekiah. The first verse is omitted in the Sept.; the Greek
version as given by Theodoret, has “Jehoiakim,” and so the Vulg. and the
Targ., but the Syr. and Arab. have “Zedekiah;” and there are three
Hebrew MSS. in which the same is found. What seems most decisive is the
beginning of the next chapter, where Hananiah comes forward in “the
fourth year” of Zedekiah and breaks the yoke of Jeremiah. Gataker,
Henry, Lowth, Scott, and Blayney, are all inclined to think that the
mistake originally was that of the scribe. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc19009.htm#fr_177) <span
id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span> The fourth verse in our version is not
correct, “And command them to say to their masters,” it ought to be,
“And command them as to their masters (or lords,) saying,” — for the
Hebrew will not admit of such a transposition. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc19009.htm#fr_178) <span
id="x.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span> Whenever the pronouns are set down in
Hebrew, they are emphatic: the beginning of this verse ought to be
rendered, “I myself,” or “made have I, even I, the earth, the man also
and the beast that are on the face of the earth,” (not as in our
version, “upon the ground,”) etc. The last clause, “and have given it
unto whom it seemed meet unto me,” according to Calvin and our version,
ought rather to be, “and I will give it to whom it shall seem right in
my eyes.” So Venema and Blayney; and it is according to the Sept.,
though the other versions are the same with our own. The verb indeed is
in the past tense, but it is preceded by <span id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>ו
conversive. Then follows the next verse, “And now I — given have I all
these lands,” etc. The fifth verse contains a general declaration of
truth; God made the earth, and would give it to whom he pleased: the
sixth includes his determination as to all these lands; he had given
them to Nebuchadnezzar. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc19009.htm#fr_179) <span
id="x.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span> Some give this view as to the beasts of the
field, that not only towns and cultivated lands would be given up to
Nebuchadnezzar, but also hills and mountains, deserts and forests, which
were inhabited by wild beasts, and that this was said in order to shew
that a complete possession of their lands, and of all things within
them, would be given to that king, not excepting the wild beasts. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc19009.htm#fr_180) <span
id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span> It seems that there were two besides, who
exercised for a time regal power, but they were not the descendants of
Nebuchadnezzar. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc19009.htm#fr_181) <span
id="x.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span> This is rendered differently, “until the
time of his land, even his, shall come.” So the early versions, and so
Venema and Blayney. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc19009.htm#fr_182) <span
id="x.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p18"></span> Here Calvin has followed the Vulg.; but our
version gives the true meaning. See note on <span
id="x.iv-p18.2"></span>[Jeremiah
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014)<span id="x.iv-p18.2"></span>.
The two clauses may be thus translated, “Until the time of his land,
even his, shall come; then reduce him (or it, that is, land) to
subjection, shall many nations and mighty kings.” Such substantially is
the version of Venema and of Blayney, and also of Piscator and Junius. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc19009.htm#fr_183) <span
id="x.viii-p7.7"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p8"></span> The five names here mentioned are thus
explained by Venema, —

<span id="x.viii-p9"></span>**1.** Prophets — who claimed divine
inspiration;

<span id="x.viii-p10"></span>**2.** Diviners — who prognosticated by
means of lots and arrows;

<span id="x.viii-p11"></span>**3.** Dreamers — who pretended that they
had divine dreams;

<span id="x.viii-p12"></span>**4.** Astrologers — who foretold events by
the clouds and stars:

<span id="x.viii-p13"></span>**5.** Sorcerers — who pretended to have
familiar converse with some spirit.

<span id="x.viii-p14"></span>Parkhurst considers the second, diviners,
as a general term, meaning those who divined either by dreams or stars,
or familiar spirits; and he renders the fourth word cloudmongers, though
he considers that they prognosticated by the stars, as well as by
meteors, thunder, lightning, and probably by the flight of birds; but he
regards the last word as meaning those who pretended to discover hidden
and future things by magical means. How completely heathenized were the
Jews become! they believed all these Pagan delusions rather than the
infallible oracles of God! and yet these were things expressly forbidden
in their law. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc19009.htm#fr_184) <span
id="x.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p9"></span> This is more suitable than our version: the
verse may be rendered thus, —

<span id="x.ix-p10"></span>**10.** For falsely do they prophesy to you,
so as to remove you away far from your own land; for I will drive you
away and ye shall perish, (that is, from the land.)

<span id="x.ix-p11"></span>The word <span id="x.ix-p11.1"></span>רקש may
often be rendered adverbially. That <span id="x.ix-p11.2"></span>ו may
sometimes be rendered for, is evident: he threatens expulsion and ruin
in case they listened to false prophesying; then, in the next verse, he
promises continuance in the land to the obedient, “But the nation that
brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, I
will make that to settle on its land, saith Jehovah, that it may
cultivate it and abide in it.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc19009.htm#fr_185) <span
id="x.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p10"></span> This is an imperative in Hebrew, and live,
but in all the early versions it is in the future tense, as rendered
here by Calvin. The meaning is the same. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc19009.htm#fr_186) <span
id="x.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p12"></span> No doubt we may extend this promise to
spiritual life, but here it means living in the land of Canaan, as
opposed to the perdition or expatriation in <span
id="x.xi-p12.1"></span>[Jer 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#010)<span
id="x.xi-p12.1"></span>. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc19009.htm#fr_187) <span
id="x.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p9"></span> As in <span id="x.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012)<span id="x.xviii-p9.1"></span>,
so here the verb is in the imperative mood, but in all the early
versions as rendered here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc19009.htm#fr_188) <span
id="x.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p8"></span> Both the Sept. and Vulg. give the first
meaning, to meet with, and not the second, to intercede with, and thus
convey no sense whatever. The Syr. uses the word, pray, “let them pray
the Lord,” etc. See <span id="x.xix-p8.1"></span>[Ge
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#008)<span id="x.xix-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="x.xix-p8.2"></span>[Job
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015)<span id="x.xix-p8.2"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc19009.htm#fr_189) <span
id="x.xxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p14"></span> Or foundations, those on which the sea or
pillars stood. See <span id="x.xxii-p14.1"></span>[1Ki
7:27-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#027)<span
id="x.xxii-p14.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc19009.htm#fr_190) <span
id="x.xxii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p21"></span> A clear instance of the affirmative sense
of this particle, for the passage can admit of no other, though the
versions, except the Syr., retain its causal sense. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](cc19010)
