[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc19003)  [Next](cc19005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 22

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1**. Thus saith the LORD; Go down to the
house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sic dicit Jehova, Descende in domum
regis Jehudah, et loquere illic ser-monem hunc,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2**. And say, Hear the word of the LORD, O
king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy
servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates:

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et dices, Audi sermonem Jehova, rex
Jehudah, qui sedes super solium Davidis, tu et servi tui, et populus
tuus qui ingredimini per portas has:

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**3**. Thus saith the LORD, Execute ye judgment
and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the
oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Sic dicit Jehova, Facite judicium et
justitiam, et eripite spoliatum e manu oppressoris; peregrinum, pupilum,
et viduam ne fraudetis *(Hieronymus hoc verbum ubique vertit,*
contristari, *vel,* tristitia afficere; *significat autem potius*
inferre violentiam, *aut* fraudulenter nocere;) ne violentiam exerceatis
*(alii vertunt,* רסמחת לא*,* et sanguinem innocentem ne fundatis in loco
isto.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p9"></span><span id="v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>The Prophet is again bidden to reprove the
king and his counsellors; but the exhortation is at the same time
extended to the whole people. It was necessary to begin with the head,
that the common people might know that it was not a matter to be trifled
with, as God would not spare, no, not even the king himself, and his
courtiers; for a greater terror seized the lower orders, when they saw
the highest laid prostrate. That what is here taught might then
penetrate more effectually into the hearts of all, the Prophet is bid to
address the king himself and his courtiers: he is afterwards bidden to
include also the whole body of the people. And hence it appears, that
there was some hope of favor yet remaining, provided the king and the
whole people received the admonitions of the Prophet; provided their
repentance and conversion were sincere, God was still ready to forgive
them.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>We must at the same time observe, as I have
already said, that they could not escape the calamity that was at hand;
but exile would have been much milder, and also their return would have
been more certain, and they would have found in various ways that they
had not been rejected by God, though for a time chastised. As then we
now say, that a hope of pardon was set before them, this is not to be so
understood as that they could avert the destruction of the city; for it
had once for all been determined by God to drive the people into a
temporary exile, and also to put all end for a time to their sacrifices;
for this dreadful desolation was to be a proof that the people had been
extremely ungrateful to God, and especially that their obstinacy could
not be endured in having so long despised the Prophets and the commands
of God. However the hope of mitigation as to their punishment was given
them, provided they were touched by a right feeling, so as to endeavor
to return into favor with God. But as Jeremiah effected nothing by so
many admonitions, they were rendered more inexcusable.

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>We now see the design of what is here said,
even that the Jews, having been so often proved guilty, might cease to
complain that they suffered anything undeservedly; for they had been
often admonished, yea, almost in numberless instances, and God had
offered mercy, provided they were reclaimable. I come now to the words —

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah, Go down*  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) *to the house of the king* We see that
the Prophet was endued with so great a courage that the dignity of the
king’s name did not daunt him, so as to prevent him to perform what was
commanded him. We have seen elsewhere similar instances; but whenever
such cases occur, they deserve to be noticed. *First,* the servants of
God ought boldly to discharge their office, and not to flatter the great
and the rich, nor remit anything of their own authority when they meet
with dignity and greatness. *Secondly,* let those who seem to be more
eminent than others learn, that whatever eminence they may possess
cannot avail them, but that they ought to submit to prophetic
instruction. We have before seen that the Prophet was sent to reprove
and rebuke even the highest, and to shew no respect of persons. (<span
id="v.i-p14.2"></span>[Jer 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span
id="v.i-p14.2"></span>.) So now, here he shews that he had, as it were,
the whole world under his feet, for in executing his office, he reproved
the king himself and all his princes.

<span id="v.i-p15"></span><span id="v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p16"></span>But he speaks of the king as *sitting on the
throne of David;* but not, as I have already said, for the sake of
honor, but for the purpose of enhancing his guilt; for he occupied a
sacred throne, of which he was wholly unworthy. For though God is said
to sit in the midst of the gods, because by him kings rule, we yet know
that the throne of David was more eminent than any other; for it was a
priestly kingdom and a type of that celestial kingdom which was
afterwards fully revealed in Christ. As, then, the kings of Judah, the
descendants of David, were types of Christ, less tolerable was their
impiety, when, unmindful of their vocation, they had departed from the
piety of their father David and became wholly degenerated. So the
Prophet, by mentioning the house of Israel and the house of Jacob, no
doubt condemned the Jews, because they had become unlike the holy
patriarch. We now, then, understand the object of the Prophet when he
says, “Hear the word of Jehovah, thou king of Judah, who *sittest on the
throne of David.”*

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>But that his reproof might have its just
weight, the Prophet carefully shews that he brought nothing but what had
been committed to him from above; this is the reason why he repeats,
*thou shalt say,* “Thus saith Jehovah, Go down, speak, and say.” From
the king he comes to the courtiers, and from them to the whole people.
*Thou,* he says, *and thy servants;* by the king’s servants the
Scripture means, all those ministers who were his counsellors, who were
appointed to administer justice and who exercised authority. But we must
notice, that at last he addresses the whole people. We hence see that
what he taught belonged in common to all, though he began with the king
and his counsellors, that the common people might not think that they
would be unpunished if they despised the doctrine to which even kings
were to submit.

<span id="v.i-p18"></span><span id="v.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p19"></span>He says, first, *Do judgment and justice* This
belonged especially to the king and his judges and governors; for
private individuals, we know, had no power to protect their property;
for though *every* one ought to resist wrongs and evil doings, yet this
was the special duty of the judges whom God had armed with the sword for
this purpose. To *do judgment,* means to render to every one according
to his right; but when the two words, judgment and justice, are
connected together, by justice we are to understand equity, so that
every one has his own right; and by judgment is to be understood the
execution of due punishment; for it is not enough for the judge to
decide what is right, except he restrains the wicked when they
audaciously resist. To do judgment, then, is to defend the weak and the
innocent, as it were, with an armed hand.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)

<span id="v.i-p22"></span>He then adds, *Rescue the spoiled from the
hand of the oppressor* He repeats what we observed in the last chapter;
and here under one thing he includes the duty of judges, even that they
are ever to oppose what is wrong and to check the audacity of the
wicked, for they can never be induced willingly to conduct themselves
with moderation and quietness. As, then, they are to be restrained by
force, he says, “Rescue the spoiled from the hand of the oppressor.” Of
the word <span id="v.i-p22.1"></span>לוזג, *gesul,* we have spoken
before; but by this form of speaking God intimates that it is not enough
for the judge to abstain from tyranny and cruelty, and not to stimulate
the wicked nor favor them, except he also acknowledges that he has been
appointed by God for this end — to rescue the spoiled from the hand of
the oppressor, and not to hesitate to face hatred and danger in the
discharge of his office.

<span id="v.i-p23"></span>The Prophet now adds other things which he had
not mentioned in the preceding chapter; *defraud not,*  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) he says, *the stranger and the orphan and
the widow* It is what is often said in Scripture, that it is not right
to defraud any one; for God would exempt all from wrong, and not only
strangers, orphans, and widows; but as orphans have no knowledge or
wisdom, they are exposed, as it were, to plunder; and also widows,
because they are in themselves helpless; and strangers, because they
have no friends to undertake their cause; hence God, in an especial
mannel, requires a regard to be had to strangers, orphans, and widows.
There is also another reason; for when their right is rendered to
strangers, orphans, and widows, equity no doubt shines forth more
conspicuously. When any one brings friends with him, and employs them in
the defense of his cause, the judge is thereby influenced; and he who is
a native will have his relations and neighbors to support his cause; and
he who is rich and possessing power will also influence the judge, so
that he dares not do anything notoriously wrong; but when the stranger,
or the orphan, or the widow comes before the judge, he can with impunity
oppress them all. Hence if he judges rightly, it is no doubt a
conspicuous proof of his integrity and uprightness. This, then, is the
reason why God everywhere enumerates these cases when he speaks of right
and equitable judgments. He further adds, *Exercise no violence, nor
shed innocent blood in this place* These things also were matters
belonging to the judges. But it was a horribly monstrous thing for the
throne of David to have been so defiled as to have become, as it were, a
den of robbers. Wherever there is any pretense to justice, there ought
to be there some fear or shame; but as we have said, that tribunal was
in a peculiar manner sacred to God. As, then, the king and his
counsellors were become like robbers, and as they so occupied the throne
of David that all impiety prevailed, and they hesitated not to plunder
on every side, as though they lived in a house of plunder; this was, as
I have said, a sad and shameful spectacle.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="v.i-p27"></span>But we ought the more carefully to notice this
passage, that we may learn to strengthen ourselves against bad examples,
lest the impiety of men should overturn our faith; when we see in God’s
Church things in such a disorder, that those who glory in the name of
God are become like robbers, we must beware lest we become, on this
account, alienated from true religion. We must, indeed, detest such
monsters, but we must take care lest God’s word, through men’s
wickedness, should lose its value in our esteem. We ought, then, to
remember the admonition of Christ, to hear the Scribes and Pharisees who
sat in Moses’ seat. (<span id="v.i-p27.1"></span>[Mt
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span id="v.i-p27.1"></span>.)
Thus it behoved the Jews to venerate that royal throne, on which God had
inscribed certain marks of his glory. Though they saw that it was
polluted by the crimes and evil deeds of men, yet they ought to have
retained some regard for it on account of that expression, “This is my
rest for ever.”

<span id="v.i-p28"></span>But we yet see that the king was sharply and
severely reproved, as he deserved. Hence most foolishly does the Pope at
the present day seek to exempt himself from all reproof, because he
occupies the apostolic throne.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)
Were we to grant what is claimed, (though that is frivolous and
childish,) that the Roman throne is apostolic, (which I think has never
been occupied by Peter,) surely the throne of David was much more
venerable than the chair of Peter? and yet the descendants of David who
succeeded him, being types and representatives of Christ, were not on
that account, as we here see, exempt from reproof.

<span id="v.i-p30"></span>It might, however, be asked, why the Prophet
said that he was sent to the whole people, when his doctrine was
addressed only to the king and the public judges? for it belonged not to
the people or to private individuals. But I have said already that it
was easy for the common people to gather how God’s judgment ought to
have been dreaded, for they had heard that punishment was denounced even
on the house of David, which was yet considered sacred. When, therefore,
they saw that those were summoned before God’s tribunal who were, in a
manner, not subject to laws, what were they to think but that every one
of them ought to have thought of himself, and to examine his own life?
for they must at length be called to give an account, since the king
himself and his counsellors had been summoned to do so. It now follows,
—

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#004)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**4**. For if ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the
throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants,
and his people.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Quid si faciendo feceritis *(alii
vertunt,* quin potius faciendo faciatis) ser-monem hunc *(hoc est,*
obediatis sermoni huic,) et ingrediemini per portas domus hujus, reges
sedentes pro Davide *(vel,* Davidi) super solium ejus, insidentes currui
et equis, ipse, rex, et servi ejus et populus ejus.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>**5**. But if ye will not hear these words, I
swear by myself, saith the LORD, that this house shall become a
desolation.

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Quod si non obedieritis sermonibus
istis, in me *(hoc est,* per me) juravi, dicit Jehova, quod in
solitudinem *(aut,* vastitatem) erit domus haec.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span><span id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>The Prophet expresses more clearly what I have
already stated, that if the Jews from the heart repented, there was yet
a place for mercy; for he promises them that God would be reconcilable,
if they sought to be reconciled to him; he allures them to repentance by
words of kindness. We may, indeed, read <span
id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>םאיכ, *kiam,* as one word, and render it, “But
rather;” but I follow others who give this version, *For if by doing ye
will do this word, then ye shall enter* in, etc.; and thus they turn the
copulative into an adverb of time, which is often the case.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) Still the other meaning is not
unsuitable, when the future verb, <span id="v.ii-p9.2"></span>ושעת,
*toshu,* is taken in a hortative sense; for we know that the future
tense in Hebrew is often to be understood as an imperative. As to the
general meaning, there is not much difference; for what the Prophet
designed to shew was this, that God would be reconciled to the Jews, if
they were not wholly disobedient. “Only,” he says, “obey my word, and
your safety shall be secured.” Not that impunity was to be expected, as
I have said before, but, as they would have found, their reconciliation
to God would not have been in vain, for their punishment would have been
mitigated; in that case their exile would have been rendered more
endurable, for God would have doubtless made their adversaries kind to
them; in short, mercy would have been shewn to them in many ways.
Moreover, the Prophet shews that he called them not in vain to repent;
for he sets before them God’s favor in mitigating their punishment.

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>And he adds, *Ye shall enter through the
gates of this house, both your kings and their counsellors;* but the
number is afterwards changed, *he,* that is, every king.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) The Prophet, seems, at the first view, to
have retracted what he had said respecting exile; but the two things are
to be connected together, that there was some hope remaining, if the
Jews accepted the favor of God, and then that the punishment, once
decreed, was to be borne by them. These two things do not disagree. For
God had resolved to drive the Jews into exile; but all Judea would not
doubtless have been reduced to solitude, as that happened through their
irreclaimable obstinacy, according to what we read at the end of this
Book; for they might have otherwise dwelt still in their own country.
This is one thing; and then their condition after their exile would have
been better and far more happy. But even at that time, the crown was
trodden under foot, and all the dignity and power of the family of David
were nearly abolished.

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>When, therefore, the Prophet says, “Enter
shall kings in chariots and on horses,” and also “the people and he and
his counsellors, *through the gates of this city;”* he does not mean
that they would so escape as that God would not chastise them for their
sins, as he had declared, but that there would still be some form of a
kingdom, and that exile would be short, and also that there would be at
length a restoration, so that the descendants of David would return to
their former state, and that the city itself would be restored so as to
abound in wealth as in all other blessings. Such is the promise. The
Prophet further adds what would otherwise take place, *If they will not
hear,* this place shall become a desolation. But this threatening shall
be considered tomorrow.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast been
pleased to erect the throne of thy Son among us, we may suffer ourselves
to be ruled by him, and not falsely boast that we are his people, but
really prove that we truly and from the heart confess him as our King,
that he may also so defend us through the whole course of life against
all the assaults of our enemies, that we, ever relying on thine aid, and
possessing our souls in patience, may at length be translated into that
blessed glory and rest, which he has purchased for us by his own blood:
— Amen.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-First

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span><span id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>We explained yesterday the declaration of the
Prophet, — that the kingdom would again be restored by the Lord, if the
king and his servants and the whole people repented. He now introduces a
commination, — that if they heard not, it was all over with the palace
and the city. But the word house, or palace is often repeated; for
though the defenses of the city gave courage to the people, yet what
made them especially proud was the confidence they felt that the kingdom
had been promised to be for ever. Hence, they thought, that the royal
dignity could not possibly fall as long as the sun and moon continued in
the heavens. (<span id="v.iv-p3.1"></span>[Ps
89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span id="v.iv-p3.1"></span>.)
This false confidence is what the Prophet now meets, and he says, *If ye
will not hear these words,* etc. He changes the number: he had said
before *this word,* <span id="v.iv-p3.2"></span>הזה רבדה תא*, at edeber
eze;* but he now says *these words*, <span id="v.iv-p3.3"></span>םירבדה
תא, *at edeberim.* But the singular number includes the whole of his
doctrine; yet he now uses the plural number, because he had exhorted
them to change their life.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>And that they might not think that they were
for no good reason terrified, he declares that God had *sworn by
himself* We indeed know that when God makes an oath, either when he
promises anything, or when he denounces punishment on sinners, it is
done on account of men’s sloth and dullness. For our hearts through
unbelief will hardly receive a simple truth, unless God removes the
impediments; and this is the design of making an oath, when God does not
only speak, but in order to render us more certain of our salvation, he
confirms his promise by introducing his own name as a pledge. The reason
is similar as to threatenings; for so great is the false security of
sinners, that they are deaf until God, as it were, with force penetrates
into their hearts. Hence he says, that God made an oath by himself; for
it seemed incredible to the Jews, that the family which had been set
apart by God from the world, would ever perish. It now follows:

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**6**. For thus saith the LORD unto the king’s
house of Judah; Thou *art* Gilead unto me, *and* the head of Lebanon:
*yet* surely I will make thee a wilderness, *and* cities *which* are not
inhabited.

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**6**. Quoniam dicit Jehova super domum regis
Jehudah, Guilead, tu mihi caput Libani, si non posuero to desertum,
tanquam urbes quae non habitantur.

<span id="v.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p5"></span><span id="v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p6"></span>He confirms the preceding declaration, and
explains more at large what had been stated sufficiently clear; for the
false boasting of the Jews could hardly be restrained, as they still
thought that the kingdom in the family of David would be permanent and
exempt from any danger of a change.

<span id="v.v-p7"></span>But interpreters differ as to the meaning of
the words. I will not repeat their views, nor is it *necessary:* I will
only state what seems to me to be the real meaning. All others indeed
give a different explanation; but the Prophet, I doubt not, means the
same thing as we have observed in <span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>; where
he says,

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>“Go to Shiloh, and see what is the state of
that place, for the ark of the covenant had a long time dwelt there.”

<span id="v.v-p9"></span>Though, then, they thought that place sacred,
yet it was reduced to desolation; and thus it must have become a
dreadful spectacle to the whole people. For the same reason now, as it
seems to me, the Prophet compares Lebanon to Mount Gilead; for what some
say, that Gilead was the chief city of the ten tribes, has nothing in
it. But we must remember the state of things at that time; the kingdom
of Israel was wholly demolished when our Prophet spoke these words.
Judea had indeed been much reduced by many calamities; but still some
kind of a kingdom remained. Then by Mount Gilead the Prophet doubtless
meant, by stating a part for the whole, the kingdom of Israel, but for a
purpose different from that assigned by interpreters, even because the
whole land of Israel was then laid waste; for all the inhabitants had
been led into exile, and all the spoils had been removed, and nothing
had escaped the rapacity and cruelty of their enemies.

<span id="v.v-p10"></span>Since, then, the land of Israel had been
reduced unto desolation, God says now, that Jerusalem and the kingdom of
Judah would not be of greater value in his sight than the whole country
of the ten tribes had been, which was doubtless larger in extent and in
wealth. And this meaning may be easily gathered from the words of the
passage; he does not say, “Thou art like Gilead the head of Lebanon;”
but, *Gilead to me art thou the head of Lebanon* And he calls Jerusalem
Lebanon, because it was, as it were, the queen of that land; for by
Mount Lebanon he designated whatever was precious in that country, for
the reason we mentioned yesterday. As to Gilead, I do not consider that
the Prophet refers especially to the city, but by stating a part for the
whole, he includes the whole country, and for this reason, because Mount
Gilead was full of many fruitful trees, and particularly of the balsam
and the rosin tree, and of many odoriferous herbs and aromatics, which
at this day are from thence brought to different parts of the world. And
hence we found it asked in <span id="v.v-p10.1"></span>[Jer
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022)<span id="v.v-p10.1"></span>,

<span id="v.v-p11"></span>“Is there no rosin in Gilead?  
is there no medicine found there to heal the Church?”

<span id="v.v-p12"></span>Why was mention made then of Mount Gilead?
even *because* there grew the best aromatics, and *especially* the
balsam tree, and also many odoriferous trees and most precious fruits.

<span id="v.v-p13"></span>The meaning then is, “What dost thou think
thyself to be? or, for what reason dost thou trust so much in thyself? I
did not spare Mount Gilead and that extensive country which was much
superior to thee; what means then this foolish presumption, that thou
persuadest thyself that all danger is far off? Thou shalt be to me as
Gilead. Think of my judgment on Mount Gilead, and of the dreadful
desolation of the land of Israel; the same which you may now see there
shall happen to thee.” We now perceive in what sense the Prophet says,
that before God the *head of Lebanon,* that is, Jerusalem itself, which
ruled over Lebanon, would *become like Gilead*  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="v.v-p17"></span>He then adds, *If I make thee not a desert*
God again makes an oath; for it is, we know, an elliptical mode of
expression, when the particle <span id="v.v-p17.1"></span>םא, *am,* is
only used, for an imprecation is to be understood, — “Let me not be
thought a God;” or, “Let my power be deemed nothing;” or, “Let me not be
hereafter counted true and faithful.” However this may be, God makes an
oath, that the city would become a desert, as those *cities which are
not inhabited* Thus the whole context appears consistent, — that
Jerusalem would be at length like the land of Israel, for he would no
more spare Lebanon than Mount Gilead. It afterwards follows:

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**7**. And I will prepare destroyers against
thee, every one with his weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice
cedars, and cast *them* into the fire.

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Et praeparabo (*vertunt alii,*
sanctificabo, *ut etiam* <span id="v.vi-p3.1"></span>שדק *hoc
significat,* praeparabo *igitur*) adversum to perditores, (*aut,*
vastatores; <span id="v.vi-p3.2"></span>תחש *significat perdere, et
redigere in nihilum, et corrumpere, unde nomen* <span
id="v.vi-p3.3"></span>םיתחשמ, *quod hic ponitur*,) virum et arma ejus
(*aut,* instrumenta bellica, vasa *transferunt,*) et exscindent
electionem cedrorum *tuarum (hoc est*, electissimas quasque cedros
tuas,) et conjicient in ignem.

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span><span id="v.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>He expresses the manner, for he had only said
before, that the ruin of the city Jerusalem was nigh at hand; he adds,
that *destroyers* would come and those well armed with *warlike
instruments,* who would *cut down all the choicest cedars* and *cast
them into the fire* But he reminds them, that those destroyers would not
come of themselves or through an impulse of their own, but through the
secret operation of God; for if the Jews had thought that they had to do
only with the Chaldeans, there would have been nothing to call forth the
exercise of a religious principle; but the Prophet distinctly declares,
that the Chaldeans would be the ministers of God, for they would be
roused and led by him, according to what is often taught by the
Prophets.

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>In short, these two things ought to be
noticed, — first, that God had in readiness many ways by which he could
punish the Jews. For the contempt of the ungodly arises, because they
dream that God is unarmed and has not always the execution, as they say,
ready at hand. Hence the Prophet shews that the Chaldeans would be ready
as soon as God hissed for them, or gave them a sign. This is one thing.
Secondly, it ought to be observed, that he reminds them that the
Chaldeans would be the scourge of God, that the Jews might not think
that they contended with mortals, but might know that they were summoned
to render an account of their life, because they had too long been
rebellious against God and his Prophets. This is what we must understand
by the word *prepare*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>Now as to the *choice cedars,* the Prophet
again alludes to Mount Lebanon and to the forest of Jerusalem, which was
mentioned yesterday. The word forest may, however, be applied to the
buildings; for the Jews built their chambers for the most part of cedar
wood, as it is well known; we may then apply this to their splendid and
sumptuous houses; but we may also take it without a figure and apply it
to the trees of Mount Lebanon. But the chief ornament of the country
were the noble trees on that Mount; hence, by cedars, the Prophet no
doubt designated whatever was splendid at Jerusalem and in the country
around it. It follows, —

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**8**. And many nations shall pass by this
city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the
LORD done thus unto this great city?

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>**8**. Et transibunt gentes multae per urbem
hanc, et dicent quisque socio suo (vir ad socium suum, ad *verbum,*) cur
fecit Jehova in hunc modum urbi huic magnae?

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span>**9**. Then they shall answer, Because they
have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshipped other
gods, and served them.

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>**9**. Et dicent, Quia dereliquierunt foedus
Jehovae Dei sui, et sese inclinarunt coram diis alienis, et coluerunt
eos.

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span><span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>The Prophet shews in these words how blind
the Jews were as to their own ruin, in disregarding in so refractory a
manner the judgment of God. The words no doubt embrace two contrasts; he
compares mortal men with God, and those many nations with him alone. The
Jews could not bear God as their judge, and were still refractory and
strove by their perverseness to overcome him. Then the Prophet says,
that as they would not endure to be judged by God, judges would come who
would pronounce on them a free impartial sentence; and who were they to
be? the heathens. And then, as the Jews would not obey the one true God,
the Prophet sets many nations in contrast with the one true God.

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span>We hence see the full import of these words,
*Pass shall many nations through this city;*  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) that is, God has hitherto adorned this
city with many privileges, so that it became like a miracle to
foreigners, for so conspicuous was the dignity of this city, that it
attracted the notice of all, and its fame was known far and wide. Now,
he says, this city shall be deprived of all its ornaments, when God
shall depart from it. *Pass,* then, he says, *shall man. nations through
this city, and they will inquire, every one of his friend, Why hath
Jehovah done thus to this city?* Jeremiah, no doubt, indirectly
condemns, not only the sloth, but also the insensibility which had so
demented the Jews, that they never duly reflected on God’s judgment, nor
were ever touched by the curses of the Law. He then shews that there
would be more understanding and wisdom in the Gentiles, for on seeing
Jerusalem overthrown and wholly demolished, they would know that this
had not happened by chance, but was an evidence of vengeance from
heaven. We thus see that he upbraided the Jews with their own stupidity,
as they did not consider the judgment of God; but he ascribed to the
nations wisdom and the spirit of inquiry; for they would ask, “Why has
Jehovah done thus to this city?”

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span>“The nations,” he says, “will understand
what ye do not comprehend, even that this city will exhibit an example
of dreadful vengeance, and this will be the subject of their inquiry;
but while God now of his own free will foretell this to you, ye close
your ears; surely there would be no need of much inquiry in a matter so
clear, were you not deaf and blind, and indeed obstinate, for God of his
own accord warns you beforehand. What, then, can this be, that God
forewarns you and ye refuse to hear him, except that the devil bewitches
you?”

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span>And he says, *this great city;* for its ruin
was more remarkable on account of its greatness. When a small town is
destroyed, hardly any account is made of the event; but when a city
falls, which was everywhere celebrated for its largeness, and also for
the extraordinary benefits conferred on it by God, it excites the wonder
of all, as though it had fallen from the clouds.

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span><span id="v.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, that there would be not
only a spirit of inquiry among the nations, but that every one would
become spontaneously a judge of the whole people: *they shall answer,*
he says, *because they have forsaken the covenant of Jehovah their God*
Now, when Jeremiah declares that all the nations would become the judges
of the people, he no doubt intended to condemn the false confidence in
which they proudly indulged. At the same time, he says, “they have
forsaken the covenant of Jehovah their God,” in order that he might take
away the plea of ignorance. For they had not only deprived the eternal
God of his own right and authority, but they had become doubly wicked,
because God had made himself familiarly known to them. As, then, true
religion had been fully revealed to them in the Law, hence their
perverseness and wicked and base ingratitude appeared, for they had
rejected God thus made known to them, *and they bowed down before
foreign gods and served them. I* only touch here on these points, for
they have been elsewhere explained. It follows, —

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#010)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>**10**. Weep ye not for the dead, neither
bemoan him: *but* weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return
no more, nor see his native country.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**10**. Ne fleatis (*vel,* ne lugeatis)
super mortuum, et ne condoleatis ei; flete flendo super eum qui migrat,
qui non revertetur amplius, et *videbit (hoc est,* ut videt) terram
nativitatis suae.

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span><span id="v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span>They explain this verse of Jehoiakim and
Jeconiah, but I consider it rather a general declaration, for the
Prophet wished briefly to shew how miserable would be the condition of
the people, as it would be better and more desirable at once to die than
to protract life in continual languor. Of the kings he wilt afterwards
speak, but reason compels us to extend these words to the whole people.

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span>When a people flee away, being not able to
resist their enemies, they may look for a restoration. In that case all
dread death more than exile and all other calamities which are endured
in this life, for they who remain alive may somehow emerge from their
ills and troubles, or at least they may have them alleviated; but death
cuts off all hopes. But the Prophet says here that death would be better
than exile; and why? Because it would have been better at once to die
than to protract a life of misery, weariness, and reproach, and at last
to be destroyed. By saying, then, *Weep ye not for the dead, nor bewail
him,*  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) it is the same as though he
had said, “If the destruction of this city be lamented, much more ought
they to be lamented who shall remain alive than those who shall die, for
death will be as it were a rest, it will be a harbor to end all evils;
but life will be nothing else than a continual succession of miseries.”
We hence conclude that this ought not to be confined to the two kings,
but viewed as declared generally of the whole people.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="v.viii-p14"></span>It follows, For *he shall return no more,
that he may see the land of his nativity* He shews that exile would be a
sort of infection that would gradually consume the miserable Jews. Thus
death would have been far better for them than to be in this manner long
tormented and to have no relaxation. He then takes away the hope of a
return, that he might shew that their exile would be as it were a dying
languor, corroding them as a worm, so that to die a hundred times would
have been more desirable than to remain in such a hard and miserable
bondage. It now follows:

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#011)<span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span>**11**. For thus saith the LORD touching
Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah
his father, which went forth out of this place; He shall not return
thither any more:

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>**11**. Quia sic dicit Jehova ad Sallum
*(vel,* super Sallum) filium Josliae, regis Jehudah, qui regnat pro
Josia patre suo, quando (רשא, *est quidem relativum, sed non dubito
quin, sumatur hic pro adverbio temporis; et ideo obscuerant sensum
interpretes, dum vertunt, qui egressus est, et coguntur deinde mutare
sensum verbi; sed hoc optime fluit et soepe occipitur pro* quando)
egressus fuerit ex hoc loco, non revertetur amplius:

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span>**12**. But he shall die in the place whither
they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more.

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span>**12**. Quoniam in loco ad quem transtulerint
ipsum, illic morietur, et terram hanc non videbit amplius.

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span><span id="v.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>What he had before said generally he now
applies distinctly and especially to the person of the king, that the
people in general might know that they could not escape that punishment
from which even the king would not be exempt. They, no doubt, when they
heard that such a hard and bitter lot would happen to a king, regarded
it as a thing incredible; but Jeremiah intended to shew in his person
that what we have just seen was nigh them all, that is, that it would be
better for them at once to die than to pine away for a long time.

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>We must at the same time notice, that what
these two verses contain respecting the king is not said as though it
applied to him alone, but rather that every one might apply it to
himself what the Prophet said of the king alone.

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span>As to the word Shallum, it is thought that
Jehoiakim was so called, who had also the name of Jeconiah, and who had
of his own accord given up the kingdom and died in exile. But as he is
called the son of Josiah, a doubt has arisen. But if we duly consider
what sacred history relates, the probable conjecture is, that he was not
his son but his grandson, for the chosen successor of his father was
Jehoiakim, called also Eliakim. Yet Matthew calls him the son of Josiah,
and that he was born to him together with his brethren. (<span
id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>[Mt 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#011)<span
id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>.) But we know that it was a common thing with
the Hebrews to call descendants sons, especially when the family of
David was spoken of; that the order of succession might be preserved,
those who next followed their predecessors were called sons. Thus,
according to this custom, Elialdm might have been deemed his son, who
was really his brother. As, then, he was the successor of Josiah, he is
called his son.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span>There is yet no doubt but that God shews here
that a pious king would not be a patronizer either to his own son, or to
his grandson, or to others; for hypocrites are wont to form a defense
for themselves from the holiness of their fathers. And as king Josiah
had faithfully served God, his sons thought that God was in a manner
bound to themselves, as though all this had not proceeded from the mere
bounty of God, that Josiah had been so sincerely religious. But
hypocrites, as I have just said, seek ever to render God bound to them.
Hence the Prophet checks this false confidence, and declares that though
Josiah was approved of God, yet his memory would not be of such an
account as to shield his posterity from punishment. God, indeed,
promises in his Law to be merciful to the thousandth generation, even to
them who love him, (<span id="v.ix-p14.1"></span>[Ex
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p14.1"></span>) but
the ungodly very absurdly lay hold on this, as though they held God
bound to them; for they thus imagine that they can deprive him of his
power, and judgment, and authority over the world. The meaning then is,
that Shallum in vain promised safety to himself because he had descended
from the holy king Josiah, who had been a patron of eminent piety, for
this could not be the means of lessening his punishment, inasmuch as he
had degenerated from his father, whom he ought to have imitated, knowing
that he was approved by God. And this also was the reason for the
repetition, for he not only calls him the son of Josiah, but also adds,
that he *reigned instead of his* father Josiah. Though, then, he
succeeded so pious a king, he yet became degenerated and departed from
the example of his father.

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span>*When he shall have gone forth from this
place, he shall not return here any more*  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) As, then, the king was precluded from
returning, what would become of the common people and the dregs of
society? Could their condition be better? How then could the Jews dare
flatter themselves when they perceived so dreadful an evidence of God’s
wrath in the king himself, on whom depended their safety? A confirmation
follows, *For he shall die in the place to which they shall have led him
away* He intimates that he was to be by force carried away; he doubtless
did not surrender himself until he saw that he was under the necessity
of yielding. Then the Prophet in effect says that he would be a
miserable exile, driven into banishment against his own will. It is then
added, that he would *see no more the land of his nativity,* so that his
lot would be nothing better than that of any one of the common people.
It follows, —

<span id="v.x"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span><span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013)<span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p2"></span>**13**. Woe unto him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; *that* useth his neighbour’s
service without wages, and giveth him not for his work;

<span id="v.x-p3"></span>**13**. Ileus qui aedificat domum suam in non
justitia, (*hoc est,* injuste,) et coenacula sua in non judicio (*hoc
est,* sine rectitudine et aequitate;) proximum suum servire facit
gratis, et opus ejus non reddit ei (*vel,* quod ille operatus fuerit non
reddit ei; (vel, quod ille operatus fuerit non reddit ei; *quidam enim
volunt esse verbum, alii nomen, sed idem manebit sensus*).

<span id="v.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.x-p5"></span><span id="v.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p6"></span>The Prophet begins here to shew that it could
not be otherwise but that the king’s palace as well as Jerusalem must be
destroyed, for their wickedness had arrived to the highest pitch; but he
now, as it will appear presently, reprehends the father of Jeconiah.

<span id="v.x-p7"></span>He then says that the city was full of
robberies, and especially the palace of the king. Yet I do not think
that the Prophet speaks only of the king, but also of the courtiers and
chief men. We must also bear in mind what I said yesterday, that the
common people were not absolved while the king was condemned. But as
dignity and honor among the people belonged both to the king and the
princes, the Prophet exposes them publicly, that, it might be made
evident how deplorable the state of things was throughout the whole
community. We must at the same time add, that the chief among them were
first summoned to judgment, not only because every one had privately
offended, but because they had by their bad examples corrupted the whole
body of the people; and also, because they had taken more liberty, as
they feared nothing. We indeed know that the rich exercise tyranny,
because they deem themselves exempt from all laws. This, then, is the
reason why the Prophet here denounces, in a special manner, a curse on
the king and the chief men.

<span id="v.x-p8"></span>He says, that they *built unjustly;* his words
are, *with no justice* and with *no judgment,* by which he designates
cruelty, frauds, and robberies; he, in short, includes under these words
all kinds of iniquity. The way in which these things were done is
stated; they wronged their neighbors, by demanding and extorting labors
without rewarding them. Here, indeed, the Prophet only refers to one
kind of injustice; but it may hence be easily concluded, how unjustly
and wickedly they ruled who were then in authority; for they employed
their neighbors, as though they were slaves, in building houses and
palaces, for they denied them their wages. But nothing can be more cruel
than to deprive the poor of the fruit of their labor, who from their
labor derive their daily support. It is, indeed, commanded in the Law,
that the wages of the laborer should not sleep with us, (<span
id="v.x-p8.1"></span>[Le 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013)<span
id="v.x-p8.1"></span>) for that would be the same as to kill him.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) There is also another indignity; when a
robber kills a man, his object is the spoil; but he who extorts labor
from a poor man, and sucks, so to speak, his blood, afterwards sends him
away naked and needy; this is more atrocious than by violence to kill
him. We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet. But as he continues the
same subject, I shall defer any further remarks till to-morrow.

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
continuest both by chastising us, and by kindly alluring us to thyself,
to deal with us in such a way as to find out whether we are healable, —
O grant, that we may not he hardened either against thy threatenings or
thy promises, but follow in a teachable spirit what thou shewest is
pleasing to thee, and make progress in holy living, and become daily
more watchful and diligent, until we shall at length reach the goal
which is set before us, and receive the reward of our faith in thy
celestial kingdom, which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-Second

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span>In the last Lecture we began to explain the
reproof given by the Prophet to King Jehoiakim for his cruelty and
oppression; for in building his splendid palaces, he constrained the
people to labor for nothing. This was the crime which the Prophet
pointed out when he said, *He! he builds unjustly, and his chambers by
iniquity;* literally, “not in judgement.”

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>As Jehoiakim might have objected and said,
that this was lawful for him, for kings think that the whole world has
been created for their sake, the Prophet called his attention to the
common rights of men, for all the Israelites were his relations; as
though he had said, “Though thou excellest in dignity, yet thou art one
of the race of Abraham, and taken from the midst of thy brethren; there
is, therefore, no reason for thee to take so much liberty as though they
were to be thy vassals.” We hence see the design of the Prophet, when he
condemned the cruelty of King Jehoiakim, who in building magnificent
palaces treated the people arbitrarily and unjustly, and extorted more
labor than what was right. It now follows, —

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014)<span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>**14**. That saith, I will build me a wide
house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and *it is*
ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

<span id="v.xiii-p3"></span>**14**. Qui dicit, AEdificabo mihi domum
amplam (mensuram, *ad verbum,* *subaudiunt quidam Interpretes,*
magnarum; *sed illud frigidum est,* *simpliciter enim* domus mensurarum
tantundem valet ac domus spatiosa,) et coenacula dilatationum (*ad
verbum, vel,* respirationum, *aut* perflationum, *nam* הור *significat
tam respirare quam dilatare; unde deducitur* הור *quod significat
spiritum et ventum*,) et perforat sibi fenestras, et tecta (*vel,*
cooperta) est domus cedro et uncta minio.

<span id="v.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p6"></span>Some render the last words, “and painted
with red;*”* but vermilion is a kind of red. They, indeed, mention three
kinds of red, — deep red, brownish, and the third mixed with various
colors; but vermilion is a brighter color. As to the main point there is
no difficulty; the Prophet reproves the ambition and pride of King
Jehoiakim, that he was not content with the moderation of his fathers,
but indulged in extravagant display, and built for himself a palace as
it were in the clouds, as though he did not wish to have a dwelling on
the earth. Splendor in houses cannot in itself be condemned; but, as it
can hardly be, nay, as it seldom happens, but that such insatiable
ambition proceeds from pride, hence the Prophets vehemently denounced
sumptuous houses; and they pronounced a curse on such displays, because
they had a regard to the motive and the end. Such was the design of the
Prophet in this passage.

<span id="v.xiii-p7"></span>He therefore thus introduces King Jehoiakim,
*who says, I will build for myself a large house and chambers of
respirations* That he *said* this proved the foolish ambition with which
Jehoiakim had been inebriated, so that he regarded as nothing whatever
was splendid before in Jerusalem. There were palaces, we know, very
sumptuous there; and we also know that the king of Judah lived in great
splendor. For though the palaces of Solomon were not then standing in
their original grandeur, yet what remained was abundantly sufficient to
satisfy a man who was not filled with pride. It hence appears that a
fondness for excess prevailed in Jehoiakim, for he despised the royal
palace, and whatever remained after the death of Solomon. For God, we
know, had blessed with prosperity Hezekiah, and Josiah, and other kings;
but they had continued within proper bounds. Since, then, such
haughtiness had crept into the heart of Jehoiakim, it is evident, that
he was filled with vain pride, nay, was drunk with folly. This was the
reason why the Prophet severely reproved him for saying, “I will build
for myself a large house and chambers of respirations,” or of
perflations.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

<span id="v.xiii-p9"></span>He then adds, *and he perforates for himself
windows*  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) It was a proof of luxury,
when men began to indulge in superfluities. In old times the windows
were small; for use only was regarded by frugal men; but afterwards a
sort of madness possessed the minds of many, so that they sought to be
suspended as it were in the air. And hence they began to have wider
windows. The thing in itself, as I have said, is not what God condemns;
but we must ever remember, as I have reminded you, that men never go to
excesses in external things, except when their hearts are infected with
pride, so that they do not regard what is useful, what is becoming, but
are carried away by fondness for excess.

<span id="v.xiii-p13"></span>It is then added, *and it is covered with
cedar,* that is, the house is covered with cedar boards. For in my
judgment the Prophet means here the wainscotting, when he says that the
house was covered with cedar; as though he had said, that King Jehoiakim
esteemed the squared and polished stones as nothing, unless a covering
was added of cedar boards to ornament the walls.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) And for the same purpose was the
*painting with vermilion;* for justly might paintings be deemed
excessive superfluities. As, then, it was a part of luxury to adorn the
walls with various paintings, as though men wished to change the simple
nature of things, the Prophet here is indignant against King Jehoiakim.
Nor is it to be doubted, but that God had regard also to the
circumstances of the times; for God had already warned him and all the
Jews respecting their future calamities. This, then, was in a manner to
treat with mockery the threatenings of God. And we know how intolerable
was this regarded by him; for he thus declares by Isaiah,

<span id="v.xiii-p19"></span>“Live do I, never shall this iniquity be
blotted out,” *  
*(<span id="v.xiii-p19.2"></span>[Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)<span id="v.xiii-p19.2"></span>)

<span id="v.xiii-p20"></span>for when he had exhorted them to put on
sackcloth and ashes, they said, “Let us eat and drink, tomorrow we shall
die.” Similar, then, was the perverseness of King Jehoiakim; for he
ought to have seen the coming calamity which was set as it were before
his eyes; but he, like one infatuated, increased the royal splendor, so
that the wealth of David and of Solomon appeared as nothing compared
with what he had expended. It now follows, —

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015)<span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span>**15**. Shalt thou reign, because thou
closest *thyself* in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do
judgment and justice, *and* then *it was* well with him?

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span>**15**. An regnabis, quia tu permisces se in
cedro? (*hoc est,* quia to involvis cedro? pater tuus annon comedit et
bibit et fecit (*hoc est,* cum faceret) judicium et justitiam? Tunc bene
fuit ei.

<span id="v.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xiv-p5"></span><span id="v.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here derides the foolish
confidence of King Jehoiakim, because he set up empty things against his
enemies instead of strong defences. Kings are wont to indulge themselves
when there is quietness and security; that is, when they fear nothing;
when no danger appears, they then give way to their own gratifications;
and this is commonly the case with all; for we see that kings especially
indulge in excesses, when there is no war, when no one gives them
trouble, and no one threatens them; but Jehoiakim, had he the least
particle of wisdom, might have known that he had many dangers to dread.
Now, when he applied all his thoughts to the painting of his walls, and
to the splendor of his palace, to its wainscotting and other trifles,
must he not have been insane, and not of a sound mind?

<span id="v.xiv-p7"></span>It is this madness that Jeremiah now condemns
when he says, *Shalt thou reign, because thou surroundest thyself with
cedar board?*  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) that is, “Can this
confirm thy kingdom to thee? or, shalt thou be more happy on this
account, because thou art surrounded by cedars?” The meaning of the
Prophet may be more fully learnt from the remaining part of the verse;
for it immediately follows, *Thy father, did he not eat and drink when
he did judgment and justice?*

<span id="v.xiv-p13"></span>Some so understand the passage, as though
the Prophet meant to obviate an objection; for Jehoiakim might have
referred to the example of his father Josiah, who had not been a sordid
man, but had displayed some royal dignity and grandeur through the whole
course of his life. Some interpreters, then, think that the Prophet
answers here what Jehoiakim might, have objected: “What! did not my
father also make a royal display?” Thus they explain the words, as
though the Prophet made at first a concession, but that by adding a
correction, he shewed that the excuse of Jehoiakim was frivolous: “I
allow that thy father was royally adorned, but he executed judgment and
justice; why dost thou not imitate thy father in his virtues? God
forgave what was superfluous or excessive, for through his great
indulgence he bears with many things in kings; but thou art far
different from thy father, for thou extortest labor from thy poor
subjects, and buildest thy palaces by means of extortion and plunder.
There is, therefore, no reason for thee to seek for thyself a covering
from thy father, for thou art wholly fallen away from his integrity.”

<span id="v.xiv-p14"></span>Others elicit an entirely different meaning,
— that Josiah had prolonged his life, and conciliated the favor of God
by ruling with justice. So, then, they connect the words thus: “Did not
thy father eat and drink,” that is, *“*did he not live happily, because
God had blessed him? Inquire the cause, and you will find it to be this
— he faithfully discharged his duties, for he executed judgment and
justice. As, then, thou seest that the equity and moderation which thy
father had practiced, was the cause of his happy life, why dost not thou
also imitate him?”

<span id="v.xiv-p15"></span>But the Prophet seems to me to mean simply
this, “Thy father doubtless lived happily, and nothing was wanting to
him while he executed judgment and justice.” For thus appears better the
contrast between the tyranny of Jehoiakim, and the uprightness of his
father Josiah; as though he had said, “Thou deemest now thy state better
than that of thy father, because thou surpassest him in luxury and
splendor.

<span id="v.xiv-p16"></span>As then thou exultest in vain things, thou
seemest to thyself to be happier than thy father: but thy father was
contented with his lot; nay, if his condition be duly regarded, God
honored him with every abundance and variety of blessings; *he did eat
and drink.”*

<span id="v.xiv-p17"></span>By *eating* and *drinking* I understand
nothing else, but that he lived cheerfully, enjoyed prosperity, spent a
peaceable life. *Thy father;* he says, *did eat and drink;* that is, he
had nothing to desire, and his condition was an evidence of God’s favor
when he *expected judgment and justice* And not unsuitable to this view
is what follows, *Then it was well with him*  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

<span id="v.xiv-p23"></span>We hence see that the foolish ambition of
Jehoiakim is here laughed to scorn; for he seemed not to think himself a
king unless he conducted himself like a madman. Such is the case with
kings at this day; they are ashamed to appear humane, and devise means
only to exercise tyranny; and they also contrive how they may depart as
far as possible from the common usage and practice of men. As then kings
are so ingenious in their own follies, which seem to be like veils, lest
anything humane should be perceived in them, the Prophet justly inveighs
here against Jehoiakim; *“It was well,”* he says, “with thy father; and
yet he acted kindly and courteously towards his people; nor had he such
haughtiness as to despise the common habits of men. Since then he was
happy, if thou regardcst what belongs to real happiness, why dost thou
please thyself so much? What hast thou that is better or more excellent
than what he had!”

<span id="v.xiv-p24"></span>We now perceive what the object of the
Prophet was to shew, that it is the only true glory and the chief honor
of kings, when they discharge their duties, and that the image of God
shines forth in them, when they execute judgment and justice; and that
when they ambitiously seek through a blind zeal to be the slaves of
pride, it is a vain attempt, and contributes nothing towards that happy
life which they foolishly imagine. To the same purpose he adds, —

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#016)<span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span>**16**. He judged the cause of the poor and
needy; then *it was* well *with him: was* not this to know me? saith the
LORD.

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>**16**. Judicium judicavit pauperis et egeni,
tunc bene; an non cognoscere me, inquit Jehova?

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span><span id="v.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span>He more fully expresses what he had said, that
Josiah lived usefully, and was honored and esteemed, for royal majesty
shone forth in him. He then repeats in other words what he had said, but
he did this for the sake of explanation.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="v.xv-p14"></span>*He undertook,* he says, *the cause,* or the
quarrel, *of the poor and needy* There is here a part stated for the
whole; for when any one deals kindly with the poor, he may yet plunder
the wealth of the rich, which cannot be deemed right; but as the case
most commonly is, that those who rule neglect the poor and helpless, the
Prophet includes under one thing the whole duty of rulers, and says that
King Josiah was upright, just, and equitable, that he not only abstained
from wrongs, but also assisted the innocent whom he saw oppressed, and
of his own accord interposed to prevent any to molest them. He then
under one thing comprehends everything that belongs to the office of a
just and upright judge. For it is the first thing for judges to abstain
from all rapacity and violence; and the second thing is to extend a hand
to the poor, and to bring them aid, whenever they see them exposed to
the wrongs of others. *He* then *judged the judgment,* or undertook the
cause, *of the poor and needy;* and it is added, *Then well;* that is,
as I have explained, “This was the happiness of thy father Josiah, so
that he was not despised by the people, nor had he any desire for
anything more.”

<span id="v.xv-p15"></span>It then follows, *Was not this to know me,
saith Jehovah?*  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) The Prophet shews
again whence proceeded the liberty which King Jehoiakim took in luxury
and superfluous display, as well as in plunder, cruelty, and oppression,
even because he had cast away every care and concern for religion; for
where a real knowledge of God exists, men must necessarily have regard
to uprightness and moderation. He then who thus acts cruelly towards his
neighbors, clearly shews that every thought of religion and every care
for it is rooted out of his heart. In short, the Prophet means that
Jehoiakim was not only unjust towards men, but was also guilty of
impiety; for except he had become a profane despiser of God, he would
not have thus unjustly oppressed his neighbors.

<span id="v.xv-p17"></span>But this passage deserves to be noticed, as
it shews that piety leads men to all the duties of love. Where God then
is known, kindness to man also appears. So also on the other hand we may
conclude, that all regard for God is extinguished, and all fear of him
is abolished, when men wilfully do wrong to one another, and when they
seek to oppress or defraud one another. There is therefore no doubt but
that gross impiety will be found where the offices of love are
neglected. For when Jeremiah *commended* the piety of Josiah on this
account, because he executed judgment and justice, he doubtless
condemned Jehoiakim, as though he had said, that he was an abandoned and
irreclaimable apostate; for had he retained a spark of religion, he
would have acted more justly and humanely towards his people. It now
follows, —

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017)<span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>**17**. But thine eyes and thine heart *are*
not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for
oppression, and for violence, to do *it.*

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>**17**. Quia non oculus tuus et cor tuum nisi
ad cupidatatem tuam, et ad sanguinem innoxium fundendum, et ad
rapacitatem, et ad oppressionem, ad faciendum (*hoc est,* ut exequaris.

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span><span id="v.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet expresses more clearly how
much Jehoiakim differed from Josiah his father. He indeed shews that he
was wholly unlike him, because Josiah had endeavored to observe what was
equitable, while he set all his thoughts on fraud, plunder, and cruelty;
for by the *eye* and the *heart* he means all the faculties of his soul
and body. One of the main senses of the body, as it is well known, is
the sight. Hence the Prophet includes here whatever is external and
internal in men, when he says, *thine eye,* that is, all thy bodily
senses are set on covetousness, and also *thine heart,* that is, all thy
thoughts, feelings, designs, meditations, and purposes are employed in
the same way. He intimates, in short, that Jehoiakim was corrupt both in
body and mind, so that having cast aside every fear of God, he abandoned
himself to avarice as well as to plunder and all acts of oppression.
*Thine eye,* he says, *and thy heart is not, except on covetousness*

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span>The verb <span id="v.xvi-p7.1"></span>עצב*,
betso,* means to covet; hence the noun signifies not only avarice, but
also any sinful lust. He adds cruelty, for it, cannot be but that all
are bloody who give loose reins to their lusts. He mentions in the third
place *rapacity,* or violent seizure; for <span
id="v.xvi-p7.2"></span>קשע*, oshek,* means to take by force what belongs
to another; hence the noun signifies rapacity. What follows in the last
place is *oppression,* or disquietude. As <span
id="v.xvi-p7.3"></span>ףור*, ruts,* means to run, Jerome renders it “the
course of thy work,” as though <span id="v.xvi-p7.4"></span>ל*, lamed,*
prefixed to <span id="v.xvi-p7.5"></span>תושע*, oshut,* were not one of
the serviles, <span id="v.xvi-p7.6"></span>ם, <span
id="v.xvi-p7.7"></span>ל, <span id="v.xvi-p7.8"></span>כ, <span
id="v.xvi-p7.9"></span>ב*, beth, caph, lamed, mem,* but this cannot be
admitted. The clear meaning of the Prophet indeed is, that Jehoiakim was
not only intent on taking possession on what belonged to others, but
that he also oppressed and distressed all he could. It is lastly added,
*to do;* the verb to do is to be applied to what has gone before, that
Jehoiakim employed all his thoughts, and was wholly engaged in evil
deeds, that he not only contrived acts of cruelty and of avariciousness
in his mind, but also carried fully into execution what he had
contrived.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) It follows, —

<span id="v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018)<span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p2"></span>**18**. Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not
lament for him, *saying,* Ah my brother! or*,* Ah sister! they shall not
lament for him, *saying,* Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!

<span id="v.xvii-p3"></span>**18**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova ad Joakim
*(vel,* de, <span id="v.xvii-p3.1"></span>לא, *capitur pro de, ergo* de
Joakim) filio Josiae regis Jehudah, Non lugebunt eum, Heus frater mi! et
heus soror! non lugebunt eum, Heus domine! heus gloria ejus!

<span id="v.xvii-p4"></span>**19**. He shall be buried with the burial
of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="v.xvii-p5"></span>**19**. Sepultura asini sepelietur, ad
trahendum, et projiciendum ad extra ad portas *(ad verbum hoc est,*
longe extra portas) Jerosolymae.

<span id="v.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xvii-p7"></span><span id="v.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p8"></span>The Prophet having inveighed against
Jehoiakim, now shews what kind of punishment from God awaited him; he
would have otherwise despised the Prophet’s reproof; but when he heard
that a reward was prepared for him, he must have been roused. Inasmuch
then as he was seized with a foolish and even a sottish lust for glory,
so that he cast aside every care for uprightness, the Prophet declares
that disgrace was prepared for him; and hence he compares him after his
death to an ass.

<span id="v.xvii-p9"></span>*Therefore thus saith Jehovah to King
Jehoiakim,* or concerning King Jehoiakim,  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) *the son of Josiah the king, etc.* He is
not called the son of Josiah for honor’s sake, but for the purpose of
touching him to the quick, because he had degenerated from the piety of
his father. But as he hoped that the religion of Josiah would be to him
a sort of covering, the Prophet derides and checks this vain confidence.
“Thou gloriest in being the son of King Josiah, but thy holy father will
avail thee nothing, for thou seemest avowedly to shew that thou art
wholly different from him. Though then thou art, descended from Josiah,
and though God has raised thee to the royal throne, yet there is no
reason for thee to be confident as to thy safety; for these benefits of
God will not preserve thee from that ignominious treatment which thou
deservest.”

<span id="v.xvii-p11"></span>He says first, *They shall not bewail him,
Ah my brother! Ah sister!* The Prophet mentions by way of imitation the
words of the mourners. That people, we know, were very vehement in
expressing their sorrow. And this ought to be borne in mind, because
some being persuaded that nothing is related by the Prophets but what
ought to be taken as an example, do therefore think that these modes of
lamentation were approved by God. But we have before seen what the
Prophet said in <span id="v.xvii-p11.1"></span>[Jer
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#004)<span id="v.xvii-p11.1"></span>,

<span id="v.xvii-p12"></span>“Enter through these gates shall the
kings  
of Judah and their princes in chariots,”

<span id="v.xvii-p13"></span>yet we know that kings had been forbidden
to make such ostentations; but God did not scrupulously refer to what
was lawful or right in speaking of royal splendor; so also when he spoke
of funeral rites. We ought not then to make a law of what the Prophet
says, as though it were right and proper to bewail the dead with
howling. There is indeed no doubt, but these excesses which the Prophet
mentions were not only foolish, but also wholly condemnable; for we
often vie with one another in our lamentations; and when men
intemperately express their grief in funerals, they excite themselves
into a sort of madness in crying and bewailing, and then when they
compose themselves and simulate grief, they act a part as in a theater.
But the Prophet here speaks only according to the common practice of the
age, when he says, “They shall not bewail him,” etc.; that is, he states
what was usually done, when one embraced another, when a sister said,
“Ah, my brother!” and when a brother said, “Ah, my sister!” or, when the
people said, “Ah, lord, O king, where is thy glory! where is thy honor!
where thy crown! where thy scepter! where thy throne!“ Very foolish then
were the lamentations which the Prophet mentions here. But as I have
already said, it is enough for us to know, that he refers to these
rites, then commonly practiced, without expressing his approbation of
them.

<span id="v.xvii-p14"></span>*They shall not,* he says, *bewail* King
Jehoiakim; they shall not say at his funeral, *Ah, my brother! Ah,
sister! And, Ah, lord! Ah, his glory!*  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) There shall be no such thing; and why?
because *he shall be buried with the burial of an ass* We have before
said, that it was justly deemed one of God’s curses when a carcass was
cast away unburied; for God would have burial a proof to distinguish us
from brute animals even after death, as we in life excel them, and as
our condition is much nobler than that of the brute creation. Burial is
also a pledge as it were of immortality; for when man’s body is laid hid
in the earth, it is, as it were, a mirror of a future life. Since then
burial is an evidence of God’s grace and favor towards mankind, it is on
the other hand a sign of a curse, when burial is denied.

<span id="v.xvii-p20"></span>But it has been elsewhere said, that
temporal punishments ought not always to be viewed alike; for God has
suffered sometimes his faithful servants to be unburied, according to
what we read in <span id="v.xvii-p20.1"></span>[Ps.
79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003)<span id="v.xvii-p20.1"></span>,
that their bodies were cast forth in the fields, that they were exposed
to be eaten by the beasts of the earth and by the birds of heaven. Those
spoken of were the true and sincere worshippers of God. But we know that
the good and the bad have temporal punishments in common; and this is
true as to famine and nakedness, pestilence and war. The destruction of
the city Jerusalem was a just punishment on the wicked; and yet Daniel
and Jeremiah were driven into exile together with the wicked, and
suffered great hardships; and, in short, they were so mixed with the
ungodly, that their external condition was in nothing different. So,
then, the state of things in the world is often in such disorder, that
we cannot distinguish between the good and the bad by outward
circumstances. But still it is right ever to hold this truth, that when
burial is denied to a man, it is a sign of God’s curse.

<span id="v.xvii-p21"></span><span id="v.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p22"></span>Hence, the Prophet says now, *He shall be
buried with the burial of an ass* He mentions the ass because it is a
mean animal; he might have named a horse or an ox, but as the ass is a
meaner and more contemptible animal, it is the same thing as though he
had said, “Jehoiakim shall be cast away with the dogs.” This prophecy no
doubt grievously wounded not only the mind of the king himself, but also
that of the whole people; for as yet his throne stood, and all highly
regarded the family of David, and thought the kingdom sacred, as it was
under the guardianship and protection of God. But the Prophet hesitated
not to denounce what was afterwards confirmed by the event; for
Jehoiakim was buried with the burial of an ass, as he was cast forth far
beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Here the Prophet amplifies the disgrace
by which the King Jehoiakim would be branded, for he might have been
left dead in a journey; but he expresses what is more grievous than the
casting forth; *Drawn out,* he says, and *cast forth,* etc.; that is,
Jehoiakim shall not only be cast forth, but also drawn as an ass or a
dog, lest his foetor should infect the city; as though he was unworthy
not only of a grave, but also of being seen by men.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

<span id="v.xvii-p24"></span>And this is to be especially noticed, for
we hence conclude how great his perverseness was in despising the
threatenings of God, since the Prophet could not otherwise storm the
mind of the king, and terrify the people, than by exaggerating the
indignity that was to happen to him. For if there had been any teachable
spirit in the king and the people, the Prophet would have been content
with making a simple statement, “Jehoiakim shall not be buried;” that
is, God will punish him even when dead; the curse of God will not only
be upon him while living, but he will also take vengeance on him after
his death. He was not content with this kind of statement; but *he shall
be buried,* he says, as an ass, and *shall be cast far off;* and further
still, his carcass shall *be drawn* or dragged; so that it was to be an
eternal mark of infamy and disgrace.

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as it has pleased
thee to perpetuate the memory of the dreadful vengeance which thou hast
executed on the descendants of David, so that we may learn by their
evils carefully to walk before thee, — O grant, that the forgetfulness
of this example may never possess us, but that we may assiduously
meditate on what is set before us, in order that we may thus endeavor to
advance and promote the glory of thy name through the whole course of
our life, so that we may at length be made partakers of thy celestial
glory, which thou hast prepared for us, and which thine only-begotten
Son has obtained for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-Third

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span><span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#020)<span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span>**20**. Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up
thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are
destroyed.

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**20**. Ascende in Libanum, et clama, et in
Basan ede vocem tuam, et clama a lateribus, quia contriti sunt omnes
amatores tui.

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span><span id="v.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span>Jeremiah triumphs over the Jews, and derides
their presumption in thinking that they would be safe, though God was
against them. He then shews that they were deceived in promising to
themselves impunity; but he bids them to *ascend Mount Lebanon,* and to
*cry aloud on Mount Bashan,* that they might know that there would be no
aid for them when God’s judgment came. But the whole verse is ironical;
for they would in vain cry and howl. Indeed, the Prophet thus treated
them, because he saw that they were wholly irreclaimable. They were not
worthy then that he should give them counsel, or faithfully warn them.
He was therefore under the necessity ironically to deride their madness
in promising safety to themselves, while they were continuing to provoke
God’s vengeance against themselves.

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span>But at the same time he accommodates what he
says to their intentions; for there is no doubt but that they ever cast
their eyes either on Egypt or on Assyria for any aid they might want.
Hence he says, *Ascend* Mount *Lebanon, and cry,* and then *cry* on
Mount *Bashan,* and *cry all around,* (for by *sides* he means all
parts;) but thou shall gain nothing, he says*, for consumed are all thy
lovers*  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) We learn from the end of
the verse that the Prophet said, *Ascend, and cry,* by way of derision.
By *lovers* he means the Egyptians and the Assyrians, and other
neighboring nations; for the Jews, when they feared any danger, were
wont to flee to their neighbors, and God was in the meantime neglected
by them; and for this reason they were called lovers. God had espoused
the people as his own, and hence he often called them his wife, and he
speaks here in the feminine gender; and thus the people are compared to
a wife, and God assumes the character of a husband. When, therefore, the
people, according to their self-will and humor, wandered here and there,
this levity was called adultery; for the simplicity of faith is our
spiritual chastity; for as a wife who regards her husband alone, keeps
conjugal fidelity and chaste conduct, so when we continue to cleave to
God alone, we are, in a spiritual sense, chaste as he requires us to be;
but when we seek our safety from this and that quarter, we violate the
fidelity which we owe to God. As soon, then, as we cast our thoughts
here and there, it is to act like a woman who seeks vagrant and unlawful
connections.

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span>We now see the reason why the Prophet compares
the Egyptians and Assyrians to lovers, for he intimates that the people
of Israel did in this manner commit adultery, as it has been stated in
other places. It follows, —

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#021)<span id="v.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span>**21**. I spake unto thee in thy prosperity;
*but* thou saidst, I will not hear. This *hath been* thy manner from thy
youth, that thou obeyest not my voice.

<span id="v.xxi-p3"></span>**21**. Loquutus sum tecum in pace tua
(*vel,* quiete, *vel,* foelicitate tua,) dixisti, Non audiam; haec via
tua (*id est,* ratio, *vel,* consuetudo) a pueritia tua, quod non
audieris vocem meam.

<span id="v.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxi-p5"></span><span id="v.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p6"></span>Here God shews that the people were worthy of
the reward he had mentioned, even to mourn and to seek aid on every side
without finding any. It, indeed, often happens that the excessive
severity of a husband alienates his wife from his society; and when a
husband, through want of thought, attends to other things and neglects
his domestic affairs, and thus his wife goes astray; or when he connives
at things when he sees his wife exposed to dangerous allurements and
flatteries, the fault is in part to be ascribed to him. But God shews
here that he had performed the duties of a good and faithful husband,
and also that it was not his fault that the people did not perform their
part.

<span id="v.xxi-p7"></span>*I spoke to thee,* he says; that is, thou
canst not say that thou hast gone astray through ignorance; for they who
are proved guilty are wont to flee to this kind of excuse, — “I did not
think; had I been warned, I would have attended to good advice; but on
slippery ground it is easy to fall, especially when no one stretches
forth his hand to give any help.” But God takes away here every pretext
of this kind, and says, that he had *spoken;* as though he had said, “I
warned thee in time; thou hast not then sinned through ignorance or want
of thought.” In short, God condemns here the perverseness of the people,
that they knowingly and wilfully abandoned themselves to every kind of
wickedness. Now this passage deserves special notice; for we see that it
is a twofold crime, when God in due time speaks to us and calls us to
the right way, and we refuse to hear; for our wickedness is inexcusable
when we suffer not ourselves to be corrected by him.

<span id="v.xxi-p8"></span>I spoke to thee, he adds, *in thy
tranquillity* By this circumstance also their crime is aggravated; for
God not only by his Prophets made known to his people what was right,
but had also, by his blessing, conciliated them to himself. For when a
husband counsels his wife, and is at the same time austere or peevish,
his wife will disregard whatever she may hear, for her mind will be
preoccupied with dislike; but when a husband treats his wife kindly, and
proves by his benevolence the love he entertains for her, and at the
same time shews prudence in his conduct towards her, she must
necessarily be of a very bad disposition if she is not moved by such
advice, kindness, and benevolence on the part of her husband. Now, God
shews here that he had sent Prophets in order to keep his people in the
faithful discharge of their duties, and that he had also been kind and
bountiful to them, that thereby they might be sweetly drawn to obey him.
Therefore, by the word “tranquillity,” the Prophet sets forth God’s
kindness and bounty towards his people.  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)

<span id="v.xxi-p10"></span>It is, indeed, true what Moses says, that
men are like mettlesome and wanton horses when they become fat. (<span
id="v.xxi-p10.1"></span>[De 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span
id="v.xxi-p10.1"></span>.) So fatness and tranquillity have such effect
as to render us more refractory. Yet this cannot avail for an excuse
when God kindly invites us, and connects with his doctrine kind and
paternal benevolence, and confirms it by the effects when we are
teachable and yield him willing obedience. Thus the Prophet closed the
mouths of the Jews, for they would have sought probably to make this
objection, — that vengeance was too vehemently denounced on them, and
that God suddenly assailed them; but he shews that when in tranquillity
and prosperity they might have acknowledged God’s paternal kindness,
they had yet been rebellious and had abused the indulgence of God.

<span id="v.xxi-p11"></span>I spoke to thee, he says, in thy
tranquillity, *and thou didst say, I will not hear* It is not, indeed,
probable that the Jews had spoken so insolently as to say openly and in
such plain words, that they would not be obedient; but the Prophet
regards their life and not their words. Though, then, the Jews did not
express these words, — that they would not obey God; yet such language
might have been clearly inferred from their conduct, for they were so
perverse as not to render obedience to God and to his counsels.

<span id="v.xxi-p12"></span>He adds, in the third place, that it had
been the *custom* of the *people from their childhood not to hear the
voice* of God. It is the height of impiety when we are not only
refractory for one day or a short time, but when we pursue wickedness
continually. God in the meantime intimates that he had from the
beginning been solicitous for the safety of his people, but in vain. It
sometimes happens that he who has become hardened in his vices, begins
to be taught after the thirtieth or fortieth: year, but he is not very
pliable; for men become hard by long usage; we see that old men are less
teachable than the young; and why? because age in a manner makes them
sturdy, so that they cannot bear to be turned and ruled. But God shews
here, that such was the wickedness of his people, that they had been
rebellious from their childhood; as though he had said, “Thou canst not
make this excuse, that thou hast been for a long time without a teacher
that thou hast been without any wisdom and understanding, and that on
this account thou hast become hardened in evils; no, because I have
found thee wholly unteachable from thy very childhood; it was *thy
custom, or* manner, *not to hear my voice,”* or, “This has been thy
custom, that thou didst not hear my voice;*”* literally, “because thou
didst not hear my voice;*”* but it ought to be rendered as above, for
<span id="v.xxi-p12.1"></span>יכ*,* is not here a connective, but all
expletive or an exegetical particle.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) It follows, —

<span id="v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#022)<span id="v.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p2"></span>**22**. The wind shall eat up all thy
pastors, and thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then shalt thou
be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.

<span id="v.xxii-p3"></span>**22**. Omnes pastores tuos depascet ventus,
et amatores tui in exilium migrabunt; certe tunc pudefies et erubesces
ab omni malitia tua (*hoc est,* propter cunctam malitiam tuam.)

<span id="v.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p6"></span>As the main fault was in the chief men,
therefore God shews, that there would be no defense found in their
prudence and wealth, when things came to an extremity: and it was a
usual thing for the common people, when reproved, to refer to their
rulers as their shield: nor is there a doubt but that the Jews made this
objection to God’s Prophets, — “What do you mean? that God has suffered
us to be unhappily governed by bad princes? then he has exposed us as a
prey to wolves: now if he punishes us, it seems an unjust thing for us
to suffer for the fault of others.” At the same time, they who thus
spoke were secure and despised God, because they thought that their
safety was secured by their chief men.

<span id="v.xxii-p7"></span>Hence, the Prophet here shakes off from the
Jews this vain confidence, *Thy pastors,* he says, *the wind shall eat
up* By pastors he understands the king and his counsellors, as well as
the priests and the prophets. The word *eat up,* means that all would be
consumed by the wind. Sometimes, indeed, men are said to feed on the
wind, that is, when they entertain vain confidences. So the wind means
in other places vain hopes, as they say; but it is in another sense that
the Prophet speaks, when he says that pastors would be eaten up by the
wind, that is, that they would vanish away like the smoke. Thus God
shews that their presumption, and frauds, and false imaginations, were
nothing but smoke and emptiness.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="v.xxii-p9"></span>He then speaks of their *lovers,* — that
they would *migrate into exile:* for the Jews thought at first, that
they would be impregnable as long as the throne of David stood; and then
we know that the common people were easily deceived by external
splendor, when they saw that the priests as well as the prophets and the
king’s counsellors were endued with craftiness, and swelling with great
pride; and hence they disregarded what the prophets threatened. Now, the
second ground of confidence was their alliance with the Egyptians, the
Assyrians, and other neighboring nations. Therefore God, after having
said, that all their pastors would be destroyed, adds, that the
Egyptians and others would be driven into captivity.

<span id="v.xxii-p10"></span>He afterwards says, *Surely, thou shalt
then be ashamed, and shalt blush for all thy wickedness;*  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) that is, “Thou shalt at length know that
thou art justly punished for thy sins, when God shall denude thee of all
aids, and make it evident that everything that now gives thee confidence
is altogether empty and vain.” And he mentions *all wickedness;* for the
Jews had not sinned only in one thing, but had added evils to evils, so
that they had provoked God’s vengeance by an immense heap of wickedness.
Their acknowledgment, however, would not be that which availed to
repentance, but extorted; for the reprobate, willing or unwilling, are
often constrained to acknowledge their shame. It follows —

<span id="v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#023)<span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p2"></span>**23**. O inhabitant of Lebanon, that
makest thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs
come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!

<span id="v.xxiii-p3"></span>**23**. Sedisti (hoc est, sedem tibi
posuisti) in Libano, nidulata es in cedris, quomodo gratiosa fuisti
(alii, vertunt, precata es) in veniendo tibi dolores, dolorem quasi
parturientis (ad verbum, sed sensus est, quomodo gratiosa eris, ubi
venerint tibi dolores, dolor quasi foeminae parturientis.)

<span id="v.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the same thing in
other words; and hence it appears how difficult it is to shake off from
men their false confidence, when they give themselves up to earthly
things. As soon, then, as false confidence strikes its roots into the
hearts of men, they cannot be moved either by any threatenings or by any
dangers; even though death itself were hanging over them, they yet
remain unconcerned: and hence Isaiah upbraids them and says, That they
had made a covenant with death. (<span id="v.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="v.xxiii-p6.1"></span>.)
This was the reason why the Prophet here multiplied words and used
greater vehemence; it was for the purpose of correcting that
perverseness which prevailed among the Jews; for they thought themselves
beyond the reach of those darts which God’s hands would throw.

<span id="v.xxiii-p7"></span>He therefore says, that they had *set their
seat on Lebanon,* and made their *nest among the cedars* Some
interpreters understand this figuratively of the cedar houses in which
they dwelt; that is, that they ornamented their houses or palaces, as we
have seen, with boards of cedar. But I take the words more simply, —
That they considered Lebanon as an impregnable stronghold, and that he
compares them to birds which choose the highest cedars to make their
nests in. The meaning is, that the Jews were so blinded by their pride,
that they thought that they had Lebanon as a safe refuge, and also that
they imagined that they had nests as it were in its cedars. But there is
no doubt but that the Prophet, in mentioning this one particular, meant
to include all those false and vain confidences with which the Jews were
inebriated. But he speaks by way of concession, as though he had said,
that the Jews were not terrified by God’s threatenings, because they
cast their eyes on Lebanon and on its lofty cedars.

<span id="v.xxiii-p8"></span>But *how gracious,* he says, *wilt thou
be;* that is, what grace wilt thou find, *when sorrows shall come upon
thee, the pain as of one in travail*  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) The Prophet expresses here what often
occurs in Scripture, that when the ungodly say, “Peace and safety,”
sudden ruin comes on them. (<span id="v.xxiii-p11.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="v.xxiii-p11.1"></span>.)
He then does not allow that the Jews gained anything by thinking that
they would have a quiet station on Lebanon, and by having their nests in
the cedars, for God would bring on them sudden pains like those of
women, who, while laughing and full of mirth, are in a moment seized
with the pangs of childbearing. Jeremiah now says, that a similar thing
would happen to the Jews. I touch but lightly on this point, while yet
it is worthy of long and careful meditation. Let us then know, that
nothing is more intolerable to God than when we promise to ourselves a
quiet rest while he proclaims war against us, and while we, as it were
designedly, daily provoke him. It follows —

<span id="v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024)<span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p2"></span>**24** *As* I live, saith the LORD, though
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right
hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;

<span id="v.xxiv-p3"></span>**24**. Vivo ego, dicit Jehova, quod si
esset Coniahu filius Joakim regis Jehudah annulus signatorius super
manum dexteram meam (*hoc est,* in many dextera mea,) ego inde to
evallam (*mutatio est personae.)*

<span id="v.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p6"></span>God here makes an oath that he had resolved
to punish Jeconiah, who was also called Jehoiachim. And he says, That
though he sat on the throne of David, he would yet be a miserable exile.
We have, indeed, seen elsewhere, that the Jews were so fascinated as to
think that, God was bound to them; and at the same time they allowed
themselves every liberty in sinning, under the pretense that God had
promised that the kingdom of David would remain as long as the sun and
moon continued in the heavens, (<span id="v.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[Ps
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="v.xxiv-p6.1"></span>)
but they did not consider that there was a mutual compact in God’s
covenant; for he required them to be faithful on their part: nor did
they consider that many were Abraham’s children according to the flesh,
who were not his lawful children before God. As to the king himself, he
never thought it possible that he should be driven into exile, because
he was David’s successor and ordained by God.

<span id="v.xxiv-p7"></span>This, then, is the reason why God now
declares, *Even though that Coniah were as a sealing ring on my finger,
I would yet pluck it off thence* However exalted then was Jeconiah, God
shews that his dignity would be only for a time, and would soon fade
away; for he would be at length thrust from his throne, and his
condition wholly changed. The word Coniah is, no doubt, in a mutilated
form, instead of Jehoiachin. The Prophet then calls him Coniah by way of
contempt, as though he did not think him worthy of the complete name,
but expresses it in two instead of four syllables. So the Prophet,
though Jeconiah was then the king, yet calls him Coniah.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="v.xxiv-p9"></span>Now, this passage teaches us, that we ought
not to be in such a way proud of God’s favors, as to forget what we are,
but ever to remember that we are dependent on him, and that we ought
diligently to pray to him at all times; for security breeds contempt;
hence it is; that God strips us of the ornaments with which we have been
clothed; and it is a just reward for our ingratitude. Let all, then, who
excel others know, that what has been given may at any time be taken
away, except good conscience be as it were the guard to preserve God’s
gifts and benefits, so that they may not at any time fall away or be
lost. It follows —

<span id="v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#025)<span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span>**25**. And I will give thee into the hand of
them that seek thy life, and into the hand *of them* whose face thou
fearest, even into the hand Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the
hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span>**25**. Et ponam to (tradam to) in manum
quierentium animam tuam, et in manum eorum a quorum facie formidas
(metuis) et in manum Nebuchadrezzar regis Babylonii et in manum
Cladaeorum.

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span><span id="v.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span>This verse is connected with the last, and
more fully explains what had been briefly said. The plucking off of the
sealing ring from God’s finger took place when Jeconiah was deprived of
his glory and his kingdom, and made subject; to the king of Babylon.
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) Though the king spared his life,
as sacred history testifies, (<span id="v.xxv-p7.1"></span>[2Ki
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007)<span id="v.xxv-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xxv-p7.2"></span>[2Ch
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006)<span id="v.xxv-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="v.xxv-p7.3"></span>[Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011)<span id="v.xxv-p7.3"></span>,)
yet when he surrendered himself to him, he trembled as though he saw the
sword ready to cut off his head; for he expected no mercy, and his fear
made him to go out of the city, and to surrender himself to his
inveterate enemy. The import of the whole is, that King Jeconiah would
come to extremities, for he would be forced to give up himself helpless
and unarmed into the hands of his cruel enemies.

<span id="v.xxv-p8"></span>But he repeats the commination, and enlarges
on the subject; *I will deliver thee,* he says, *into the hand of those
who seek thy life,* and then, *into the hand of those whose face thou
dreadest,* and, in the third place, *into the hand of Nebuchadnezer,*
(Nabuchadnezer, king of Babylon, is called here and in other places,
Nebuchadrezer,) and lastly, *into the hand of the Chaldeans.* Thus the
Prophet recounts, as it were in order, several kinds of death, that
Jeconiah might know how dreadful God’s judgment would be. He adds —

<span id="v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#026)<span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p2"></span>**26**. And I will cast thee out, and thy
mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and
there shall ye die.

<span id="v.xxvi-p3"></span>**26**. Et projiciam to et matrem tuam quae
genuit to in terram alienam, in qua non estis geniti, et illic
moriemini.

<span id="v.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p6"></span>Here, again, the Prophet confirms what he
had said of the severe vengeance which God would take on Jeconiah. And
though he was in his thirty-seventh year brought out of prison, and
admitted unto the royal table, among other princes, he yet died in
exile; and perhaps it would have been better for him to continue in
prison till his death than to have been corrupted by allurements when he
became one of the princes, for he thus defiled himself. However this may
have been, he died in exile together with his mother Nehusta.

<span id="v.xxvi-p7"></span>The Prophet then enhanced the grievousness
of his punishment by saying, *I will cause thee to migrate,* or cast
thee out,  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) *and thy mother who bare
thee.* It is added, for the sake of indignity, that the mother of the
king would be led captive with him; for the female sex is often spared,
and she was also advanced in years. But God executed upon her his
judgment, because she was his associate in impiety: “I will remove you,”
he says, *“into foreign lands, in which ye were not born, and there ye
shall die.”*

<span id="v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#027)<span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p2"></span>**27**. But to the land whereunto they
desire to return, thither shall they not return.

<span id="v.xxvii-p3"></span>**27**. Et in terram ad quam ipsi levant
animum suum, ut revertantur illuc, non revertentur illuc.

<span id="v.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p6"></span>The Prophet again changes the person, and
yet not inelegantly, for he speaks here as one indignant, and after
having addressed a few words to King Jeconiah, he turns aside from him
and declares what God would do. Thus, when we think one hardly worthy to
be addressed, we change our discourse; and after having spoken a few
words to him, we take another mode of speaking. In the same manner, the
Prophet spoke very indignantly when he addressed Jehoiakim, and then he
declared how God would deal with him: he passed by him as though he was
deaf or unworthy of being noticed. We thus see the design of the Prophet
in the change he makes in this passage.

<span id="v.xxvii-p7"></span>*Into the land,* he says, *to which they
raise up their mind that they may return, there they shall not return*
He had said before that both the king and his mother would die in a
foreign land, and he now confirms the same thing; for the foolish
notion, that the king of Babylon would be at length propitious to them,
could not but with great difficulty be eradicated from their minds: nor
is there a doubt but that such thoughts as these were entertained, —
“When Nebuchadnezzar shall see us coming suppliantly to him, he will be
turned to mercy, for what more does he require? He does not mean to fix
here his royal palace; it; will satisfy him to have the people tributary
to him; and when he shall find that I am a man of no courage, he will
prefer having me a king, rather than to appoint a new one.” Such, then,
was the reasoning which the king had with his courtiers. Hence this vain
persuasion is what the Prophet now demolishes: *They raise up their
mind* to the land, that is, they think of a free return at length into
their own country; for to raise up the mind is to apply the mind or
thought to any thing. *They raise up,* then, *their mind to the land,*
that is, the land of Judah; but they *shall never return thither,*
whatever they may promise to themselves.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)

<span id="v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
promisest to us rest nowhere except in thy celestial kingdom, we may
never suffer ourselves, while travelling on the earth, to be allured and
driven here and there; but may we in the meantime call on thee with
resigned minds, and thus carry on our warfare, that; how much soever
thou mayest he pleased by various contests to try and prove us, we may
still continue to be thy faithful soldiers, until we shall enjoy that
rest which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine only-begotten
Son. — Amen.

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-Fourth

<span id="v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p1"></span><span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028)<span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p2"></span>**28** *Is* this man Coniah a despised broken
idol? *is he* a vessel wherein *is* no pleasure? wherefore are they cast
out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?

<span id="v.xxx-p3"></span>**28**. An simulachrum contemptum, contritum,
vir iste Coniah? an vas, in quo non est oblectatio? ut quid disjecti
sunt ipse et semen ejus et projecti super terram quam non noverunt?

<span id="v.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxx-p5"></span><span id="v.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p6"></span>As the Prophet was hardly able to convince
the Jews of what he had foretold, he confirms the same thing; but he
speaks here as of what was incredible. He assumes the character of one
greatly wondering, that others might cease to wonder. He then asks,
whether it was possible that Jeconiah should be driven into exile and
there miserably perish? We now see the design of the Prophet, that as
the Jews thought that the kingdom would be perpetual, it was necessary
to shake off such a notion, so that they might know that God had not in
vain threatened what we have already noticed. But there is in these
questions a kind of irony, for the Prophet might have made a positive
assertion in plain words; but from regard to others, he hesitates
through wonder, or seems to doubt as of a thing that was monstrous.

<span id="v.xxx-p7"></span>Is he a *statue?* he says; some translate “a
vessel;” but it seems to be taken here, as in other places, in its
proper sense, a statue. *Is,* then, *this man Coniah a despised and a
broken statue?* for <span id="v.xxx-p7.1"></span>ףופ, *puts,* is both to
fail and to break.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) We have said
that a part of his name was left out by way of contempt; still, as the
Jews were so blinded by the royal dignity that they could not believe
the prophecy, he asks respecting it as of a thing incredible. *Is he a
vessel?* etc., he adds. The Hebrew word <span
id="v.xxx-p8.1"></span>ילכ, *cali,* we know, is taken for any kind of
vessel; for the ancients called all kinds of furniture vessels. He asks,
then, *Is he a contemptible vessel? Is he a vessel in which there is no
delight?* He had before said that he was a despised statue. *Why are
they cast forth, he and his seed, and thrown into a land which they have
not known?* that is, into a remote land?  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) And we know that it is a hard lot when
one is driven far away from his own country. There is, then, no doubt
but that the Prophet enhances the grievousness of the evil when he
speaks of an unknown country: for Zedekiah, who was put on the throne,
was his uncle; and of his posterity the first was Salathiel, born in
exile. It now follows —

<span id="v.xxxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
22:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029)<span id="v.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p2"></span>**29**. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word
of the LORD.

<span id="v.xxxi-p3"></span>**29**. Terra, terra, terra, audi sermonem
Jehovae,

<span id="v.xxxi-p4"></span>**30**. Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this
man childless, a man *that* shall not prosper in his days: for no man of
his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any
more in Judah.

<span id="v.xxxi-p5"></span>**30**. Sic dicit Jehova, Scribite virum
hunc orbum (*vel,* solitarium) virum, cui prospere non erit in diebus
suis; quia prospere non habebit quisquam ex semine ejus sedens super
solium Davidis et dominans adhuc in Jehudah.

<span id="v.xxxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxi-p7"></span><span id="v.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p8"></span>The Prophet more fully confirms what I have
lately referred to; and the repetition was not superfluous in exclaiming
“earth” three times, for as the hardness of iron is overcome by the
repeated strokes of the hammer, so the Prophet repeated the word
“earth,” that he might subdue that perverseness in which the Jews had so
hardened themselves that no threats of God moved them. He did not adopt
this vehemence, as rhetoricians do who aim to appear eloquent; but it
was necessity that constrained him thus to assail that refractory
people, who would have otherwise turned a deaf ear to what we have
observed and read. By this preface, then, the Prophet especially shews
that he spoke of God’s dreadful judgment, and also reminded the Jews of
the certainty of this prophecy, though they were persuaded that the
kingdom would never fall. Hence in this repetition we see that there is
an implied reproof, as though he had said that they were indeed deaf,
but that it was to no purpose, for they would be constrained to see the
fulfillment of what they did not then believe. *Earth, earth, earth,
hear,* he says.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)

<span id="v.xxxi-p11"></span><span id="v.xxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p12"></span>Then he adds, *Thus saith Jehovah, Write ye
this man solitary,* or childless. Some think that these words were
addressed to angels or to prophets; but I regard not such a notion as
well founded: this mode of speaking seems rather to me to have been
taken from common practice, for decrees which were to continue in force
for a long time were usually written. When an edict was proclaimed, and
was to be in force only for a few days, it was not commonly recorded in
the public monuments; but when a law was enacted, which was to be
binding on posterity, it was written in the public tablets. Then the
Prophet intimates that this judgment of God could not be rendered void,
nor would be momentary like decrees which in a few days are disregarded
and soon forgotten, but that it would be certain and permanent. *Write
ye,* then, *this man childless* This bereavement is set in opposition to
the promise of God, that there would be perpetual successors to David on
his throne as long as the sun and moon were in the heavens. (<span
id="v.xxxi-p12.1"></span>[Ps
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="v.xxxi-p12.1"></span>.)
And the Prophet shews here that this promise as to Jeconiah would not be
fulfilled.  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="v.xxxi-p15"></span>And he adds, Write ye *this man as one who
will not prosper in his days; nay,* (for <span
id="v.xxxi-p15.1"></span>יכ*,* seems to me to be emphatic here,) *no one
of his seed shall prosper;* and then he adds an explanation, *sitting on
the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.*

<span id="v.xxxi-p16"></span>Now, it is no wonder that the Jews regarded
this judgment of God with abhorrence, as though it was something
monstrous, for God seemed to them to be inconsistent with himself, for
he had testified that his covenant would never be rendered void, and had
appealed to the sun and moon as witnesses. Hence, when the posterity of
David failed, at least when his throne was subverted, and no one
appeared as his successor, the truth of the promise seemed to have
failed, which was very strange. But it was possible for God, who doeth
wonders, to execute such punishment on Jeconiah and on such as were like
him, and yet in a secret and incomprehensible manner to bring things
about, so that the covenant which he had made should not wholly fail.
The grace of God, then, was hidden for a time, but never extinguished;
for at length a rod did grow up from the stem of Jesse, as it is said by
Isaiah.

<span id="v.xxxi-p17"></span>However, the words seem to imply otherwise,
for Jeconiah is said to be *solitary,* and then *unprosperous;* and
lastly, the Prophet declares that no one of his seed would sit on the
royal throne. But we must bear in mind that these words are to be
confined to a temporary punishment, and extend only to the coming of
Christ, though the posterity of David, as we shall hereafter see, did
begin to arise in Zerubbabel, but this was only an obscure and a small
prelude. We must, therefore, come to the time of Christ if we would
reconcile these two things which seem repugnant, — that Jeconiah became
childless, and that a successor from the seed of David never failed; it
was so, because this childlessness was only for a time; and this
interruption of God’s grace was something like death; but in course of
time it appeared that God was mindful of his covenant, even at a time
when he seemed to have forgotten it. And this prophecy, therefore,
ought; to be connected with that of Ezekiel,

<span id="v.xxxi-p18"></span>“Remove ye, remove, remove the crown until
he comes whose it is.”  
(<span id="v.xxxi-p18.2"></span>[Ezek.
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span id="v.xxxi-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxxi-p19"></span>There, also, Ezekiel repeats the word
“remove” three times, as though he had said that there would be no
kingdom of David, not only for a few months or years, but through a
series of many ages.

<span id="v.xxxi-p20"></span>There is no wonder, then, that the Prophet
declares here that Jeconiah would be childless, for such a sad calamity
for so many ages, as the throne of David trodden under foot with scorn
and contempt, might have overwhelmed the faithful with despair. This,
then, was the reason why he said that he would be *childless,* and also
that his whole posterity would be under a curse. But we must bear in
mind that exception, which is expressed by another Prophet,

<span id="v.xxxi-p21"></span>“until he comes whose the crown is.” (<span
id="v.xxxi-p21.1"></span>[Eze
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span id="v.xxxi-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="v.xxxi-p22"></span>For it was reserved for the head of Christ,
though for a long time it had been exposed to dishonor and to the
reproaches of all nations.

<span id="v.xxxi-p23"></span>Now it is useful to know this, for we are
taught that God is ever so consistent with himself, that his covenant,
which he has made with Christ and with all his members, never fails, and
that yet he punishes hypocrites even unto death. If any one, during a
long period, had sought for the Church in the world, there was none in
appearance; yet God shewed that he was faithful to his promises, for
suddenly there arose a people regenerated by the Gospel, so that his
covenant was not dead, but as it were for a time buried. The truth of
God, then, was proved by the event; and yet he took a dreadful vengeance
on the ingratitude of men when he thus blinded the whole world, now
follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc19004.htm#fr_31) <span
id="v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p14"></span> Or “descend;” it appears that Jeremiah was in
the Temple when he had this commission. And it would be better to render
the first words, “Thus said Jehovah,” as it is a narrative of what had
taken place. In <span id="v.i-p14.1"></span>[Jer
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p14.1"></span>, it
is said the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, and then he was commanded
to go down to the potter’s house; which intimates that he was at the
time in the Temple, officiating probably in his course as a priest. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc19004.htm#fr_32) <span
id="v.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p20"></span> The verb here is different from that in <span
id="v.i-p20.1"></span>[Jer 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012)<span
id="v.i-p20.1"></span>, though rendered in our version the same —
“execute.” It is <span id="v.i-p20.2"></span>השע, to do, to act, but is
used in a wide sense, like <span id="v.i-p20.3"></span>facio in Latin.
To do judgment is to judge or condemn, that is, the guilty; to do
justice is to justify or acquit, that is, the innocent. Perhaps the best
rendering would be, “Administer judgment and justice;” the former to the
guilty, and the latter to the innocent.

<span id="v.i-p21"></span>Blayney’s version can by no means be approved,
“Do right and justice,” as the distinctive character of the two acts is
not expressed. “Do judgment and justice,” are all the Versions and the
Targum. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc19004.htm#fr_33) <span
id="v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p24"></span> So it is rendered by Blayney; by the Vulg.
and Targ., “Make not sad;” by the Sept., “Tyrannize not over;” and by
the, Syr., “Wrong not.” The verb means to press down, to depress, and
hence to oppress. With this the next verb is connected by <span
id="v.i-p24.1"></span>ו in many copies, and by all the Versions except
the Arab., and by the Targum; and it means to do wrong by force or
violence, outrageously to injure, or to deal unjustly with, to plunder.
They were not to press them down by denying them their rights, nor
violently to take their things away from them, or to plunder them.

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>We may render the passage as Gataker does,
“And the stranger, the orphan, and the widow oppress not, wrong not,” or
plunder not. A similar passage is in <span id="v.i-p25.1"></span>[Jer
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#006)<span id="v.i-p25.1"></span>. The
word rendered there “oppress” is different, <span
id="v.i-p25.2"></span>קשע, and more general in its meaning, including
the two ideas here — oppression by denying them their rights, and by
plundering them. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc19004.htm#fr_34) <span
id="v.i-p25.3"></span>

<span id="v.i-p26"></span> There is first in this passage a general
direction, “Administer ye judgment and justice;” and then there is a
specification which refers first to justice and then to judgment, the
order, as is commonly the case, being reversed. It was an act of
“justice” to rescue the plundered from the hands of the plunderer. Then
they were forbidden to administer wrong, “judgment,” so as to depress
and plunder the stranger, the orphan, and the widow, and to shed
innocent blood. See <span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>[Ps
94:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#006)<span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>. It
shews a bad state of society when the wicked and the guilty are not
punished; but it is still worse when the helpless are oppressed, and the
innocent are condemned. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc19004.htm#fr_35) <span
id="v.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p29"></span> Poor Peter never had any throne, therefore
the Pope’s throne cannot be apostolic. The Pope’s throne is a heathen
throne, both materially and spiritually. The seat itself is a chair of
some heathen hero or deity, and the power claimed to be exercised was
never claimed nor possessed by Peter. The Pope is quite as much an
impostor as Mahomet, only his blasphemy is greater and more detestable.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc19004.htm#fr_36) <span
id="v.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span> The Vulg., the Syr., and the Targum omit the
<span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>ו before “enter:” but it has often the
meaning of then, especially when preceded, as here, by the conditional
particle if. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc19004.htm#fr_37) <span
id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> The verse may be rendered thus, —

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>**4.** For if doing ye shall do this word,
Then come through the gates of this house Shall kings, sitting for David
on his throne, Who shall ride in a chariot and on horses, He, and his
servant, and his people.

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>The “sitting” belongs to the kings, but
“riding” to the king, his servant, and his people. As “he” is in the
singular number, so “the servant” is, though both are pluralized by the
Sept., the Vulg., and the Arab., and indeed, the “servant” by the Syr.
And the Targ. But the Hebrew is as rendered above, as to the word
“chariot,” and “servant;” it is the idiom of the language. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc19004.htm#fr_38) <span
id="v.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span> “These words” include the “word” of message
contained in the second verse, and the “word” of precept in the third
verse; and “this word” or thing, at the beginning of the fourth verse,
is the latter — the word of precept. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc19004.htm#fr_39) <span
id="v.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p14"></span> That “the top (or head) of Lebanon,” means
Jerusalem, or the city of David, the residence of the royal family, is
evident from the seventh verse, “they shall cast down thy choice
cedars.” This point being settled, there can be hardly a doubt
respecting the correctness of Calvin’s view. All the Versions give this
rendering, “Gilead, thou art to me the head of Lebanon;” the meaning of
which does not appear. The Targum is a paraphrase not more intelligible.
It would be better to use the future tense, as that is used at the end
of the verse, —

<span id="v.v-p15"></span>Gilead shalt thou be to me, O top of Lebanon!
Surely I will make thee a wilderness, Like cities not inhabited.

<span id="v.v-p16"></span>It was to be dealt with by him as Gilead had
been, which was now wholly depopulated. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc19004.htm#fr_40) <span
id="v.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span> The verb is <span id="v.vi-p8.1"></span>שדק,
to sanctify, or rather to separate or to set apart for a holy purpose,
to consecrate. It is rendered by the Septuagint, “I will bring;” by the
Vulgate, “I will sanctify;” by the, Syriac, “I will prepare:” but by
Blayney, “I will commission.” It intimates a setting apart or selecting
for a holy purpose, such as the execution of the just judgment of God.
Perhaps the best rendering would be, “I will consecrate for thee.”

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>The next words are “destroyers, each man and
his instrument,” rendered by the Septuagint, “a destroying man and his
hatchet;” by the Vulgate, “a slaying man and his weapons;” by the
Syriac, “wasters, each with a hatchet in his hand;” and by the Arabic,
“a destroying man with his hatchet.”

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>The word <span id="v.vi-p10.1"></span>ילכ,
does not mean specifically a weapon of war, but generally an instrument
of any kind; and “hatchet” is the most suitable term for it here. We
might then give this version, —

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>**7.** And I will consecrate for thee
destroys, Every man and his hatchet; And they shall cut down thy
choisest cedars, And shall cast them into the fire.

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>— *Ed*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc19004.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span> So the Versions, “through,” and not, “by,”
as in our version; it is “nigh” in the Targ. The preposition is <span
id="v.vii-p10.1"></span>לע, upon, over, most commonly. It may mean the
passing over the city when in ruins. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc19004.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span> Literally, “nor nod for him.” They were not
to shake the head for him in sign of sorrow. There was a shaking of the
head in scorn or derision as well as in condolence or sympathy. See
<span id="v.viii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016)<span id="v.viii-p8.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc19004.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p9"></span> The Versions and the Targum seem to favor
this view of Calvin, as they render the participle, “going away,” in the
present tense, as in our version. The verse, then, is as follows, —

<span id="v.viii-p10"></span>Weep ye not for the dead, nor bewail him;
Weep, weep for him who goeth away; For he will not return any more, And
see the land of his nativity.

<span id="v.viii-p11"></span>The repetition of the verb “weep” is
emphatical. Our version, “weep sore,” is the Arab. The Sept. and the
Targ. take it as an instance of what often occurs in Hebrew, a
participle joined to a verb to enhance its force; but it is not so here,
the two verbs are in the imperative mood. But it may be that there is
here, as many think, a direct allusion to Josiah, who was dead, and was
much lamented, and to Shallum, who was taken captive and carried into
Egypt, where he died. In that case we ought to render the second line
thus, —

<span id="v.viii-p12"></span>Weep, weep for him who has gone away.

<span id="v.viii-p13"></span>The Hebrew participle may often be rendered
in the past tense; and so it is rendered here by Gataker, Venema, and
Blayney. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc19004.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span> Most commentators agree that Shallum was
another name for Jehoahaz, who succeeded his father Josiah. See <span
id="v.ix-p11.1"></span>[2Ki 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030)<span
id="v.ix-p11.1"></span>; and <span id="v.ix-p11.2"></span>[2Ch
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001)<span id="v.ix-p11.2"></span>. He
reigned only three months, and was succeeded by his elder brother
Jehoiakim. Compare <span id="v.ix-p11.3"></span>[2Ch
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#002)<span id="v.ix-p11.3"></span>,
with <span id="v.ix-p11.4"></span>[Jer
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#005)<span id="v.ix-p11.4"></span>. The
only difficulty arises from <span id="v.ix-p11.5"></span>[1Ch
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p11.5"></span>,
where we have the sons of Josiah arranged in this order, — Johanan,
Jehoiakim, Zedekiah, and Shallum. Johanan no doubt died young, and he
could not be Jehoahaz, for he is said to be the first-born; and
Jehoahaz, as it appears from <span id="v.ix-p11.6"></span>[2 Chr.
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#002),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#005)<span id="v.ix-p11.6"></span>, was
younger than Jehoiakim, and older by many years than Zedekiah. The only
solution of the difficulty seems to be that there is, as Blayney,
Horsley, and others thought, a typographical mistake in <span
id="v.ix-p11.7"></span>[1Ch 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#015)<span
id="v.ix-p11.7"></span>, that Shallum ought to be before Zedekiah,
instead of being after him. His two brothers had two names as well as
Shallum. There is a mistake of the same kind (that of transcribers at an
early period, as there are no different readings) in <span
id="v.ix-p11.8"></span>[2Ch 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009)<span
id="v.ix-p11.8"></span>, where Jehoiachin is said to have been eight
years old when he began to reign, instead of eighteen, as we find it
stated in <span id="v.ix-p11.9"></span>[2Ki
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)<span id="v.ix-p11.9"></span>. And
this age alone comports with the language of Jeremiah in this chapter,
for he would not have denounced such a judgment on a child eight years
of age.

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>As to <span id="v.ix-p12.1"></span>[Mt
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#011)<span id="v.ix-p12.1"></span>, the
true reading no doubt is, “And Josiah begat Jehoiakim, and Jehoiakim
begat Jeconiah,” etc., as found in some copies, though not of great
authority.

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span>Some, with Calvin, think Shallum to be
Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin, the son of Jehoiakim, and not Shallum the son
of Josiah. The objection to this is, that the Prophet here proceeds from
Shallum to Jehoiakim, and then to his son Jeconiah. And from what he
says of Jehoiakim, it appears that he delivered this prophecy in his
reign, except we think, as some do, that the Prophet relates here in the
reign of Zedekiah what he had previously prophesied. But the probability
is, as Blayney and others think, that this prophecy was delivered in the
reign of Jehoiakim. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc19004.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span> There is no doubt but <span
id="v.ix-p16.1"></span>רשא is sometimes an adverb of time, when; but all
the Versions and the Targum render it here who, “who has gone forth,”
etc. Shallum, whoever he was, had no doubt been led captive, as it is
said in the next verse; for the verb, which Calvin renders in the second
future, is in the past tense, and is so rendered by all the Versions. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc19004.htm#fr_46) <span
id="v.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.x-p9"></span> This verse is not correctly rendered by Calvin
nor by any of the early versions. The two last clauses are made by them
all in a great measure tantological, while they are perfectly distinct
in their meaning. I render the verse thus, —

<span id="v.x-p10"></span>Wo to him who builds his house by means of
injustice, And his chambers by means of wrong judgment: Of his neighbor
he makes a slave for no reason, And for his work he gives nothing to
him.

<span id="v.x-p11"></span>The verb <span id="v.x-p11.1"></span>רבע when
followed by <span id="v.x-p11.2"></span>ב, means to enslave, or to make
a slave. See <span id="v.x-p11.3"></span>[Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014)<span id="v.x-p11.3"></span>. We
hence see the force of the word, <span id="v.x-p11.4"></span>סנח
gratuitously, for no reason, because the Jews might under certain
circumstances be reduced to a state of slavery; but Jehoiakim did this
when there was no cause. This was the “wrong judgment” And then he gave
them no support, nothing for their work; this was the “injustice.” He
reduced them to slavery, and did not maintain them. The real import of
the passage is completely lost in the loose rendering of the Versions;
but the Targ. rightly expresses the meaning of the third line, “To
slavery he reduces for no cause his neighbor.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc19004.htm#fr_47) <span
id="v.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p8"></span> The word is <span
id="v.xiii-p8.1"></span>םיחורמ, rendered “fanned — <span
id="v.xiii-p8.2"></span>ῥιπιστὰ,” by the Sept., and “spacious” by the
other Versions and the Targ. The rendering may be “chambers of
ventilations,” meaning “airy chambers.” Parkhurst considers it a Huphal
participle, and renders it “airy.” But Blayney objects to this, as it is
in a different gender from “chambers;” but it may be viewed as in
construction; for in Hebrew two nouns are often used for a noun and a
participle, or an adjective. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc19004.htm#fr_48) <span
id="v.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p10"></span> The Vulg., the Syr., and Targ., read, “And
he opens for himself windows.” The verb is <span
id="v.xiii-p10.1"></span>ערק, to rend, to divide, and also to distend,
to enlarge, to dilate. See <span id="v.xiii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030)<span id="v.xiii-p10.2"></span>.
The line may be rendered, —

<span id="v.xiii-p11"></span>And he makes large his windows.

<span id="v.xiii-p12"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc19004.htm#fr_49) <span
id="v.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p14"></span> Calvin is quite right in applying the
latter part to the house generally, and not to the chambers, as it is
done by the Sept. and the Arab.; and guided by them, Houbigant proposed
emendations of the Text. The arrangement of the verse is according to
the common practice of the Prophets, —

<span id="v.xiii-p15"></span>**14.** Who says, “I will build me a
spacious house, And airy upper apartments:” And he makes large his
windows; And covered it is with cedar, And painted with vermilion.

<span id="v.xiii-p16"></span>There are two things mentioned, — house and
apartments. Of the latter he speaks first, as it is usually the case,
that he made large windows in them; and then he speaks of the house in
general, that it was covered (not ceiled) with cedar, as the Temple was,
(<span id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>[1Ki
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015)<span id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>,)
and painted with vermilion. Here we see an instance how emendations have
been proposed through ignorance as to the Hebrew style. The Syriac
version makes the sense more distinct, though it be not literal, and is
as follows, —

<span id="v.xiii-p17"></span>Who says, “I will build me large houses,
And spacious chambers:” For these he opens windows; Those he covers with
cedars, And adorns with paintings.

<span id="v.xiii-p18"></span>“Vermilion,” <span
id="v.xiii-p18.1"></span>רשש, rendered, “<span
id="v.xiii-p18.2"></span>μίλτω — ochre,” or ruddle, by the Sept.;
“sinopide — a red stone,” by the Vulg. and Targ. Parkhurst quotes Pliny,
who says that <span id="v.xiii-p18.3"></span>μίλτος was found in silver
mines, and was a sort of reddish sand, and used as a paint. Something of
this kind was what is here mentioned, though it is not known now
specifically what it was, nor is it of much consequence. It occurs only
here, and in <span id="v.xiii-p18.4"></span>[Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014)<span id="v.xiii-p18.4"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc19004.htm#fr_50) <span
id="v.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p8"></span> The general sense is given, but not a
literal rendering. The last verb is variously rendered; “because thou
betakest thyself to cedar,” is the Vulg.; “wilt thou delight thyself in
cedars?” the Syr.; the Targ. is a loose paraphrase, and the Sept. and
Arab. wholly depart from our present text, “because thou art stimulated
by Ahaz thy father.” Then what follows is widely different, but wholly
inconsistent with the original. The verb is the Hithpael of <span
id="v.xiv-p8.1"></span>הרח, to burn, to be hot; and it means to be hot
or warm with anger, exertion, grief, or delight. In the second sense it
is used in <span id="v.xiv-p8.2"></span>[Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)<span id="v.xiv-p8.2"></span>; but
here in the last sense, “because thou art inflamed with cedar,” or
greatly delightest thyself in cedar; and this meaning is countenanced
both by the Vulg. and Syr. Blayney takes the third sense — “hot with
grief,” and gives this version, which is approved by Horsley, though its
meaning is not very evident, —

<span id="v.xiv-p9"></span>Shalt thou reign because thou frettest
thyself in cedar?

<span id="v.xiv-p10"></span>Venema is more to the point, —

<span id="v.xiv-p11"></span>Shalt thou reign, because thou art in great
heat for cedar?

<span id="v.xiv-p12"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc19004.htm#fr_51) <span
id="v.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p18"></span> The whole verse would read better thus, —

<span id="v.xiv-p19"></span>15. Shalt thou reign, because thou art
enamored with cedar? Thy father — did he not eat and drink? When he
administered judgment and justice, Then it was well with him.

<span id="v.xiv-p20"></span>To eat and to drink, as Calvin, observes,
means a happy life; his father enjoyed life, though he took no delight
in cedars; but his happiness arose from governing justly his people. The
Syr. connects the two last lines as above, —

<span id="v.xiv-p21"></span>He executed judgment and justice, I
therefore did him good.

<span id="v.xiv-p22"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc19004.htm#fr_52) <span
id="v.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span> Venema considers that there is here no
repetition, but takes this verse as addressed to Jehoiakim, and gives
this version, —

<span id="v.xv-p8"></span>By judging judge the afflicted and poor, Then
it will be well with thee: Is not this the knowledge of me, saith
Jehovah?

<span id="v.xv-p9"></span>But the words will not admit of this
rendering. The verb is in the past tense, followed by a noun derived
from the same verb, a thing not unusual in Hebrew. Literally the verse
is, —

<span id="v.xv-p10"></span>He defended the defense (the cause) of the
needy and poor, Then well it was with him: Was not that to know me,
saith Jehovah?

<span id="v.xv-p11"></span>The pronoun <span id="v.xv-p11.1"></span>אוה,
is not this, but that, when used as a demonstrative pronoun. See <span
id="v.xv-p11.2"></span>[Ge 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)<span
id="v.xv-p11.2"></span>. We may indeed render the last line thus, —

<span id="v.xv-p12"></span>Was not that the knowledge of me, saith
Jehovah? That is, Was it not the fruit or the effect of that knowledge?

<span id="v.xv-p13"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc19004.htm#fr_53) <span
id="v.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p16"></span> The Vulg. is, “Was it not so, because he
knew me, saith Jehovah?” the Syr., “He who doeth such things knoweth me,
saith the Lord;” and the Targ., “Is not that the knowledge which I
desire, saith the Lord?” The Vulg. is the most correct. “They are said
to know God,” says Grotius, “who shew by their deeds that they know what
pleases Him.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc19004.htm#fr_54) <span
id="v.xvi-p7.10"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span> The most literal version of this verse is
the following, —

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>For on nothing are thine eyes and thine
heart, Except on thy gain, And on innocent blood, that it may be shed,
And on oppression and on violence, That they may be done.

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span>“That it may be shed,” is literally, “for
being shed,” it is a passive participle; and such is the case as to the
last verb. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc19004.htm#fr_55) <span
id="v.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p10"></span> It is “to” in the Sept. and Vulg., and
“concerning” in the Syr., Arab., and Targ. The latter is most adopted by
commentators. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc19004.htm#fr_56) <span
id="v.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p15"></span> The original is not “his,” but “her
glory.” The lamentation is such as was used for kings, when there was
also a condolence expressed for the queens. Ah, my brother! and, Ah,
lord! was a lamentation for the king when dead, (<span
id="v.xvii-p15.1"></span>[Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005)<span id="v.xvii-p15.1"></span>;)
and, Ah, sister! and, Ah, her glory! was sympathy for the surviving
queen. Her glory had departed with her husband. This is Blayney’s view.

<span id="v.xvii-p16"></span>The Versions and the Targum are all
different, and not one of them renders the original correctly.

<span id="v.xvii-p17"></span>The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="v.xvii-p18"></span>**18.** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
Jehoiakim, The son of Josiah, the king of Judah — They shall not lament
for him — “Ah, my brother, and, Ah, sister. They shall not lament for
him — “Ah, Lord! and, Ah, her glory!”

<span id="v.xvii-p19"></span>To render the <span
id="v.xvii-p19.1"></span>ו disjunctively “or,” as in our version, seems
not suitable. The lamentation and the condolence are to be connected
together. The “Ah” might be rendered “Alas;” and so it is in many
places. See <span id="v.xvii-p19.2"></span>[1Ki
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030)<span id="v.xvii-p19.2"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc19004.htm#fr_57) <span
id="v.xvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p23"></span> The verb, or rather participle, rendered
“drawn,” means to be dragged along, and not carried. See <span
id="v.xvii-p23.1"></span>[2Sa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013)<span id="v.xvii-p23.1"></span>.
He was to be dragged out of the city and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem. It is said in <span id="v.xvii-p23.2"></span>[2Ch
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006)<span id="v.xvii-p23.2"></span>,
that Nebuchadnezzar “bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.” The
probability is (for we have no express account) that he died while in
fetters at Jerusalem, before he was removed, and that Nebuchadnezzar,
from indignation at his rebellion, had him dragged as a dead ass out of
the city and exposed as food for rapacious birds and beasts. We find it
said in <span id="v.xvii-p23.3"></span>[2Ki
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#006)<span id="v.xvii-p23.3"></span>,
that “Jehoiakim slept with his fathers;” but this only means that he
died, or that he died a natural death and was not killed; for we find
this phrase used, when burial is afterwards mentioned. See <span
id="v.xvii-p23.4"></span>[2 Chr.
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#016), [2 Chr.
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014)<span id="v.xvii-p23.4"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc19004.htm#fr_58) <span
id="v.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span> “All around,” <span
id="v.xx-p8.1"></span>םירבעמ, is rendered “beyond the sea” by the Sept.;
“to those who pass by,” by the Vulg.; “from the farther shores of the
sea, by the Syr.; “at the fords,” by the Targ.; “beyond the fords,” that
is, of the Nile, by Grotius and Piscator; and “from the borders,” by
Blayney. But the most suitable rendering here is what has been adopted
by Gataker and Venema, “from Abarim,” a mountain in the confines of
Moab. See <span id="v.xx-p8.2"></span>[Nu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)<span id="v.xx-p8.2"></span>.
There are here two mountains previously mentioned, lying to the north;
and here is another to the east. Jerusalem (for that is here addressed)
is commanded, by way of taunt, to ascend these mountains to cry for aid
and to utter its lamentation; for all its lovers from these quarters
were destroyed; the king of Babylon had subdued them. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc19004.htm#fr_59) <span
id="v.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p9"></span> The word for tranquillity is in the plural
number, “tranquillities,” meaning tranquil, or quiet times or seasons.
It is rendered “fall,” very unaccountably, by the Sept.; “abundance,” by
the Vulg.; “affluence,” by the Syr.; “when thou didst sit tranquil,” by
the Targ. But the word clearly means a tranquil, quiet, or peaceable
state. Blayney rightly renders the expression, “in the times of thy
tranquillity.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc19004.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.xxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p13"></span> The <span id="v.xxi-p13.1"></span>יכ is
omitted in the Sept., and the clause is given as in apposition with the
former, which seems to be the meaning; “the way” was not to hear God’s
voice. Blayney, very unsuitably, connects the last line with the
following verse. I render the verse thus, —

<span id="v.xxi-p14"></span>**21.** I spoke to thee in thy quiet times;
Thou didst say, “I will not hear:” This has been thy way from thy
childhood; For thou didst not hear my voice.

<span id="v.xxi-p15"></span>It has been usual with many to render
“hear,” “obey;” but not rightly. The complaint against the people was,
that they would not “hear” the voice of God, much less obey it. The
answer here was that they would not “hear.” The complaint, or the charge
against them is the same, and the verb ought to be so rendered. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc19004.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p8"></span> The wind sometimes means what is empty; and
in this sense the Sept., the Vulg., and the Arab. take it here, “All thy
pastors the wind shall feed;” but the Syr. and the Targ. take the “wind”
as meaning a blasting or a stormy wind: “All thy pastors the wind shall
feed on,” or eat up, is the Syr.; and the Targ. gives this paraphrase,
“All thy pastors shall be scattered unto every wind.” The verb, no
doubt, means to feed, and to feed on, or eat up, or consume, but not to
scatter or disperse. Therefore the meaning here is, either that the
pastors would have nothing but what was empty to support them, or that
they would be consumed as by a blast. The first is most consonant to the
tenor of the passage; for the aid of their lovers is previously referred
to; but they would find this aid to be “wind,” and then it is added,
that these lovers as well as themselves would be driven into captivity.
There is a striking paronomasia in the words. The word for pastors is
derived from the verb to feed. We may give this version, “All thy
feeders shall the wind feed.” The feeders had fed the people with winds,
with empty expectations, and they, in their turn, would have nothing but
wind, what was empty, to live upon or to support them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc19004.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p11"></span> Our version is better as to the two verbs
here used, “ashamed and confounded.” The latter is stronger than the
former. The Vulg. and the Targ. invert the order, “confounded and
ashamed.” The Sept. and Arab. have “ashamed and dishonored,” or
despised. The first verb means simply to be ashamed, and the other to
turn aside as it were from a sense of shame, as one not able to look on
others. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc19004.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p9"></span> The former part of this passage is
differently rendered by all the early versions: the Sept., “thou wilt
groan;” the Vulg., “how thou hast groaned;” the Syr., “how much wilt
thou groan.” The reading adopted was <span
id="v.xxiii-p9.1"></span>תנהנ, from <span id="v.xxiii-p9.2"></span>ההנ,
instead of <span id="v.xxiii-p9.3"></span>תנחנ, for the <span
id="v.xxiii-p9.4"></span>י is not found in many copies, nor in the Keri,
nor in connection with the two participles at the beginning of the
verse. The Targ. has “what wilt thou do.” Most of modern expounders take
the text as we have it, and there are no different readings. Then the
whole verse would read as follows, —

<span id="v.xxiii-p10"></span>**23.** Inhabitress of Lebanon! nestler in
the cedars! How graceful (or favored) shalt thou be, When come on thee
shall throes, A pain like that of childbearing!

<span id="v.xxiii-p11"></span>The gender is feminine, and either
Jerusalem or the house or family of David is meant. The word for
“throes” means girding pains or pangs. The verse is the language of
irony. The people were so hardened, that nothing else would have touched
them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc19004.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p8"></span> The early Versions throughout this passage
give his name as Jeconiah; but the Targ., Coniah, according to the
Hebrew. The Rabbins give various reasons for the change, and others too,
which are frivolous. The reason given by Calvin and adopted by Gataker,
Lowth, and others, is confirmed by the contemptuous language used in the
28th verse. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc19004.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p7"></span> There is here a striking contrast: God would
pluck off Jeconiah, were he like a signet on his right hand, and would
deliver him into the hand of his enemies. From being as it were on the
divine hand, he would be given up into the hand of those who sought his
life. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc19004.htm#fr_66) <span
id="v.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p8"></span> The word is strong; it means to toss, to
hurl, violently to cast forth, to throw with force, as one throws a
missile weapon. See <span id="v.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[1Sa
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#011)<span id="v.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.
The “<span id="v.xxvi-p8.2"></span>mittam“ of the Vulg. is too weak; the
“<span id="v.xxvi-p8.3"></span>ἀποῤῥίψω” of the Sept. is more suitable.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc19004.htm#fr_67) <span
id="v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p8"></span> The phrase, “to raise or lift up the
mind,” or the soul, is to set the heart on a thing. The Vulg. has
adopted the Hebrew idiom, “to which they lift up their soul.” The Sept.
leaves out “return,” and have only, “which they wish in their souls.”
Our version retains the true idea, though it be not literal, “whereunto
they desire to return;” literally, “where they are lifting up their soul
to return there:” the two adverbs of place are given, the relative
adverb and the pronoun adverb, if we may so call them. It is the same
sort of idiom as when a relative and a pronoun are used, one before and
the other after the verb, as in <span id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#025)<span id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>,
“whom thou fearest (or dreadest) their face,” rightly rendered in our
version, “whose face thou fearest:” but the Welsh is literally the
Hebrew; the idiom is exactly the same. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc19004.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.xxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p8"></span> The verb means to loose, to set free; and it
is here in a passive sense, to be loosed or set free. It seems to refer
to the setting free the idol or statue from its fastenings; therefore,
“broken down” would be its best rendering. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc19004.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.xxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p9"></span> It is singular that all the early versions
soften down the strong terms used in this verse; not one of them give a
faithful translation. The Sept., the Syr., and the Arab. give hardly the
half of the verse, and what they give is divested of the tone and spirit
of the original. The Vulg. leaves out the word “idol” or statue, and
puts “an earthen vessel” in its place. The whole verse I render as
follows, —

<span id="v.xxx-p10"></span>**28.** A contemptible, broken down idol! Is
this the man Coniah? Is he a vessel in which there is no delight? Why
are they cast out, he and his seed, And sent into a land which they have
not known?

<span id="v.xxx-p11"></span>There is the relative which understood after
“vessel” in the third line. The Welsh, which in this kind of idiom is
exactly the same with the Hebrew, admits of the same sort of ellipsis, —

<span id="v.xxx-p12"></span><span id="v.xxx-p12.1"></span>Ai llester yw
heb hoffder ynddo?

<span id="v.xxx-p13"></span>Which is verbally the Hebrew, “Is he a
vessel without delight in it?” The “casting out” was from the land of
Canaan, and the “sending” was into the unknown land. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc19004.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p9"></span> It does not appear whether Calvin meant the
earth generally or the land of Judea. But the latter most probably is
what is intended. The version, then, ought to be, “Land, land, land!”
The Sept. and the Arab. have “land” only twice, but the other versions
have it three times as in Hebrew. The paraphrase of the Targ. is
singular, “From their own land they have made them to migrate to another
land; land of Israel! hear the words of the Lord.”

<span id="v.xxxi-p10"></span>“Land” means often the inhabitants; and
what follows proves that it has this meaning here; for it is added,
“Write ye,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc19004.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.xxxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p13"></span> The word rendered “childless”“ properly
means “wholly stripped,” or destitute, or “quite naked.” It is rendered
“banished” by the Sept., but “childless” by the Vulg., the Syr., and the
Targ. He was “childless” as a king, having had no son as a successor on
the throne of David; but he had children, see <span
id="v.xxxi-p13.1"></span>[1 Chr. 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#018)<span id="v.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.
And that this is the meaning appears evident from the end of the verse.

<span id="v.xxxi-p14"></span>Scott thinks that Zedekiah, the uncle of
Jeconiah, is the person spoken of in these two last verses. He considers
that the contents of this chapter were repeated in Zedekiah’s reign as a
warning to him. But this view is not consistent with the general tenor
of the chapter. See especially <span id="v.xxxi-p14.1"></span>[Jer.
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019)<span id="v.xxxi-p14.1"></span>;
these shew evidently that the prophecy was delivered in the time,
probably in the latter time of Jehoiakim; then the Prophet proceeds, in
<span id="v.xxxi-p14.2"></span>[Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024)<span id="v.xxxi-p14.2"></span>
to the end of the chapter, prophetically to describe the late of his son
Jeconiah. And having said that he would be childless as a king, that
none of his seed would sit on the throne of David, he introduces in the
next chapter, which is connected with this, the “righteous branch,” the
Messiah, the King of Zion. The proper division of the chapter is at the
ninth verse. According to this view there is a perfect consistency, —
Jeconiah was the last reigning prince in the right line (Zedekiah, his
uncle, was not in the right line) on the throne of David, as a temporal
sovereign; then he, of whom David was a type, came, not to sit and to
rule on the visible throne of David, but on that which it represented. —
*Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](cc19005)
