[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc19001)  [Next](cc19003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Fifth

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#001)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**1**. Now Pashur the son of Immer the
priest, who *was* also chief governor in the house of the LORD, heard
that Jeremiah prophesied these things.

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Et audivit Phassur filius Immer
sacerdos et ipse praefeetus erat (dux) in Templo (in aede) Jehovae,
Jeremiam vaticinantem (prophetantem) hos sermones:

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>**2**. Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the
prophet, and put him in the stocks that *were* in the high gate of
Benjamin, which *was* by the house of the LORD.

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span>**2**. Et percussit Phassur Jeremiam
Prophetam, et posuit eum in cippum *(vel,* in carcerem; *sed mihi magis
placet nomen carceris)* qui erat in porta Benjamin superiore, quae
spectabat ad aedem Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>Jeremiah relates here what sort of reward he
had received for his prophecy, — that he had been smitten and cast into
prison, not by the king or by his courtiers, but by a priest who had the
care of the Temple. It was a grievous and bitter trial when God’s
servant found that he was thus cruelly treated by one of the sacred
order, who was of the same tribe, and his colleague; for the priests who
were then in office had not been without right appointed, for God had
chosen them. As, then, their authority was founded on the Law and on
God’s inviolable decree, Jeremiah might well have been much terrified;
for this thought might have occurred to him, — “What can be the purpose
of God? for he has set priests of the tribe of Levi over his Temple and
over his whole people. Why, then, does he not rule them by his Spirit?
Why does he not render them fit for their office?

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>Why does he suffer his Temple, and the
sacred office which he so highly commends to us in his Law, to be thus
profaned? or why, at least, does he not stretch forth his hand to defend
me, who am also a priest, and sincerely engaged in my calling?” For we
know that God commands in his Law, as a proof that the priests had
supreme power, that whosoever disobeyed them should be put to death.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>(<span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>[De
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>.)
“Since, then, it was God’s will to endue the priests with so much
authority and power, why therefore did he not guide them by his grace,
that they might faithfully execute the office committed to them?”

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>Nor was Jeremiah alone moved and shaken by
this trial, but all who then truly worshipped God. Small, indeed, was
the number of the godly; but there was surely no one who was not
astonished at such a spectacle as this.

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>Pashur was not the chief priest, though he
was of the first order of priests; and it is probable that Immer, his
father, was the high priest, and that he was his vicar, acting in his
stead as the ruler of the Temple.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)
However this may have been, he was no doubt superior, not only to the
Levites, but also to the other priests of his order. Now this person,
being of the same order and family, rose up against Jeremiah, and not
only condemned in words a fellow-priest, but treated him outrageously,
for he smote the Prophet. This was unworthy of his station, and contrary
to the rights of sacred fellowship; for if the cause of Jeremiah was
bad, yet a priest ought to have pursued a milder course; he might have
cast him into prison, that if found guilty, he might afterwards be
condemned. But to smite him was not the act of a priest, but of a
tyrant, of a ruffian, or of a furious man.

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>We may hence learn in what a disorder
things were at that time; for in a well-ordered community the judge does
not leap from his tribunal in order to strike a man, though he might
deserve a hundred deaths, as regard ought to be had to what is lawful.
Now, if a judge, whom God has armed with the sword, ought not thus to
give vent to his wrath and without discretion use the sword, it is
surely a thing wholly inconsistent with the office of a priest. Then the
state of things must have been then in very great disorder, when a
priest thus disgraced himself. And from his precipitant rage we may also
gather that good men were then very few. He had been chosen to preside
over the Temple; he must then have excelled others not only as to his
station, but also in public esteem and in the possession of some kind of
virtues. But we see how he was led away by the evil spirit.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>These things we ought carefully to
consider, for it happens sometimes that great commotions arise in the
Church of God, and those who ought to be moderators are often carried
away by a blind and, as it were, a furious zeal. We may then stumble,
and our faith may wholly fail us, except such an example as this affords
us aid, which shews clearly that the faithful were formerly tried and
had their faith exercised by similar contests. It is not then uselessly
said that *Pashur smote Jeremiah* Had he struck one of the common
people, it would have been more endurable, though in that case it would
have been an act wholly unworthy of his office; but when he treated
insolently the servant of God, and one who had for a long time
discharged the prophetic office, it was far less excusable. This
circumstance, then, ought to be noticed by us, that the priest dared to
strike the Prophet of God.

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>It then follows that Jeremiah was cast by
him *into prison* But we must notice this, that he had *heard* the words
of Jeremiah before he became infuriated against him. He ought,
doubtless, to have been moved by such a prophecy; but he became mad and
so audacious as to smite God’s Prophet. It hence appears how great is
the stupidity of those who have once become so hardened as to despise
God; for even the worst of men are terrified when God’s judgment is
announced. But Pashur heard Jeremiah proclaiming the evil that was near
at hand; and yet the denunciation had no other effect on him but to
render him worse. As, then, he thus violently assailed God’s Prophet,
after having heard his words, it is evident that he was blinded by a
rage wholly diabolical. We also see that the despisers of God blend
light with darkness, for Pashur covered his impiety with a cloak, and
hence cast Jeremiah into prison; for in this way he shewed that he
wished to know the state of the case, as he brought him out of prison
the following day. Thus the ungodly ever try to make coverings for their
impiety; but they never succeed. The hypocrisy of Pashur was very gross
when he cast Jeremiah into prison, in order that he might afterwards
call him to defend his cause, for he had already smitten him. This great
insolence, then, took away every *pretense* for justice. It was
therefore extremely frivolous for Pashur to have recourse afterwards to
some form of trial for deciding the case.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>The word <span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>תכפהמ, *mephicat,* is rendered by some, fetter;
and by others, stocks; and they think it to be a piece of wood, with one
hole to confine the neck, and another the feet. But I know not whether
this is suitable here, for Jeremiah says that it was in the higher gate
of Benjamin. This certainly could not be properly said of fetters, or of
chains, or of stocks. It then follows that it was a prison.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) He mentions the *gate of Benjamin,* as it
belonged to that tribe; for we know that a part of Jerusalem was
inhabited by the Benjamites. They had two gates, and this was the higher
gate towards the east. He says that it was opposite *the house of
Jehovah;* for besides the court there were many small courts, as it is
well known, around the Temple. It follows: —

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**3**. And it came to pass on the morrow,
that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah
unto him, The LORD hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Et accidit postridie (die crastino)
ut educeret Phassur Jeremiam e carcere; et dixit ei Jeremias, Non
Phassur vocavit Jehova nomen tuum, sed potius terrorem undique.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>No doubt Pashur called other priests to
examine the case. It was, indeed, a specious pretense, for he seemed as
though he did not wish to condemn the holy Prophet hastily, or without
hearing his defense. But Jeremiah only says briefly that he was brought
out of prison: we at the same time gather that he was not dismissed, for
he was summoned before Pashur to give a reason for his prophecy.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>But here the Prophet shews that he was not
cast down or disheartened, though he had been most contemptuously
treated; he bore patiently the buffetings and stripes he had received,
and also his incarceration. We know that such outrages are so bitter to
ingenuous minds, that they can hardly sustain them. But Jeremiah teaches
us, by his own example, that our constancy and firmness ought not to be
weakened though the whole world loaded or almost overwhelmed us with
reproaches. We ought, then, to understand that courage of mind ought not
to fail or be weakened in God’s servants, however wickedly and
contumeliously they may be treated by the world. For Jeremiah, when he
came out of prison, spoke more boldly than before; nor was he beyond the
reach of danger. Courage increases when one obtains the victory, and he
can then safely and securely insult his enemies; but Jeremiah was yet a
captive, though he had been brought out of prison, and he might have
been afterwards cast there again and treated more cruelly than before.
But neither the wrong he had received, nor the fear of new contumely,
deterred him from denouncing God’s judgment on the ungodly priest. Such
magnanimity becomes all God’s servants, so that they ought not to feel
shame, nor grow soft, nor be disheartened, when the world treats them
with indignity and reproach; nor ought they to fear any dangers, but
advance courageously in the discharge of their office.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>It must in the second place be noticed, —
that God’s Prophet here closes his eyes to the splendor of the priestly
office, which otherwise might have hindered him to denounce God’s
judgment,. And this ought to be carefully observed; for we know the
ungodly he hid under masks, as the case is in the present day with the
Pope and all his filthy clergy: for what do they allege but the name of
Catholic Church and perpetual priesthood and apostolical dignity?
Doubtless, Pashur was of the priestly order; but what the Papacy is, the
Scripture neither mentions nor teaches, except that it condemns it as
altogether filthy and abominable. And the Levitical priesthood, as I
have said, was founded on God’s Law; and yet Jeremiah, guided by the
command of God, hesitated not severely to reprove the priest and to
treat him as he deserved. It is, therefore, then only that we tightly
and faithfully discharge the prophetic office*,* when we shew no respect
of persons, and disregard those external masks by which the ungodly
deceive the simple, and are haughty towards God while they falsely
pretend his name.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>Now he says, *Jehovah has called thy name
not Pashur, but terror on every side* Some render the words, “Because
there will be terror to thee on every side;*”* but incorrectly, for in
the next verse a reason is given which explains what the Prophet means.
Jeremiah no doubt had a regard to the meaning of the word Pashur,
otherwise it would have been unmeaning and even foolish to say, “Thy
name shall be called not Pashur, but terror on every side.” Interpreters
have expounded the word Pashur as meaning an increasing prince, or one
who extends power, deriving it from <span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>השפ,
*peshe*, to increase, and transitively, to extend; and they add to it
the word <span id="iii.iii-p12.2"></span>רש, *sher,* which means a
prince; and so they render it, a prince extending power, or a prince who
increases. But as there is some doubt as to the points, I know not
whether this etymology can be maintained. I am more inclined to derive
the word from <span id="iii.iii-p12.3"></span>חשפ, *peshech,* to cut or
break. It is indeed but once found in this sense in Scripture, but often
in the Chaldee language. However this may be, it is taken in this sense
once by Jeremiah in the third Chapter of Lamentations.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) And hence by a metaphor it means to open;
and <span id="iii.iii-p13.7"></span>א, *aleph,* may be deemed quiescent
in the second word, so that it means one who breaks or opens the light.
The words which follow — “terror on every side” — induce and compel me
to give this interpretation. He does not say that he would be a terror
on every side; but that terrors surrounded him, <span
id="iii.iii-p13.8"></span>ביבסמ, *mesabib,* so that there was no escape.
As then the name of Pashur was honorable, signifying to open light, he
mentions this, (it is indeed a metaphor, by which breaking means
opening:) as then he had this name, which means to bring forth light,
Jeremiah says, “Thou shalt be called a terror on every side;” that is, a
terror that so surrounds all that no escape is possible.  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) We see that the contrast is most suitable
between the opening of light and that terror which spread on every side,
so that there is no opening and no escape; and the explanation follows:

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**4**. For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they
shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold
*it:* and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he shall carry them captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with
the sword.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, Ecce ego pono
to in terrorem tibi et omnibus amicis tuis; et cadent per gladium
hostium tuorum, oculi tui videntes, (*id est*, oculis tuis videntibus,)
et totum Jehudah tradam in manum regis Babylonis, et transferet eos
(*vel*, traducet) Babylonem, et percutiet eos gladio.

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah explains more at large why he
said that Pashur would be terror on every side, even because he and his
friends would be in fear; for he would find himself overwhelmed by God’s
vengeance, and would become a spectacle to all others. In short,
Jeremiah means, that such would be God’s vengeance as would fill Pashur
and all others with fear; for Pashur himself would be constrained to
acknowledge God’s hand without being able to escape, and all others
would also perceive the same. He then became a spectacle to himself and
to others, because he could not, however hardened he might have been, do
otherwise than feel God’s vengeance; and this became also apparent to
all others.

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>*Behold,* he says, *I will make thee a
terror to thyself and to all thy friends; and fall shall they by the
sword of their enemies, thine eyes seeing it; and all Judah will I
deliver into the hand,* etc. He repeats what he had said; for Pashur
wished to be deemed the patron of the whole land, and especially of the
city Jerusalem. As, then, he had undertaken the cause of the people, as
though he was the patron and defender of them all, Jeremiah says, that
all the Jews would be taken captives, and not only so, but that
something more grievous was nigh at hand, for when the king of Babylon
led them into exile, he would also smite them with the sword, not indeed
all; but we know that he severely punished the king, his children, and
the chief men, so that the lower orders on account of their obscurity
alone escaped; and those of this class who did escape, because they were
not noble nor renowned, were indebted to their own humble condition. It
follows, —

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#005)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**5**. Moreover I will deliver all the
strength of this city, and all the labours thereof, and all the precious
things thereof, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give
into the hand of their enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them,
and carry them to Babylon.

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span>**5**. Et ponam totam fortitudinem urbis
hujus, et omnem laborem ejus, et omnem pretiousum ejus, (*vel*, omnem
gloriam,) et omnes thesauros regum Jehudah ponam in manum inimicorum
ipsorum, et spoliabunt ipsos et tollent eos et abducent eos Babylonem.

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, but
amplifies what he had said in order to confirm it. At the same time
there is no doubt but that Pashur was more exasperated when he heard
these grievous threatenings; but it was right thus to inflame more and
more the fury of all the ungodly. Though, then, they may a hundred times
raise a clamor, we must not desist from freely and boldly declaring the
truth. This is the reason why the Prophet now more fully describes the
future calamity of the city.

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>*I will give up,* he says, the whole strength
*of this city,* etc. This word “strength” is sometimes taken
metaphorically for riches or wealth. Then *the whole strength,* or
substance, *of this city and all its labor will I give up,* etc. This
second clause is still more grievous, for what had been acquired with
great labor was to be given to plunder; for when any one becomes rich
without labor, that is, when riches come to one by inheritance, without
any trouble or toil, he is not so distressed when he happens to be
deprived of his wealth; but he who has through a whole life of labor
obtained what he expects would be for the support of life, this person
grieves much more and becomes really distressed with anguish, when
enemies come and deprive and plunder him of all he possesses. There is
therefore no doubt but that “labor” is here mentioned, as in other parts
of Scripture, in order to amplify the evil. He then adds, *all its
precious things and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I
deliver into the hand of their enemies; who* will carry away, not only
riches, labor, and treasures, but also the men themselves, and *bring
them to Babylon*  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) The rest to-morrow.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may not by our
perverseness increasingly provoke thy wrath, but that whenever thou
threatenest us, we may immediately fear and tremble at thy word, and
also obey thee in the true spirit of meekness, and so dread thy
threatenings as to anticipate thy judgment by true repentance, and thus
strive to glorify thy name, that thou mayest become our strength and
glory, and that we may be able not only before the world, but before
thee and thy angels, really to glory, that we are that peculiar people
whom thou hast favored with thy adoption, that thou mayest to the end
carry on in us the work of thy grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Six

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#006)<span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>**6**. And thou, Pashur, and all that
dwell in thine house shall go into captivity: and thou shalt come to
Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and
all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies.

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span>**6**. Et tu Phashur et omnes habitatores
domus tuae *(hoc est* omnes domestici tui) venietis captivitatem; tu
venies Babylonem, et illic morieris, et illic sepeheris, et omnes amici
tui, quibus vaticinatus es in mendacio.

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>Now Jeremiah declares that Pashur himself
would be a proof, that he had truly foretold the destruction of the city
and the desolation of the whole land. He had indeed before exposed his
vanity; but he now brings the man himself before the public; for it was
necessary to exhibit a remarkable instance, that all might know that
God’s judgment ought to have been dreaded.

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span>Though that impostor flattered the people,
yet Jeremiah says, that he and all his domestics would be led into
captivity; that is, that the whole family would be as it were a
spectacle, so that all the Jews might see that Pashur would be brought
to nothing. “Let all the Jews then know,” he seems to have said, “that
he is a false prophet.”

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span>But what follows might have raised a
question; for Jeremiah declares as a punishment, that Pashur dying in
Babylon would be buried there; but he had said before, “I will give
their carcasses for meat to the birds of heaven and to the beasts of the
earth;” and now it is not consistent in the Prophet to represent that as
a punishment which is reckoned as one of God’s favors. In answer to
this, let it be especially noticed, that God does not always punish the
ungodly alike, or in the same way. He would have some to be cast away
unburied, as they were unworthy of that common lot of humanity; but he
would have others buried, but for a different, purpose; for there is
weight in the particle *there,* for Babylon is put in contrast with the
holy land. Whosoever were buried in the land of Canaan, had even in
their death a pledge of the eternal inheritance; for as it is well
known, God wished them while they lived so to enjoy the land, that they
might look forward to heaven. Hence burial in the land of Canaan was as
it were a visible mark or symbol of God’s adoption, as though all the
children of Abraham were gathered into his bosom until they arose into a
blessed and immortal life. Hence Pashur, by being buried in Babylon,
became an outcast from God’s Church; for it was in a manner a
repudiation, as though God would thus openly put on him a mark of
infamy.

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>If it be objected and said, that the same
thing happened to Daniel, and to some of the best servants of God, and
that Jeremiah himself was buried in Egypt, which was far worse; the
answer we give is this, — that temporal punishments which happen to the
elect and God’s children for their good do in a manner change their
nature as to them; though, indeed, it must be held, that all punishments
are evidences of the wrath and curse of God. Whatever evils then happen
to us in this life ought to be regarded as the fruits of sin, as though
God thereby shewed himself openly to be displeased with us. This is one
thing. Then, when poverty, famine, diseases, and exile, and even death
itself, are viewed in themselves, we must always say that they are the
curses of God, that is, when they are regarded, as I have said, in their
own nature. But God consecrates these punishments as to his own
children, so they turn to their benefit, and thereby cease to be curses.
Whenever then God declares, “Thou shalt be unburied,” it is no wonder
that this dishonor should be deemed an evidence of his wrath and a proof
of his curse. And farther, whenever he formerly said thus, “Thou shalt
be buried out of the holy land,” it was also an evidence of his curse,
that is, with regard to the reprobate. At the same time God turned to
good whatever might otherwise be a curse to his elect; and hence Paul
says, that all things turn out for good and benefit to the faithful, who
love God. (<span id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span>Now, then, we understand why the Prophet
says, that Pashur would be *buried* in Babylon; nor is there a doubt but
that there was more disgrace in that burial, than if his body was cast
out and devoured by wild beasts; for God intended to render him
conspicuous, that all might for a long time turn their eyes to him,
according to what is said in <span id="iii.viii-p10.1"></span>[Ps
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012)<span
id="iii.viii-p10.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span>“Slay them not, O God, for thy people may
forget them.”

<span id="iii.viii-p12"></span>God then intended that the life and death
of Pashur should be a memorial, in order that the minds of the people
might be more impressed. At the same time, were the word burial taken in
a wider sense, there would be nothing wrong, as though it was said,
“There shall his carcass lie until it becomes putrified.”

<span id="iii.viii-p13"></span>Then Jeremiah adds, *Thou and thy friends
to whom thou hast prophesied falsely*  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) This passage teaches us that a just reward
is rendered to the ungodly who wish to be deceived, when they sustain a
twofold judgment from God. Behold, then, what all the wicked who seek
flatterers that promise them wonderful things, gain for themselves! they
thus earn for themselves a heavier vengeance. The more they strive to
put afar off God’s judgment, the more, no doubt, they increase and
inflame it. This is the reason why the Prophet denounces a special
judgment on the friends of Pashur, to whom he had prophesied; they had
wilfully laid hold on those false promises by which he had flattered
them, so that they boldly despised God. Since, then, they wished of
their own accord to be thus deceived, it was right that these deceptions
through which they slandered the prophetic threatenings, and which they
usually set up as a shield against them, should bring on them a heavier
punishment. It then follows —

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>**7**. O LORD, thou hast deceived me*,* and
I was deceived: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in
derision daily, every one mocketh me.

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span>**7**. Decepisti me, Jehova, et deceptus
sum; vim intulisti mihi, itfuisti superior; fui in ludibrium toto die,
(*vel,* quotidie, *hoc est,* assidue;) omnes subsannant me.

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span>Some think that these words were not spoken
through the prophetic Spirit, but that Jeremiah had uttered them
inconsiderately through the influence of a hasty impulse; as even the
most eminent are sometimes carried away by a hasty temper. They then
suppose the Prophet, being overcome by a temptation of this kind, made
this complaint, to God, “What! Lord, I have followed thee as a leader;
but thou hast promised to me what I do not find: I seem, then, to myself
to be deceived.” Others give even a harsher explanation, — that the
Prophet had been deceived, according to what is said elsewhere,

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span>“I the Lord have deceived that Prophet.”
(<span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>[Eze
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span>But there is no doubt but that his language
is ironical, when he says that he was *deceived* He assumes the
character of his enemies, who boasted that he presumptuously prophesied
of the calamity and ruin of the city, as no such thing would take place.
The Prophet here declares that God was the author of his doctrine, and
that nothing could be alleged against him which would not be against God
himself; as though he had said that the Jews contended in vain, under
the notion that they contended with a mortal man; for they openly
carried on war with God, and like the giants furiously assailed heaven
itself. He then says that he was deceived, not that he thought so; for
he was fully satisfied as to himself; nor had he only the Spirit of God
as a witness to his calling, but also possessed in his heart a firm
conviction of the truth he delivered. But as I have already said, he
relates the words of those who, by opposing his teaching, denied that he
was God’s servant, and gave him no credit as though he was only an
impostor.

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span>But this mode of speaking is much more
striking than if he had said in plain terms, “Lord, I am not deceived,
for I have only obeyed thy command, and have received from thee whatever
I have made public; nor have I presumptuously obtruded myself, nor
adulterated the truth of which thou hast made me the herald: I have,
then, faithfully discharged my office.” If the Prophet had thus spoken,
there would have been much less force in his words than by exposing in
the manner he does here the blasphemies of those who dared to accuse
God, and make him guilty by arraigning his servant as a false prophet.

<span id="iii.ix-p10"></span>We now, then, understand why he spoke
ironically, and freely expostulated with God, because he had been
deceived by him; it was that the Jews might know that they vomited forth
reproaches, not against a mortal man, but against God himself, who would
become the avenger of so great an insult.

<span id="iii.ix-p11"></span>Were any one to ask whether it became the
Prophet to make God thus his associate, the answer would be this, — that
his cause was so connected with God’s cause, that the union was
inseparable; for Jeremiah speaks not here as a private individual, much
less as one of the common people; but as he knew that his calling was
approved by God, he hesitated not to connect God with himself, so that
the reproach might belong to both. God, indeed, could not be separated
from his own truth; for nothing would be left to him, were he regarded
as apart from his word. Hence a mere fiction is every idea which men
form of God in their minds, when they neglect that mirror in which he
has made himself known, Nay more, we ought to know that whatever power,
majesty, and glory there is in God, so shines forth in his word, that he
does not appear as God, except his word remains safe and uncorrupted.
As, then, the Prophet had been furnished with a sure commission, it is
no wonder that he so boldly derides his enemies and says, that God was a
deceiver, if he had been deceived. To the same purpose is what Paul
says,

<span id="iii.ix-p12"></span>“If an angel come down from heaven and
teach you another Gospel, let him be accursed.” (<span
id="iii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Ga 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ix-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.ix-p13"></span>Certainly Paul was inferior to the angels,
and we know that he was not so presumptuous as to draw down angels from
heaven, and to make them subservient to himself; no, by no means; but he
did not regard what they might be; but as he had the truth of the
Gospel, of which he was the herald, sealed in his heart, he hesitated
not to raise that word above all angels. So now Jeremiah says, that God
was a deceiver, if he was deceived: how so? because God would deny
himself, if he destroyed the truth of his word.

<span id="iii.ix-p14"></span>We now, then, perceive that the Prophet did
not exceed what was right, when he dared to elevate himself, so as to
become in a manner the associate of God, that is, as to the truth of
which God was the author and he the minister.

<span id="iii.ix-p15"></span>But from this passage a useful doctrine may
be gathered. All who go forth to teach ought to be so sure of their
calling, as not to hesitate to appeal to God’s tribunal whenever any
dispute happens. It is indeed true, that even the best servants of God
may in some things be mistaken, or be doubtful in their judgment; but as
to their calling and doctrine there ought to be that certainty which
Jeremiah exhibits to us here by his own example.

<span id="iii.ix-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou hast constrained
me* By saying that he had been *deceived,* he meant this, — “O God, if I
am an impostor, thou hast made me so; if I have deceived, thou hast led
me; for I have derived from thee all that I have; it hence follows, that
thou art in fault, and less excusable than I am, if there be anything
wrong in me.” Afterwards, as I have said, he enlarges on this, — that
God *constrained* him; for he had not coveted the prophetic office, but
being constrained, undertook it; for he could not have rejected or cast
off the burden laid on him. He then expresses two things, — that he had
brought no fancies of his own, nor invented anything of what he had
said, but had been the instrument of God’s Spirit, and delivered what he
had received as from hand to hand: this is one thing. And then he adds,
— that had he his free choice, he would not have undertaken the
prophetic office; for he had been drawn as it were by constraint to obey
God in this respect. We now then perceive the meaning of Jeremiah.

<span id="iii.ix-p17"></span>Were any to ask, whether it could be deemed
commendable in the Prophet thus constrainedly to undertake his office;
to this the plain answer is, — that a general rule is not here laid
down, as though it were necessary for all to be thus unwillingly drawn.
But though Jeremiah might not have been faultless in this respect., yet
he might have justly testified this before men. And we have seen at the
beginning, that when God appointed him a teacher to his Church, he
refused as far as he could the honor,

<span id="iii.ix-p18"></span>“Ah! Lord,” he said, “I know not how to
speak.”  
(<span id="iii.ix-p18.2"></span>[Jer
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p18.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.ix-p19"></span>Though then he was constrained by God’s
authority, and as it were, led by force, and though he may have shewed
in this respect that he was not free from fault or weakness; yet he
might have rightly pleaded this against his enemies.

<span id="iii.ix-p20"></span>He then says, that he was *a scorn
continually, and was derided by all* The Prophet no doubt tried here to
find out whether any portion of the people was still reclaimable; for to
hear that God was charged with falsehood, that the Prophet’s office was
rendered void by the wilfulness and audacity of men, was much calculated
to rouse their minds. When, therefore, they heard this, they must surely
have been terrified, if they had a particle of true religion or of right
knowledge. Hence the Prophet wished to make the trial, whether there
were any remaining who were capable of being reclaimed. But his object
also was to shew, that their wickedness was inexpiable, if they
continued wickedly and proudly to oppose his doctrine.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="iii.ix-p27"></span>And we ought carefully to notice this; for
this passage has not only been written, that we may be instructed in the
fear of God; but the Holy Spirit continually proclaims against all
despisers, and openly accuses them, that they offer to God the atrocious
insult of charging him with falsehood and deception. Let us then know
that a dreadful judgment is here denounced on all those profane men who
despise God’s word and treat it with derision; for the Holy Spirit by
the mouth of Jeremiah openly proclaims, as I have said, before God’s
tribunal, that God is made by them a liar. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008)<span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>**8**. For since I spake, I cried out, I
cried violence and spoil; because the word of the LORD was made a
reproach unto me, and a derision, daily.

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span>**8**. Quia ex quo locuutus sum, vociferor
violentiam et vastationem clamo; quia fuit sermo Jehovae mihi in
opprobrium et in contumeliam toto die *(vel,* quotidie, assiduè, *ut
dictum est.)*

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span>**9**. Then I said, I will not make mention
of him, nor speak any more in his name. But *his word* was in mine heart
as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not *stay.*

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span>**9**. Et dixi (itaque dixi, *copula enim
illativam valet)* non recordabor et non loquar amplius in nomine ejus;
et fuit in corde meo quasi ignis ardens, clausus in ossibus meis, et
fatigatus sum ferendo et non potui.

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span><span id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span>The Prophet says here that he found no fruit
from his labors, but on the contrary, he saw that all his efforts and
endeavors had an opposite effect; for they exasperated all the Jews,
inflamed their rage, and drove them into a greater licentiousness in
sinning. Hence he says, that he purposed to give up the office assigned
to him, but that by a secret impulse he was constrained to persevere,
and that thus he was not at liberty to desist from the course which he
had begun.

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span>But the verse is variously explained; *From
the time I spoke, I cried violence aloud and proclaimed devastation*
Thus some take the words, as though Jeremiah said, that since he began
to teach he uttered complaints; for he saw that he was violently
assailed and was exposed to all kinds of wrongs: but this view appears
to me too frigid. Others come nearer to the truth who consider him as
saying, that he had not ceased to cry against outrages and plunders,
when he saw that all kinds of wickedness prevailed among the people; as
though he had said, “I could not mildly and peaceably teach them, for
their disposition and temper prevented me, but their wickedness
compelled me to treat them with severity, as all God’s servants ought
wisely to consider what the state of the Church requires.” If indeed we
should in tranquil times cry aloud, it would be mad affectation; and
this is what is done by many, who without thought and without any reason
always make a great cry; but when we see Satan reigning, we ought not
then to withhold nor to act as in a truce; but as it is an open war it
is necessary to cry aloud. They who take this view, then, understand
that Jeremiah cried aloud, because he saw that the people were
refractory, and also saw that things were so bad that they could not be
restored to a right state without the greatest sharpness and vehemence.

<span id="iii.x-p10"></span>But I rather think that the Prophet had
another kind of trial, — that he brought down a greater vengeance of God
by his cries, as though he had said, “To what purpose should I furnish
God with weapons by my preaching? since I do nothing but increase his
wrath, which will at length fulminate and consume the whole land
together with the people.” He then says, that he cried violence and
devastation aloud, for impiety itself is a sort of hostile violence by
which God is provoked. The meaning is, that the Prophet saw no other
fruit to his labor, but that men were rendered more insolent, and from
being thieves became robbers, and from being disdainful became ruffians,
so that they increasingly kindled God’s wrath, and more fully abandoned
themselves. This was indeed a most severe and dangerous trial; it is
therefore no wonder that the Prophet says, that it came to his mind to
turn aside from his office as a teacher.

<span id="iii.x-p11"></span><span id="iii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p12"></span>Now this passage is especially worthy of
being observed; for not only teachers are influenced by this feeling,
but all the godly without exception. For when we see that men are, as it
were, made worse through God’s word, we begin to doubt whether it be
expedient to bury every remembrance of God and to extinguish his word,
rather than to increase the licentiousness of men, they being already
inclined enough to commit sin. We indeed see at this day that the
doctrine of the Gospel does not restore all to obedience; but many give
themselves a more unbridled license, as though the yoke of discipline
was wholly removed. There was some fear under the Papacy, there was some
sort of obedience and subjection; and now the liberty of the Gospel,
what is it to many but brute license, so that they sin with impunity and
blend heaven and earth together. There are also others who, on observing
so many controversies, do, under that pretext, throw aside every concern
for religion, and every attention to it. There are some fanatics who
allow themselves to doubt and even to deny the existence of God. As then
we see that the effect of the truth is not such as might be wished,
those who are otherwise firm must needs be shaken or made to totter.
Therefore, this passage ought the more to be noticed; for Jeremiah
confesses that he was sore troubled when he saw that the word of God was
a derision, and hence he wished to withdraw from the course of his
calling. Let us know that whenever such a thing comes into our minds we
ought manfully to resist it; and, therefore, the two things here
mentioned ought to be connected, for when he said, *I will no more
mention him, nor speak in his name,* he added, *but* the word of God was
*like a burning fire*

<span id="iii.x-p13"></span>We hence see how God restrained his servant,
lest he should fall headlong, or succumb under his temptation; for he
would have been suddenly drawn in as it were into a deep gulf, had he
not been preserved by God. Therefore, whenever temptations of this kind
present themselves to us, let us pray God to restrain and to support us;
or if we have already fallen, let us pray him to raise us up and to
strengthen us by his Spirit.

<span id="iii.x-p14"></span>But the way is shewn by which God aided his
servant: The word of God became *as a burning fire in his heart;* and it
was also *closed up in his bones,* so that he was led by an ardent zeal,
and could not be himself without going onward in the course of his
office. He concludes by saying, that he *was wearied,* or could hardly
bear himself, *with forbearing;* as though he had said, that it was not
in his power either to abstain from teaching or to do what God
commanded; for a burning ardor forced him to go on; and yet he had no
doubt in his view those despisers with whom he had to do. It is the same
then as though he had said, that he had found out what it was to have
the whole world against him, but that God prevailed. Now this was said,
because profane men take occasion to be secure and indifferent, when
they imagine that Prophets and teachers are unfeeling men, — “O, what do
we care for fanatics, who do not possess common feelings? and it is no
wonder, since they are stupid and insensible, that they are thus angry
and violent, disregard all others, and feel nothing that is human.” As,
then, they imagine that men are sticks, when they speak of God’s
servants as being without discretion, the Prophet seems to say, “Surely
ye are deceived, for I am not so much an iron, but that I am influenced
by strong and many feelings; nay, I have learnt and I know how great is
my weakness, nor do I dissemble but that I am subject to fear, to
sorrow, and to other passions; but God has *prevailed* There is then no
reason for you to think that I speak so boldly, because I feel nothing
human; but I have done so after a hard struggle, after all those things
came into my mind, which are calculated to weaken the courage of my
heart; yet God stretched forth his hand to me, and not only so, but I
was constrained, lest I should arrogate anything to myself, or boast of
my heroic courage. *I did not prevail,* he says, but when I submitted
myself to God and desired to give up my calling, I was constrained, and
God dealt powerfully with me, for his word became as *a burning fire* in
my heart, so that at length, through the strong influence of the Spirit,
I was constrained to proceed in the discharge of my office.”

<span id="iii.x-p15"></span>*Therefore I said, I will mention him no
more, nor speak in his name;* not that the Prophet wished himself or
others to forget God, but because he thought that he lost all his labor,
and that he in vain made a stir, since he cried aloud without any
benefit, and not only so, but he more and more exasperated the wicked;
as an ulcer, the more it is pressed, the more putrid matter it emits; so
the impiety of the people was more and more discovered, when the Prophet
reproved sins which were before hid.  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iii.x-p21"></span>Let us now then learn by the example of the
Prophet, that whenever Satan or our flesh raises an objection and says,
that we ought to desist from preaching celestial truth because it
produces not its proper and legitimate fruits, it is nevertheless a good
odor before God, though fatal to the ungodly. Though then the truth of
the Gospel proves the savor of death to many, yet our labor is not on
that account of no value before God; for we know that we offer to God an
acceptable sacrifice; and though our labor be useless as to men, it is
yet fruitful as to the glory of God; and while we are the odor of death
unto death to those who perish, yet to God, even in this respect, our
labor is acceptable. (<span id="iii.x-p21.1"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="iii.x-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.x-p22"></span>Let us also beware lest we withdraw
ourselves from God; but even when many things happen to impede our
course, let us overcome them by the power of the Spirit. At the same
time let us fear, lest through our sloth we bury our ardor of which the
Prophet speaks. We see what happened to Jonah; he had so far fallen as
to forsake entirely his office, by extinguishing, as much as he could,
the judgment of God; and when he became a fugitive, he thought himself
beyond danger, as though he was removed from God’s presence. (<span
id="iii.x-p22.1"></span>[Jon 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.x-p22.1"></span>.) God indeed saw him, but yet his word was not
in him as a burning fire. As then so great a man through his own sloth
extinguished, as far as he could, the light of the Holy Spirit, how much
more ought we to fear, lest the same thing should happen to us? Let us
then rouse the sparks of this fervor, until it inflame us, so that we
may faithfully devote ourselves altogether to the service of God; and if
at any time we become slothful, let us stimulate ourselves, and may the
power of the Holy Spirit be so revived, that we may to the end pursue
the course of our office and never stand still, but assail even the
whole world, knowing that God commands us and requires from us what
others disapprove and condemn.

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as at this day a
greater and viler impiety breaks forth than at any age, and thy sacred
truth is treated with derision by many of Satan’s drudges, — O grant,
that we may nevertheless constantly persevere in it, nor hesitate to
oppose the fury of all the ungodly, and relying on the power of thy
Spirit, contend with them until that truth, which thou didst once
proclaim by thy Prophets, and at length by thine only-begotten Son, and
which was sealed by his blood, may attain its full authority, that as it
proves to many the savor of eternal death, so it may also be a pledge to
us of eternal salvation, until we shall be gathered into thy kingdom at
the coming of the same thy Son Jesus Christ. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Seventh

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>**10**. For I heard the defaming of many,
fear on every side. Report, *say they,* and we will report it. All my
familiars watched for my halting, *saying,* Peradventure he will be
enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge
on him.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>**10**. Quia audivi contumeliam multorum,
terrorem undique, Nuntiate et nuntiabimus: omnis vir (*id est,* omnes
homines, homo pacis, *ad verbum,* <span id="iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>שונא
omnes homines) pacis meae (*id est,* familiares mei*, qui debuerant
colere mecum amicitiam)*, observant latus meum (*vel,* claudicationem,
*metaphorice et melius,)* si forte erret, et praevaleamus ei, et sumamus
ultionem nostram ex eo.

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span>Jeremiah proceeds with the same subject,
and before God accuses his enemies, — that they disgracefully contended
with him, though he deserved no such treatment, for he had endeavored to
secure as far as he could their safety. He then says, that he had *heard
the slander of many,* or as it may be rendered, *of the great;* but the
former rendering is more suitable, for it immediately follows, that
there was *terror on every side,* as though all with one consent
assailed him. He then says, that he was surrounded with terror on every
side, because he saw that the whole mass was opposed and hostile to him,
and that he stood alone. He says, also, that his enemies laid in wait
for him, and sought occasions to destroy him.

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span>*Report ye, and we will report to him*
Here he assumes their person and relates what they consulted to do. He,
no doubt, introduces here the chief men and the priests as the speakers,
who were contriving means to form an accusation against the holy man;
for we know what is commonly done in conspiracies of this kind;
worthless men run here and there and hunt for every little thing; then
they bring their report, and from this the accusation is formed. As,
then, it did not comport with the dignity of the chief men and of the
priests, to run here and there and to inquire of such as they might meet
with what Jeremiah had said, they sat still and sent others, and said,
“Go and report to us, and we shall then report to the king.” For the
word “king” must be here understood, as the pronoun is put without an
antecedent; come then and *report, and we will report to him* We now
perceive what Jeremiah complained of, even that he had not only many
enemies who calumniated him, but that he had also those who wished
insidiously to entrap him.

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span>And he adds what was still worse, — that
he was thus unjustly treated, not only by strangers or those who were
openly his enemies, but by his own friends or relations; for the Hebrews
called domestics and those connected by relationship, *men of peace;*

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span>“the man of my peace, in whom I trusted,”

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>is an expression used in <span
id="iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>[Ps
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)<span id="iii.xiii-p10.1"></span>;
but it is a phrase which often occurs. In short, Jeremiah means, that he
was not only in a manner overwhelmed by a vast number of enemies, but
that he was also without any friends, for they treacherously betrayed
him. He says that they *watched his side,* or halting. Some render it
“breaking;” but halting or debility is the most suitable; and the
metaphor is most appropriate; it is taken from the side, and they who
halt or through weakness totter, incline now on this side, then on that
side. So Jeremiah says, that they *watched* him; *if by chance he go
astray,* he again speaks in their name, “Let us then watch whether he
will halt or go astray from the road; and then we shall prevail against
him.”

<span id="iii.xiii-p11"></span>We may, in short, gather from these
words, that this holy servant of God was not only harassed openly by
professed enemies, but that he was also insidiously watched, and
perfidiously, too, by men who pretended to be his friends, while yet
they were his worst enemies. If, then, deceitful men at this time assail
us by secret means, and others oppose us openly, let us know that
nothing new has happened to us; for in these two ways God tried
Jeremiah. We also see that it was a common thing with the ungodly to lay
hold on some pretext for calumny; for as soon as the Prophets opened
their mouth, they could have said nothing but what was immediately
misrepresented; and hence Micah complained that he was assailed by a
similar artifice, for when the spoke with severity, they all cried out
that he raised a tumult among the people, and sought nothing but new
things, so that by disturbing the state of the city and kingdom, he
would bring all things to ruin. (<span id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>.)
If, then, God suffers us to be tried by such intrigues, let us bear such
indignity with resigned and calm minds; for no Prophet has been exempt
from this kind of trouble and annoyance.

<span id="iii.xiii-p12"></span>They said further, *Let us take our
revenge on him,* as though, indeed, they had a cause for revenge! for
what had Jeremiah done? In what had he offended them? Though, then, they
had suffered no wrong, they yet would take revenge! But it is no wonder
that the ungodly and the despisers of God spoke thus; for we know that
they thought themselves grievously injured whenever their wounds were
touched; for they considered reproofs, however just and necessary, to be
reproaches. Hence then it was, that their rage kindled in them a desire
for revenge, though yet no wrong had been done to them.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#011)<span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>**11**. But the LORD *is* with me as a
mighty terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they
shall not prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not
prosper: *their* everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span>**11**. Atqui Jehova mecum tanquam gigas
fortis (*aut,* terribilis;) propterea persecutores mei ruent, et non
praevalebunt; pudefient valde, quia non prudenter agunt, (*vel,* non
prospere succedet illis;) opprobrium seculi (*id est,* perpetuum,
*subaudiendum est,* quod) non oblivioni tradetur.

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet sets up God’s aid against
all the plottings formed against him. However, then, might perfidious
friends on one hand try privately to entrap him, and open enemies might
on the other hand publicly oppose him, he yet doubted not but that God
would be a sufficient protection to him. And we ought to act exactly in
the same manner, whenever Satan rouses the wicked against us to oppose
us either by secret artifices or by open cruelty; God alone must be, as
they say, our brazen wall. But we must first know that he stands on our
side; for the power of God can avail nothing to animate us, except we be
firmly persuaded of this truth, that he is on our side. And how this
confidence can be obtained, we shall presently see.

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span>He says, that his *persecutors* would fall,
so that they would *not prevail,* but be *ashamed* We see how many
persecuted the holy man, and also with what arms they were furnished;
for they possessed great power, and were also endued with guiles and
intrigues. But the Prophet was satisfied with the help of God alone, and
boldly concluded, that they would *fall;* for it could not be but that
God would prove victorious. Whenever, then, we fight with the world and
the devil and his slaves, this ought in the first place to come to our
minds, that God stands on our side to defend our cause and to protect
our safety. This being settled, we may then boldly defy both the
artifices and the violence of all enemies; for it cannot be but that God
will scatter, lay prostrate, overwhelm, and reduce to nothing all those
who fight against him.

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span>He further says that their *reproach* would
be *perpetual,* and would never come to *oblivion* We have seen already
that the Prophet was loaded with many reproaches; but whenever God
suffers his servants to be exposed to the curses of the wicked, he in
due time aids them; and therefore we ought fully to expect that he will
shortly dissipate, as mists, such calumnies. As then God, according to
what is said in <span id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>[Ps
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006)<span id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>,
brings forth the innocency of the godly like the dawn, which in a moment
appears while the earth seems buried in darkness, so the Prophet now
says that on the other hand the *reproach* with which God will cover all
the wicked will be *perpetual.*  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) It
now follows, —

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012)<span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>**12**. But, O LORD of hosts, that triest
the righteous, *and* seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them: for unto thee have I opened my cause.

<span id="iii.xv-p3"></span>**12**. Et (*vel,* tu autem) Jehova
exercituum, probans justum, videns renes et cor, videbo ultionem tuam ex
ipsis, quia tibi patefeci litem meam (*vel,* jus meam, causam meam.)

<span id="iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet shews here briefly how he dared
to allege God’s name and help against his enemies; for hypocrites often
boast that God is their helper, but they falsely pretend his name. The
proof, then, by which the Prophet shews that he did not falsely or
presumptuously pretend what he had stated, — that God was to him like a
strong giant, who could easily lay prostrate all the wicked, ought to be
well weighed; and it was this — that he dared to make God the witness
and judge of his integrity. Hence if we desire to have God’s name to
plead for the purpose of repelling all those artifices which are
contrived against us by the devil, we must learn to offer ourselves to
be tried by him, so that he may really examine our thoughts and
feelings.

<span id="iii.xv-p7"></span>Now, in the first place, let us bear in mind
what the Prophet teaches, — that nothing is hid from God; for hypocrites
will not hesitate to go so far as to offer themselves to be tried by
God; but they do not yet duly consider what is said here, that nothing
is hid from him. There are many recesses in the heart of man, and we
know that all things there have many wrappings and coverings; but God in
the meantime is a heart-discerner, (<span
id="iii.xv-p7.1"></span>καρδιογνώστης,) who proves the heart and reins.
Under the word *reins,* the Hebrews include all the hidden thoughts and
feelings. We must then remember this as the first thing, that the
Prophet acknowledges that there can be no disguise as to God, and that
men gain nothing by acting fallaciously, for he penetrates into the
inmost thoughts and discerns between the thoughts and the feelings.

<span id="iii.xv-p8"></span>He adds that the *righteous are tried* by
God. There is to be understood here a contrast, because men’s judgment
is commonly superficial; for when there is an appearance of integrity,
there is an immediate acquittal, though the heart may be deceitful and
full of all perfidy. The Prophet then means, that when we come to God’s
tribunal no one is there acquitted but he who brings a pure heart and
real integrity. He then rises to a higher confidence, and says, that he
should *see the vengeance* of God.

<span id="iii.xv-p9"></span>We now see whence the Prophet derived his
confidence, even because he had thoroughly examined himself, and that
before God; he had not appealed to earthly witnesses only, nor had he,
as it were, ascended a public theater to solicit the favor of the
people; but he knew that he was approved by God, because he was sincere
and honest.

<span id="iii.xv-p10"></span>And then he justly adds, at the same time,
that he had *made known his cause* or his complaint to God. There is to
be understood here again a contrast; for they who are carried away by
the popular breath do not acquiesce in God’s judgment. Ambition, like a
violent wind, always carries men along so that they cannot stop
themselves; hence it is that neither the testimony of conscience nor the
judgment of God has much weight with them. But the Prophet says, that he
had made known his cause to God.

<span id="iii.xv-p11"></span>If any one objects and says, that
hypocrites do the same, to this I answer, that though some imitation may
appear in them, there is nothing real or genuine; for though they may
boast that God is their witness, and that he approves of their cause, it
is only what they speak vainly before men; for there is not one of them
who deals thus privately with God. As long, then, as they are given to
ostentation, they do not make known their cause to God, however they may
appeal to him, refer to his tribunal, and declare that they have no
other end in view but to promote his glory. They, then, who boastingly
sound forth these things before the world for their own advantage, do
not yet make known their cause to God, but by frivolous and vain
boasting pretend his name.

<span id="iii.xv-p12"></span>What, then, is it to make known our cause
to God? It is to do this when no one is witness, and when God alone
appears before us. When we dare in our prayers to address God thus, — “O
Lord, thou knowest my integrity, thou knowest that there is nothing hid
which I do now lay before thee,” then it is that we truly make known our
cause to God; for in this case there is no regard had for men, but we
are satisfied with the judgment of God alone. This was the case with the
Prophet when he said, that he had made known his cause to God; and it
must have been so, for we have seen that all ranks of men were opposed
to him. As then he was under the necessity of fleeing to the only true
God, he justly says, that he had referred his cause to him.

<span id="iii.xv-p13"></span>By saying that he should see the
*vengeance* of God, he alludes to that wished-for revenge before
mentioned, for his enemies had said, “Let us take our revenge on him.”
The Prophet says, *“I shall see thy vengeance*, O Lord.” By saying that
he should *see* it, he speaks as though he had his hands tied; for thus
the faithful, of their own accord, restrain themselves, *because* they
know that they are forbidden by God’s command to revenge themselves on
their enemies. As, then, there is a difference between doing and seeing,
the Prophet here makes a distinction between himself and the audaciously
wicked; for he would not himself take vengeance according to the
violence of his wrath, but that he should only *see* it; and then he
calls it the vengeance of God, for men rob God of his right whenever
they revenge themselves according to their own will. Paul says,

<span id="iii.xv-p14"></span>“Give place to wrath.” (<span
id="iii.xv-p14.1"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span id="iii.xv-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xv-p15"></span>While exhorting the faithful to
forbearance, he uses this reason, that otherwise no place is given to
God’s judgment; for whenever we take revenge, we anticipate God, as
though every one of us ascended God’s tribunal, and arrogated to
ourselves his office. We now, then, perceive what this mode of speaking
means.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

<span id="iii.xv-p21"></span>But we must at the same time notice, that
God’s vengeance is not to be imprecated, except on the reprobate and
irreclaimable. For the Prophet no doubt pitied his enemies, and wished,
if they were reclaimable, that God would be propitious and merciful to
them, according to what we have before seen. What, then, the revenge
intimates of which he speaks is, that he knew by the prophetic spirit
that they were wholly irreclaimable; and as his mind was under the
influence of right zeal, he could imprecate on them the vengeance of
God. If any one now, after the example of the Prophet, should wish all
his enemies destroyed, and would have God armed against them, he would
act very presumptuously, for it does not belong to us to determine
before the time who the reprobate and the irreclaimable are; until this
be found out by us, we ought to pray for all without exception, and
every one ought also to consider by what zeal he is influenced, lest we
should be under the power of turbulent feelings, as is commonly the
case, and lest also our zeal be hasty and inconsiderate. In short,
except it be certain to us that our zeal is guided by the spirit of
uprightness and wisdom, we should never pray for vengeance on our
enemies. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#013)<span id="iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>**13**. Sing unto the LORD, praise ye the
LORD: for he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of
evildoers.

<span id="iii.xvi-p3"></span>**13.** Canite Jehovae, celebrate Jehovam,
quia eripuit animam miseri (*vel,* afflicti) e manu scleratorum.

<span id="iii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet breaks out into an open
expression of joy, and not only gives thanks himself to God, that he had
been freed from the intrigues and violence of the wicked, but he also
summons others, and encourages them to sing praises to God; as though he
had said, that his deliverance was such a favor, that not only he should
be thankful to God for it, but that all should join to celebrate it,
according to what is said by Paul in <span id="iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[2Co
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span id="iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>,
that thanks might be given by many to God. The Prophet no doubt had
experienced God’s help, yea, that help which he had before so highly
extolled. As, then, he had really found that God was victorious, and
that his safety had been defended against all the ungodly by God’s
invincible power, he in full confidence expressed his thanks, and wished
all God’s servants to join with him.  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

<span id="iii.xvi-p10"></span>Whenever, then, we are reduced into
straits, and seem to be, as it were, rejected by God himself, let us
still wait patiently until he may be pleased to free us from the hand of
the wicked; without misery and distress preceding, we should never
sufficiently acknowledge the power of God in preserving us. Thus
Jeremiah confesses that he was for a time miserable and oppressed, but
that he was at length delivered, even when the ungodly and wicked
thought themselves victorious. Now follows an outcry, which seems to be
of a very different character, —

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>**14**. Cursed *be* the day wherein I was
born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed.

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span>**14**. Maledietus dies, quo natus sum (in
eo, *sed abundat;)* dies quo peperit me mater mea, non sit benedictus:

<span id="iii.xvii-p4"></span>**15**. Cursed *be* the man who brought
tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him
very glad.

<span id="iii.xvii-p5"></span>**15**. Maledictus vir, qui nuntiavit
patri meo, dicendo, Natus est tibi filius masculus; quoniam *(vel,*
quando) laetificavit eum *(hoc est,* cum vellet exhilarare patrem meum.)

<span id="iii.xvii-p6"></span>**16**. And let that man be as the cities
which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in
the morning, and the shouting at noontide;

<span id="iii.xvii-p7"></span>**16**. Et sit vir ille quasi urbes quas
perdidit Jehova, et non poenituit, et audiat clamorem mane, et tumultum
tempore meridiano, *(hoc est,* in meridie ipsa.)

<span id="iii.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xvii-p9"></span><span id="iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p10"></span>It seems, as I have said, that the
Prophet was inconsistent with himself; from joy and thanksgiving he
immediately passed into curses and execrations; what could have been
less appropriate? If we say that he was tried by a new temptation, yet
this seems by no means satisfactory, though it is in this way that
interpreters commonly untie the knot. But it seems to me a levity
unworthy of the holy man to pass suddenly from thanksgiving to God into
imprecations, as though he had forgotten himself. I, therefore, doubt
not but that the Prophet here relates how grievously he had been
harassed by his own thoughts. The whole of this passage, then, is
connected with thanksgiving, for he amplifies the deliverance which he
has just mentioned, that is, that he had been brought back, as it were,
from the lower regions. Thus he recites, in the latter passage, what had
before happened to him, as though he had said, “When I now declare that
I have been rescued by God from the hand of the wicked, I cannot
sufficiently express the greatness of that favor, until I make it more
clearly known to all the godly how great and how dreadful agonies I
suffered, so that I cursed my birth-day, and abhorred everything that
ought to have stimulated me to give praise to God.”

<span id="iii.xvii-p11"></span>In short, the Prophet teaches us here
that he was not only opposed by enemies, but also distressed inwardly in
his mind, so that he was carried away contrary to reason and judgment,
by turbulent emotions which even led him to give utterance to vile
blasphemies. For what is here said cannot be extenuated; but the Prophet
most grievously sinned when he became thus calumnious towards God; for a
man must be in a state of despair when he curses the day in which he was
born. Men are, indeed, wont to celebrate their birth-day; and it was a
custom which formerly prevailed, to acknowledge yearly that they owed it
to God’s invaluable goodness that they were brought forth into vital
light. As then it is a reason for thanksgiving, it is evident that when
we turn to a curse what ought to rouse us to praise God, we are no
longer in a right mind, nor possessed of reason, but that we are seized
as it were with a sacrilegious madness; and yet into this state had the
Prophet fallen.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iii.xvii-p13"></span>We may then here learn with what care
ought every one of us to watch himself, lest we be carried away by a
violent feeling, so as to become intemperate and unruly.

<span id="iii.xvii-p14"></span>At the same time I allow, and it is what
we ought carefully to notice, that the origin of his zeal was right. For
though the Prophet indirectly blamed God, we ought yet to consider the
source of his complaint; he did not curse his birth-day because he was
afflicted with diseases, or because he could not endure poverty and
want, or because he suffered some private evils; no, nothing of this
kind was the case with the Prophet; but the reason was, because he saw
that all his labor was lost, which he spent for the purpose of securing
the wellbeing of the people; and further, because he found the truth of
God loaded with calumnies and reproaches. When, therefore, he saw the
ungodly thus insolently resisting him, and that all religion was treated
with ridicule, he felt deeply moved. Hence it was that the holy man was
touched with so much anguish. And we hence clearly see, that. the source
of his zeal was right.

<span id="iii.xvii-p15"></span>But we are here reminded how much
vigilance we ought to exercise over ourselves; for in most instances,
when we become weary of life, and desire death, and hate the world, with
the light and all the blessings of God, how is it that we are thus
influenced, except that disdain reigns within us, or that we cannot with
resignation bear reproaches, or that poverty is too grievous to us, or
that some troubles press on us too heavily? It is not that we are
influenced by a zeal for God. Since, then, the Prophet, who had no
regard to himself nor had any private reason either of gain or of loss,
became yet. thus exasperated and so very vehement, nay, seized with so
violent a feeling, we ought surely to exercise the more care to restrain
our feelings; and though many things may daily happen to us, which may
produce weariness, or overwhelm us with so much disdain as to render all
things hateful to us, we ought yet to contend against such feelings; and
if we cannot, at the first effort, repress and subdue them, we ought, at
least, according to the example of the Prophet, to learn to correct them
by degrees, until God cheers and comforts us, so that we may rejoice and
sing a song of thanksgiving.

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as virulent
tongues now surround us, and the devil has many mercenaries, who have
nothing else in view but to prevent by clamors whatever is rightly
derived from thee, and has proceeded from thy mouth, — O grant, that we
may firmly oppose such intrigues, and also stand with resolute minds
against all their violent artifices, and proceed in the course of thy
holy calling, until we shall at length surely know that they who trust
in thee, and faithfully devote themselves to thy service, are never left
without thy help; and that, having at last finished our warfare, we may
be gathered into that blessed rest which has been obtained for us by the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Eight

<span id="iii.xix-p2"></span><span id="iii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p3"></span>We said yesterday that the Prophet’s
confused state of mind is described in this passage; for he would have
no doubt himself confessed, that he was carried away by an intemperate
feeling, so as not to be himself; for it is to cast reproach on God when
any one curses his own birth-day. And he goes farther than this, for he
adds, *Cursed be the man who declared to my father, that a male child
was born* Here he not only fights against God, but is also ungrateful
towards men; for what but thanks did he deserve who first told his
father that he had a son born to him? It was then an ingratitude in no
way excusable And hence we also learn that the Prophet had no control
over his feelings, but was wholly led away by a blind impulse, which
made him to utter very inconsiderate words; for in this sentence there
is no piety nor humanity; but as I have said, the Prophet was ungrateful
to men as well as to God; and his hyperbolical language also more fully
expresses how intemperate his feelings were, *who declared to my father
that a male child was born* He seems here, as though he avowedly
despised God’s favor, for we know that males are preferred to females.
But the Prophet mentions here the word male, as though he wished to
complain of what he ought to have been thankful for.

<span id="iii.xix-p4"></span><span id="iii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p5"></span>And he adds, *Who with joy made him joyful*
We see, as it is commonly said, how he mingles heaven and earth; for had
it been in his power, when this frenzy possessed his mind, he would have
certainly disturbed all the elements. But more grievous and more
inordinate is what follows, *Let that man be like the cities which God
destroyed without repentance* Why did he imprecate on an innocent man
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah? and then he speaks not of
temporal punishment, but devotes the man to endless perdition, for that
is the import of the words, *and he repented not;* as though he had
said, “May God be angry with him, without shewing any mercy, but
manifest himself as wholly implacable, as he dealt with Sodom, which he
at once destroyed without leaving it any hope.” Had he spoken of an
inveterate enemy, he ought to have kept within those bounds prescribed
to all God’s children; but he had nothing against the man who brought
the news to his father. We hence see how he was led away as it were by
an insane impulse. But let us hence learn to restrain, in due time, our
feelings, which will pass over all bounds if we indulge them; for they
will break out then as it were into fury, as the case was with the
Prophet.

<span id="iii.xix-p6"></span>He also adds, *Let him hear a cry in the
morning, and a tumult at noon-tide* Here he devotes an innocent man to
perpetual inquietude. And mention is made of the dawn, for we know that
terrors occur during darkness in the night. If anything happens in the
day-time, we inquire what it is, and we are not so frightened; but when
there is any noise in the night, fear takes full possession of us. There
is then something monstrous in what the Prophet expresses here. Hence,
also, we more fully learn how very hot was his indignation, that he thus
wished perpetual torments to an innocent man. *In the morning,* he says,
*let him hear a cry, and at noon a tumult* Had he said, “Let him hear a
cry perpetually,” it would not have been so grievous. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
20:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#017)<span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p2"></span>**17**. Because he slew me not from the
womb; or that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb *to be*
always great *with me.*

<span id="iii.xx-p3"></span>**17**. Quare non occidisti me ab utero? et
fuisset *(hoc est,* ut esset) mihi mater mea sepulchrum meum? et in
utero ejus conceptus saeculi *(id est,* perpetuus, *vel,* uterus ejus
fuisset in conceptu perpetuo; *et hoec posterior expositio videtur
reelins quadrare, ac si diceret, Fuisset uterus, matris meoe sterilis,
ita ut non conciperet nisi post soeculum, id est, nunquam.)*

<span id="iii.xx-p4"></span>**18**. Wherefore came I forth out of the
womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with
shame?

<span id="iii.xx-p5"></span>**18**. Quare ex utero egressus sum ad
videndum molestiam et dolorem, ut consumantur in opprobrio dies mei?

<span id="iii.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xx-p7"></span><span id="iii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p8"></span>After having denounced his imprecations on
his birth-day, and on the messenger who had wished to convey joy to his
father, Jeremiah now expostulates with God. It hence appears how great
was his madness; for thus must we speak. But if Jeremiah spared not God,
how should he spare a mortal man? There is then no doubt but that he
raged furiously against God, for his expostulation is that of a man
wholly desperate; he asks, why he was not slain from the womb, as though
he did not regard it as a kindness that he came alive into light. But
this life, though exposed to many sorrows, ought yet to be counted as an
evidence of God’s inestimable favor. As the Prophet, then, not only
despised this goodness of God, but contended with God himself, because
he had been created a man and brought into light, how great was his
ingratitude!

<span id="iii.xx-p9"></span><span id="iii.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p10"></span>He then adds, *My mother might have been my
grave;*  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) that is, “This light and
life I value not; why then did I not die in my mother’s womb? and why
did she conceive me?” Then he says, *Why came I forth from the womb that
I might see trouble and sorrow, and that my days. might be consumed in,
reproach?* Here he gives a reason why he was wearied of life; but he
could not have been cleared on this account, nor ought he to be so at
this day; for what just cause can we have to contend with God? Jeremiah
was created to sorrow and trouble: this is the condition of all; why,
then, should God be blamed? his days were spent in reproach: there was
nothing new in his case; for many who have received an honorable
testimony from God had suffered many wrongs and reproaches. Why, then,
did he not look to them as examples, that he might bear with patience
and resignation what had happened to other holy men? but he seemed as
though he wished to appear as it were in public, that he might proclaim
his disgrace, not only to his own age, but to every age to the end of
the world.

<span id="iii.xx-p17"></span>At the same time we must remember the
object he had in view; for the Prophet, as we have said, was not seized
with this intemperate spirit after he had given thanks to God, and
exulted as a conqueror, but before; and in order to amplify the grace of
God in delivering him as it were from hell itself, into which he had
plunged himself, he mentioned what had passed through his mind. The
drift of the whole description seems to be this, — “I was lost, and my
mind could conceive nothing but what was bitter, and with a full mouth I
vomited forth poison and blasphemies against God.” What the Prophet then
had here in view, was to render more conspicuous the kindness of God in
bringing him to light from so deep an abyss.

<span id="iii.xx-p18"></span>A similar mode of speaking is found in the
third chapter of Job. But Job had not the reason which, as we have said,
Jeremiah had; for Jeremiah was not influenced by any private grief when
carried away by all insane impulse to speak against God. Whence, then,
was his great grief? even because he saw he was despised by the people,
and that the whole of religion was esteemed by them as nothing: in
short, he saw that the state of things was quite hopeless. He was, then,
inflamed with zeal for God’s glory; and he also was extremely grieved at
the irreclaimable wickedness of the people; but Job had only a respect
to his own sufferings. There was, therefore, a great difference between
Job and Jeremiah; and yet we know that both were endowed, as it were,
with angelic virtue, for Job is named as one of three just men, who
seemed to have been elevated above all mankind; and Jeremiah, if a
comparison be made, was in this instance more excusable than Job; and
yet we see that they were both inflamed with so unreasonable a grief,
that they spared neither God nor man.

<span id="iii.xx-p19"></span>Let us then learn to check our feelings,
that they may not break out thus unreasonably. Let us at the same time
know that God’s servants, though they may excel in firmness, are yet not
wholly divested of their corruptions. And should it happen at any time
to us to feel such emotions within us, let not such a temptation
discourage us; but as far as we can and as God gives us grace, let us
strive to resist it, until the firmness of our faith at length gains the
ascendency, as we see was the case with Jeremiah. For when overwhelmed
with such a confusion of mind as to lie down as it were dead in hell
itself, he was yet restored, as we have seen, to such a soundness of
mind, that he afterwards courageously executed his own office, and also
gloried, according to what we observed yesterday, in the help of God.
Let us proceed, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc19002.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> The account which Blayney gives is the
most probable: that he was the first of his order. There were
twenty-four courses of priests, as appointed by David, <span
id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>[1 Chronicles
24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>; and
the head of each course was for the time the ruler or governor of the
Temple. These heads of the courses were no doubt the “chief priests”
mentioned in the New Testament, for in fact there was only one chief
priest. They were also called the “captains” of the Temple. “The chief
overseer in the house of Jehovah” is the most suitable rendering. The
whole verse might be rendered as follows, — “When Pashur, the son of
Immer, the priest, while he was the chief overseer in the house of
Jehovah, heard Jeremiah prophesying these words, then Pashur smote
Jeremiah,” etc. So the Syriac, and so does Blayney connect the first
with the second verse. The family of “Immer” formed the sixteenth
course. See <span id="iii.ii-p13.2"></span>[1Ch
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#014)<span id="iii.ii-p13.2"></span>.
“The priest” refers to Pashur, and not to “Immer;” and it is so rendered
by the Sept., Vulg., and the Arab., though not by the Syr. Immer was the
name of the family. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc19002.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span> The versions differ — “dungeon” is the
Sept.; “stocks-nervum” is the Vulg.; and “circle,” or “circuit,” is the
Syr.; but the Targ. has “prison.” The word occurs in two other places,
in <span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>[1Ch
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026)<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>,
and in <span id="iii.ii-p18.2"></span>[2Ch
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#010)<span id="iii.ii-p18.2"></span>,
and is rendered “prison.” Venema renders it “the torturing prison,”
taking the verb from which the word comes in a bad sense, as signifying
to distort, and hence to torture. Symmachus favors this view, for he
renders it “a place of torment — <span
id="iii.ii-p18.3"></span>ζασανιστήριον,” and “a rack — <span
id="iii.ii-p18.4"></span>στρεζλωτήριον.” The form of the expression is
in favor of this idea, “and set him in the stocks,” or on the rack. And
so in <span id="iii.ii-p18.5"></span>[Jer
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#026)<span id="iii.ii-p18.5"></span>,
the rendering ought to be — “that thou shouldest set him on the stocks
(or rack) and in prison” Of what kind was this instrument of torture it
is not known. Prisons had especially three names — “the house of
roundness (<span id="iii.ii-p18.6"></span>רהסה);” “the house of
confinement (<span id="iii.ii-p18.7"></span>אלכה);” and “the house of
the rack, or stocks, (<span id="iii.ii-p18.8"></span>תכפהמה).” See <span
id="iii.ii-p18.9"></span>[Ge
39:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#020)<span id="iii.ii-p18.9"></span>;
<span id="iii.ii-p18.10"></span>[1Ki
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#027)<span id="iii.ii-p18.10"></span>;
and <span id="iii.ii-p18.11"></span>[2Ch
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#010)<span id="iii.ii-p18.11"></span>.
But “the house” is not here torture itself. Had the prison been
intended, the word “house,” as in <span id="iii.ii-p18.12"></span>[2Ch
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#010)<span id="iii.ii-p18.12"></span>,
would have been placed before it. It is at the same time probable that
the prison was the place where the rack or the stocks were. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc19002.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span> I would render the verse thus: —

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>**3.** And it happened on the morrow that
Pashur brought out Jeremiah from the stocks; and Jeremiah said to him, —
Not Pashur does Jehovah call thy name, But, Terror on every side.

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>I take <span id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>ארק
to be a participle, and not a verb in the past tense. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc19002.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span> The word is not spelt with <span
id="iii.iii-p13.1"></span>ה, but with <span id="iii.iii-p13.2"></span>ח;
it is “Pashchur.” Therefore, the former derivation cannot be admitted.
Venema derives it from <span id="iii.iii-p13.3"></span>שופ, to be proud,
or ferocious, and <span id="iii.iii-p13.4"></span>רוח, which means
“white,” or splendid; then the meaning is, “splendid prince.” Gataker
seems to prefer the opinion of those who derive the word from <span
id="iii.iii-p13.5"></span>שפ, diffusion, and <span
id="iii.iii-p13.6"></span>רוח, paleness, because he diffused, or spread
fear, which produces paleness to all around. Instead of this, a terror,
the cause of paleness, would be to him and to all his friends, as stated
in the following verse. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc19002.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.iii-p13.9"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span> The Vulg. alone gives this meaning to the
phrase; the Sept. has “<span id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>μέτοικον —
emigrant,” and the Syr. “stranger and wanderer.” And then in the fourth
verse both these versions give a correspondent meaning. “I will deliver
thee into emigration (or captivity) with all thy friends.” That this
word, rendered “terror,” may be derived from <span
id="iii.iii-p14.2"></span>רוג, which means to sojourn, to peregrinate,
is undeniable; as a participle noun from Hiphil, it may mean a
sojourner, or an emigrant. The word in this sense is found often in the
plural number. See <span id="iii.iii-p14.3"></span>[Ge
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p14.4"></span>[Ex
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p14.4"></span>.
But the phrase, as found here, occurs four times in this book, where it
can have no other meaning than “terror (or fear) on every side,” <span
id="iii.iii-p14.5"></span>[Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025)<span id="iii.iii-p14.5"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p14.6"></span>[Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii-p14.6"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p14.7"></span>[Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii-p14.7"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p14.8"></span>[Jer
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029)<span id="iii.iii-p14.8"></span>;
and it occurs once elsewhere, in <span id="iii.iii-p14.9"></span>[Ps
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013)<span id="iii.iii-p14.9"></span>;
where also its meaning is evident from the context. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc19002.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span> What Calvin and our version render
“strength” is rendered the same by the Sept., <span
id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>ἰσχὺν, — by the Vulg., “substance,” — by the
Syr., “citadels,” — and by the Targ., riches. The primary meaning of the
word is to be strong, or firm; and then what is strongly, or firmly
secured — store, or treasure, here, and the two things which follow are
explanatory of this store, — the labor, or the fruit of labor, — their
garments; and precious things, — their gold, silver, and precious stones
and furniture: —

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>**5.** And I will give the whole store of
this city, Even all the fruit of its labor, And every precious thing in
it, — Yea, all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give, Into the
hand of their enemies: And they shall plunder them and take them, And
bring them into Babylon.

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>All the versions refer “them” in the two
last lines to the people, but the Targum to the things mentioned in the
preceding lines; but the former view is the right one. To render the
last verb to “carry,” as in our version, is not correct; for it means to
cause to come, and hence to bring; and this clearly supports the
versions.

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span>The exposition of Blayney is, that by
“strength’” is meant the military, by “labor” the workmen, and by “the
precious” the respectable part of society. Then he ought to have gone on
and said, that by “the treasures” were meant the kings of Judah! But all
this is fancy, and wholly inconsistent with the tenor of the passage.
They were to “plunder” them; and if their stores were not referred to,
how could this be said of what their enemies would do? And then,
according to this view, the treasures of the kings were to become a
spoil, and not the stores of the city. To spoil the people of their
property was one of the most common threatenings of the Prophets. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc19002.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p14"></span> This verse ought to be thus arranged, —

<span id="iii.viii-p15"></span>**6.** And thou, Pashur, and all who
dwell in thine house, Go shall ye into captivity: Yea, to Babylon shalt
thou go, And there shalt thou die, and there be buried — Thou and all
thy friends, To whom thou hast prophesied falsely.

<span id="iii.viii-p16"></span>There is here an instance of the free and
unmodified manner in which statements are often made in Scripture. It is
said in <span id="iii.viii-p16.1"></span>[Jer
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#004)<span id="iii.viii-p16.1"></span>,
that “his friends” would fall by the sword; but here, that they would be
carried into Babylon, die, and be buried there. The hearers of Jeremiah,
no doubt, understood him, though a captious hearer could have made out a
contradiction against him. But the meaning is, that many of them would
be slain by the sword, and that many of them, or most of such as
remained, would be led into captivity. A great number were to be slain,
and a great number would be taken captives. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc19002.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p21"></span> I find none agreeing with Calvin in his
view of this verse; nor many with our version in rendering the first
verb “deceived.” So is the Septuagint, but the Vulgate, Syriac, and
Targum have “enticed.” In other parts it is rendered in our version
“enticed,” “allured,” and “persuaded.” Blayney has “allured,” but
Gataker and Lowth prefer “persuaded;” and this wholly comports with the
view the Prophet gives of his calling in the first chapter, to which he
evidently refers, and also with what follows in this verse. He was
unwilling to undertake the office, but he was induced to do so by what
God said to him. There was nothing like deception in the case; for God
had previously told him of the difficulties he would have to encounter.
And then he adds, that he was “constrained,” which I consider to be the
meaning of the next verb. He had been persuaded by reasons and promises,
and constrained by authority. I would render the verse thus, —

<span id="iii.ix-p22"></span>**7.** Thou didst persuade me, O Jehovah,
and I was persuaded; Thou didst constrain me, and didst prevail: I am
become a derision every day; The whole of it are jeering me.

<span id="iii.ix-p23"></span>The “it” refers to the city where he was,
and of which he speaks at the end of the last chapter; for this chapter
is but a continuation of the narrative. What he relates there of the
fate of the city drew the attention and excited the rage of Pashur.
After having spoken of what Pashur did, Jeremiah gives utterance here to
his complaints.

<span id="iii.ix-p24"></span>Blayney renders the last line thus, and is
approved by Horsley, —

<span id="iii.ix-p25"></span>Ridicule hath spent its whole force upon
me.

<span id="iii.ix-p26"></span>All the versions and the Targum regard
<span id="iii.ix-p26.1"></span>הלכ, not as a verb, but as signifying
“all,” or every one; and the proposed rendering is too refined. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc19002.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p16"></span> The beginning of the eighth verse seems to
be connected with the end of the seventh. Such appears to be the Syriac
version. Then the remaining part of the eighth will coalesce with the
ninth. This gives a consistency to the whole passage.

<span id="iii.x-p17"></span>I am become a derision every day; The whole
of it are jeering me,

<span id="iii.x-p18"></span>**8.** Whenever I speak, cry against
violence, Or, proclaim a devastation. Because the word of Jehovah was to
me A reproach and a scoff every day,

<span id="iii.x-p19"></span>**9.** Therefore I said, “I will not mention
it, Nor will I speak any more in his name;” But it became in my heart
Like a burning fire, confined in my bones; And I was wearied with
restraining and I could not.

<span id="iii.x-p20"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc19002.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p13"></span> There is not much agreement in the early
versions on this verse, nor in the Targum; and modern expounders
somewhat differ, though the general meaning is obvious, and is given
very lucidly by Calvin. I shall give what I consider to be the most
literal rendering, —

<span id="iii.xiii-p14"></span>Truly I have heard the babbling of many,
— “Terror on every side, publish ye, We also shall publish it:” All the
men who are at peace with me, Watch for my halting, — “He may perhaps be
enticed; Then we shall prevail over him, And shall take on him our
revenge.”

<span id="iii.xiii-p15"></span>Both Grotins and Blayney render <span
id="iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>יכ, “truly,” or verily, and consider this
verse connected with the following. There is evidently in the second
line an allusion to the name given to Pashur: the multitude, by the way
of ridicule, repeated the name. Cocceius and Blayney render the line
according to this meaning. “All the men,” etc., literally, “Every man of
my peace,” that is, who is at peace with him; they were those who seemed
to be his friends, though really his enemies, and plotting for his
downfall, and that by trying to entice him out of his course. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc19002.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span> Except in the first line, the Sept. and
the Vulg. differ from the text as well as from one another; both are
exceedingly confused. Few expounders have kept the proper tenses of the
verbs. The Prophet states not only what would happen to his enemies, but
also what had already in part happened to them, —

<span id="iii.xiv-p10"></span>**11.** But Jehovah is with me as a
terrible warrior; Therefore my persecutors shall stumble, And shall not
prevail: They have become exceedingly ashamed, Because they have not
succeeded; A perpetual shame! It shall not be forgotten.

<span id="iii.xiv-p11"></span>The last two lines are according to what
Horsley suggests. “A terrible warrior” is rendered by the *Sept*., “a
strong combatant, <span id="iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>μαχητὴς ἰσχύων;” by
the *Vulg*., “a brave warrior, <span id="iii.xiv-p11.2"></span>bellato
fortis, by the *Syr*., “the strongest giant;” and by the *Arab*., “the
strongest help.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc19002.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p16"></span> There is but little difference between
this verse and the 20th of the 11th chapter (<span
id="iii.xv-p16.1"></span>[Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020)<span id="iii.xv-p16.1"></span>);
the variety is in the first two lines. While here we have —

<span id="iii.xv-p17"></span>But Jehovah of hosts, who art the trier of
the righteous,  
The seer of the reins and of the heart;

<span id="iii.xv-p18"></span>we have as follows in <span
id="iii.xv-p18.1"></span>[Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020)<span id="iii.xv-p18.1"></span>,
—

<span id="iii.xv-p19"></span>But Jehovah of hosts, who art a righteous
judge,  
The trier of the reins and of the heart.

<span id="iii.xv-p20"></span>As in the former instance, the Versions
render what follows as an imprecation, — “May I see,” etc., while the
Targum does as Calvin, “I shall see,” etc.; and this better comports
with the passage. The Prophet first mentions God as a righteous judge,
and then he concludes that he should see God’s vengeance on his enemies,
because he had devolved his cause on him, or revealed it to him. He had
referred his cause to a righteous judge, and hence he felt assured that
vengeance would overtake his enemies. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc19002.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p7"></span> The “poor” here does not mean him who is
in low circumstances, but him who is helpless or defenseless; and this
is the meaning of the word often in other parts, especially in the
Psalm. The word “soul,” too, here and in other places, means life, —

<span id="iii.xvi-p8"></span>Sing ye to Jehovah, praise Jehovah, For he
hath rescued the life of the helpless From the hand of malignants.

<span id="iii.xvi-p9"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc19002.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p12"></span> The greatest difficulty in this passage
is the connection. That Jeremiah should have cursed his birthday is what
can be accounted for, as in the case of Job. Nature, even in the best of
men, sometimes utters its own voice. But how he came to do this
immediately after having thanked God for his deliverance, seems
singular. The explanation of Calvin, that he relates what had passed in
his mind, while he was confined by Pashur, is plausible, and has been
adopted by Grotius, Gataker, Cocceius, and Henry. Grotius considered, “I
had said,” to be understood at the beginning of the fourteenth verse.
Adam Clarke thought that the words have been transposed, and that the
five last verses ought to come in between the eighth and the ninth
verse: and he says what is true, that there are many transpositions in
this book. Houbigant, approved by Horsley, thought the right place for
these verses is between the sixth and the seventh verse. But these
transpositions are not satisfactory. Venema’s notion is, that Jeremiah
does not speak in his own name, but in the name of Pashur. Having
described in the previous verse his own ease, the protection he found
from God, he describes in these verses the wretchedness and misery of
his persecutor, and introduces him as cursing his birth-day, etc. But
this is very far-fetched and fanciful. Scott acknowledges the transition
to be very extraordinary, but yet thinks that the Prophet describes what
had passed through his own mind, and says that the experience of good
men proves that such sudden changes occur. “An experimental acquaintance
with our hearts,” he says, “and the variations of our passions, under
sharp trials, as encouraging or discouraging thoughts occur to our
minds, will best enable us to understand it.” This is probably the right
view of the subject. The Prophet, indeed, acknowledged God’s kindness in
saving his life, and invited others to join him in praising him: yet
when he considered his circumstances, he gave way to his own natural
feelings. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc19002.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p11"></span> Our version seems right in rendering the
<span id="iii.xx-p11.1"></span>ו in this sentence or; and so it ought to
be rendered in the previous verse, otherwise there is an inconsistency
in representing a man destroyed, and hearing an outcry, etc. The two
verses may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.xx-p12"></span>**16.** And let that man be like the cities
Which Jehovah overturned and repented not; Or a hearer of an outcry in
the morning And of tumult at noon-tide.

<span id="iii.xx-p13"></span>**17.** Why not slay me did he from the
womb? Or become to me did my mother my grave, And her womb a perpetual
conception?

<span id="iii.xx-p14"></span>The last words are, literally, “a
conception of perpetuity,” — the Vulg. has, “an eternal conception,” —
the Syr., “a perpetual conception.” Then the next verse is as follows, —

<span id="iii.xx-p15"></span>**18.** For what purpose has this been?
From the womb I came forth To see labor and sorrow, And spent in shame
are my days.

<span id="iii.xx-p16"></span>— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](cc19003)
