[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc19002)  [Next](cc19004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 21

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. The word which came unto Jeremiah from
the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah,
and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui datus fuit Jeremiae (factus
fuit ad Jeremiam) a Jehova, cum misisset ad eum rex Zedekias Phassur
filium Malchiah et Zephaniam filiam Maassiah sacerdotem (vel,
sacerdotis) dicendo,

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. Enquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for
us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be
that the LORD will deal with us according to all his wondrous works,
that he may go up from us.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Interroga (inquire) nunc pro nobis
(aut, consule pro nobis) Jehovam; quia Nebuchadnezer rex Babylonis
praeliatur contra nos, si faciat Jehova nobiscum secundum omnia
mirabilia sua, et ascendat a notis.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus
shall ye say to Zedekiah:

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et dixit Jeremias illis, Sic dicetis
Zedekiae,

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**4**. Thus saith the LORD God of Israel;
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that *are* in your hands,
wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and *against* the
Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them
into the midst of this city.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Sic dicit Jehovah Deus Israel, Ecce ego
reduco (alii vertunt, convertam; quidam minus apte, congregabo; bene
vertetur, contraham, vel, prohibebo) onmia vasa (id est, instrumenta)
bellica (belli) quae sunt in manibus vestris, quibus yes praeliamini (in
ipsis, sed abundat) adversus regem Babylonis et Chaldaeos, qui obsident
vos ab extra murum (hoc est, foris extra murum,) et colligam ipsos in
medium urbis hujus.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>Jeremiah relates how he received the king’s
messengers, who sought from him an answer, whether he could bring any
comfort in a state of things so perplexed and almost hopeless, he then
says, that two had been sent to him; one was Pashur, not the priest
mentioned in the last chapter, for he was the son of Immer but this was
the son of Melchiah; and the other was Zephaniah the priest, the son of
Maaseiah. But he shews that the king and his counsellors were
disappointed of their hope, for they expected a favor-able answer, as
though God would be propitious to Jerusalem; but the Prophet answered as
he was commanded by God, that it was all over with the city, the
kingdom, and the whole nation.

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>We shall also see from other passages that
Zedekiah was not one of the worst; though he did not really fear God and
was led away by false counsels, there was yet in him some regard for
religion, so that he did not avowedly despise God as Epicureans do. Many
such are found even at this day in the world, who think it enough to
cherish a half-buried fear of God, and to retain some little regard for
religion; but it is very fading, and disappears on even the least
occasion. So it was with Zedekiah; he was as it were neutral, for he
neither seriously worshipped God nor yet despised him.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>Hence it was, that he sent messengers to
Jeremiah. He knew that while God was displeased with them no safety
could be hoped for; but he did not understand the way of appeasing God,
nor had he any real desire to be reconciled to him; as the case is with
hypocrites, who, though they wish God to be kind to them, yet when God’s
mercy is offered to them, either openly reject it, or are unwilling to
embrace it, because they cannot bear to surrender themselves to God.
Such was the state of mind in which Zedekiah was; and hence it was, that
he asked the Prophet to consult God. But we must also observe that this
was an honorable message; and it hence more fully appears that Zedekiah
was not one of those furious tyrants, who like the giants seek to fight
with God. For by sending two messengers to the Prophet, and employing
him as an advocate to seek some favor from God, he proved that religion
was not wholly suppressed and extinguished in him.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>And hence also it may be seen how bold and
courageous was the Prophet; for he was not softened by the honor paid to
him, but gave such answer as was calculated to exasperate the king, and
to drive him into great rage. But we ought especially to notice, that
they did not flatter the Prophet so as to induce him to give a false
answer, but wished God to be consulted. It hence appears that they were
convinced of Jeremiah’s integrity, that he would say nothing rashly or
from himself, but would be a faithful interpreter and herald of heavenly
oracles. And yet we see, and shall hereafter see in several passages,
that the king was very incensed against God’s Prophet. But hypocrites,
though they are forced to reverence God, are yet carried here and there,
and maintain no consistency, especially when they perceive that God is
against them; for they are not turned by threatenings. They cannot,
therefore, but make tumult, and strive like refractory horses to shake
off their rider. Such an instance we find in Zedekiah; for he
acknowledged Jeremiah as God’s faithful servant; for he did not say,
“Tell a lie for us, or in our favor but, *inquire of God for us.*

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>He then adds, *If Jehovah will deal with us
according to all his wondrous works*  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) We again see that Zedekiah had some sense
of religion; but it was very evanescent; for he was not influenced by
any real impression, being like hypocrites who wish, as it has been
said, to have peace with God, provided it be on their own terms. But as
they are unwilling wholly to surrender themselves to God, they take a
circuituous course, and seek to allure God to themselves, at least they
come not to him except through various windings, and not in a direct
way. Hence Zedekiah refers here to God’s miraculous works which had been
wrought in behalf of the Israelites in all ages; as though he had said,
“God has hitherto dealt; in a wonderful manner with his chosen people,
and whenever he brought help to our fathers, he manifested wonderful
proofs of his power; will he not deal with us at this day in the same
manner?” He assumes the principle, that God’s covenant remained
inviolable; and this was quite true, but the application was false; for
Zedekiah and the whole people ought to have kept faith with God. For if
they wished God to be propitious to them, why did they not in return
worship and serve him as their God? But as they were covenant-breakers,
how foolishly and vainly did they allege God’s covenant, which they
themselves had rendered void? But it is usual with hypocrites to apply
to themselves every favor which God shews to his own children; for they
falsely assume the name as a covering, and say, that they are members of
the Church because God had adopted them. This was the reason why
Zedekiah asked whether God would do according to his wonderful works, as
though he had said, “Surely God is ever like himself, and we are his
people; and as he has so often delivered his Church, and in such various
ways, his power has always been wonderfully displayed; why, then, will
he not deal with us in the same manner?”

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>He at last, adds, *that he may ascend from
us*,  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) that is, that the King
Nebuchadnezzar may raise the siege and leave us free.

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>Now follows the answer of Jeremiah, *say ye
to Zedekiah,* etc.; he did not go to the king himself, but by way of
contempt delivered the message to be borne by the messengers. The
Prophet no doubt did this designedly, and through the impulse of the
Holy Spirit. He did not, indeed, proudly despise his king; but it was
necessary for him by his magnanimity to cast down the pride of the king,
so that he might know that he had to do with the living God, whom he had
very insolently treated. *Say ye to Zedekiah, Thus saith Jehovah, the
God of Israel,* etc. He adds the words, *the God of Israel,* that
Zedekiah might know that the wonderful works, in reliance on which he
still thought that their condition was safe, did not belong to him and
the people; as though the Prophet had said, “Though God did not help
thee and thy people, he would not yet be inconsistent with himself, or
depart from his covenant; but he would remain ever the God of Israel,
though he destroyed thee and all thy people.”

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>He says, *Behold I,* etc.; it was said
before, Nebuchadnezzar is come to make war with us: now he says, “I am
God;” as though he had said, “Nebuchadnezzar may be conquered, he may
change his counsel, he may leave you through weariness; but know ye that
Nebuchadnezzar fights under my authority.” *Behold,* he says, I prohibit
(for so ought <span id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>כסמ to be rendered) *all the
warlike instruments which are in your hands, and with which ye fight
against the king of Babylon and against the Chaldeans;* as though he had
said, “However furnished ye may be with weapons and forces, and whatever
may be necessary to defend the city, I forbid the use of these weapons,
that is, I will cause that they will avail you nothing.” Some, as I have
said, render the word, “I will turn them against you.” But the meaning
seems more suitable to the etymology of the word, when we say, that the
weapons which the Jews had would avail them nothing, because God would
prevent them from producing any effect.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span>He afterwards adds, *the Chaldeans, who fight
without the wall against you* He described their state at that time, for
the city was besieged by the Chaldeans; there was a wall between them,
and the Jews thought that they could repel the attacks of their enemies.
But God says, “the Chaldeans are this day shut out by the wall, *but I
will gather them,* he says, *into the middle of this city;* that is, I
will make a breach, so that the wall may not be a hinderance to prevent,
the Chaldeans from occupying the very bosom of the city.” It follows, —

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**5**. And I myself will fight against you
with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in
fury, and in great wrath.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>**5**. Et praeliabor ego contra vos in manu
extenta et brachio robusto, et in ira et furore et excandescentia magna.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>He proceeds with the subject; and though he
afterwards is more diffuse, he yet confirms here what we have just seen,
— even that God was the leader of the war, and that the Chaldeans were,
as it were, his hired soldiers, whom he guided by his own hand, and to
whom he would give the signal to fight.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>*I, myself* he says, *will fight against you*
He put this in opposition to the wonderful works which Zedekiah had
mentioned. God, indeed, had formerly been in a wonderful way present
with his Church, not only once, but a thousand times; but he says now,
“whatever power I have, it shall be exercised now against you; expect,
therefore, no aid from me, but know that I am armed, and shall wholly
destroy you.” He adds, *with an extended hand and a strong arm;* as
though he had said, “your fathers found wonderful works done for their
safety; but you shall by experience learn how great is my power to
destroy you.” In short, he means that all God’s power would be a cause
of terror to the Jews, and that therefore they could not escape, as
there is nothing more dreadful than to have God’s hand opposed to us. To
the same purpose is what follows, *in wrath, and in fury, and in great
indignation*  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) God intimates in
these words that he would be implacable, and that hence Zedekiah was
mistaken when he thought that the end of their evils was nigh at hand.

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>He might indeed have said briefly, “I will
fight with an extended hand and with wrath;” but he mentioned wrath
three times in various words. Hence what I have said appears evident,
that Zedekiah was deprived of every hope, lest he should deceive
himself, as though he would somehow propitiate God, who had already
given up the city to final destruction. But we shall see that the
Prophet had not ceased from the discharge of his office, and that he had
allowed some room for repentance. But he made expressly this answer, for
the king could not have been otherwise awakened. We shall see how he
explained himself; but this beginning was as it were a thunderclap to
lay prostrate the pride of the king and of the people. They had become
first torpid in their evils, and then such was their contumacy that they
sought to subject God to themselves. As then their stupidity and their
obstinacy were so great, the Prophet could not, with any hope of
success, have exhorted them to repent and offered them the mercy of God;
it was therefore necessary for them to be so smitten as to perceive that
they were wholly lost, and that God was so angry with them that they
could not be saved by any human means. But we must defer the rest till
to-morrow.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not to
provoke thy wrath, and are also so slow to repent, — O grant, that we
may at least so profit under thy threatenings and the manifestations of
thy judgment, that we may give up ourselves wholly to thee, and hope,
also for thy favor which has been for a time hidden from us, until with
resigned minds we shall be able confidently to call on thee, and so
prove our constancy, that thy name may be glorified in us, so that we
may also be glorified in thee through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-Ninth

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#006)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**6**. And I will smite the inhabitants of
this city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span>**6**. Et percutiam habitatores urbis hujus,
tam hominem quam bestliam; peste magna morientur.

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span>**7**. And afterward, saith the LORD, I will
deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and
such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and
from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and
into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek
their life: and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall
not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span>**7** Et post sic (postea) dicit Jehova,
Tradam Zedekiam, regem Jehudah, et servos ejus, et populum, et qui
residui erunt in urbe hae a peste, a gladio, et a fame, in manum
Nebuehadrezer, regis Babylonis, et in manum inimieorum ipsorum, et in
manum quaerentium animam ipsorum; et percuitet eos ore gladii; non
parcet illis, neque ignoscet, neque miserabitur.

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span><span id="iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same discourse, even
that God had resolved to destroy Jerusalem and the people, at least for
a time. But he points out here what he intended to do, even that he
would consume them by pestilence and famine, as long as they continued
in the city; as though he had said, “Though these Chaldeans may not
immediately take the city by means of a siege, yet its destruction shall
be worse, for famine shall rage within and consume them.” We now
perceive the design of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span>But we must keep in mind what I reminded you
of yesterday, — that God assumes to himself what might have been
ascribed to the Chaldeans, for he makes himself the author of all these
calamities; *I will smite,* he says, *the inhabitants of this city, both
man and beast; by a great pestilence shall they die* This was the first
kind of punishment; before the enemy rushed into the city the pestilence
had consumed many of the people. Now there is a circumstance mentioned
which shews how dreadful would be their state, for not only men would
perish, but even brute animals. It was no wonder that God’s vengeance
extended to horses, and oxen, and asses; for we know that all these were
created for the use of man. Hence when God manifested his wrath as to
these animals, His object was to fill men with greater terrors; for they
thus saw oxen and asses, though innocent, involved in the same
punishment with themselves. For how can we suppose that horses and asses
deserved to perish by diseases, or through want of daily food? But God
sets forth such a spectacle as this, that he may more effectually touch
men; for they thus see that the whole world is exposed to a curse
through their sins. They are indeed constrained to know how great their
sinfulness is; for on this account it is that the earth becomes dry and
barren, that the elements above and below perform not their offices, so
that the sterility of the ground deprives animals of their food, and the
infection of the air kills them. But on this subject we have spoken
elsewhere.

<span id="iv.v-p10"></span><span id="iv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p11"></span>He then adds, *And afterwards,* that is, when
the pestilence had in a great measure consumed them; *I will give,* or
*deliver*, he says, *Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his servants, into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzer* He intimates that though they might suffer
with courage their wants, it, would be of no avail to them. It often
happens that a siege is raised, when the obstinacy of the besieged is so
great, that they overcome famine and thirst, and struggle against
extreme want; for they who besiege them are led to think that they
contend with furious wild beasts, and so depart from them. But God
declares here that the event would be different as to the Jews, for
after having been nearly consumed, they would still be delivered up into
the power of their enemies. Thus he shows that, their endurance would be
useless. It is indeed, a most deplorable thing, that when we have
endured many grievous and distressing evils, the enemy should at length
gain the *ascendency,* and possess over us the power of life and death.
But God shows here that such a calamity awaited the Jews; *I will
deliver,* he says, *Zedekiah the king of Judah, etc.* He doubtless
intended to show how foolish their confidence was, when they thought
that they were safe under the shadow of their king: “The king himself,”
he says, “shall not exempt himself from danger; what then will it avail
you to have a king?” And the king is expressly mentioned, that the Jews
might not deceive themselves with the foolish notion, that they had a
sufficient safeguard in their king.

<span id="iv.v-p12"></span>He then adds, *And his servants,* that is,
his counsellors or courtiers; for servants were those called who were
the chief men and ministers of the king, “and his ministers.” There was
a great deal of pride in these courtiers, and they were very hostile to
the Prophets; for being blinded by their own foolish wisdom, they
despised what the Prophets taught and all their warnings. For this
reason the Prophet says that they would be delivered into the hand of
the king of Babylon.

<span id="iv.v-p13"></span>It is further said, *And the people* The last
copulative is to be taken exegetically, *even,* <span
id="iv.v-p13.1"></span>םיראשנה-תאו, *veat enesharim,* “even the
residue;” for he refers to none but the people, but intimates what the
people would be, even a small number, a remnant. Then the words are to
be thus rendered, “even those who shall remain in the city.” But
Jerusalem, when this discourse was delivered, was in a flourishing
state, and had a large number of inhabitants, he therefore shews, that
after God diminished and reduced the people to a small number, there
would not yet be an end to their evils, but that a worse thing would
still happen to them, for their life would be put in the power of their
enemies; he therefore says, *even those who shall remain in the city;*
and he alludes to the last verse, for he had said that many would perish
through want; nor does he refer only to famine, but, also to the sword
and to the pestilence, for he says, even those who shall remain *from
the pestilence, and from the sword, and from the famine* The famine, as
it is usual, produced pestilence; and then when their enemies attacked
the city with their warlike instruments, many must have been killed, as
they could not repulse their enemies from the walls without a conflict.
Then God shows that the Jews would have to contend with want,
pestilence, and the sword, until they were overcome, and the city taken
by the Chaldeans.

<span id="iv.v-p14"></span>It is afterwards added, *into the hands of
their enemies, into the hand of those who seek their life* This
repetition is not superfluous, for God intimates what is more fully and
clearly expressed by Isaiah, — that the Chaldeans would not be satisfied
with plunder, that they would make no account of silver and gold, for
they would burn with rage, and their object would be to shed blood.
(<span id="iv.v-p14.1"></span>[Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)<span id="iv.v-p14.1"></span>.)
So the meaning is here, when he mentions those who would *seek their
life;* for they would be led by deadly hatred, so that their anger and
cruelty would not be appeased until they destroyed them. Thus he shows
that it would be a bloody victory, for the Jews would not only be led
captives, because their conquerors would not think it worth their while
to drag them away as worthless slaves, but their object would be wholly
to destroy them.

<span id="iv.v-p15"></span>Hence he says, *He will smite them* There is
a change of number, and the reference is made to the king, and yet the
whole army is included, *he will smite them with the mouth of the sword,
he will not spare, he will not forgive,* (the words are synonymous,)
*and will shew no mercy*  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) God thus
transferred his own inexorable wrath to the Chaldeans, who were his
ministers, as though he had said, “Your enemies will be implacable, they
will not be turned to mercy; for I have so commanded, and I will rouse
them to execute my judgment.” Nor can this be deemed strange, because
God had resolved in his implacable wrath to reduce the people to
nothing. For we know how great was their perverseness in their sins.

<span id="iv.v-p17"></span>Since then they had so often rejected the
mercy of God, they had in a manner closed up the door of pardon. Hence
it was that God resolved that the Chaldeans should thus rage against
them without any feeling of humanity. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008)<span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>**8**. And unto this people thou shalt say,
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the
way of death.

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>**8**. Et ad populum hunc dices, sic dicit
Jehova, Ecce ego propono coram vobis (coram faciebus vestris) viam vitae
(vitarum, *ad verbum*) et viam mortis:

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span>**9**. He that abideth in this city shall die
by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that
goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live,
and his life shall be unto him for a prey.

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span>**9**. Qui habitabit in urbe hac morietur
gladio et fame et peste; qui autem egressus fuerit et habitaverit
(*vertunt quidam*, qui ceciderit*; sed dicemus de hoc verbo postea*)
apud Chaldeos, qui obsident vos, vivet et anima illi erit in spolium.

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span><span id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span>God here declares that he proposed to the
*people the way of life and the way of death*, in order that they might
surely know that all who remained in the city would soon meet with
death, and that those who willingly surrendered to their enemies would
have their life spared. Moses says in another sense that he set before
them the way of life and the way of death; he spoke of the Law, which
contains promises of God’s favor, and threatenings to transgressors. But
the Prophet means here another thing, that is, that there was no hope of
safety except the Jews submitted their neck to the yoke, and surrendered
of themselves to their enemies; for if they pertinaciously defended
themselves, God would be their enemy, for he had led the Chaldeans to
assail them, and directed their counsels and their forces. He indeed
confirms what he had said before, but at the same time he more
particularly describes what was to be, that the Jews might lay aside
their perverseness, and acknowledge that they could not escape the
correction which they deserved.

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span>The import of what is said is, that as the
Chaldeans fought under the authority of God, they would be victorious;
it was then in vain for the Jews to resist, as they could not escape,
unless they overcame God himself, which was impossible. He leaves then
but one hope to them, that is, humbly to acknowledge God’s just judgment
by submitting of themselves to a temporal punishment, and by enduring
exile with a resigned mind. This then is the meaning, and it is not
different discourse, but the Prophet confirms what he had said before,
and at the same time applies God’s threatenings to the state of the
people, so that they might humble themselves, and not think it of any
use to resist God in their obstinacy, as they would at length be
constrained to succumb.

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span><span id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span>*Thou shalt say to this people, Thus saith
Jehovah, Behold I set before you the way of life and the way of death.*
Which was the way of death? *Whosoever,* he says, *abides in this city,
shall die by the sword, or by famine, or by pestilence* This was
incredible to the Jews, and they were no doubt inflamed with rage when
they heard that they were to perish in the holy city which God
protected; for there he had his sanctuary, and there his rest was. But
the Prophet had already dissipated all these delusions; he could,
therefore, boldly threaten them, though they still alleged their vain
pretences: he had shewed reasons enough why they could hope for nothing
less than exile from God, for they had so many times, and so
obstinately, and in such various ways provoked him. This, then, he says,
is the *way of death,* it is by remaining in the city. And he mentions
several kinds of evils, and shews that God was armed not only with a
hostile sword, but would also employ famine and pestilence, so that he
would kill some with the sword, consume some with famine, and destroy
some with pestilence. Hence he shews that they would be so assailed on
every side, that it would be in vain to attempt to escape; for when they
shunned the sword, pestilence would meet them; and when they were
preserved from the pestilence, the famine would consume them.

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>He then adds, *But he who went out to the
Chaldeans, who besieged the city,* etc., that is, who willingly
surrendered himself; for it was a sign of obedience when the Jews with a
resigned mind received correction; and it was also an evidence of
repentance, for they thus confessed that they were worthy of the
heaviest punishment. This is the reason why the Prophet represents it as
*the way of life* to go out willingly, and to make a surrender of
themselves of their own accord to their enemies. And by saying, *who
besiege you,* <span id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>םכילע םירצה*, etserim
olicam,* he wished to anticipate objections which any one of the people
might have alleged, — “How can I dare thus to expose myself? for the
Chaldeans besiege us, and it will be all over with me as to my life if I
go forth as a suppliant to them.” By no means, says the Prophet, for
though they carry on a deadly war with the city*,* yet every one who of
his own accord goes forth to them shall be safe, and shall find them
ready to shew mercy. God would not have promised this had he not the
Chaldeans in his own power, so that he could turn their minds as he
pleased.

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span>As to the verb <span
id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>לפנ, *nuphel,* it means strictly to fall; but I
consider that it signifies here to dwell, as in <span
id="iv.vi-p13.2"></span>[Ge 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span
id="iv.vi-p13.2"></span>*,* where it is said that Ishmael dwelt in the
sight of, or over against his brethren. They who render it “died” touch
neither heaven nor earth. Some read, “his lot fell among his brethren;”
but this is an unnatural rendering. There is, then, no doubt but that
the verb means often to lie down, and hence to dwell; and yet I allow
that the Prophet alludes to subjection; for we must remember what must
have been their condition when they went over to the Chaldeans; they
must have been subjected to great reproach. It was then no small
humiliation; but yet we may properly render the verb to dwell. *He,*
then, *who went out to the Chaldeans and dwelt with them,*  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) that is, who suffered himself to be led
into exile, or who migrated according to their will from his own country
to a foreign land — *he,* he says, *shall live,* and *his life shall be
for a prey,* that is, he shall save his life, as when any one finds a
prey and takes it as his own by stealth; for prey is to be taken here as
an accidental gain. Whosoever, then, he says, shall not deem it too
grievous a thing to submit to the Chaldeans, shall at least save his
life.

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span>In short, God intimates that the wickedness
of the people had advanced so far, that it was not right to forgive
them. What, then, was to be done by them? to submit with resignation and
humility to a temporal punishment, and thus to cease to shut up the door
of God’s mercy. He, however, teaches them at the same time that no
salvation could be hoped for by them until they were chastised. And
hence we may learn a useful doctrine, and that is, that whenever we
provoke God’s wrath by our perverseness, we cannot be exempt from all
punishment; and that we ought not to be impatient, especially when he
punishes us moderately; and that provided we obtain eternal mercy, we
ought submissively to bear paternal corrections. It follows, —

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>**10**. For I have set my face against this
city for evil, and not for good, saith the LORD: it shall be given into
the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span>**10**. Quia faciem meam contra urbem hanc
in malum, et non in bonum, dicit Jehova; in manum regis Babylonis
tradetur et exuret eam igni.

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span>He again confirms what he had said, that it
would be the way of death if the Jews remained fixed in the city, for
this would be to struggle against God; for God is said to *set* his
*face for evil,* since he had fully determined to punish that nation. To
set the face is the same as to be resolute. Then God says that what he
had resolved respecting the destruction of Jerusalem could not be
changed. Now, what must at length be the issue when any one thinks that
he can, against the will of God, escape death? As they who violently
stumble against a stone break their legs, and arms, and head, too; so
they who furiously stumble against God attain for themselves final ruin.
 <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span>We hence see why the Prophet added this
verse: it was, that the Jews might not in their usual manner foster vain
hopes; for to hope for any good was to contend with God himself.
*Delivered,* he says, *shall be this city into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire* He intimates that
Nebuchadnezzar would not only conquer the people and triumph over a
taken city, but that the city itself was doomed to destruction. It is,
indeed, a most grievous thing when a city is wholly demolished: cities
are often taken, and the conqueror removes the inhabitants here and
there, while it remains still a habitable place; but God declares here
that he would act more severely towards the city of Jerusalem, for it
was to perish by fire. It follows, —

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011)<span
id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span>**11**. And touching the house of the king
of Judah, *say,* Hear ye the word of the LORD;

<span id="iv.viii-p3"></span>**11**. Et ad domum *(vel,* palatium) regis
Jehudah, Audite sermonem Jehovae:

<span id="iv.viii-p4"></span>**12**. O house of David, thus saith the
LORD, Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver *him that is* spoiled
out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and
burn that none can quench *it,* because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="iv.viii-p5"></span>**12**. Domus David, sic dicit Jehova,
judicate mane judicium (sunt quidemt duo verba, sed utrunque significat
judicare; sensus antem est, judicare mature, et proferre rectum et
oequum judicium; postea adjungit speciem unam,) liberate spoliatum e
manu oppressoris, ne exeat, tamquam ignis, indignatio mea, et ardeat, et
non sit extinguens, a facie malitiae studiorum ipsorum (hoc est, propter
malitiam scelerum ipsorum).

<span id="iv.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p8"></span>Now the Prophet tells us that he was sent
to the king and his counsellors. Hitherto he has been addressing the
king and the whole people indiscriminately; but here a special message
is committed to him to be delivered at the *palace* of the king; and he
was to say that judgment was nigh him and his counsellors. But he is not
now threatened as before, for there is a condition interposed: he
exhorts them to repent, and indirectly promises them pardon, for in vain
would he have spoken to them of repentance had he not given them some
hopes of pardon and deliverance. He is not yet inconsistent with
himself, for though the king was to be driven into exile, he might yet
obtain some favor, after having submitted to a paternal correction.
Though, then, the Prophet here exhorts the king and his counsellors to
repent, he does yet shew that they were not to be wholly free from
punishment, and yet he promises some mitigation.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="iv.viii-p10"></span>And this passage reminds us that we ought
not to rush headlong into despair when some great evil is suspended over
us, and when God shews that we cannot wholly escape punishment. For
there is nothing more unreasonable than that the fear by which God
restores us to himself should be the cause of despair, so that we repent
not; for though God’s wrath be not wholly removed, yet it is a great
thing that it is mitigated, which is an alleviation accompanying the
evil itself.

<span id="iv.viii-p11"></span>In short, the Prophet intimates that God’s
wrath might be alleviated, though not wholly pacified, provided the king
and his counsellors began to act rightly and justly. But he mentions the
*house of David,* not for honor’s sake, but, on the contrary, by way of
reproach; nor does he refer to David, as some unmeaningly assert,
because he ruled justly and was a most excellent and upright king; but
the Prophet had regard to God’s covenant. For we know that they deceived
themselves when they thought that they were to be exempt from trouble
through a peculiar privilege, because God had chosen that family, and
promised that the kingdom would be perpetual. Thus hypocrites
appropriate to their own advantage whatever God has promised; and at the
same time they boast, though without faith and repentance, that God is
bound to them. Such, then, was the presumption of the king and his
counsellors; for they who were David’s descendants doubted not but that
they were exempt from the common lot of men, and that they were, as they
say, sacred beings. Hence the Prophet says, in contempt, *The house of
David!* that is, “let these vain boastings now cease, for God will not
spare you, though you may a hundred times boast that you are the
descendants of David.” And at the same time he upbraids them with having
become wholly degenerate, for God had made a covenant with David on the
condition that he served him faithfully; but his posterity were become
perfidious and apostates. Therefore the Prophet brought before them the
name of David, in order that he might the more reproach them, because
they were become wholly unlike their father, having departed from his
piety.

<span id="iv.viii-p12"></span><span id="iv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p13"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah,* he adds, *Judge ye
judgment* There was no doubt a great liberty taken by the king and his
courtiers in committing plunder, for the Prophet would not have here
recommended justice to them had they not wholly neglected what was just
and right. As, then, there was no care to administer justice, the
Prophet bade them to recognize what was due to God and to his people.
But it was a most grievous trial to all the godly to see that the sacred
house, in which the living image of God ought to have shone forth
brightly, was become a house of spoils, where robbers dwelt, who with
impunity plundered all around them. When, therefore, the state of things
is in such a disorder that the very judges, whom God has set over his
Church, are like robbers, let us know that such a thing happened
formerly; nor is there a doubt but that God thus took vengeance on the
impiety and wickedness of the people, for he would have never suffered
that house to be so contaminated and so filled with so many crimes, had
not the people been unworthy of a good and faithful king and of upright
counsellors. Let us, then, know that the Prophet exhorted the king and
his counsellors to execute justice, because they had forgotten their
office, and were become like rapacious wolves.  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)

<span id="iv.viii-p15"></span>He specifies one act, *Free ye the spoiled
from the hand of his oppressor* Some read, “from the hand of the
fraudulent,” as though <span id="iv.viii-p15.1"></span>קשע, *oshek,*
should mean to oppress by calumny and malice, or by fraudulent means;
but it is to be taken otherwise here. Some distinguish between the two
words <span id="iv.viii-p15.2"></span>קשע, *oshek,* and <span
id="iv.viii-p15.3"></span>לזג, *gesal,* and say that the first means to
retain a deposit or wages, or anything that belongs to another, and that
the latter signifies to take a thing by force, to plunder. But this
difference, as it appears, is not observed by the Prophet, for he says,
“Free ye the plundered or the spoiled.” From whose hand? from “the hand
of the oppressor.” As, then, these two words correspond, I doubt not but
that <span id="iv.viii-p15.4"></span>לזג, *gesal,* means both to take by
force and to plunder; and that though <span
id="iv.viii-p15.5"></span>קשע, *oshek,* means often fraudulently to
oppress, yet not always. However this may be, God intimates that neither
the king nor his counsellors had any care for the poor, so as to repress
violence, and robbery, and plunder. Then the very judges themselves were
the associates of robbers, for they allowed them with impunity to rob
and plunder without affording any aid to helpless men when they were
thus wickedly harassed. There is, however, no doubt but that God would
have them to perform their duties towards all, both rich and poor,
without exception; but as injustice in this particular was especially
seen, this is the reason why by stating a part for the whole he
specified only one thing.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)

<span id="iv.viii-p17"></span>He then adds, *Lest my indignation go
forth like fire, and burn, and there be none to extinguish it* Here the
Prophet intimates, that except the king and his courtiers repented, it
was all over with them. There is then a contrast to be understood here
between that paternal correction of which he had spoken, and the
destruction of which the Prophet now speaks. God’s indignation had been
already kindled, nor could it be immediately extinguished; and though
they had to suffer, yet the issue would have been happy and according to
their wishes: but he here declares that there would be an irreconcilable
war with God, except they labored to return to his favor. He adds, *On
account of the wickedness of their doings* There is here a change of
person, except we read <span id="iv.viii-p17.1"></span>םכ, *cam, “you;”*
but this sort of change often occurs in Scripture. The Prophet, after
having addressed them, says now, “on account of the wickedness of their
doings,” as though having finished his discourse, he spoke of them as
being absent, or as though God, after having given orders to his
Prophet, then added, “I denounce this on them, because they have so
deserved.”

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not, by
new crimes, daily to kindle thy wrath, we may not proceed to obstinacy
or contempt; and since it is good for us to be chastised by thine hand,
grant that we may resignedly submit to thy scourges, and allow thee to
act the part of a Father towards us, in restoring us to the right way,
and never cease to hope in thee, even when thou seemest to be angry with
us; but may our hope regard that issue which thou promisest, even that
evils themselves shall be an aid to our salvation, until having gone
through all the miseries of the present life, we shall come into that
blessed rest which thine only-begotten Son has procured for us. — Amen.

<span id="iv.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span>Lecture Eightieth

<span id="iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
21:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013)<span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span>**13**. Behold, I *am* against thee, O
inhabitant of the valley, *and* rock of in the plain, saith the LORD;
which say, Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our
habitations?

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>**13**. Ecce ego contra to, quae habitas in
valle, petra in planitie (*vel,* patrae planitiei, *alii vertunt*) dicit
Jehova; qui dicitis, Quis descendet contra nos? et quis ingrediatur
habitacula nostra?

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span>**l4**. But I will punish you according to
the fruit of your doings, saith the LORD: and I will kindle a fire in
the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things round about it.

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span>**14**. Et visitabo super vos secundum
fructum studiorum vestrorum, dicit Jehova; et accendam ignem in sylva
ejus, et consumet quiequid est in circuitu ejus.

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span><span id="iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span>Though the whole nation was corrupt in the
time of the Prophet, yet Jerusalem was the head and seat of all evils,
especially as there was there more licentiousness; and then they thought
that the Prophets had no liberty there, as though the citizens were, by
a peculiar privilege, exempt from all reproof; and, lastly, the very
situation of the city gave them courage, for when they regarded the
height of their walls, their towers, and fortresses, they thought
themselves beyond the reach of danger. Hence was the security which the
Prophet now condemns; and, therefore, he calls it *the inhabitant of the
valley*

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span>Jerusalem, we know, was situated on small
hills: the Mount Sion had two tops; and then there were hills
contiguous, especially towards Lebanon; there was, however, a plain on
every side. And then if we except Mount Sion, Jerusalem was in a valley;
for it was surrounded, we know, by mountains. There were mountains
around it, as it is said in <span id="iv.xi-p9.1"></span>[Ps
125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)<span id="iv.xi-p9.1"></span>.
Now, its very situation gave confidence to the citizens, as access to it
was difficult. They, therefore, thought that enemies could not come into
that valley, which kept them inclosed, as in a fortified place. This is
the reason why the Prophet called not the city by its own name, but said
that it *dwelt in the valley;* and afterwards he called it a *rock in
the plain;* for <span id="iv.xi-p9.2"></span>רשי, *isher,* is straight,
and hence <span id="iv.xi-p9.3"></span>רושימ, *mishur,* means a level
ground. The whole region was then a continued plain as far as the
mountains. Jerusalem itself had also, as we have said, its small hills;
it was therefore, as it were, a *rock in a Plain*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="iv.xi-p13"></span>We now see for what purpose the Prophet used
this circumlocution, even because the Jews gloried in the position of
their city, as though it was impregnable; and also, because the vicinity
of the mountains, as well as the plain, gave them great advantages. And
we know how disposed men are to take to a false security when there is
apparently no danger; but on the contrary, they think of various
defences and aids from which they expect to derive help. It is,
therefore, this false boasting that the Prophet condemns, when he calls
Jerusalem the *inhabitant of the valley,* and then says, that it was a
*rock in the plain*

<span id="iv.xi-p14"></span>What follows makes this more clear, *Who
say, Who shall come down against us? and, Who shall enter into our
habitations?* The verb <span id="iv.xi-p14.1"></span>תחי, *ichet,* some
take in the sense of tearing, “Who shall make a breach on us?” They
derive the word from <span id="iv.xi-p14.2"></span>תתח, *chetat;* but it
is rather from <span id="iv.xi-p14.3"></span>תחנ, *nechat, to* descend;
for the first meaning would be too strained. The Prophet speaks
according to the opinion of the people, who thought themselves
sufficiently fortified against all the attacks of their enemies. It may
have been, indeed, that they did not speak thus openly; but the Prophet
had regard to the hidden thoughts of their hearts, when he ascribed to
them this boasting, — that they dwelt in an impregnable place, as the
access to it was formidable; for they spoke boldly, “Who shall descend
to us?  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) who will enter our houses?”
as though they had their nest in the clouds. They intimated that their
state would be safe, because their enemies would not dare to come nigh
them, or would be disgracefully repelled if they dared, as it would be
enough for them to close their gates.

<span id="iv.xi-p16"></span><span id="iv.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p17"></span>But God, on the contrary, says, *Behold I
will* come *to thee,* or *against thee,* and *will visit* thee. There
is, indeed, a change of number; for he says, *I will visit you,* for he
had begun by saying, “Ye who say,” <span id="iv.xi-p17.1"></span>םירמאה,
*eamrim. I will visit upon you,* he says, *the fruit of your doings;*
that is,

<span id="iv.xi-p18"></span>“I will deal with you according to what you
have done, as your works deserve.” Merit is to be taken for reward. Then
God threatens that he would render to the Jews what they merited,
because they had not ceased to provoke his wrath.

<span id="iv.xi-p19"></span>He adds, lastly, *I will kindle a fire in
its forest* Some take “forest” metaphorically for the neighboring towns;
but this seems foreign to the Prophet’s meaning. I do not, indeed, deny
but that there is a metaphor in the words; but then the word forest is
not to be applied to towns and villages, but to the buildings of the
city itself, according to a mode of speaking elsewhere used by the
Prophets. As their houses were built of a large quantity of wood, of
tall and most choice trees, the Prophet compares this mass of wood to a
forest. We may, however, give a simpler explanation, and I know not
whether it be more suitable that the Prophet points out Lebanon. He then
means by the *forest* of the city the trees of Lebanon, which we know
were particularly fine, for their loftiness were everywhere known; and
we know also that they were very large. As, then, a part of their false
glory was Mount Lebanon, the Prophet distinctly intimates that it would
serve as a help to burn the city itself; for when God burned Jerusalem,
he would take from the vicinity materials for the purpose.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iv.xi-p21"></span>Now, as we understand the meaning of the
Prophet, let us learn how to apply this passage. We have said elsewhere
that nothing is more hateful to God than false confidence; when men,
relying on their own resources, promise to themselves a happy and a safe
condition, they become torpid in their own security. Thus it comes, that
they despise God, and never flee to him; they scorn his judgments, and
at length are carried away by a mad impulse to every kind of insolence.
This is the reason why the Prophets so often and so sharply reprove
secure men, for they become presumptuous towards God when they are
touched by no regard for him, and with no fear of him. They then not
only dishonor God by transferring the hope of their safety to mere means
or such helps as they foolishly depend on, but they also think that they
are not under the authority of God. Hence it is, that they promise
themselves impunity, and thus become wholly hardened in their sins. Now
follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc19003.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> The “if” may better be rendered “it may be,”
<span id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>ילוא; it is so rendered by the Vulg., Syr.,
and the Targ. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc19003.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span> The Syr. Renders the verb “ascend” as a
Hiphil; and more consistently with the passage, “and drive him away from
us.” With the exception of the Arab., the Versions and the Targ. Render
the first verb in the verse, not “inquire,” but “ask,” or “pray the Lord
for us.” Then the verse would be as follows: —

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>**2.** Pray now for us to Jehovah; for
Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, is warring against us: it may be
that Jehovah will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, and
make him to depart from us.

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>The verb <span id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>שרד,
transitively as here, means to seek: see <span
id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>[Ps 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>. And to seek the favor of Jehovah, or to pray to
him, seems most consistent with the latter part of the verse. Blayney’s
rendering is, “Intreat, we pray thee, Jehovah for us;” and this is the
meaning taken by Venema and Gataker. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc19003.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span> The verb <span id="iv.i-p27.1"></span>כס
means to turn, to turn aside, to turn round, to change; it seems to mean
here to turn to a contrary purpose, to turn from the right use, to
divert, to revert, or to reverse, “Behold, I will reverse the
instruments of war which are in your hands; <span
id="iv.i-p27.2"></span>μετάστρεφω — I change,” that is, to what is
opposite, is the Sept.; Blayney reads, “Behold, I will turn aside,” etc.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc19003.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span> There seems to be a gradation in these
terms, — “in wrath, and in hot displeasure, and in great foaming
indignation.” The first word means simply wrath or anger; the second,
heated wrath; and the third, foaming wrath, and “great” is added to it.
None of the Versions, except the Arab., presents this climax; the Sept.
and Syr. have only two, “anger and great wrath;” the Vulg., “fury,
indignation, and great wrath;” and the Arab., “wrath, indignation, and
the greatest fury.” The Targ. has the same with the Vulg. These terms
refer evidently to the provocations which had been given by the Jews.
Their conduct had been such as to excite wrath, and heated wrath, and
even great foaming wrath. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc19003.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p16"></span> The Versions and the Targum all differ as to
these three verbs, and their distinct meaning is not given by any of
them. The first is to spare, the second is to relent, and the third is
to feel compassion or pity. The last act, sparing, is mentioned first,
then the previous one relenting, and in the third place, what occasions
relenting, pity, or compassion. The same verbs occur together in <span
id="iv.v-p16.1"></span>[Jer 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.v-p16.1"></span>, but in a different order, relent, spare, pity.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc19003.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span> “Shall go to,” is the Sept.; “shall fly
to,” the Vulg.; “shall obey,” the Targ.; it is omitted in Syr. Blayney
is, “surrendereth himself.” The verb, followed by <span
id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>לע, as here, means to fall away to, or to join.
See <span id="iv.vi-p14.2"></span>[2Ki
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi-p14.2"></span>.
“But he who goeth out and joins the Chaldeans, who besiege you, shall
live,” etc. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc19003.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span> The phrase is not, “against this city,” but
“upon this city;” and such is the rendering of the Sept. and Vulg.,
though the Syr. has “against.” How could his face be set against it, not
for good? God is said to set or fix his face on the city, and it was for
doing it evil, and not for doing it good. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc19003.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p9"></span> The verb “thou shalt say,” or “say,” at
the beginning of verse 8, is to be understood here, “say also to the
house,” etc. So the Vulg. connects the sentence, and also the Targ. But
the Sept., Syr., and the Arab. put the word “house” in the vocative case
— “O house of the king of Judah, hear the word of the Lord.” More
consistent with the original is the former construction. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc19003.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p14"></span> The correct rendering is, “The right
defend ye in the morning.” The common meaning of <span
id="iv.viii-p14.1"></span>ןוד is to defend, to vindicate, to plead for,
or contend for: it means, also, to rule with authority. It is rendered
often in our version to judge, while it ought to be to defend. See <span
id="iv.viii-p14.2"></span>[Ge
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#006)<span id="iv.viii-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.viii-p14.3"></span>[Ps
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)<span id="iv.viii-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.viii-p14.4"></span>[Ps
135:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#014)<span
id="iv.viii-p14.4"></span>. “In the morning” may be taken literally or
figuratively. The morning was the time observed by good judges to decide
matters of judgment: in corrupt times the judges or princes spent the
morning in drinking. See <span id="iv.viii-p14.5"></span>[Ec
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)<span id="iv.viii-p14.5"></span>.
Thus the judges are here required to reassume the ancient practice of
deciding causes in the morning. See <span id="iv.viii-p14.6"></span>[Ex
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013)<span id="iv.viii-p14.6"></span>.
The phrase, “in the morning,” means also to do a thing, promptly, fully,
and diligently. The very same words are used in <span
id="iv.viii-p14.7"></span>[Ps
101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)<span id="iv.viii-p14.7"></span>,
and rendered in our version “early,” only the word for morning is in the
plural number — “in the mornings,” literally. Then, if taken
figuratively, the phrase means — promptly, carefully, diligently —
“Defend carefully the right.” The version of Blayney is singular, but
inadmissible — “Judge ye, searching out right.” There is no instance of
the verb <span id="iv.viii-p14.8"></span>ןוד being used intransitively,
and “in the morning” is given by all the Versions and the Targ. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc19003.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.viii-p15.6"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p16"></span> This sentence is as follows, — “And
rescue the plundered from the hand of the violent,” or him who uses
violence. The Vulg. alone has “calumniator” for the last word, which is
wholly improper; “who wrongs him” is the Sept.; “who oppresses him” is
the Syr. and Arab. The word means to oppress by force or violence. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc19003.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.xi-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p10"></span> Of all explanations of this passage, this
is the most satisfactory. Mount Sion was surrounded by a valley, and
that valley by contiguous mountains. The city, therefore, was a valley
with a rock or a mountain in the midst, called here the rock of the
level ground. The sentence may, indeed, be thus rendered, “The
inhabitant of the valley of the rock of the level ground.” “The valley
of the rock” means, in this case, the valley around the rock or the
mountain; then the valley is farther designated as the level ground.

<span id="iv.xi-p11"></span>The Versions vary; that of Sept. is, “who
inhabitest the valley of Sor, the plain;” the Vulg., “the inhabitress of
the solid valley and of the plain;” the Syr., “who dwellest in valleys,
who hast a large plain;” and the Targ., “who dwellest in strength, in
fortified cities.” The nearest to the original is the Sept. version;
which has been followed by Venema, who thought that there was a valley
called Sor in Jerusalem, which, from its situation, was the most secure
part of the city: hence the word “descend,” in the following sentence.

<span id="iv.xi-p12"></span>Blayney’s version is, “O thou inhabitant of
the levelled hollow of a rock.” He considered that Mount Sion is meant,
the residence of the house of David, and so called, because the top was
levelled. Then he rendered the following sentence, “Who shall make a
breach on us?” But the difficulty is to understand “the levelled
hollow,” and how to make the original to bear such a rendering.
Doubtless, the version of Calvin or that of Venema, which is not very
different, is the best. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc19003.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.xi-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p15"></span> The Sept. and Arab. are, “Who will alarm
us?” the Vulg., “Who will smite us?” Syr., “Who can come against us?”
and the Targ., “Who will descend against us?” The verb <span
id="iv.xi-p15.1"></span>תתח, is intransitive, and if it be here in
Hiphil, it will not admit of the preposition <span
id="iv.xi-p15.2"></span>לע, which comes here after it. This sufficiently
proves that it is <span id="iv.xi-p15.3"></span>תחנ, to come down, to
descend, which requires this very preposition. See <span
id="iv.xi-p15.4"></span>[Ps 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xi-p15.4"></span>. This being clearly the case, the view of
Blayney, as to “the levelled hollow of a rock,” must be wrong, for to
“descend” into Mount Sion, would be no suitable expression. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc19003.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p20"></span> “The Word ‘forest’ is often metaphorically
taken for a city in the prophetical writings, because its stately
buildings, or its principal inhabitants, resemble tall cedars standing
in their several ranks. See <span id="iv.xi-p20.1"></span>[Jer
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007)<span id="iv.xi-p20.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.xi-p20.2"></span>[Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024)<span id="iv.xi-p20.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.xi-p20.3"></span>[Eze
20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046)<span id="iv.xi-p20.3"></span>;
Zecheriah. 11:1.” — *Lowth*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](cc19004)
