[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bet05)  [Next](bet07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT BETZAH (YOM TOB).

### CHAPTER I.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING EATABLES AND BEVERAGES: PREPARATIONS FROM THE
FIRST DAY OF FESTIVALS TO THE SECOND, FROM THE FESTIVALS TO THE SABBATH,
AND VICE VERSA.

MISHNA: An egg laid on a festival may be eaten on the same day. So say
the school of Shammai; the school of Hillel, however, say it must not.
The school of Shammai say that leaven the size of an olive and leavened
bread the size of a date (are to be removed before Passover), but the
school of Hillel say that both must be removed when of the size of an
olive only. If wild game or fowl is to be slaughtered on a festival, the
school of Shammai say one should dig up (the earth) with a spade and
cover the blood, but the school of Hillel forbid the killing unless
loose earth had been prepared for that purpose the day before. Both
schools, however, agree that if the killing had been done, one may
loosen some earth and cover the blood with it, for ashes are always
ready in the hearth.

GEMARA: To what kind of hen does the Mishna refer? If to a hen designed
for eating, why then does the school of Hillel prohibit the eating of
the egg? Is it not a part of the eatables which were prepared (for the
festival)? If to a hen kept for laying eggs only, what is the reason of
the school of Shammai, who permit to eat it? Is this not Muktzah
(designation  <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2).md)? Should we suppose that
the school of Shammai do not hold the theory of Muktzah, even then the
eating of it could not be permitted, as it is a new-born thing, and even
one who denies the theory of Muktzah should hold to the theory of Nolad
(new-born thing). Nay, R. Na'hman has declared that one who denies the
theory of Muktzah denies also the theory of Nolad.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

If so, then the school of Shammai will be in accordance with R. Simeon
(who denies the theory of Muktzah), and the school of Hillel will be in
accordance with R. Jehudah (who holds it); but this would not be the
case, because did not R. Na'hman state (in Tract Sabbath) that the
school of Hillel are always in accordance with R. Simeon and the school
of Shammai with R. Jehudah? R. Na'hman may say: Because we found an
anonymous Mishna (in Tract Sabbath, p. 375) which is in accordance with
R. Simeon, therefore he declares that concerning the Sabbath the school
of Hillel hold with R. Simeon, and concerning the festivals we found an
anonymous Mishna (Sabbath, p. 375) in accordance with R. Jehudah,
therefore he declares that the school of Hillel are in accordance with
R. Jehudah, who is more rigorous.

Let us see: Who makes the Mishna anonymous? Rabbi (its editor). Why does
he make it anonymous in regard to Sabbath in accordance with R. Simeon,
and in regard to festivals (makes it anonymous) according to R. Jehudah?
This is no question. Relating to Sabbath, which is so rigorous that it
has a capital punishment and there is no fear that anyone will dare to
disregard its rules, therefore Rabbi made an anonymous Mishna in
accordance with the more lenient R. Simeon; but relating to festivals,
which have no capital punishment at all, and the rules are lenient, for
fear that otherwise they may be disregarded, Rabbi made an anonymous
Mishna in accordance with R. Jehudah.

Now, then, if the Mishna means a hen which is kept for laying eggs, and
the reason that the school of Hillel prohibit it, is because the egg is
Muktzah, why do they not differ about the hen itself? (whether it is
permitted to eat it or not). Therefore said Rabba: The Mishna refers to
a hen kept for eating, and to a festival which falls after Sabbath; and
the teaching of the school of Hillel is not for the reason of Muktzah,
but of preparation; *i.e.*, an egg which is laid to-day Rabba is certain
that it was ripe the preceding day, and it is in accordance with his
theory, thus: It is written \[Ex. xvi. 5\]: "And it shall come to pass
on the sixth day, when they *prepare* what they shall have brought in";
*i.e.*, only on a week-day shall anything be prepared for the Sabbath or
for festivals, but nothing should be prepared on a festival for the
Sabbath, and *vice versa*.

Said Abayi to Rabba: Let it then be permitted on a festival which does
not come after Sabbath, and he answered: It is as a precautionary
measure for the festival which falls after Sabbath.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Said Abayi again:
Let it then be permitted on a Sabbath, and he rejoined again: It is a
precautionary measure for the Sabbath which falls after a festival. Said
Abayi again: Do we take such precautionary measures? Have we not learned
in a Boraitha: If one kills a hen on a festival and finds in it ripe
eggs, he is permitted to eat them? Now, if such precautionary measures
are taken, why should not the same precautionary measure be taken for
the above eggs, for fear lest one eat new-laid eggs? Rabba again
rejoined: Ripe eggs in the entrails of a hen are not a usual occurrence,
and for an unusual occurrence no precautionary measures are taken.

R. Joseph, however, said that (the prohibition of eating an egg from a
hen kept for eating) is as a precautionary measure lest one may eat
fruit which has fallen from a tree on Sabbath. R. Itz'hak said that the
precautionary measure is taken lest one drink the beverages which flow
from a tree on Sabbath. From the following teaching we learn that R.
Johanan agrees with R. Joseph's opinion, viz.: R. Johanan found R.
Jehudah contradicting himself, namely: We have learned in a Mishna in
Sabbath, one may not press fruit to derive beverage from it; and even if
the beverage flowed of itself, it is prohibited. R. Jehudah, however,
said: If the fruit was for the purpose of eating, the beverage which
flows from it is permitted, and if the fruit was for beverage, the
latter is not permitted. From this we see that although the beverage
which flows from the fruit was not prepared on the preceding day, its
use is nevertheless permitted; and in another place we find that the
same R. Jehudah said, "that an egg which was laid on one festival day
may be eaten on the second festival day"--on the second, but not on the
first. This contradicts his first dictum, that the beverage may be used
on the same day. And R. Johanan answered about this contradiction thus:
Say, that it is on the contrary, that not R. Jehudah permits to drink
the beverage, but the first Tana in the above Mishna. Now, when R.
Johanan contradicted the teaching concerning the beverage and the egg,
we must say that the prohibition of both is for one and the same reason.

Rabbina the son of R. Ula said: It is not so. R. Jehudah, who says that
the egg must be eaten on the second day, and not on the first, refers to
a case where the hen was kept for laying eggs only, and this is
according to his theory of Muktzah.

An objection was raised from the following Boraitha: An egg which was
laid on Sabbath or on a festival day must not be

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

handled to cover a vessel with it, or to support the foot of a bed, with
it. It is permitted, however, to cover it with a vessel to prevent it
from breaking. If it is doubtful whether the egg was laid on that day or
not, it is also disallowed to use it. Should it become mixed in even
with a thousand eggs, all the eggs are prohibited to be used on that
day. It is right according to Rabba's teaching, who says that when the
egg is prohibited for the reason of preparation, which is biblical,
therefore a doubtful egg must not be used because it is doubtful
according to a biblical law, and all doubts about biblical ordinances
must be decided more rigorously; but according to R. Joseph and R.
Itz'hak, who say that it is prohibited only as a precautionary measure,
why then is it not allowed to use the doubtful egg that is so only
according to a rabbinical ordinance, and all doubts concerning
rabbinical ordinances must be decided more leniently? The latter part of
the Boraitha means that it was doubtful whether it was laid by a hen
biblically forbidden to be eaten (*e.g.*, sick or crippled), If it is
so, how will the latter part of this Boraitha, "if it were mixed in even
with a thousand eggs, all are prohibited," be explained? It would be
right if there were a doubt whether it was laid on a week-day or on a
festival, where the prohibition is temporary (because on the morrow all
may be eaten); and there is a rule when anything is temporarily
prohibited, if it is mixed in with a thousand, the prohibition remains,
but if the egg was doubtful to be from a biblically forbidden hen (in
which case the prohibition remains in force always), then if it is mixed
in with other eggs, why should they all be invalid? Let it be ignored as
against the majority? (that one egg be removed, and the remaining should
be used). The assumption that an egg is a thing of value, and therefore
must not be ignored, would apply only to those who say that all things
usually counted must not be ignored; but what can be said to those who
say that only things which are always sure to be counted may be ignored?
(This objection remains.)

R. Ashi said: The meaning of "doubtfulness" in the Boraitha is, whether
it is a week or festival day, it is nevertheless prohibited to use it,
although according to R. Joseph and R. Itz'hak it is only a rabbinical
doubt, because the prohibition is only temporary, and in case of a
temporary prohibition even a rabbinical one must wait till the
prohibition is over.

We have learned in a Boraitha: Anonymous teachers in the name of R.
Eliezer said that the egg in question may be eaten

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

together with the hen that laid it. To what case does the Boraitha
refer? If the hen is kept for eating, then it is self-evident; if it is
a hen kept for laying eggs, then both are not allowed to be used. Said
R. Zera: The Boraitha means to say that the egg can only then be eaten
when the hen which laid it was also eaten. Flow shall it be explained?
Said Abayi: In case the hen was bought not for any definite purpose, if
it was slaughtered and prepared, then it is clear that it was bought for
the festivals, and the egg may also be used; but if the hen is kept
alive, then it is clear that it was bought with the intention to keep it
for laying eggs, and then it must not be used. R. Mari, however, said
that the Boraitha meant to say nothing, but merely exaggerated (*i.e.*,
the egg may be eaten in any manner), as we have learned in the following
Tosephta: A new-laid egg may be eaten with the hen that laid it, and a
new-born pullet with its shell. As the shell cannot be used and is only
an exaggeration, so is it also meant with the egg and the hen which laid
it.

It was taught: If Sabbath fell after a festival, or *vice versa*,
anything born on one of these days must not be used on the other. So
said Rabh. R. Johanan, however, allowed it to be used on the morrow.

Shall we assume that Rabh holds that both are of one and the same
sanctitude? Did not Rabh say that the Halakha prevails according to the
four old sages <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) who are in accordance
with R. Eliezer, who said that Sabbath and the festivals are of
different sanctitudes? Nay, here they do not differ concerning the
sanctitudes, but as to the law of preparation mentioned above in the
name of Rabba. Rabh is in accordance with this theory and R. Johanan is
not.

The Tanaim of the following Tosephta differ on the same point: If an egg
was laid on the Sabbath, it may be eaten on the festival, and *vice
versa*. R. Jehudah in the name of R. Eliezer, however, said, that there
is still a difference of opinion among the schools of Shammai and
Hillel. According to the former it may, and according to the latter it
may not be eaten.

The householder of R. Adda b. Ahabah had eggs which were laid on a
festival preceding the Sabbath; he came to him and inquired whether it
is permitted to roast them that day, to be eaten on the morrow. He
answered: What is thy question P

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Because thou
thinkest that when Rabh and R. Johanan differ the Halakha prevails
according to the latter; yet even R. Johanan permits only to sip the egg
when raw on the morrow, but he never permitted to handle it on the same
day.

The householder where R. Papa lived, according to others another man,
had eggs which were laid on a Sabbath preceding a festival, and he asked
R. Papa if they could be eaten on the morrow, and R. Papa answered him:
Leave it until to-morrow and come again, because Rabh did not use an
interpreter on a festival day after meals to decide questions belonging
to the next day, for fear, perhaps, that he had drunk more than a
quarter of a lug of wine. When he came on the next day R. Papa said to
him: If I had decided the question yesterday, when I was a little
lightheaded, I would have erred, and would have decided according to R.
Johanan, as the rule is where Rabh and R. Johanan differ, the Halakha
prevails always according to R. Johanan, and this would not be right,
because Rabha said that the case in question is one of the three <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) where the Halakha prevails according to
Rabh, both when he is lenient as well as rigorous.

R. Johanan said: Wood which falls from a tree on Sabbath must not be
used on the following festival day; and if it would be asked what is the
difference between the wood and the egg, it can be said that the egg can
be used while raw just after it has been laid, and if left until the
next day, because it must not be used on the same day; but if the wood
will be used just after Sabbath is over, one might say that the use of
the wood was allowed on the same day, and that it was not used because
it was prohibited to make a fire on Sabbath.

R. Mathna said: If wood had fallen down from a tree directly into an
oven on a festival day, one may add wood which had been prepared on the
preceding day and burn it; but is not this handling a prohibited thing?
To this the answer is, because the bulk of the wood may be handled, the
rest is ignored. But did he not ignore the prohibited wood
intentionally? and a Mishna teaches that a prohibited thing must not be
ignored on purpose. This, however, is only true of a biblical
prohibition, but not of a rabbinical. But according to R. Ashi, who said
that a thing which is prohibited only temporarily, cannot be ignored by
any means, what can be said? This is when the prohibited thing is
preserved; but here, when the wood is to be destroyed by fire, it is
different.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

It was taught about the two festival days in exile: Rabh said if
anything was born on the first day, it may be eaten on the morrow, but
R. Assi says it must not. Said R. Zera: It seems to me that R. Assi is
correct in his opinion, because in our time the time of the calendar is
known to us, and nevertheless we hold in exile two days of festival
(consequently we must hold all the ordinances which were ordained in
that time). Abayi, however, said: It seems to me that Rabh is correct in
his opinion, and our keeping of two days of festival in exile is merely
because a message was sent to us from the West: Take heed of the customs
of your ancestors, as it can happen that the government might forbid the
keeping of festivals, and the exact date might be forgotten (after the
government should retract the command).

It was taught: Rabh and Samuel both said of the two festival days of New
Year: Something born on the first day must not be used on the other.

Rabha said: From the day of the ordinance of Rabban Johanan ben
Zakkai, <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) an egg which is laid on the
first day of the New Year festival may be eaten on the next day. Said
Abayi to him: Did not Rabh and Samuel both say that it is not allowed?
Rejoined Rabha: I say to you that of Johanan b. Zakkai, and you mention
Rabh and Samuel to me \[says; the Gemara: Do really Rabh and Samuel
contradict a Mishna P Nay, it presents no difficulty: The ordinance of
Johanan b. Zakkai was only for Palestine, but Rabh and Samuel speak for
the exile\].

R. Joseph, however, said even after the ordinance of Johanan b. Zakkai
the prohibition of the egg remains in force, because the prohibition has
been ordained by the vote of a majority of sages, and everything that
has been ordained by a majority some time ago, must again be voted by a
majority. Said Abayi to him: Did the sages in Johanan b. Zakkai's time
discuss about an egg? They discussed only about the witnesses of the new
moon. When it was ordained that the witnesses should not be received on
the 30th day (consequently two days were kept festival), the egg was
prohibited, but after that, when it was again allowed to receive the
witnesses the entire 30th day, in consequence holiday was kept only one
day, and the egg could not be any longer prohibited.

R. Ada and R. Shalman \[both from the city of Khaluchith\] said: The
reason why the egg is prohibited even after the ordinance

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of R. Johanan b. Zakkai, is because the Temple will soon be rebuilt, and
then one may say the last year, have we not eaten the second day of the
festival the egg that was laid on the first day? We will do the same
now, and they will not know that the last year had two separate
sanctitudes; and now, when the Temple is built, the two days are as one
long day of one and the same sacredness.

If it is so, let the witnesses who come to testify about the new moon,
also not be received? because soon will the Temple be rebuilt, and they
will say: Did we not receive the last year the whole 30th day? The same
will we do now? What comparison is there? Only the court (Beth Din) can
receive the testimony of the witnesses, but eating an egg appertains to
the common people. Rabha, however, said: That even after the ordinances
of R. Johanan b. Zakkai the egg is prohibited for this reason: Would not
R. Johanan b. Zakkai himself agree that if the witnesses were coming
after the Min'ha prayer (in the afternoon), both the 30th day and the
morrow would be kept sacred? (Therefore we who are at a great distance
from Palestine, and do not know when the witnesses appeared, must keep
both days holy, and as of one kind of sacredness; in consequence an egg
laid cannot be eaten on what is considered as the same day.)

Rabha said again: The Halakha prevails according to Rabh in these three
ordinances, both when he is lenient and rigorous (namely: 1. An egg laid
on a Sabbath preceding festival day or on a festival day preceding a
Sabbath may be eaten on the morrow. 2. The same is the case with the two
festival days in exile. 3. But if it m, as laid on the first day of the
two New Year's days, it must not be eaten).

Rabha said: The preparing for the burial of a dead body on the first day
of the exile festival must be done by Gentiles; but on the second day
Israelites may do it, even if it is New Year. With a new-born thing,
however, in the two days of New Year it is different (because *these*
two days are considered as of one sacredness). The sages of Nehardai,
however, said the case is the same with a new-born thing also. Said Mar
Zutra: The law concerning burial on holidays refers to a case when the
corpse had been lying some time and there is fear of corruption; but if
it had just died it may lie until after the holidays and then be
interred. R. Ashi, however, said: Even if it has just died it can be
buried on the same day, as the sages considered the second day of a
festival a week-day in relation to a dead body, and it is

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

allowed even to cut myrtle for it and prepare (a nice cloak for him
besides) the shrouds.

Rabbina was sitting in the presence of R. Ashi on the first day of New
Year, and noticed that he was downcast. He asked him: Why is the Master
downcast? R. Ashi answered: Because I have not made a combining of
cookery (Erub Tabshilin; ix., the third day of the new year was a
Sabbath, and it was necessary to prepare on the second day of New Year
for the Sabbath by making a "combining of cookery"). Said Rabbina to
him: Let Master make it to-day. Did not Rabha say that whoever forgot to
make a combining on the eve of a festival, is permitted to make it on
the first day? And R. Ashi rejoined: Rabha allowed it only on the exile
festival day, but not on the two days of New Year. Said Rabbina again:
Did not the sages of Neherdai decide that the same is the case with New
Year's day? R. Mordecai answered to Rabbina: I have heard Master plainly
declare that he did not agree with the sages of Neherdai (Master means
R. Ashi). Therefore do not molest him with this question.

The rabbis taught: A pullet which was born on a festival must not be
eaten on the same day. R. Eliezer ben Jacob said even on a week-day it
is not allowed to eat it on the same day, because its eyes are not yet
open. We also learn in the following Boraitha: It is written \[Lev. xi.
22\]: "All flying insects that walk upon four legs shall be an
abomination to you." By "all" it is meant to add the pullet whose eyes
are not as yet open.

R. Huna said in the name of Rabh: An egg becomes ripe as soon as it is
laid, What does Rabh mean to teach us by this statement? Shall we assume
that he meant to say that it becomes ripe enough to be eaten with milk,
which would not be the case if the egg were found in the entrails of a
hen? Did not a Boraitha say: He who kills a hen and finds in it ripe
eggs may eat them with milk? Shall we assume that Rabh means to teach us
that when it is laid on a festival it may be eaten on that same day; but
how if it were found in the entrails of a hen, would it not be allowed
to eat it on a festival? Did not a Boraitha say that if ripe eggs are
found in the hen on a festival day, they may be eaten? If it be said
that Rabh means to teach us what the Boraitha has added to the Mishna
(this cannot be said either, because) we have learned in the Mishna, an
egg laid on a festival the school of Shammai permit to be eaten, etc. We
see therefore that the above schools differed only about an egg laid
already, but not about an egg found in the entrails of a hen and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

it cannot be said of the school of Hillel that they prohibited this, for
then the above Boraitha which allows this would not be in accordance
with any of the schools.

Rabh comes to teach us that only an egg which is laid is ripe to be put
under a hen for hatching; but an egg which is found in the entrails of a
hen, even if it were ripe, cannot be used for hatching, as it cannot
breed pullets.

And the difference is in matters of buying and selling (*i.e.*, if one
buy eggs for hatching and he was given eggs which were found in the
entrails of a lien, the seller must return the money to him). As it
happened once, one came to the market and asked for new-laid eggs and he
was given eggs which were found in a killed hen. When the case was
brought before R. Amai he decided that the sale was null and void and
the seller must return the money. Is that not self-evident? One may say
that when the buyer asked for new-laid eggs he meant eggs for eating,
and he who sold him the eggs which were found in the killed hen has only
to return to the buyer the difference between the value of a new-laid
egg and one found in a killed hen. Therefore he comes to teach us that
it is not so, but that the whole sale is null and void and the seller
must return the money.

It happened, also, that one came to the market and asked for eggs of a
hen which had paired with a cock, and he was given eggs of a hen which
laid them by warming herself by scratching the earth; and when this case
was also brought before R. Amai, he made the sale null and void for the
same reason.

And if you wish, we will explain (the above saying of R. Huna in the
name of Rabh), that an egg is ripe as soon as it is laid, means, that as
soon as the greater part of it is out of the body of the hen, it is
considered ripe; and this will be in accordance with R. Johanan, who
said that an egg, of which the greater part was out on the eve of a
festival, and it slipped back, and came out on the festival, it might be
eaten the same day. And still others say, that Rabh means to teach that
when the egg is wholly out then it is ripe, 'but not otherwise, the
reverse of the opinion of R. Johanan.

The text says: When one has killed a hen and found ripe eggs in it, they
may be eaten with milk. R. Jacob, however, said: When the egg is as yet
covered with veins, it must not be eaten with milk.

The rabbis taught: All the females which have communication with their
males in the day-time only, give also birth in the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

day-time only; and those which have communication in the night-time
only, give also birth in the night-time only. Those, however, which have
communication at all times, give birth also at all times. Those that
have communication in the day-time only: *e.g.*, a hen; and in the night
only, *e.g.*, a bat; and at all times, *e.g.*, man and all animals
similar to him.

To what purpose did the Master say all this? This is necessary to the
following Halakha: R. Mari the son of R. Cahana says: One who has
searched a chicken-coop on the eve of a festival at twilight, and does
not find any eggs, and on the morrow before sunrise does find one, it
may be eaten the same day (as it could not have been laid during the
night). But did he not search the day before? Say, then, he did not
search thoroughly; and even if he did search thoroughly, it is possible
that at that time the greater part of the egg came out and slipped back
again; and this is in accordance with what is stated above in the name
of R. Johanan.

This is not so? For did not R. Jose b. Saul say in the name of Rabh: If
one has searched a chicken-coop on the eve of a festival at twilight,
and does not find any eggs in it, and on the morrow he finds one, it
must not be used? He has reference to a hen which bears by scratching
the earth (and such a hen may lay even at night). If it is so, say in
the case of R. Mari also that the egg which was found in the morning was
laid by such a hen.

There is the case where a male was in the coop. Even then, can it not
happen that a hen may scratch the earth? Said Rabina: It is certain that
when there is a male, no hen scratches the earth for the purpose of
bearing. And at what distance in the neighborhood must the cock be? Said
R. Gamda in the name of Rabh: As far as she can hear his voice in the
day-time.

R. Mari, according to his decision, has decided a case (in which it was
searched on the eve of a festival and nothing found in it, but an egg
was found on the morrow, and there was no cock at) a distance of sixty
houses.

When there is a stream between, the hen does not cross it, but she
crosses a bridge; neither does she cross over a plank. It happened once
that a hen crossed over a plank.

"*The school of Shammai say that leaven the size of an olive*," etc.
What is the reason of their teaching? They maintain if the same size
would be for leaven and leavened bread, why did the Torah need mention
leaven at all? Let it have been written

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "leavened bread,"
and it would be known from an *a fortiori* conclusion that leaven the
size of an olive is prohibited (*i.e.*, as leavened bread, which is not
as sour as leaven itself, one is culpable if he eats the size of an
olive, so much the more, leaven itself the same size). Now, when the law
mentioned leaven and leavened bread separately it is only to teach us
that their sizes are different (leaven the size of an olive and leavened
bread the size of a date). The school of Hillel, however, maintain that
both are needed, because if *leaven* only were mentioned, one might say
that because leaven is very sour, it must not be used, but leavened
bread, which is not so sour, one may eat; if *leavened bread* only were
mentioned, one could say that leavened bread which is fit to be eaten is
prohibited, but leaven itself which is not fit for eating one is not
culpable if he eats; therefore leaven is also mentioned.

We have learned also in a Boraitha: It is written \[Ex. xiii. 7\]: "And
there shall not be seen with thee any unleavened bread, neither shall
there be seen with thee any leaven in all thy boundaries." This is the
point of difference between the school of Shammai and the school of
Hillel: The first says, leaven the size of an olive and leavened bread
the size of a date, and according to the latter, both are of the size of
an olive.

"*When a person has killed*," etc. If one has killed already, but may he
not commence it? Said Rabha: The Mishna meant to say that if a person
wishes to slaughter an animal at a festival and comes to ask how he
shall do it, the school of Shammai say he must be told that he may
slaughter first, dig to get loose earth, and then cover; but the school
of Hillel say he must be forbidden to slaughter unless he has loose
earth prepared from the preceding day. R. Joseph, however, said, that
according to the school of Shammai he must be told to dig first,
slaughter, and then cover. Said Abayi to R. Joseph: Shall we assume that
the Master and Rabha differ about what R. Zera said in the name of Rabh,
as follows: Whoever slaughters a wild animal or fowl, must have loose
earth beneath, to soak the blood, and some on the top, to cover with, as
it is written \[Lev. xvii. 13\]: "Then shall he pour out the blood
thereof, and cover it up with (or *in*) earth"? <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) It is not said "to place earth *on* it," but
to it "cover it *in* earth." From this we infer that there must be earth
underneath and earth on the top. Now, the Master agrees with R. Zera
(and therefore he must be told to dig first), but Rabha

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

does not agree with R. Zera (therefore in his opinion he must be told to
slaughter first and dig after). Rejoined R. Joseph: We both agree with
the dictum of R. Zera, and we differ on another point, namely, Rabha
holds if there is already earth underneath, he may slaughter, but he
must not dig first, for it may happen that he should afterwards
reconsider the matter and not slaughter at all (then he will have dug
for nothing), but I hold it is better to permit him to dig first, else
it may be that he would not slaughter at all, and not enjoy the festival
as becomes it.

"*Both colleges agree*," etc. R. Zriqa said in the name of R. Jehudah:
The case is when one had a spade sticking in the ground from the
preceding day. But he pounds the earth? (reduces the earth to powder).
Said R. Hyya bar Ashi in the name of Rabh: It is meant that the spade
was already in powdered earth.

"*As the ashes from the hearth*," etc. Where are the ashes mentioned?
Said Rabha: The Mishna means to say, that the ashes from the hearth may
be considered as always prepared. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh:
The case is when the hearth had been heated on the preceding day, but
when the fire was made on the festival, it is not so. When the ashes,
however, are hot enough for roasting an egg, they are considered as
prepared. We have learned the same in a Boraitha, with the addition,
that if one has brought loose earth for his garden or for a ruin, he may
cover the blood with it.

R. Jehudah said again: One may bring a basketful of earth, and do with
it all that he needs. Lectured Mar Zutra in the name of Mar Zutra the
great: The case is when he has separated a corner for it.

An objection was raised: We have learned elsewhere: A kui <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) must not be slaughtered on a festival, and
when it is, its blood must not be covered. Now, if it be so, let him
cover it as R. Jehudah said above? What question is it--he could also
cover it with the ashes of the hearth, or with a spade in powdered
earth? We must say, then, that they were not available; and it is the
same with the basketful of earth mentioned above, that he has not any.
If such is the case, why a kui, of which it is doubtful whether his
blood must be covered or not? Even an animal of which it is certain that
his blood must be covered, the same is the case? The Mishna means to
say, that not only an

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

animal of which it is certain that his blood must be covered must not be
slaughtered, unless he has prepared a covering; but even an animal which
is doubtful, lest one say that because of the enjoyment of the festival
it shall be slaughtered without covering, it comes to teach us that he
must not. But did not the latter part of the Mishna state, that if it
*was* slaughtered the blood must not be covered, from which we must
infer that the first part of the Mishna means, even when he has a
prepared covering for it?

Therefore said Rabha: The ashes of the hearth are only considered to be
prepared when the animal is of a species whose blood must be certainly
covered; but when the animal is of a kind about the covering of whose
blood there is a doubt, it is not so (*i.e.*, the ashes must not be
handled for this purpose, as they are Muktzah). And this is in
accordance with his theory elsewhere, that if one has brought earth to
cover with it dung, he may cover with it the blood of a fowl, but not
*vice versa*. The sages of Neharbelai, however, said that even if he has
brought the earth for the purpose of covering with it the blood of a
fowl, he may cover with it dung also. In the West R. Joseph bar Hama,
and according to others Rabha the son of R. Joseph bar Hama, and R. Zera
differed on this point. According to one a kui (about which it is
doubted whether it is a wild or domestic animal) is regarded as dung,
and according to the other it is not so (but who entertained either of
these two opinions it was not known). Now, from the above teaching of
Rabha, who said that earth prepared for a fowl must not be used for
dung, we infer that Rabha is the one in whose opinion a kui is regarded
as dung.

Rami the son of R. Jebha, however, said that the reason that we do not
cover a kui on a festival is as a precautionary measure, lest one think
the use of its tallow permissible. If so, let it not be covered even on
a week-day? Nay, on a week-day one (who sees the blood covered) may
think it is done for the purpose of cleaning the yard. But what shall be
the reply to him who comes to ask (whether he should cover the blood)?
Therefore we must say, that the reason is this: On a week-day, when it
is doubtful, the sages decree that nevertheless he should trouble
himself to cover it, but on a festival day the sages do not wish to put
him to perhaps unnecessary work.

R. Zera taught: Not the blood of a kui only is it prohibited to cover on
a festival day, but even when a slaughtered domestic animal's and fowl's
blood were mixed together, it must not be

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

covered either. Said R. Jose bar Jasiniah: The case is when one cannot
cover the whole blood with one (shovelful) stroke of the spade, but if
he can, he must cover it. Is this not self-evident? One might say that
we should prohibit this as a precautionary measure to prevent him from
making two strokes. Therefore he comes to teach us that such
precautionary measures are not necessary. Rabha said: If one has
slaughtered a fowl on the eve of a festival, the blood must not be
covered on the festival; but if he kneaded dough on the eve of a
festival, he must separate the "first dough" on the festival. The father
of Samuel, however, said that even this is prohibited.

MISHNA: Beth Shammai say: It is prohibited to remove a ladder from one
dove-cote to another; it may, however, be inclined from one opening to
another (of the same dove-cote). But Beth Hillel allow both.

GEMARA: R. Hanan bar Ammi said: Both schools differ only when it is done
in public ground: According to Beth Shammai one who will see him
carrying a ladder may think he is going to repair his roof; but Beth
Hillel do not care for that, for they say the dove-cote will show the
man's purpose of carrying the ladder. But if this is done in private
ground (where there is no person to see his act), all agree that this is
permissible. But is it so? Did not R. Jehudah say in the name of Rabh,
that all which is prohibited on account of its liability to be seen (and
misjudged) remains so even in the greatest privacy? In this the Tanaim
differ (Sabbath, pp. 336, 337).

Our Mishna does not accord with the Tana of the following Boraitha: R.
Simeon b. Elazar said both schools agree that the ladder may be carried
from one dove-cote to another; the point on which they differ is whether
the ladder may be carried back. The school of Shammai prohibit it, and
the school of Hillel allow even this. Said R. Jehudah: The Mishna refers
only to a ladder used for a dove-cote, but a ladder to an attic all
agree is prohibited. R. Dosa said he may incline it from one window to
another. Anonymous teachers say in the name of R. Dosa, that he may also
trail the ladder (making it change its position by turning it about).

The children of R. Hyya were going out into the villages. When they came
back their father asked them, was no question asked of you, which you
have decided? and they answered that they were asked whether a ladder of
an attic may be inclined on a festival, and they allowed it. And he said
to them: Go, prohibit

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

what you have permitted. (Said the Gemara): "The children of R. Hyya
thought that R. Dosa had allowed what R. Jehudah prohibited, and it was
not so; he only allowed what the first Tana did not prohibit; *i.e.*, a
ladder to a dove-cote, allowed by the first Tana even to be carried, R.
Dosa permits only to incline.

"*It may, however, be inclined from one opening*," etc. We learn also in
another Mishna farther on: The shutters (of shops) must not be removed
on a festival, so is the decree of Beth Shammai; but according to Beth
Hillel they may be even returned to their places. From this we see that
concerning the enjoyment of the festival, the school of Shammai are
rigorous, and the school of Hillel are lenient. Is not this in
contradiction to the first Mishna of this chapter, where we see the
opposite? It would be (intelligible) if we explain the first Mishna's
meaning that it speaks of a spade stuck in the ground before (then Beth
Shammai would not be more rigorous). But what can be said of the
self-contradiction of Beth Hillel? Said R. Johanan: Change the names of
the authorities (assume the prohibitions to be made by Beth Shammai and
the permissions by Beth Hillel). Says the Gemara: Perhaps it is not so,
because we can explain the lenience of Beth Hillel in the case of the
shutters by the fact that the law of building cannot be applied to
vessels (according to their theory); but in the first Mishna, where such
a reason cannot be found, they did not permit.

MISHNA: Beth Shammai say: It is unlawful to remove the birds from their
places, unless they have been handled *before* the festival; but Beth
Hillel say: It is unnecessary to do more than stand on the eve of the
festival before the dove-cote and say: "This and this bird will I take
for the festival."

GEMARA: Said R. Hanan bar Ammi: They differ only about the first brood
of pigeons. Beth Shammai hold that if one will not handle it before the
festival, he may change his mind (and spare it when he comes to take it
on the festival, and will take others instead of them, but if he has
handled it on the previous day, we are sure that he will not change his
mind). Beth Hillel, however, do not entertain this fear. But as for the
second brood, all agree that it is enough if he says before the
festival: "I will take this and this."

According to Beth Hillel, why is it needed one should mention the
individual bird? Would it not suffice to refer to the whole dove-cote
(and say, "from this dove-cote I will take

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

more")? Should we assume that the school of Hillel do not hold the
theory of premeditated choice (see Vol. III., p. 80)? But this would not
be right, as from the Mishna (Oholath, VII., 3), we know that the school
of Hillel hold this theory. Said Rabha: It is needed for the reason that
if he will not point out the individual, he may handle the next day all
birds of the dove-cote except the one he chooses (if any) unnecessarily.
But did not Beth Hillel say it is enough if he says: "I will take this
and this bird," and yet he may reject it when he comes to take it for
slaughtering? Nay, this is on the eve of a festival, if he has chosen
some of them, be they lean or fat, he will not exchange them for others;
but if he did not so on the eve, and he comes to choose them on the
festival itself, it may be that he will be compelled to handle many
until he finds one that is fit, or it may happen he finds none fit, and
he will handle them for no purpose, and he will be deprived of the
enjoyment of the festival.

MISHNA: If a person who had prepared for a festival black pigeons finds
white ones, or having prepared white pigeons, should find black ones; or
two birds, and he find three, they must not be used. If three birds had
been prepared and two only are found, they may be used; but if they had
been prepared within the nest, and are found before the nest, they must
not be used unless there were no other birds but these in the dove-cote.

GEMARA: Is not this self-evident? Said Rabba: The Mishna refers to a
case when one had prepared both white and black, and on the morrow, when
he comes to take them, he finds they have changed places. One might say
that the pigeons are all the same, but they have changed places, hence
the Mishna comes to teach us that it is not customary for the birds to
change places, and therefore we must say that all the old ones are gone,
and those which are found are other pigeons. Shall we suppose that this
Mishna is in support of the decree of R. Hanina, who said that when one
has to decide according to the majority of cases similar to one at hand,
or according to the intrinsic probability, one should decide according
to the former? (As our Mishna decided that they are other pigeons, and
that is because in the majority of cases pigeons do not change places,
we see that the Mishna decides according to majority and not
probability.) Nay, the case of the Mishna can be explained as Abayi says
farther on, that it means not in the nest itself, but on the board
before the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

nest, where strange pigeons also come and roost (and so decides not
according to majority, but probability).

"*Or two birds, and he finds three*," etc. Why is it so? For all
reasons: Either all are strange pigeons, or at least one.

"*If three birds*," etc. Why so? Because two are the same, though one is
gone. Shall we assume our Mishna is only according to Rabbi, and not the
sages of the following Boraitha? If one had left at a certain place one
hundred zuz of second tithe, and he found afterwards two hundred zuz,
the ordinary and the second tithe money are mixed together. Such is the
decree of Rabbi. But the sages said that the whole is considered as
ordinary money (considering the first hundred as having been stolen, and
this to be other money). But if he left two hundred zuz, and found only
one hundred, it is considered that one hundred has been stolen, and the
other hundred remains. So is the decree of Rabbi. But the sages said
that the remainder becomes ordinary. Hence we see that the case of the
doves in our Mishna is according to Rabbi? Nay, the Mishna can be
explained even in accordance with the sages, for it was taught in
addition to this Boraitha, that R. Johanan and R. Elazar both said that
in the case of pigeons the law is different because pigeons have the
habit of leaving their nest for short whiles.

"*But if they had been prepared in the nest*," etc. Shall we say this
part of the Mishna is in support of the above decree of R. Hanina? Here
it can also be explained as the former according to Abayi (that the
board before the nest is meant where strange pigeons come to roost).
Rabha, however, said: The Mishna refers to a case where there were two
nests, one on the top of the other; and not only is one prohibited to
use pigeons found before the lower nest, when he had prepared same in
the lower, and found both nests empty, because it is considered that
from only the lower nest they are gone, and those from the upper nest
have come down; but if he had prepared them in the upper one, and found
them in front of it, while both nests are empty, the case is the same;
though usually pigeons do not go up, it is considered that the upper
pigeons are gone, and those of the lower nest came up in front of the
upper nest.

"*Unless there were no other birds*," etc. How was the case? Shall we
say flying pigeons are meant? Then it maybe assumed that those that had
been in the nest had flown away, and these are strangers. And if pigeons
too young for flying are meant, then if there is a nest within fifty
ells, we may say that those

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

that were here bounded away, and these are strangers; but if no strange
nest is near, is it not self-evident that they are the same and may be
used, as Mar Uqba bar Hamma said: A pigeon that cannot fly yet is not
able to bound away more than fifty ells? Nay, it can be explained thus:
There is a nest within fifty ells, but it is situated in a corner so
that the pigeons could not see it. They are in their own nest, and the
Mishna comes to teach us, that the fear of their bounding away is only
when there is another nest within fifty ells, which is visible to them
when they are in their own nest; but if not visible, they do not bound
away at all.

MISHNA: Beth Shammai say: The (large wooden) pestle may not be moved for
the purpose of using it as a block to cut meat upon; but Beth Hillel
allow it. Beth Shammai teach: It is unlawful to lay down a skin to be
trodden on (as a preparation for its being tanned) or to raise it from
the ground unless the (*minimum*) quantity of meat of the size of an
olive be thereon; Beth Hillel, however, allow it.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha (an addition to this Mishna) that
all agree that if one has already cut meat on this pestle, it may not be
handled more (because the occasion on which it was necessary for the
festival is over).

Said Abayi: Even if the pestle mentioned in the Mishna was a new one,
made only for breaking bones, the case is the same; (and Abayi found
this necessary to explain) lest one say, that because it is a new one,
it shall be feared that he will change his mind and will not use it for
this purpose, and so it will be handled unnecessarily, and therefore the
Mishna comes to teach us that this fear is not entertained. From this we
see that Beth Shammai have not such fear. But did we not learn in a
Boraitha: Beth Shammai said the slaughterer and the knife must not be
brought to the animal, nor, *vice versa*, it to them (for fear of his
changing his mind, and not slaughtering at all, and being troubled for
nothing)? And the same is the case with spices and the pestle, which
must not be carried to the mortar, nor *vice versa*. But Beth Hillel
allow both (hence we see that the school of Shammai fear his changing
his mind). What comparison is it? He can reject on second consideration
an animal because he wants a fatter one, or spices because he resolves
to have a dish without spices, but in this case the animal is already
slaughtered and the meat is for cooking; hence he must cut it and
prepare it for eating.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

"*Beth Shammai teach it is unlawful to lay down a skin*," etc. We have
learned in a Boraitha: Both schools agree that meat for roasting may be
salted on the skin. Said Abayi: Only for roasting is it permitted to
salt meat on it, but not for boiling (because for roasting much salt is
not necessary, but for boiling more is needed). Is not this
self-evident? It is plainly stated, "for roasting." Abayi comes to teach
us that even for roasting, if more salt is needed than ordinarily, it is
not permitted.

The rabbis taught: Tallow must not be salted and must not be turned
over. In the name of R. Joshuah, however, it was said that one may
spread it out upon nails for being aired. Said R. Mathna: The Halakha
does not prevail according to R. Joshuah; but wherein differs this case
from the case of the skin in our Mishna? (The cases are not identical.)
When one sees him spreading out the skin, he may think because it is fit
for sitting on, it is spread out for such purposes; but when one will be
allowed to salt the tallow, he may say: For what purpose have the sages
allowed it? Only that it shall not become spoiled. Then what is the
difference between spreading and salting, and he will also salt it?

R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: One may salt several pieces of
meat at one time, though only one of them is needed. R. Adda bar A'hbah
had recourse to ingenuity, and used to salt meat for a festival meal
(salting one piece with the pretext that he will use it, and then
rejecting it, and choosing another, and so on).

MISHNA: The shutters of stalls must not be removed on a festival
according to Beth Shammai; but Beth Hillel allow even to replace them.

GEMARA: What kind of shutters is meant? Said Ula: The shutters of
movable stalls. He said again: There are three things of which the
finishing was allowed (though not essential for the festival), for the
reason of the beginning (which was necessary; *i.e.*, if it would not
have been allowed to finish them, they would not have been begun). They
are: The skin for the tanner, the shutters of the shops, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) and the replacing of a plaster (on the
priest's hand <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9).md) in the Temple. And
Rhaba said in the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

name of Rabh Jehudah the Babylonian Amora: <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) The same is the case when one opens a
barrel or begins to knead dough on the festival (he may stop up the
barrel, or finish the kneading, because he would not begin if he were
not permitted to finish, and his enjoyment of the festival would not be
complete), and this is according to Rabbi Jehudah the Tana, who said (in
Hagigah, p. 52), he shall finish it.

Our Mishna is not in accordance with the Tana of the following Boraitha:
R. Simeon b. Elazar said: The schools both of Shammai and Hillel agree
that the shutters may be removed on the festival; they differ only about
the replacing of them. Beth Shammai do not permit this, and Beth Hillel
allow even this. But this is in case there are hinges, but if there is
none all agree it is permitted. But have we not learned in another
Boraitha the contrary of this? Said Abayi: It can be explained so: If
the hinges are at the sides of the shutters, all agree it is
prohibited; <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) if there are no hinges
at all, all agree it is permissible. They differ only on this point when
the hinges are in the middle: Beth Shammai prohibit it as a
precautionary measure, lest one think it permissible also even when they
are at the sides, and Beth Hillel think such a precautionary measure is
not to be taken.

MISHNA: A child, a Lulab (a branch of a date-tree), holy scrolls, must
not be carried in public ground according to Beth Shammai; but Beth
Hillel allow it.

GEMARA: In the presence of R. Itz'hak bar Abdimi one Tana taught as
follows: If one slaughters a voluntary offering on a festival, he is
liable to the penalty of stripes. Said R. Itz'hak to him: According to
whom is your teaching? That is only according to Beth Shammai, who do
not hold the theory that because it is permitted to carry things for the
purposes of the festival, it is permissible to carry other things, even
when they are not necessary for the purposes of the festival; but
according to Beth Hillel, who hold this theory, we can say, because
slaughtering for the festival is permitted, slaughtering for other

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

purposes is also permitted, consequently he is not liable to stripes. R.
Johanan's opinion is also that Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel differ about
the acceptation of the above theory.

Because a disciple has taught in the presence of R. Johanan thus: If one
cooks the sinew which shrank \[Gen. xxxii. 33\] in milk on a festival,
and eats it, he is liable to five times stripes: once for cooking the
sinew, once for eating it, once for cooking meat in milk, once for
eating meat with milk, and once for kindling a fire on the festival. And
R. Johanan said to him: Go with thy teaching out of the college, because
for kindling a fire and cooking on the festival he is not liable for
stripes, according to the teaching of the Mishna; and even if you would
find a Mishna which is in accordance with your teaching, it could be
only according to the school of Shammai, who deny the theory that,
because it is permitted to kindle a fire and to cook for the purposes of
the festival, it is permissible also for other purposes; then, according
to the school of Hillel, who agree with this theory, no Mishna could
teach so. Now then, when kindling and cooking are permitted on the
festival, you must remove the stripes for cooking and kindling out of
the whole case.

MISHNA: It is unlawful, according to Beth Shammai, to carry to the
priest on a festival the first dough (Halah) or other gifts, whether
they had been set apart for that purpose on that day or on the preceding
day. Beth Hillel, however, allow this. Said Beth Shammai: Let us say to
them: Is there not an analogy of expression in both? First dough and
other priestly dues are called gifts to the priest (Matanoth); and
heave-offering (Terumah) is also called gifts to the priest. Now, as the
last is prohibited, the same must be the case with the first? Rejoined
Beth Hillel: Nay, how can the gifts be compared to heave-offering? The
last one is not allowed to be set apart on the festival, whereas other
gifts may.

GEMARA: At the first glance, the teaching of the Mishna, "whether it had
been set apart on the same day," would seem to mean that it was
slaughtered and set apart on the same day, and the expression, "the
preceding day," would seem to mean that it was slaughtered also on that
day. If it is so, however, according to whose opinion would the Mishna
be? Not according to R. Jose, not according to R. Jehudah, but according
to the anonymous teachers. As we have learned in the following Boraitha:
R. Jehudah said: Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel do not differ about the
gifts that were set apart on the eve of a festival,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

whether they might be brought together with the gifts set apart and
slaughtered on the festival. What they differ in is only whether those
set apart on the eve of the festival might be brought to the priest
separately. Beth Shammai do not allow this, and Beth Hillel permit it.
R. Jose, however, said that the above schools do not differ about gifts
at all, but only about the heave-offering; but an anonymous teacher said
that they never differ about the heave-offering, which is prohibited
according to all, but only about other gifts. Hence our Mishna is in
accordance with the anonymous teachers. Said Rabha: Did the Mishna teach
that they were set apart and *slaughtered* on the same day? They were
set apart on that day, but may have been slaughtered on the previous
day. Then the Mishna will be according to R. Jehudah only, but not
according to the anonymous teachers? Nay, we may say it is in accordance
with the anonymous teachers also, but the point on which they differ
would be the gift that had been slaughtered on a preceding day. If it is
so, the anonymous teachers would say the same as R. Jehudah? Nay, there
is a difference about the adding of the gifts set apart on the preceding
day to those set apart on the festival itself (according to R. Jehudah
it may be done, and according to the anonymous teachers it may not).
Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The Halakha prevails according to
R. Jose.

R. Tubbi the son of R. Nehemiah possessed one pitcher of wine of
heave-offering on a festival, and he came to R. Joseph and asked him:
Can I give it away to the priest to-day? And the answer was, that R.
Jehudah in the name of Samuel declared the Halakha prevails according to
R. Jose (who permits).

The host of an inn where Rabha bar R. Hanan was staying, possessed
bundles of mustard stalks, and he asked his guest: May I thrash it and
eat it on a festival? And he did not know the law. And he came before
Rabha, who told him: We have learned in a Tosephta, one may pluck ears
or crush pea-pods to get out the grains or peas on a festival. Abayi
objects: We have learned in a Boraitha: Whoso has plucked ears on the
eve of Sabbath, he may blow away chaff on the Sabbath from one hand into
another, and eat, but not sieve. If he has done it on the eve of a
festival, he may sieve it on the next day in a small but not a large
sieve (that it may not be thought he does it for the next day). Hence it
seems from this that to do it on the festival itself is not allowed.
Rabha answered: The same would be the case on the festival itself. But
as in the first part it is said: On

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the eve of Sabbath, so in the last part he speaks of the eve of the
festival. (Said Abayi again:) If it is so, then we find a case in which
it is allowed to set apart heave-offering on a festival (as it is
usually taken from a quantity of grains, not ears); and here, when he
thrashes the ears for the purpose of eating the grain, you allow him to
separate the heave-offering of it, for otherwise he is not allowed to
eat, and in our Mishna it is plainly stated that the heave-offering is
not allowed to be set apart on the festival. Rabha answered: It presents
no difficulty. Elsewhere it is said, according to Rabbi's opinion
heave-offering may be separated on the festival, and only R. Jose bar
Jehudah opposed him, and our Mishna is in accordance with the latter.

How shall one pluck (a change from the ordinary week-day manner there
must be)? Abayi in the name of R. Jose said: He shall pluck it with the
thumb and the index-finger. But R. Ivya upon the same authority said:
The thumb and the two fingers next to it. Rabha, however, said: As soon
as he does it in a peculiar manner, the number of fingers he employs is
a matter of no great consequence.

How shall one blow? R. Adda bar A'hba said in the name of Rabh: He shall
blow only off his fingers (but not the palms). But in Palestine they
ridiculed this, saying that, provided he does it in a peculiar manner,
he may employ his palms also. Therefore R. Elazar said: He may blow it
off one hand with his whole might (but must not use the other).

MISHNA: Spices may be pounded on a festival with a wooden pestle only,
and salt with an earthenware jug, or with a large wooden spoon,
according to Beth Shammai. But Beth Hillel say: Spices may be, as usual,
pounded with a stone pestle, and salt with a wooden spoon.

GEMARA: From this we see that all agree that salt must be pounded in a
different manner. Why? R. Huna and R. Hisda: One said, because all the
dishes must have salt, but not all the dishes must have spices; and the
other said, all the spices lose their fragrance, but not salt. What is
the difference between the two? If one knows on the eve of a festival
what dish he will prepare on the morrow? According to the former it
needs a peculiarity (because he could have prepared it on the eve); and
according to the latter it needs not, because had he prepared it on the
eve the spices would lose their fragrance.

R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel, however, said: All that is pounded may
be pounded on a festival as on week-days, even salt.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Did we not say
above, that salt must be pounded differently? He holds with the Tana of
the following Boraitha: R. Meir said: Both schools of Shammai and Hillel
never differ about the point that all things may be pounded on a
festival as on week-days, and salt when it is among them: what they
differ about is, whether it may be done so when it is separate.
According to Beth Shammai it must be pounded with an earthenware jug or
a large wooden spoon; and only in a quantity needed for roasting, but
not for stewing into a pot; but Beth Hillel allow any quantity.

R. A'ha Bardla said to his son: If it shall happen that you will have to
pound something on a festival, you should incline your mortar, and then
pound (*i.e.*, he shall make some change in the manner of pounding). R.
Shesheth heard on a festival the sound of pounding in a mortar, and he
said: It is surely not in my house. Why was he sure? Perhaps the mortar
was inclined? Because he could infer from the sound that this was not
so. Perhaps they were pounding spices? Then the sound would have been
different.

The rabbis taught: *Ptisana* <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) must
not be made on a festival, for nothing may be pounded. But a small
quantity may be pounded in a small mortar.

It once happened that R. Papa was the guest of Mar Samuel, and *Ptisana*
was offered him, but he did not partake of it. Why? Perhaps it had been
done in a small mortar? He did not choose to trust his host's servants,
because they were disobedient.

MISHNA: When one picks pulse on a festival, he may, according to Beth
Shammai, only pick out the eatable part and eat it; but according to
Beth Hillel he may pick it as usual in his lap, in a basket with holes,
or in a large dish, but not on a large table, or through a small or
large sieve. Rabban Gamaliel says: It is also lawful to pour water
thereon, and remove the part not fit to eat, by hand.

GEMARA: We learn in a Boraitha: Said R. Gamaliel: The Mishna refers to a
case when there was more of the eatable part than of the part unfit for
eating; but if the opposite was the case, then all agree that he may
take out only the eatable part and leave the rest. Is there any one who
is allowed to do as usually even when the unfit part was larger than the
rest? R. Gamaliel meant to say, that even when the quantity of the unfit
part was

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

small, but to pick it out would be more trouble than to pick out the
eatable part, all agree that he shall do what gives less trouble,

"*Rabban Gamaliel said*," etc. We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Elazar
bar Zadok said: Such was the custom in the house of Rabban Gamaliel:
They usually brought a pail full of lentils and poured water on it, and
the eatable part settled down, while the unfit part remained floating;
but another Boraitha states the contrary (that the unfit part settles
down, etc.)? It presents no difficulty: the straw floats above, but if
there is any dust or other such matter, it sinks.

MISHNA: It is unlawful for one to send to another as a present on the
festival anything but eatables, according to Beth Shammai. Beth Hillel,
however, permit to send even cattle, game, and poultry, either
slaughtered or alive; also presents of wine, oil, fine flour, and pulse,
but not grain. R. Simeon allows also to send grain.

GEMARA: R. Je'hiel taught: This is permissible only when he sends it by
a few persons, but not by a whole line of men. A Boraitha taught that a
line is not constituted by less than three men.

"*R. Simeon*," etc. A Boraitha taught: R. Simeon permits to send grain;
*e.g.*, wheat, to make of it a dish which the inhabitants of Lydia used
to make (by grinding the grains of wheat); barley, to give it to cattle;
and lentils, to make of them a dish.

MISHNA: It is also permitted to send clothes, sewed or not, even of
"Kelayim," in case they can be used on the festival, but not sandals
with iron nails or unfinished shoes. R. Jehudah says: White shoes may
not be sent either, because an artificer is required to make them fit
for use. This is the general rule: Whatever can be used on the festival,
may be sent as a present thereon.

GEMARA: It is right that sewed clothes should be permitted on a
festival, because they can be used, and clothes not sewed may also be
used for covering; but how can Kelayim be used? The Mishna meant to say
rough clothes which can be used for sitting upon, and this is according
to R. Huna the son of R. Joshuah, who said that felt of the city of
Narash (which was rough) might be worn even if in it is Kelayim (linen
and wool mixed together),

"*But not sandals*," etc. What is the reason? Because once

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

an accident occurred. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) Said Abayi:
Sandals with iron nails must not be worn, because an accident happened
on account of them, but they may be handled; and this we infer from our
Mishna, which says that they shall not be sent, and if it were
disallowed to handle them, it would be self-evident that they could not
be sent.

"*Or unfinished shoes*." Is it not self-evident? The Mishna means to say
that even if there were nails in them already (so that they could be put
on), yet being unfinished, they might not be sent.

"*R. Jehudah says*," etc. We have learned, in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah
permits to send black shoes, but not white, because lime is needed to
make them white; and R. Jose prohibits black shoes, because they must be
polished. They do not disagree, however. Both speak of the customs in
their respective places. In the place of one Master the skin of the
shoes had the inner side turned out, and therefore it had to be made
white; while in the other the opposite was the case, and polishing was
needed.

"*This is the general rule*," etc. R. Shesheth permitted to his
disciples to send phylacteries on a festival. Said Abayi to him: Did not
we learn in our Mishna, only a thing which can be used on the festival
may be sent (and phylacteries are not used then)? And he answered: The
Mishna meant to say things fit to be used on a week-day may be sent on a
festival. Said Abayi: When the phylacteries are spoken of we would like
to say something: If one was on the road on the eve of Sabbath or of a
festival, and the Tefilin were on his head and the sun set, he may lay
his hand on the Tefilin and thus come to his home. The same is the case
when he was sitting in the house of learning and the Tefilin were on his
head, he may lay his hand on them until he comes home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:1](bet06.htm#fr_2.md) See footnote on p. 79 of
Tract Sabbath.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](bet06.htm#fr_3.md) See Tract Erubin, p. 82.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:1](bet06.htm#fr_4.md) As it will be explained
further on, [p. 8](#page_8.md).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](bet06.htm#fr_5.md) For this ordinance of R.
Johanan ben Zakkai see Tract Rosh Hashana, pp. 55-56.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:1](bet06.htm#fr_6.md) The Hebrew term is ‏בעפד‎
which signifies both in and with.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[13:1](bet06.htm#fr_7.md) Cross between a he-goat
and a hind.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[20:1](bet06.htm#fr_8.md) It means that he would not
slaughter, the animal at all if he would not be sure that the skin would
not be spoiled; and so he would not open the shop to take out what was
necessary for the festival, if he would not be allowed to shut it again,
and the festival would be without enjoyment.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[20:2](bet06.htm#fr_9.md) As the priest is not
permitted to do his work of sacrificing when there is something between
(Hatzitzah, *intervention*) his hand and the victim.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[21:1](bet06.htm#fr_10.md) Rashi says: To some
people it is doubtful if it was in the name of R. Jehudah the second, or
R. Jehudah the disciple of Samuel; but I say, he added, that Rhaba, who
was from Pumbeditha, had never seen R. Jehudah the second, as we do not
find that he, sometime in his life, ever went to Palestine. Moreover, it
is said elsewhere that no one was so particular in his study as Rhaba of
Pumbeditha, and we must assume that Rhaba was so particular that he
would not leave in his words any doubt about the man in whose name he
said it; and if it was Jehudah the second, he would have certainly
mentioned it.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[21:2](bet06.htm#fr_11.md) As when the hinges are
at the sides, it is very difficult to remove and replace.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[25:1](bet06.htm#fr_12.md) Latin for a dish of
pounded barley.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[27:1](bet06.htm#fr_13.md) See Tract Sabbath, p.
116.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](bet07.md)
