[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kat03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# CHAPTER III.

REGULATIONS REGARDING MOURNING ON FESTIVALS, REGARDING THOSE WHO ARE
UNDER THE BAN, AND WASHING.

MISHNA: The following may shave (trim their hair) on the middle days:
One who arrives from the sea countries, or returns from captivity, or
has been discharged from prison; or one who was absolved by the sages
from the ban, or from his vow (not to cut his hair for a certain period
of time); also a Nazarite and the leper who is restored to cleanness.
The following may wash their garments on the middle days: One who
arrives from the sea countries, or returns from captivity, or has been
discharged from prison; and one whom the sages have absolved from the
ban, or from his vow. Towels, barbers' napkins, and bathing towels (may
be washed). Men and women who have had a running issue, women after
their courses or lying-in, and all persons who from uncleanness are
restored to cleanness, are permitted to wash their garments; but all
other persons are forbidden.

GEMARA: What is the reason for not permitting other persons? As we have
learned in the following Mishna (Taanith). "The priests of the weekly
watch and the standing Israelites are prohibited from shaving their
beards and washing their clothes; but on Thursday they are allowed to do
so in honor of the Sabbath." And Rabba bar bar Hana in the name of R.
Elazar said: "The reason why they are prohibited to do so the whole week
is in order that they shall not enter upon the fulfilment of their
duties when they are filthy (if they would be allowed to do so during
the days of their duty)." The same reason applies to the festival (if
they will be allowed to do so in the middle days they will not shave
themselves before the festival).

"*Who arrive from the sea countries*." Our Mishna is not in accordance
with R. Jehudah of the following Boraitha: R. Jehudah said: "One who
returns from the sea countries may not shave, for he went to sea of his
own accord." Said Rabha: "If he went to sea for adventurous purposes,
all agree that he may not; if to earn his bread, all agree that he may.
They only

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

differ in case he went to sea to accumulate profits (*i.e.*, one who was
well provided with an income, but went to sea to increase his riches).
One equals it to the case of adventurous purpose; and the other, to that
for the purpose of earning his bread. Samuel said: "A minor (child) may
be shaved on the middle days, and it makes no difference whether he was
born on or before the middle days." Said R. Pin'has: "We also have a
Mishna to the same effect: All those who were permitted to shave on the
middle days may also do so during their mourning." From this we must
assume that those prohibited to shave on the middle days are also
prohibited from doing so during their mourning? Now, if a minor would be
prohibited, then mourning would be customary to a minor also, but the
following Boraitha states: "The garments of a minor mourner are rent for
the purpose of moving others to mourn?" Hence we see that to a minor
himself mourning is not customary? Said R. Ashi: Does, then, the Mishna
state "those who are prohibited"? (It only states "those who are
allowed") and possibly some are prohibited who are not mentioned in the
Mishna.

A mourner must not observe mourning on festivals, for it is written
\[Deut. xvi. 14\]: "And thou shalt rejoice on thy feast." Then, if the
mourning commences before the festival the positive commandment of the
rejoicing of the feast which relates to the whole public is relieving
from the positive commandment of mourning of an individual; and in case
it began on the festival, the commandment of mourning to an individual
cannot relieve from the commandment (of rejoicing) to the public. What
is the law of one who is under the ban as regards the festival? Said R.
Joseph: Come and hear: "Cases involving capital punishment or stripes,
or civil cases, may be tried (on the middle days), and if one (of the
parties) is in contempt he may be put under the ban." Now then, if you
should think that if one who was *already* under the ban the festival
comes and postpones it, how could we put one under the ban *originally*
on the festival? Said Abayi to him: "Perhaps the Boraitha meant, by
'tried,' the examination only (but not the result)?" Therefore said
Abayi: This can be decided from our Mishna, which states: "One whom the
sages absolved from the ban." And if the festival would postpone it, why
then the absolving by the sages?

Said Rabha: Does, then, the Mishna state: The *sages have absolved* the
ban? It states: "Who was *absolved by the sages* from the ban," which
means that he has previously arrived at an

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

understanding with his opponent and then come to ask the rabbis that
they should absolve him. (Hence the question remains undecided.)

Is the law of leprosy customary on the festival? Said Rabha: "Come and
hear: It is written \[Lev. xiii. 45\]: "And the leper." That means to
include even if it was the high-priest. Now, it is certain that as to
the high-priest all the week-days are considered feast-days, as we have
learned in a Mishna (Sebo'him): "The high-priest may sacrifice in his
mourning before the interment of the corpse, but not to eat of it."
Infer from this that the law of leprosy is customary on festivals. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)

Rabha said: Whence do we know that the court has power to summon one to
appear before them; to appoint a time for the trial before the chief of
the court; and to fix a time for the appearance of both parties? It is
written \[Num. xvi. 12-16\]: "And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab," etc. "And Moses said unto Korah, thou and thy
company be ye before the Lord," etc. "Thou and they and Aaron
to-morrow." And whence do we know that the court has power to postpone
the trial to another day? It is written \[Jerem. xlvi. 17\]: "They
called out there," etc., "he hath let the time appointed pass by." And
whence do we know that the report of the court messenger, that the
summons is disobeyed, is not considered slander? From the report of the
messengers to Moses \[Num. xvi. 114\]. And whence do we know that a
great man has the power to put one under the ban? From \[Judges, v.
23\]: "Curse ye Meroz, said the messenger of the Lord." \[It means that
he was a great man.\] And whence do we know that the court has power to
excommunicate him and to prohibit to eat or drink in his company, or to
stand near him within a distance of four ells? From the passage \[ibid.,
ibid.\]: "Curse ye bitterly, curse its inhabitants." And whence, that
his disobedience is made public? From \[ibid., ibid.\]: "Because they
came not to the help of the Lord." And whence, that his property may be
confiscated (made ownerless)? From \[Ezra, x. 8\]: "And that whosoever
should not come within three days," etc., "all his substance should be
forfeited <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) and himself separated from
the congregation

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of the exiles." Whence, that he may be cursed, beaten, his hair plucked,
and made to swear? From \[Nehem. xiii. 25\]: "And I contended with them,
and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked out their hair,
and made them swear," etc. Whence, that his hands and feet may be bound,
and he may be tied to the whipping post, and prosecuted? From \[Ezra,
vii. 26\] Whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to a fine on
goods, or to imprisonment." What is meant by "banishment"? Said Ada Mari
in the name of Ne'hemiah bar Baruch in the name of R. Hyya bar Abin,
quoting R. Jehudah: "It means, prosecution." What kind of prosecution?
Said R. Jehudah, son of R. Samuel bar Shilath, in the name of Rabh: "It
means that he is put under the ban at once, and if he does not repent
within thirty days the ban is continued; and if he still continues to be
disobedient, he is excommunicated after the lapse of sixty days." Said
R. Huna bar Hinna to him: "But has not R. Hisda stated: He is first
warned on a Monday, Thursday, and the following Monday"? This relates
only to cases involving money; but if he is accused of having denounced
the authorities, he is at once put under the ban. A certain butcher was
disobedient to R. Tubi bar Mathna, and be was put under the ban by the
concurrence of Abayi and Rabha. Subsequently he came to an understanding
with his opponent. Said Abayi: "What shall be done in such a case? Shall
we absolve him? Thirty days have not passed yet? Shall we not? The
rabbis need him?" And he turned to R. Idi bar Abin and asked him: "Do
you know anything about such a case?" And the latter answered him: "R.
Ta'hlipha bar Abimi said in the name of Samuel: 'The horn that announced
that he was placed under the ban, may announce that he was absolved.'"
And Abayi rejoined: "This is only in cases involving money; but in the
case of denouncing the authorities, the ban must continue for thirty
days." Ameimar said: "The Halakha prevails, that if scholars declare the
ban over a person, he may be absolved therefrom by three other
scholars." Said R. Ashi to Ameimar: Have we not learned in a Boraitha:
R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: If one of the scholars who declared the ban
over a person died, his part cannot be absolved from? Shall we not
assume that it cannot be absolved from at all? Nay; that means, only
until other three absolve him.

The rabbis taught: The ban is declared for not less than thirty days;
rebuke, however, is only for seven days; and although

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

there is no explicit proof for that, there is a hint \[Num. xii. 14\]:
"If her father had spit in her face, would she not be ashamed seven
days?" R. Hisda said: "Our (Babylonian) ban equals in point of time
their (Palestinian) rebuke; and their rebuke is only for seven days." Is
that so? Has it not happened that R. Simeon bar Rabbi and Bar Qappara
have been studying together, and they came across a difficult question?
Said R. Simeon to Bar Qappara: "This question must be solved by Rabbi
(my father)." And Bar Qappara answered him: "What could Rabbi say to
this?" <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) R. Simeon reported this
statement to his father, and he became angry. Subsequently Bar Qappara
came to visit him, and Rabbi said to him: "Bar Qappara, I have never
known thee." Bar Qappara understood this reproach, and he reprimanded
himself for thirty days? It also happened that Rabbi ordered not to
teach disciples in the public streets. R. Hyya disregarded the order,
and did teach his two nephews, Rabh and Rabba bar bar Hana, in a public
street. When Rabbi heard of it, he was angry. Subsequently R. Hyya came
to visit him, and Rabbi said to him: "Eyya, you are wanted in the
street." R. Hyya understood what was hinted at, and he reprimanded
himself for thirty days.

\[On the thirtieth day Rabbi sent a message to him to come; and a short
while after he sent him another message not to come. Subsequently R.
Hyya came. Said Rabbi to him: "Why didst thou come?" He answered:
"Because the Master sent for me to come." Said Rabbi: "But did I not
subsequently send thee not to come?" And he replied: "The first message
I received, the second one I did not." And Rabbi applied to him the
following passage \[Proverbs, xvi. 7\]: "When the Lord receiveth in
favor a man's ways, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with
him."\] Hence we see from this that the rebuke of the Palestinians is
for thirty days? The rebuke of a prince is different.

For how long, however, is *our* rebuke? For one day only, as seen from
the following: Samuel and Mar Uqba, *studying* together, the latter used
to sit (out of respect to Samuel) four ells distant from the former; but
when sitting as a court, the reverse used to be the case, and Mar Uqba
used to sit on a low platform (near the candelabrum <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11)) in order that his voice might be heard

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

well. Mar Uqba was in the habit of accompanying Samuel every day to his
residence. One day he was so engrossed in a case that he forgot to do
it, and the latter, instead, followed *him* to his house. When they
reached the house, Samuel said to him: "Is this sufficient for thee? May
I now return?" And Mar Uqba understood that Samuel was angry, and he
reprimanded himself for one day. There was a woman who was sitting in a
pathway, and was in the habit of stretching out her foot to pick up the
barley. A young scholar happened to pass by and she paid no attention to
him, and he remarked: "How insolent this woman is!" The woman came
before R. Na'hman and he asked her: "Did he utter the ban?" And she
answered: "Nay." He then ordered her to be reprimanded for one day.
Zutra bar Tubiah was once arranging biblical passages before R. Jehudah.
When he came upon the passage \[II Sam. xxiii, 1\]: "And these are the
last words of David," he said to him: "If these were the last, what were
the first words of David?" R. Jehudah remained silent. But when he (Mar
Zutra) repeated the question, R. Jehudah said: "Art thou of, the opinion
that if one cannot explain this he is no more a great man?" And Mar
Zutra understood that R. Jehudah was angry, and he reprimanded himself
for one day. How is this passage, however, to be explained? It plainly
reads "the last"; then there must be the first words? \[Ibid. xxi. 1\]:
"And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, on the day that
the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out
of the hand of Saul." This passage was expounded thus: The Holy One,
blessed be He, said unto David: "David, thou singest songs over the
downfall of Saul; if thou wert Saul and he were David, I would
annihilate many a David for his sake." And this is meant by \[Psalms,
vii. 1\]: "A Shiggayon of David <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)
which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the affairs of Cush (the
Ethiopian) the Benjamite." Was then his name Cush? It was Saul, but as
an Ethiopian is distinguished from others by the color of his skin, so
was Saul distinguished from others by his good deeds. Likewise \[Num.
xii. 1\]: "On account of the Ethiopian woman which he had married." Was
then her name Ethiopian? Was it then not Ziporah? But it is to state,
that as an Ethiopian is distinguished by the color of his skin, so was
she distinguished by her kind deeds. Likewise \[Jerem. xxxviii. 7\]:
"Now when the slave of the king, the Ethiopian,"

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

etc. Was then his name Ethiopian? <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)
Was it then not Zedekiah? But as it is stated above. Likewise \[Amos,
ix. 7\]: "Are ye not like the children of the Ethiopians, O children of
Israel?" Was then their name Ethiopians? Was it then not "Israel"? But
as the Ethiopians differ from others in the color of their skin, so does
Israel differ from all idolaters by their good deeds.

R. Tan'hum said in the name of R. Huna, and according to others R. Huna
himself said it: A disciple who put one under the ban for disobedience
to himself, the ban is valid, as we have learned in a Boraitha: "One who
is put under the ban by the Master is considered so also towards the
disciple; but if put by a disciple, is not so towards the Master." Hence
towards the Master he is not so, but as towards the general public he is
so. Now, then, let us see: To what case is this applicable? Shall we
assume that it applies to Heavenly things? Is it not written \[Psalms,
xxi. 30\]: "There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel *against
the Lord*"? Hence it must be assumed, even for the disobedience to
himself. R. Joseph said: "Even a young scholar, if only he is certain
that his demand against another is just, may render judgment in his own
favor." There was one young scholar concerning whom evil rumors were
current. Said R. Jehudah: "What shall be done in this case? Shall we put
him under the ban? The rabbis need him. Shall we not? The name of Heaven
will be profaned." And he asked Rabba bar bar Hana: "Do you know
anything about such a case?" He answered him: So said R. Johanan: "It is
written \[Malachi, ii. 7\]: 'The priest's lips are ever to keep
knowledge, and the law are they to seek from his mouth, for he is the
messenger <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) of the Lord of hosts.'
That means: If the Master is equal to an angel, law may be sought from
his mouth, but not otherwise." Thereupon R. Jehudah put him under the
ban. Subsequently, R. Jehudah was taken ill and the rabbis made him a
sick-call, among whom was also that young scholar. When R. Jehudah
beheld him, he smiled. Said he to R. Jehudah: "Is it not enough that you
put me under the ban, that you still laugh at me?" R. Jehudah answered
him: "I do not laugh at you, but in the world to come I will be proud to
say that I was not biased even towards so great a man as you."

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

When R. Jehudah died the young scholar came to the college and asked to
be absolved from the ban, and the rabbis answered him: "There is not
here a man equal in esteem to R. Jehudah to absolve you. Go to R.
Jehudah the Second, and he may absolve you." He went to him. Said the
Nasi to R. Ami: "Go and examine his case, and if found favorable,
absolve him." R. Ami did so, and was about to absolve him when R. Samuel
bar Na'hmeni arose and said: "Even when the maid-servant of the house of
Rabbi declared one under the ban the sages did respect it for three
years, and so much the more we must respect Jehudah our colleague." Said
R. Zera: "How did it happen that this old man came to-day to college
after an absence of several years? It is a token that the young scholar
is not to be absolved." He left weeping, and on the way he was stung by
a bee and he died. He was brought to the vaults of the Pious, and was
not accepted; he was then removed to those of the Judges, and was
accepted. Why so? For he acted as R. Ilai of the following Boraitha: "If
one cannot withstand the temptation, he shall go to a place where he is
not known, and shall dress in black and wrap himself in black and do as
he pleases, but shall not profane the name of Heaven openly."

What was the occurrence with the maid-servant of the house of Rabbi? The
maid-servant of the house of Rabbi saw once one beating his grown-up
son, and she said: "Let that man be under the ban, for he has
transgressed the commandment \[Lev. xix. 14\]: 'Thou shalt not put a
stumbling-block before the blind.'" And the following Boraitha states
that this passage relates to one who beats his grown-up son. Resh Lakish
was watching an orchard, and there came a certain man and ate of the
figs. Resh Lakish shouted to him not to do it, but he paid no attention
to him. Resh Lakish then said: "Let this man be under the ban." And the
man answered him: "On the contrary, let *that* man be under the ban; for
if I am responsible to thee in damages, am I then liable to be put under
the ban?" When Resh Lakish came to the college, he was told: "His
placing you under the ban is valid, but not yours." "How can it be
corrected?" "Go and ask his pardon." "But I do not know where to find
him?" And he was told: "You have to go to the Nasi in order to be
absolved, as we have learned in a Boraitha: 'One who was put under the
ban and he does not know the person, he must go to a Nasi in order to be
absolved.'"

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

R. Huna said: It was enacted in Osha that if the chief of tile court
should be delinquent, if for the first time he should not be put under
the ban, but should only be told: "Be dignified and stay at home." But
if for the second time, he should be put under the ban, lest the name of
Heaven be profaned. This is not in accordance with the following
statement of Resh Lakish: A scholar who is delinquent is not put under
the ban publicly, for it is written \[Hosea, ii. 5\]: "Therefore shalt
thou stumble in the day-time, and the prophet also shall stumble with
thee in the night," which means: See that he is devoid of publicity, as
the night is devoid of daylight.

Mar Zutra the Pious, when a young scholar was delinquent and deserving
to be reprimanded, first reprimanded *himself* and then the young
scholar. When he entered his residence, he first absolved *himself* and
then the young scholar. R. Giddel said in the name of Rabh: "A scholar
may first put himself under the ban (for a certain period of time) and
afterward absolve himself therefrom." Said R. Papa: "I may be rewarded;
for, as a matter of fact, I have never put a young scholar under the
ban."

"*And the Nazarite and the leper*," etc. R. Jeremiah questioned R. Zera:
"Does it mean in the case when they had no opportunity to do so before,
or even when they had?" And he answered him: "We have learned this in
the following Boraitha: All those who were said to be permitted to shave
on the middle days, may do so only when they had no opportunity to do it
before, but not otherwise. A Nazarite, however, may do so, although he
had the opportunity to do so before, in order that his sacrifice be not
delayed.

The rabbis taught: "All those who were said to be permitted to shave on
the middle days, may also do so in their mourning." But have we not
learned in another Boraitha that they may not? Said R. Hisda ill the
name of R. Shila: "The first Boraitha relates to a case where the
mournings succeeded one another." If this is the case, why only "those
who were said," etc.? Why not every one? As we have learned in a
Boraitha: "When one mourning succeeds the other, and so on for a long
time, and his hair has become heavy, it may be made light by a razor,
and he may wash his clothes in water?" Yea, but as to this, it was
taught that R. Hisda said: The Boraitha means by a razor only, but not
by scissors; in water, but not with Spanish chalk (which was used then
instead of soap) or lye. Said R. Hisda:

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "From this it may
be inferred that a mourner must not wash his clothes."

The rabbis taught: "As it is not allowed to shave on the middle days, so
also is it not allowed to trim the nails. Such is the dictum of R.
Jehudah. R. Jose, however, permits it." And the same is the case in
regard to mourning. Said Ula: "The Halakha prevails according to R.
Jehudah in regard to mourning, and according to R. Jose in regard to the
middle days." Samuel, however, said: "The Halakha prevails according to
R. Jose in regard to both mourning and the middle days." As Samuel said
elsewhere: The Halakha prevails according to the one who is lenient, in
regard to mourning. R. Shaman bar Aba said: I was present once on the
middle days in the college of R. Johanan, and saw him trimming his nails
with his teeth and throwing the parings away. And from the above
occurrence three things were inferred: that the nails may be trimmed on
the middle days; that there is no aversion to trimming them with the
teeth; and that the parings may be thrown away. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) R. Itz'hak bar Jacob bar Geurah in the
name of R. Johanan sent the following message: "Flaxen garments may be
washed on the middle days."

MISHNA: The following documents may be written on the middle days:
contracts of betrothing, bills of divorce, and receipts in discharge of
debts; also wills or codicils; deeds of gift; premonitions; and deeds of
maintenance, certificates of Halitza, and certificates of refusal;
arbitration bonds; decrees of the Beth Din; and powers of attorney.

GEMARA: Samuel said: "One is permitted to become betrothed to a woman on
the middle days, for fear that he may be preceded by another one." Rabh
said in the name of R. Reuben b. Atztrubli: It appears from the Law, the
Prophets, and the Hagiographa that the union of a woman to her husband
comes from God himself. The Law \[Gen. xxiv. 50\]: "Then Laban and
Bethuel answered and said: The thing hath proceeded *from the Lord*,"
etc.; the Prophets \[Judges, xiv. 4\]: "But his father and his mother
knew not that it was from *the Lord*"; the Hagiographa \[Prov. xix.
14\]: "Houses and wealth are an inheritance from fathers; but from the
*Lord* cometh an intelligent wife." <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16)
Rabh further said in the name of the same authority; and according to
others this was learned in a Boraitha:

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "R. Reuben b.
Atztrubli said: 'No one is suspected of having done something (wrong),
unless he has really done it; and if he has not done it all, he has done
part of it; and if not even that much, he at least had in mind to do it;
and if not even that much, he probably approved of it when it was done
by others.'" An objection was made: Come and hear \[Psalm cvi. 16\]:
"Moreover, they envied Moses in the camp and Aaron the holy one of the
Lord." And R. Samuel bar Itz'hak said: "From this it is inferred that
every one suspected his own wife of having relations with Moses?" (Hence
we see that one may be suspected although there is no particle of
foundation for it?) In that case it was different, for it was done out
of hatred. Another objection was made: Come and hear: R. Jose said: "May
my share in the world to come be with those who were *groundlessly*
suspected." And R. Papa said: "I was once suspected without any ground
whatever?" This presents no difficulty. The one is the case when the
suspicion has ceased; the other is, when it has not. What is meant by
not having ceased? Said Abayi: My mother told me: 'A town rumor is for a
day and a half.' The case is only if it has not ceased at intervals, but
if it has it does not matter; and if, however, it has ceased out of
fear, it is not taken into consideration; and even if it was not out of
fear, the case is when it was not circulated again more vigorously. All
this, however, is the case when the person suspected has no enemies; but
if he has, the latter circulated it.

MISHNA: Bonds of debts must not be written on the middle days; but if
the lender does not otherwise want to trust the borrower, or the latter
has nothing to eat, they may be written. Holy Scrolls, Phylacteries, or
Mezuzoth must not be written on the middle days, and not a single letter
may be [corrected](errata.htm#13)--even in the Book of Ezra. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) R. Jehudah, however, says: "One may write
Phylacteries and Mezuzoth for his own use, and he may also spin sky-blue
wool for show-threads in his garment."

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: One may write Phylacteries and Mezuzoth for
his own use and may spin sky-blue wool for show-threads in his garment;
but for others he may do it as a favor only (without compensation). Such
is the dictum of

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

R. Meir. R. Jehudah, however, said: "One may connive and sell his own,
and then write another one for his own use." But R. Jose said: "He may
write and sell in the usual way as much as necessary for his living
expenses." Rabh, and according to others Rabba bar bar Hana, rendered
his decision to R. Hananel: "The Halakha prevails, that one may write
and sell in the usual way as much as necessary for his living expenses."

MISHNA: One who buried his dead three days before the commencement of
the festival is freed from the observance of the seven (days of deep
mourning); if eight days before the festival, he is freed from the
observance of the thirty days; for the sages hold: "The Sabbath enters
into the computation, but does not supersede the mourning, whereas the
festivals supersede the mourning, but do not enter into the
computation." R. Elazar said: "Since the destruction of the Temple,
Pentecost is to be considered (in respect to mourning) like the
Sabbath." R. Gamaliel said: "The New Year and the Day of Atonement are
to be considered like festivals; the sages, however, say that it is
neither as the one nor as the other, but hold that there is no
distinction between the Pentecost and any other festival, but the New
Year and the Day of Atonement are like the Sabbath."

GEMARA: Rabh said: "Only the *observance* of the thirty days is
dispensed with, but not the days themselves." So also said R. Huna. R.
Shesheth, however, said: "Even the days are dispensed with." In what
case may it happen that the days shall still not be dispensed with? If
(the observance of the thirty days being dispensed with) one had not
shaved himself on the eve of the festival, he may not do so after the
festival (during all the thirty days). We have so also learned in a
Boraitha: One who buries his dead three days before the festival is
freed from the observance of the seven days; if eight days, he is freed
from the observance of the thirty days, and he may shave himself on the
eve of the festival; if he, however, failed to do so on the eve of the
festival, he must not do so after the festival. Abba Saul, however,
said: "He may do so, for as the observance of the three days frees from
the observance of the seven days, so also does the observance of the
seven days free from the observance of the thirty days. "Seven days?
Have we not learned eight? Abba Saul is of the opinion that a portion of
a day counts for a whole day, and the seventh day enters into the
computation of both. Said R. Hisda in the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

name of Rabina bar Shila: "The Halakha prevails according to Abba Saul,
and even the sages concede to Abba Saul that in case the eighth day
falls on a Sabbath which is incidentally the eve of a festival, he may
shave on the eve of Sabbath." According to whom is the statement of R.
Amram in the name of Rabh: "A mourner, as soon as his condolers have
left him, is permitted to wash himself"? It is according to Abba Saul.
Said Abayi: The Halakha prevails according to Abba Saul in regard to the
seventh day; and the sages concede, in regard to the thirtieth day, that
a portion of a day counts for a whole day. Rabha said: The Halakha
prevails according to Abba Saul regarding the thirtieth day, but not
regarding the seventh day. But the sages of Nehardea maintained that the
Halakha prevails according to Abba Saul in both cases, as Samuel said:
"The Halakha prevails according to the one who is lenient in regard to
mourning." Abayi inquired of Rabba: "If one buried his dead on the
festival, does, or does not, the festival enter into the computation of
the thirty days? Certain it is to me that it does not enter in regard to
the seven days, for the observance of the seven is not customary on the
festival; but my question is in regard to the thirty days, because the
observance of the thirty days is customary on the festival?" And he
answered him: "It does not enter." Abayi raised an objection based on
the following Boraitha: The festival enters into the computation of the
thirty days. How so? If the burial took place in the beginning of the
festival, the observance of the seven days begins after the festival,
and his work may be done by others, and his male and female servants may
do their work privately, and the public need not condole with him during
the seven days, for they have already done so on the festival; and the
festival enters into the computation of the thirty days? This objection
remains unanswered. When Rabbin came from Palestine he said in the name
of R. Johanan: "Even if he was buried on the festival" (the festival
enters into computation). So also has R. Elazar decided to his son R.
Padath.

The rabbis taught: If one has observed the lowering of the couch for
three days prior to the festival, he need not observe it any more after
the festival. Such is the dictum of R. Eliezer. The sages, however,
hold: "Even one day, and even one hour." Said R. Elazar b. R. Simeon:
These are, respectively, the decrees of the school of Shammai and the
school of Hillel. For the school of Shammai decrees: "Three days"; and
the school

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of Hillel decrees: "Even one day." Said R. Huna in the name of R. Hyya
bar Abba, quoting R. Johanan, and according to others R. Johanan said to
R. Hyya bar Abba and R. Huna: "Even one day, and even one hour." Rabha
said: "The Halakha prevails according to our Tana (of the Boraitha), who
holds three days."

Rabina happened to be in Sura of Euphrates. Said R. Habibha to him:
"What is the Halakha?" And he answered him: "Even one day, and even one
hour." R. Jose bar Abin said: "One who receives information which is
recent on the festival, but becomes remote after the festival, the
latter counts, and mourning is observed only one day." Rabbi Ada of
Kisri taught before R. Johanan: "One who receives information which is
recent on the Sabbath but becomes remote thereafter, must mourn one day
only." Must he rend (his garments) or not? R. Mani said: "He may not."
R. Hanina, however, said: "He may." Said R. Mani to R. Hanina: "As to my
statement, it is correct, because rending is customary only together
with the observance of the seven days; but as to your statement, is then
there a case in which one must rend although there is no mourning of the
seven days?" Is there not such a case? But has not R. Isi the father of
R. Zera, and according to others the brother of R. Zera, taught before
R. Zera: "One who has no garment to rend and he becomes a mourner, if
within the seven days, he must rend; if after the seven days, he may
not"? And R.1 Zera rejoined: "This is the case only in the five cases of
relatives whom one is bound to bury, but over his father and mother he
must rend notwithstanding (the lapse of the seven days?). In this case
it is only out of respect to his father and mother."

"*Because the sages held that Sabbath enters into computation*," etc.
The inhabitants of Judea and the inhabitants of Galilea: Those hold that
the law of mourning applies on Sabbath (to things done privately),
because the Mishna states: "It enters into computation"; and these hold
that it does not apply, because the Mishna states: "But it does not
supersede."

But does not the Mishna state that it enters into computation? It is
only because it has to state in the latter part, that it does not enter,
he uses also in the first past "enter." But did not the Mishna state
plainly "it does not supersede"? This is for the same reason, as it has
to state in the latter part "it does supersede" it uses the same term in
the first part also.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Raphram bar Papa said: "We have learned in Tract 'Great Mourning': 'A
mourner is prohibited to have sexual intercourse during his mourning. It
happened once that one did have sexual intercourse with his wife during
his mourning, and his corpse was dragged about by hogs.'" Samuel said:
"To remove the wrapping from the head, the rent from the front to the
back, and to put the couch in proper condition (on the Sabbath) is
obligatory; but to wear shoes, to have sexual intercourse, and to bathe
the hands and feet in warm water on Friday evening is optional." Rabh,
however, said that even removing the wrapping is also only optional.

Abayi found R. Joseph during his mourning walking around in the house
with his mantle wrapped around his head (on the Sabbath), and he said to
him: "Does not the Master hold that mourning is not customary on the
Sabbath?" And he answered him: "So said R. Johanan: 'Things of a private
nature are permitted.'"

"*R. Elazar said: Since the destruction of the Temple*," etc. R. Giddel
bar Menasiah said in the name of Samuel: "The Halakha prevails according
to Rabban Gamaliel (Berachoth), who said that a mourner on the Sabbath
is bound to observe all the commandments."

R. Anni bar Shashan lectured in front of the house of the Nasi: "If (the
mourning is) observed one day before Pentecost and on Pentecost, it is
considered to have been observed fourteen days." (For Pentecost counts
for seven days, and so also does the day preceding it, as stated above.)
When R. Ami heard of this he was angry, and said: "Is this then his own?
This was stated long ago by R. Elazar in the name of R. Oshiya." The
same thing was stated in a lecture by R. Itz'hak of Naph'ha in Babylon
at the cottage of the Exilarch, and R. Shesheth became angry because R.
Elazar in the name of R. Oshiya, the author of this statement (Hagiga,
40), was not. mentioned. R. Papa, accompanying R. Avia the elder,
lectured: "One day (of observance of mourning) before the New Year and
the day of New Year count for fourteen days." Said Rabina: "Therefore,
one day before the Tabernacles, the Tabernacles, and the eighth day
(which counts for a separate festival) count (regarding mourning)
twenty-one days." Rabina happened to be in Sura of Euphrates. Said R.
Habibha of same place to him: "Do you, Master, hold: 'If observed one
day before the New Year and on the New Year it counts fourteen

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

days'?" And he answered him: "I have only stated that it seems to me
that the Halakha prevails according to R. Gamaliel."

MISHNA: The garments are not rent, nor the shoulders laid bare, nor the
funeral meal eaten (on the middle days), unless by the near relatives of
the deceased. The funeral meal is not to be taken except on a couch
standing up properly.

GEMARA: Does this apply to a scholar also? Have we not learned in a
Boraitha: "When a scholar dies, all must rend their garments, bare their
shoulders, and partake of the funeral meal served in the public
thoroughfare, for all are considered as his relatives"? Nay, this Mishna
refers to one who is not a scholar, but an upright man over whom also
rending is obligatory, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
"Why do little children die? Because their parents failed to weep
(mourn) over the death of an upright man; to one who does so, all his
sins are forgiven, for the honor he has done to the deceased." In the
case of the death of an ordinary person, however, rending is obligatory
only on the one who is present at the time of the death, as we have
learned in the following Boraitha: "R. Simeon b. Elazar said: 'One who
is present at the time when the death occurs is bound to rend his
garments, for it is similar to the case of one who is present at the
time the Holy Scrolls are burned, in which case he is bound to rend his
garments.'" When R. Saphra's soul passed unto rest, the rabbis intended
not to rend their garments, for they said: "We received no teachings
from him." Said Abayi to them: "Does, then, the Boraitha treat of a
rabbi? It treats of a scholar, and still more so in the present case,
when his Halakhas are always on our lips in the college?" Still they
were inclined not to rend, for they said: "The time for doing so has
already passed." Said Abayi to them: "We have learned: In the case of a
scholar, so long as the funeral orations are still going on, one is
bound to rend." They then wanted to rend at once (without holding
funeral orations). Said Abayi to them: "There is a Boraitha that states
that the honor paid to the remains of a scholar lies in the funeral
oration." When R. Huna departed, it was intended to place the Holy
Scrolls on his bier. Said R. Hisda to them: "Shall we now act against
his will? Has not R. Ta'hlipha said: 'I was once present when R. Huna
wanted to sit down on a cot on which the Holy Scrolls were lying, and he
first removed the latter and then sat down'? Hence we see that he was of
the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

opinion that one must not sit on a cot on which the Holy Scrolls are
placed?" When the cot was to be removed from the house, it was found out
that it could not pass through the door; and it was about to be removed
through the roof opening, when R. Hisda remarked: "We have a tradition
from him that the honor to a deceased scholar demands that he be removed
through the door opening." They then wanted to place him on a cot of
smaller dimensions, but R. Hisda again remarked: "We have a tradition
from him that the respect to a deceased scholar demands that he be
removed in the cot he died on." Then they broke away the door-posts, and
passed him out. Then R. Abba began the following eulogy: "Our rabbi was
worthy that the Shekhina should rest upon him, but Babylon prevented
it." When his corpse arrived in Palestine, R. Ami and R. Assi were
informed that "R. Huna had arrived." And they said (under the impression
that he was alive): "When we were in Babylon we could not raise our
heads on account of him (for his great learning), and now he has
followed us here." And they were then told: "His *coffin* has arrived."
R. Ami and R. Assi went out (to pay their respects). R. Aila and R.
Hanina remained in the house. Others, however, said that only R. Hanina
remained. What was the reason of those who went out? The following
Boraitha: "When a coffin is being removed from one place to another,
those present must stand in a row and must pronounce the mourning
benediction and the words of consolation." The reason, however, of those
who did not go out is the follow me, Boraitha: "When a coffin is being
removed from one place to another, those present need not stand in a
row," etc. But do not these Boraithas contradict each other? Nay, the
one relates to a case where the skeleton is still in good condition; the
other where it is not. But R. Huna's skeleton was still in good
condition? They were not aware of that. They then began to deliberate
where to place his remains, and concluded to place them alongside of
those of R. Hyya. For they said: "R. Huna diffused the Torah among
Israel as much as did R. Hyya." The question then came up as to who
should do the placing. Said R. Haga to them: "*I* will do it, for I was
his disciple since the age of eighteen. I never had a wet-dream, and I
have served him since then and knew his ways: once it happened that one
of his phylactery fillets turned over, and he fasted forty days." When
R. Haga brought in the coffin into the arch, he noticed that Jehudah was
sleeping at the right of his father and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Hezekiah at his left. He heard Jehudah say to his brother: "Rise, for it
would not be correct not to pay respect to R. Huna." When he arose, a
pillar of fire arose with him. R. Haga became frightened and, lifting up
the coffin of R. Huna, left the arch.

When R. Hisda died they wanted to place the Holy Scrolls on his bier.
Said R. Itz'hak: "A thing which was not approved by his Master (R.
Huna), we must not do to him." They also intended to leave their rent
garments unmended, when R. Itz'hak bar Ami said to them: "In case of a
scholar, the rent may be sewed together as soon as those who follow the
coffin turn away their faces from the latter." When Rabba bar Huna and
R. Hamnuna had died in Babylon, their bodies were brought on camels to
Palestine. Arrived at a narrow bridge, where the two camels could not
pass at once, both remained standing. An Ishmaelitish merchant present,
surprised. at the interruption of the journey, asked for the reason, and
was told that each of the deceased wished to give the other the
preference of the way. "If I were to give my view of the matter," the
Arab said, "I should decide in favor of Rabba bar Huna (as he was known
to me as a venerable man)." The Arab had hardly concluded his remarks,
when the camel bearing Rabba passed the bridge. (As a punishment for not
paying proper respect to R. Hamnuna), the molars and front teeth of the
Arab fell out. A disciple declaimed the following elegy:

A learned scion of an ancient race  
Upward to Sacred Palestina draws,  
And bears into illimitable space  
The code of battles, the great book of laws.  
The cormorant and the hedgehog nightly gloat  
Upon destruction spreading far and wide;  
For God His wrath upon the earth has hurled,  
Our pious sage His voice has called away;  
And God is glad that from this sinful world  
His dearest servant has come home to stay. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

When Rabina died, the funeral orator held the following oration:

Bend, ye majestic palms, in grief sincere  
O'er one who like a palm had flourished here  
Nor cease your mourning when the moon's soft ray  
Changes to shadowy night the brilliant day. <span id="page_43">p.
43</span>  
For moon's broad glare had oft to midnight waned  
Ere slumber o'er his studious eyelids reigned.

R. Ashi said to Bar Kipuk (the funeral orator): "What oration will you
make on that day (of my death)?" And he answered him: "The following.

How can the lowly hyssop still survive,  
When with devouring flames the cedars strive?  
With huge Leviathan the angler's prey,  
What have the fishes of the pond to say?  
If the dry torrents shame the fisher's hook,  
How fares it with the waters of the brook?

Said Bar Abhin to him: "Heaven forbid that 'net' and 'flame' be used in
orations over the righteous." "What, then, would *you* say?" "I would
say: 'Weep for the losers but not for the lost (deceased), for *he*
passed into rest but we into grief.'" R. Ashi felt discouraged (for one
orator used the words "net" and "flame," and the other the word "lost"),
and their (of the orators) feet upturned. When he died, neither of the
orators came to hold orations. And this was meant by R. Ashi when he
said: "Neither Bar Kipuk nor Bar Abhin would be bound to perform the
ceremony of Halitza." (*Vide* Yebamoth, 103*a*, where it is stated that
those who have deformed feet are not bound to perform Halitza.)

When Rabha came to Hiddekel, he said to Bar Abhin: "Pronounce an
(appropriate) prayer," and the latter began: The major part of Israel
went through water; remember, and have mercy. We went astray from Thee
as a woman goeth astray from her husband; do not cast us off, for it may
have the same indication as that of the bitter-water." \[*Vide* Num. v.
11-28.\]

R. Hanin, the son-in-law of the Nasi, had been for a long time
childless; he prayed and was answered. On the day of the birth of the
child he died. The funeral orator on this occasion declaimed the
following elegy:

Parental joy was changed to hopeless pain  
Where bliss had entered, grief was doomed to reign  
For in the moment of his hope fulfilled,  
The joyful beating of that heart was stilled.

The child was named Hanin after his father. When R. Johanan died, R.
Itz'hak b. Elazar began the eulogy as follows: "This day is as momentous
to Israel as the day of which the prophet

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

spoke \[Amos, viii. 9\] 'And it shall come to pass in that day that I
will cause the sun to go down at noon,'" which R. Johanan explained to
have reference to the day of the death of the King Josiah. When R.
Johanan departed, R. Ami observed both the seven and the thirty days (of
mourning). Said R. Abba the son of R. Hyya bar Abba: "R. Ami stands
alone in his action, for so said my father in the name of R. Johanan:
'Even over an instructor in science one need not mourn more than one
day.'" When R. Zera departed, the funeral orator delivered the following
oration:

In Babylon this noble sage was born,  
In Palestine he was admired and cherished;  
"Woe unto me!" doth Reketh <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) sadly
mourn,  
"For my most precious jewel now has perished."

When R. Abuhu died, the pillars of Kisri shed tears; when R. Jose died,
the gutters of Sepphoris were overrun with blood; when R. Jacob died,
the stars were seen in the day-time; when R. Assi, all the trees were
rooted out; when R. Hyya, fire-balls fell from heaven; when R. Mena'ham
(ben R. Simai), all the images became obliterated and as smooth as if
passed upon with a roller; when R. Tan'hum bar Hyya died, all the
impressions upon the images were effaced; when R. Eliashib, seventy
burglaries were committed in Nehardea; when R. Hamnuna, hailstones fell
from heaven; when Rabba and R. Joseph died, the bridge-arches of
Euphrates collapsed; when Abayi and Rabha, the bridge-arches of Hiddekel
collapsed; when R. Mesharshia died, the trees were laden with thorns
(instead of fruit). <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20)

MISHNA: The food for the funeral meal is not placed before the mourners
on a table, nor in a silver tureen, nor in a dish, but in wicker
baskets. The mourning prayers must not be pronounced on the middle days,
but the rows are formed and the consolation is pronounced and the people
assembled are at once dismissed. The bier must not be set down in any
public place, that the mourning may not spread (in the middle days). The
bier of women must at *no* time be there set down, on account of respect
(to the sex of the deceased). <span id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21)

"*The bier must not be set down in any public street*." Said R.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Papa "No middle
days are considered in regard to a scholar (Talmid-Hakham), and so much
the more so the half-feast of Hanuka or Purim. This, however, is the
case only in the presence of the corpse." This is not so? Has not R.
Kahana lamented over the death of R. Zbhid of Nehardea on the banks of
the river (and surely the corpse was not there)? Said R. Papa: "That was
on the very day he received the information, which is equivalent to the
presence of the corpse."

MISHNA: The mourning women may wail during the middle days, but not clap
(their palms together). R. Ishmael said: The nearest to the bier may
clap. On the days of the New Moon, on the half-festivals of Hanuka and
Purim, they may wail and clap, but must not sing lamentations; but when
the corpse is interred, they must neither wail aloud nor clap.

What is meant by wailing? When all of them join in one chorus. What is
meant by lamentation? When one recites and the others respond, as it is
written \[Jer. ix. 20\]: "Teach your daughters wailing and every one her
neighbor lamentation." But of the age that is to come it is written
\[Isa. xxv. 8\]: "He will destroy death to eternity; and the Lord
Eternal will wipe away the tear from off all faces."

GEMARA: R. Levi bar Hitha said: One who takes leave of the dead shall
not say, "Go *in* peace," but "Go *with* peace," as it is written \[Gen.
xv. 15\]: "But thou shalt come to thy fathers *with* peace"
(*Be*sholom); but the contrary must be said when taking leave of the
living. When David said to Absalom: "Go *with* peace "\[II Sam. xv. 9\],
the latter hanged himself; while, when Jethro said to Moses \[Exod. iv.
18\]: "Go *in* peace" (*Le*sholom), Moses went and was successful. R.
Levi further said: One who goes from the college to the prayer-house,
and *vice versa*, is rewarded by receiving the appearance of the
Shekhina, as it is written \[Psalms, lxxxiv. 8\]: "They go from strength
(college) to strength (the prayer-house); each of them appeared before
God in Zion." R. Hyya bar Ashi said in the name of Rabh: "Scholars
(Talmide-Hakhamim) have no rest even in the world to come, as it is
written \[ibid.\]: 'They go from strength to strength; each of them
appeareth before God in Zion.'"

END OF TRACT MOED KATAN (MINOR FESTIVALS).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[27:1](kat04.htm#fr_8) All the laws of mourning
not belonging to festivals we transfer to Tract Ebel Rabbathi (Great
Mourning) as the proper place, and they will be published in the next
volume, which will complete this section.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[27:2](kat04.htm#fr_9) Leeser translates
"devoted."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[29:1](kat04.htm#fr_10) Rashi explains this to
mean: "There is no scholar who could answer this." But our explanation
seems to us more proper.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[29:2](kat04.htm#fr_11) For Mar Uqba was an
Exilarch.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[30:1](kat04.htm#fr_12) The root of Shiggayon is
‏שגה‎ meaning "error."

<span id="fn_13"></span>[31:1](kat04.htm#fr_13) The Talmud translates
the meaning of the words literally. Hence our translation.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[31:2](kat04.htm#fr_14) The text reads "Malach,"
which means a messenger, and also an angel.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[34:1](kat04.htm#fr_15) This subject will be
explained in Tract Niddah.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[34:2](kat04.htm#fr_16) See our "Maamar
Ha'ishuth," Wien, 1887, p. 6.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[35:1](kat04.htm#fr_17) It means the first
Pentateuch which Ezra wrote. Rashi, however, says that he heard that it
should not be read "Ezra," but, ‏עזרה‎, which means the Temple; as to
his knowledge, there was a correct copy of the Holy Scrolls, from which
all the others are corrected.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[42:1](kat04.htm#fr_18) From "The Poetry of the
Talmud," by Sekels, with metrical corrections, as also the verses
following.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[44:1](kat04.htm#fr_19) Reketh is Tiberias.
(Rashi.)

<span id="fn_20"></span>[44:2](kat04.htm#fr_20) All this must not be
understood literally but allegorically.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[44:3](kat04.htm#fr_21) The Gemara belonging to
this Mishna, which properly does not come in here, will be found in its
proper place.
