[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](meg01)  [Next](meg03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT MEGILLA.

## CHAPTER I.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE TIME WHEN THE BOOK OF ESTHER MUST BE READ ON
THE RABBINICAL FEAST OF PURIM IN OPEN TOWNS AND WALLED CITIES, ETC.

MISHNA: The Megilla is read sometimes on the 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, or
on the 15th of the month Adar, neither earlier nor later. Cities which,
from the time of Joshua the son of Nun, were surrounded with walls, read
it on the 15th. Villages and large open towns should read it on the
14th, and inhabitants of villages may read it in advance on the day of
assembly. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) How is this to be
understood? When the 14th fell on Monday, inhabitants of villages and of
large open towns used to read it on that day, and those of walled cities
on the day following. When it fell on Tuesday or Wednesday, the
inhabitants of villages used to read it in advance (the preceding
Monday) on the day of assembly, those of large open towns on that day
(the 14th), and those of walled towns on the morrow. When it fell on
Thursday, inhabitants of villages and large open towns used to read it
on that day, and of walled towns on the following day. If it fell on the
eve of Sabbath, inhabitants of villages read it in advance on the
preceding or day of assembly, and those of large open towns and of
walled towns on that day (14th). When it fell on Sabbath, inhabitants of
villages and large open towns read it in advance on the preceding
Thursday, the day of assembly; and of walled towns on the morrow (the
Sunday). When it fell on Sunday, in villages they read it on the
preceding day of assembly (Thursday), and in large open towns on that
day (14th), and in walled cities on the morrow.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

GEMARA: The Megilla was read on the 11th day. Whence do we deduce this?
Whence do we deduce this! (Is this, then, a biblical commandment, which
you want to deduce from the passages of the Bible? This is only
rabbinical), and as it will be explained further on, the sages made it
easier for the inhabitants of villages, who usually came to the towns on
Mondays and Thursdays, that they should read then the Book of Esther,
and should have time to provide their brethren of the towns with water
and with food? We meant to say so: let us see. The reading of the
Megilla, the men of the Great Assembly have ordained. Now, at the first
glance, if the men of the Great Assembly had ordained it should be on
the 14th and 15th, have then the sages the power to abolish the
ordinances of the Great Assembly? Have we not learned in a Mishna that a
Beth Din is not able to abolish the ordinances of its colleagues unless
they are greater than they in wisdom and in members? Therefore we must
say that all the mentioned days were ordained by the Great Assembly.
Where, then, is the hint in the Bible for it? Said R. Shamen bar Abba in
the name of R. Johanan: It is written \[Esther, ix. 31\]: "To confirm
these days of Purim in their times." In their *times*: this signifies
that many times are to be ordained. But if so, say even the 16th and
17th? Nay, it is written \[ibid. 27\]: "So that no one should trespass
it." That means, it must never be after the appointed time. R. Samuel
bar Na'hmani, however, said: It is written \[ibid. 22\]: "like those
days whereon the Jews had rest from their enemies." And those "days" are
plural, meaning two; "like the days" means to add also the 11th and the
12th. But perhaps it is the 12th and the 13th? Said R. Samuel 'bar
Itz'hak: The 13th day was the time when all Israel in all places were
assembled to take revenge on their enemies, and it is certain that such
a day must not be added from the verse, because this day was the day of
the main miracle; and therefore if you add something, it can be only the
11th and the 12th. But again, perhaps it is the 16th and 17th? That is
already explained by the verse: "He shall not trespass." Said Rabba
bar bar Hanah in the name of R. Johanan: This is only according to R.
Aqiba, according to whom are many anonymous Mishnas; but the sages say
that in our time, (when the messengers are no longer sent) and the
people look to the reading of the Megilla as to a sign of the coming
feast-day (of Passover), therefore it must be read only in its main time
(14th). And so we have learned also in a Boraitha:

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Jehudah said:
The old ordinance was only when the years were fixed (by the court in
Palestine), and Israel dwelt on its own land; but in our time, when they
look to make the feast only when the Megilla. is read, it must be read
only in its time. Did R. Jehudah say so? Did not we learn in another
Boraitha that *R. Jehudah* said that the ordinance was only in those
places where the people from the villages came to the towns on Mondays
and Thursdays; but in the places where they do not come, it must be read
only in its main time? From this we see that where they come, even in
our time, they can read it not in its appointed time, and this
contradicts his teaching above. This contradiction was made by R. Ashi,
and he answered it: That one Boraitha is not according to R. Jehudah,
but according to R. Jose his son.

"*Cities which, from the time of Joshua b. Nun*," etc. How do we deduce
this from the Book of Esther? Said Rabba: It is written \[ibid. ix.
19\]: "Therefore do the Jews of the villages that dwell in the unwalled
towns," etc. Now, when the inhabitants of the unwalled towns read on the
14th, it is self-evident that the inhabitants of the walled towns read
on the 15th. But perhaps the inhabitants of unwalled towns read on the
14th, but of walled towns do not read at all? Do not read at all! Are
they not Israelites? And furthermore, it is written \[ibid. 30\]: "And
he sent letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred and twenty-seven
provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus," <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and that means all Israel? But perhaps it
means the inhabitants of open towns should read on the 14th only, and
those of walled towns should read on both the 14th and I 5th, as it is
written \[ibid. 21\]: "To take it on themselves as a duty that they
should celebrate the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth
day of the same, in each and every year." If it would read, "the
fourteenth *and* the fifteenth," it would be right as you said; but when
it is written, "the fourteenth day," separately, and "the fifteenth,"
separately, that means that the inhabitants of open towns should
celebrate on the fourteenth, and those of walled towns on the fifteenth.
But this is only about the celebration, which means the eating and the
drinking; but the reading of the Megilla, which is only a memorial,
whence do we deduce that this is also different? It is written \[ibid.
28\]:

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "And these days
are remembered and celebrated." And we compare the celebration to the
remembering; as the celebration is different, so is the remembering.

But what is the reason of the Tana of our Mishna, who says "walled towns
from the time of Joshua b. Nun"? He makes an analogy of expression: it
is written here, "therefore the Jews of the unwalled towns"; and it is
written \[Deut. iii. 5\], "besides the unwalled towns." As thereby
unwalled towns are meant those from the time of Joshua, so also is it
meant here.

Our Mishna will not be in accordance with R. Joshua b. Kor'ha of the
following Boraitha: R. Joshua b. Kor'ha said: The inhabitants of towns
surrounded with walls from the times of Ahasuerus should read on the
15th. What is his reason? It shall be as in Shushan? As in Shushan they
read on the 15th, so all towns surrounded with a wall shall read on the
15th. But the inhabitants of Shushan itself act according to whom? It is
certainly not in accordance with the sages, because it was not
surrounded with a wall in the time of Joshua b. Nun? Said Rabba, and
according to others Kdi: The case with Shushan is different, for there
was the miracle, and they feasted on the 15th. R. Joshua b. Levi said: A
large city, and its neighborhood, and all the places around that can be
seen with it, must be considered like the large city itself. But how
much distance is meant? Said R. Jeremiah, according to others R. Hyya
bar Abba, as the distance from Hamtn to Tiberia, which was a mile. The
same says again: The double letters in the Hebrew alphabet--Mem, Nun,
Zadik, Pe, Kaph--the prophets have added. Is this possible? Is it not
written \[Lev. xxvii. 34\]: "*These* are the commandments"; from which
we infer *these* are the commandments, and no prophet has the power to
make new ones from that time? And furthermore, did not R. Hisda say that
the Mem (when it is the last letter of the word) and Samekh (which is
round), which were chased through the tables of Moses, were held in only
by a miracle? This is so, but it was not before known which letter must
be in the middle of the word and which at the end; and the prophets
ordained that the open one should be at the middle and the closed one
final. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) But even that much had they
then the right to do? Therefore we must say that it was forgotten and
the prophets only restored them. The same

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

authority says again: The Targum (translation) of the Pentateuch was
made by Unkelas the Proselyte under the supervision of R. Eliezer and R.
Joshua; the Targum of the Prophets--by Jonathan b. Uziel under the
supervision of the three prophets Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, Then
the ground of Palestine trembled (as if shaken by an earthquake) four
hundred Parsaoth square, and a heavenly voice was heard: Who are these
who have revealed My Mystery to man? Then Jonathan b. Uziel arose and
said: "I am the one who hath revealed Thy Mystery to man, but it is
known unto Thee that not to my honor, nor in honor of the house of my
father I did this, but for Thy glory, to prevent controversies in
Israel." He intended to do the same with the Hagiographa, when a
heavenly voice was heard: "Refrain from doing this." Why, so? Because in
the Hagiographa the time of Messiah's arrival would be known if it
should be translated (and this must be hidden).

Why at the translation of the Pentateuch did not the ground tremble, and
at the translation of the Prophets it trembled? Because the Pentateuch
is almost all explained; but in the Prophets there are many things not
explained at all. As it is written \[Zechariah, xii. 11\]: "On that day
will the lamentation be great in Jerusalem, like the lamentation at
Hadad-rimman in the valley of Megiddon." And R. Joseph said, but for the
translation of this verse, I would not know at all what it means. The
translation is: "On this day will the mourning in Jerusalem be as it was
over Ahab b. Amri, that was killed by Hadad-rimman b. Tabrimon in the
city of Ramoth Gilead, and as they mourned over Joshia b. Aman, who was
killed by Pharaoh Necho (the lame one) in the valley of Megiddon."

It is written \[Dan. x. 7\]: "And I, Daniel, saw alone this appearance,
but the men that were with me did not see the appearance; nevertheless a
great terror fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves." Who
were these men? Said R. Jeremiah, according to others R. Hyya b. Abba:
They were Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. They were better than he,
because they were prophets, and be, Daniel, was not a prophet. And he
was better than they because be saw it, and they, did not see it. But if
they did not see, why fell a terror upon them? Although they did not see
literally, they saw it clairvoyantly. Said Rabbina: From this we may
infer that whoso is terrified, although he does not himself see, he sees
clairvoyantly.

We have learned in a Boraitha: The priests during their service,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Levites from their
balcony, and the Israelites standing around, all must leave their places
to go and hear the reading of the Book of Esther. And so also said R.
Jehudah in the name of Rabh. This the houses of learning took as their
support when they stopped the learning of the Law, and went to hear the
reading of the Megilla. They draw an *à fortiori* conclusion from the
Temple service: as the Temple service, which was very vigorous, they
stopped for the sake of the Megilla, the learning of the Law so much the
more. But did not R. Samuel bar Unia say that the learning of the Law is
greater than the daily sacrifices? It presents no difficulty; the
learning of an individual is not greater than Temple service, but the
learning of a congregation together is greater.

Rabha said: It is certain to me that of the Temple service and the
reading of the Megilla the latter has the preference, as it is said
above. Between the studying of the Law and the reading of the Megilla
the latter has the preference, as did the houses of learning. Between
the studying of the Law and the burying of a dead man who has no friends
the latter has the preference. Between the Temple service and the
burying of a dead man the latter has the preference. But what is
doubtful to me is, if a man has to read the Megilla and to bury a man
who has no friends, which has the preference? Shall we assume the
Megilla has the preference, because it proclaims the miracle; or the
burying has preference, for the honor of man? After he had considered,
he himself decided that the burying has preference, as the Master said
(Sabbath, p. 85): Great is the honor of man, which supersedes even a
negative commandment of the Torah. The text says: R. Joshua b. Levi said
that "a large city and its neighborhood," etc., are considered as the
city itself. We have learned in a Boraitha, in addition to this: If it
is in the neighborhood, even if it cannot be seen from a distance
together with the city; and when it can be seen with the city, although
it is not near the city. (This is explained, when the city is in a
valley or on a mountain.)

R. Joshua b. Levi says again: A city where the inhabitants had resided
before, and later it was surrounded with a wall, must be considered as a
village. Why so? Because it is written \[Lev. XXV. 29\]: "And if a man
sell a dwelling-house in a walled city." Whence we may infer that the
city was walled before he dwelt in it, but not if he had dwelt in it and
afterward it was walled. He says again: A city where there are not ten

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

unemployed men <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) who devote all their
time to the study of the Law must be considered as a village. What does
he come to teach us? Did we not learn this in the following Mishna: What
is called a great city? If there are ten unemployed men and less than
this it is a village? His teaching is needed to tell us that, even if it
was a great city and men came thither from the whole world, if there are
fewer than ten men unemployed there, it is considered as a village. The
same says again: A large city that was destroyed, and afterward was
rebuilt, must be considered as a large city. What is meant by
destroying? Shall we assume it is meant that the walls were destroyed?
Then if they were only rebuilt it is considered a large city, and not
otherwise? Did we not learn in a Boraitha, R. Eliezer b. R. Jose said:
It is written \[ibid. 30\]: "The house in the city which has a wall,"
from which we infer, which has had a wall previously, even though it has
not now? Nay, what is meant by the expression "destroyed" is, that it
has not now ten unemployed men (who learn the Law). R. Joshua b. Levi
says again: It is obligatory for women to hear the reading of the
Megilla, because they benefited also by the same miracle. He says again:
If the Feast of Purim falls on Sabbath, it may be lectured about the
duties of this day (Purim). Why only the Feast of Esther? Is this not a
rule for all festivals? Did we not learn in a Boraitha: Moses ordained
that the Israelites should lecture on the duties of each day: the
Halakhoth of Passover on Passover, those of Pentecost on Pentecost, and
those of Tabernacles on the Feast of Tabernacles? One might say, we
shall take a precautionary measure not to lecture about the Megilla,
lest one carry it four ells in public ground. As Rabha explains further
on, he comes to teach us that such a precautionary measure is not taken
about lecturing. The same says again: So also said R. Helbu in the name
of Ulla: One is obliged to read the Megilla in the evening, and to
repeat it in the daytime, as it is written \[Ps. xxx. 13\]: "To the end
that my glorious soul may sing praise to thee, and never be silent. O
Lord my God! forever will I give thanks unto thee." (As this psalm in
the Pesiqtha is interpreted; to refer to Mordecai and Esther, he
explains "may sing praise to thee" means to read the Megilla in the
night, and "never be silent" means to read it in the day.)

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

"*Inhabitants of villages shall read*," etc. R. Hanina said: The sages
made it easier for the inhabitants of villages to read on the days of
assembly, because they usually supply with water and food the
inhabitants of towns on those days.

"*How is to be understood? 'If it falls on Monday,'*" etc. Why, in the
first part of the Mishna, does it begin with the order of the days of
the month and when it comes to explain it, it begins with the order of
the days of the week? (It does not say "read on the 15th," but "on the
morrow.") Because confusion between the numbers of the days in the month
and in the week would have arisen, therefore it begins with the dates of
the month alone.

"*If it fell on the eve of Sabbath*," etc. According to whom is this
Mishna? According to Rabbi, or according to R. Jose? Which Rabbi and R.
Jose? Of the following Boraitha: If it falls on the eve of Sabbath,
villages and large open cities used to read it on the day of assembly,
and inhabitants of walled towns read it on that same day. Said Rabbi:
*I* say that the large open towns must not have the appointed time
postponed, and must be equal to walled towns, and both read the same
day. And which R. Jose? From the following Tosephtha: If it falls on the
eve of Sabbath, the inhabitants of walled towns and villages read on the
day of assembly, and the large open cities read on the appointed day. R.
Jose, however, said: The inhabitants of walled towns do not read in
advance of those of the large cities, but both read on the appointed
day. But does Rabbi hold that for the inhabitants of large cities we do
not change for the day of assembly? Did we not learn in another
Boraitha: If the Feast of Purim falls on Sabbath, the inhabitants of
villages read in advance on the previous assembly day, and the
inhabitants of large open cities read on the eve of Sabbath, and those
of walled towns on the day following? As the appointed day has already
been changed for the inhabitants of large cities for the previous day,
(I say) it shall be fixed on a day before, which is the assembly day?
What comparison is this? In case of the above Boraitha the right-time
was on Sabbath, and as they had it changed it was set two days before;
but in the previous Boraitha the right-time was the eve of Sabbath, why
should it be changed? According to whom is what R. Helbu said in the
name of R. Huna, as follows: If the Feast of Purim fall on Sabbath all
is postponed for the day of assembly (Thursday). \[What is meant by
"all"? Is it possible, "all"? Do not the inhabitants

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

of a walled town read it on the Sabbath itself? It means, for those for
whom it has to be postponed, it shall be set on the assembly day.\] This
will be according to Rabbi.

We see, however, that all agree that the Megilla must not be read on the
Sabbath. Why so? Said Rabha: All are obliged to read the Megilla, but
not all are able to read it; and this is a precautionary measure, lest
one take the Megilla in his hand and go with it to an expert to learn to
read it, and at the same time he will carry four ells in public ground.
(Therefore it must not be read on Sabbath at all.) And the same is the
reason why we do not blow the cornet on the New Year's day when it falls
on Sabbath, and do not use the Lulab on the first day of the Feast of
Tabernacles when it falls on Sabbath. R. Jose said: Here is another
reason: It is because the poor hope only for the day when the Megilla is
read to receive gifts, a thing which cannot be done on Sabbath. We have
learned the same also in the following Boraitha: Because it was said
that the inhabitants of villages read in advance on the day of assembly,
the charity that must be given on that feast shall be collected and
distributed on the same day, because the poor hope only for the day when
the Megilla is read. The enjoyment of eating and drinking, however, must
be only on the appointed time.

Rabh said: If the Megilla is read in the right-time, it may be read even
by an individual; but if not on the right-time, then only when ten men
are together. R. Assi, however, said: In both instances it must be read
only when ten men are together. It happened once that Rabh had not ten
men: he took the trouble to assemble ten men because of R. Assi's
decision.

MISHNA: What must be considered as a large town? Any town in which there
are ten *Batlonim*. Should there be less than that number, it is legally
considered a village. It was said with respect to these, that "it may be
done sooner, but not later"; but the day of the delivery of wood for the
priests, the fast on the 9th of Abh, the festive sacrifices, and the day
of assembly (to fast and pray for rain) are to be postponed to a later
day, but must not be kept before their proper time.

Although it was said in respect to the reading of the Megilla that it
may be done earlier but not later, it is yet permitted on these days to
pronounce funeral orations and to fast, also to give the gifts to the
poor. Said R. Jehudah: When is it allowed to read the Megilla before its
proper time? In places where it is customary for the country people to
assemble in the towns on

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Mondays and Thursdays; but where that does not take place, the Megilla
may only be read on its proper day.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: By the ten *Batlonim* are meant
those who are always in the house of prayer (and must be supported by
the congregation, so that at the prayer should never be less than ten
men, as is explained in Tract Berachoth).

"*It may be done sooner, but not later*." Why so? Said Samuel: Because
in the Book of Esther it was said, "shall not trespass."

"*Delivery of wood for the priests, the 9th of Abh*," etc. The 9th of
Abh shall not be made sooner, because calamities are not lamented in
advance; and concerning the festive sacrifice and the assembly, it
cannot be done earlier, because that duty has not arrived yet. And a
Boraitha taught: "The festive sacrifice, and all the time appointed for
it (if it was not brought in its right time), can be postponed, but not
made earlier." It is right, the festive sacrifice itself; if the
festival falls on Sabbath, we postpone it till after Sabbath. But what
is meant by "its time shall be postponed"? Said R. Ushia: The Boraitha
meant to say thus: The feast-offering, when the festival falls on
Sabbath, and the burnt-offering which must be brought when the pilgrims
visit Jerusalem \[see Deut. xvi. 16, 171, even when the festival did not
fall on Sabbath, the offering had to be postponed for the time during
the seven days after it. And this is according only to Beth Shammai
(Betzah, Chap. II., Mishna 3). Rabha, however, said: What is meant by
"the time of the feast-offering may be postponed"? Only for the seven
days it can be postponed, not later.

R. Eleazar said in the name of R. Hanina: Rabbi used to set out a plant
on Purim, and washed himself in the market of Ziporith (publicly) on the
17th day of Tamuz (which is a fast-day), and intended to abolish the
fast of the 9th of Abh. But the sages did not agree with him. Said to
him R. Abba bar Zabda: Rabbi, this was not so, for it once happened when
the 9th of Abh fell on Sabbath, and it was postponed to Sunday, and
Rabbi declared: When it has been postponed, it shall not be kept at all.
And the sages did not agree with him. And the former then read the verse
\[in Ecc. iv. 9\]: "Two are better than one." (Rashi explains this, that
he means to say the second statement was better than the first; but it
seems to us the explanation is different. He means to say that if so,
both happened twice, and

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Rabbi did not intend to abolish the 9th of Abh, but *did* abolish.)

Hezekiah used to read the Megilla in Tiberia both days--the 14th and the
15th--because it was doubtful to him whether Tiberia had been surrounded
with a wall from the time of Joshua b. Nun. But how can this be
doubtful? Is it not written \[Josh. xix. 35\]: "And the fortified cities
Ziddim, Zer and Chammath, Rakkath and Kinereth"? And we have a tradition
that Rakkath is Tiberia. It was doubtful to him, because on one side the
sea was its wall. If so, why is it doubtful? The sea is not a wall, and
we have learned in a Boraitha that what is written \[Lev. xxv. 30\],
"the city that has a wall," means a wall, but not if the houses are
built around like a wall--and that excludes Tiberia where the sea is the
wall? He was not doubtful in respect to the law about houses in a walled
town, but in respect to the Megilla, because the expression in the
Megilla is "open towns," and he doubted whether the city, having the sea
as a wall, is called open or not.

R. Asi used to read the Megilla in the city of Hutzl also on both days,
because he doubted whether it was surrounded in the time of Joshua with
a wall or not. According to others, R. Asi said: This Hutzl, which was
in the tribe of Benjamin, I am certain was walled in the time of Joshua
b. Nun.

R. Johanan said: When I was a child I said a thing, and afterward the
elders were asked, and it was found that I was right; namely, Hammath,
that is, Tiberia. And why is it called in the Bible Hammath? Because of
the hot springs that are in Tiberia. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)
Rakkath is Ziporith, but why is it called in the Bible Rakkath? Because
it is situated on the summit of a mountain, as the banks of a river are
more elevated than the river. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5)
Kinereth, that is, Genoser; but why is it called Kinereth? Because the
fruit of this city is agreeable as the sound of a violin. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6) Said Rabha: Is it possible a man exists who
says that Rakkath is not Tiberia? It is known to us that if a great man
dies here in Babylon, they in Tiberia, in the funeral oration, say thus:
The man was great in Sheshakh (Babylon,--Rashi explains this because
Sheshah is, by the alphabet of Athbash, Babel) and his name has reached
Rakkath. And if the coffin is brought thither, they say in the funeral
oration so: Ye lovers of Israel, inhabitants

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of Rakkath, go and receive the man who was killed in the valley of
Babylon. And when R. Zera died, in the lamentation was mentioned Rakkath
(see Moed Katan, p. 44.) Therefore said Rabha: Hammath means
Hammei-Grar, Rakkath is Tiberia, Kinereth is Genoser. And why is it
called Rakkath? Because even the common men there are full of religious
merits as a pomegranate. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

R. Jose bar Hanina said: It is written \[Zechariah, ix. 7\]: "And I will
remove their blood out of their mouth, and their abominations from
between their teeth; and their land also shall be left for our God." I
will remove their blood out of their mouth,--that means, their *Beth
Bamia*; <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) "and their abominations from
between their teeth"--that is, their *Beth Galia*; <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_8) "and the land also will be left to our God"
means, the houses of prayer and of learning which are in Edom (meaning
Rome); "and it shall be as a prince's dwelling in Judah, and Ekron shall
be like Jebusi"--that means the theatres and circuses which were in
Edom, but in the future the princes of Judah will teach the Torah
publicly in them. R. Itz'hak said: Leshem is Pamias, Ekron is
Cesaria--why is it called the daughter of Edom? Because it was the
metropolis of kings. Same said because there kings were reared, and
according to others because from the inhabitants of that city were made
kings. Of Cesaria and Jerusalem--if one will say to thee, Both are
destroyed, thou shalt not believe; if one will say, Both are in their
splendor, do not believe; but if one will say, Cesaria was destroyed and
Jerusalem is in its glory, or *vice versa*, you may believe, as it is
written \[in Ezek. xxvi. 2\]: "I shall be made full, now she is in
ruins"--that means, if one is full the other is destroyed, and if one is
destroyed the other is full. R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak says, we infer it
from the following passage \[Gen. xxv. 23\]: "one people shall be
stronger than the other" (Israel and Edom, *i.e.*, Rome). And R. Itz'hak
said: It is written \[Is. xxvi. 10\]: "If favor be shown to the wicked,
he will not learn righteousness." Isaac our father said before the Holy
One, blessed be He: Creator of the Universe! let Esau be favored. And He
said: "He is wicked." Said Isaac again: "It is because he has not
learned righteousness." And the Lord said again: "(It is known before me
that even) in the land of

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

uprightness he will deal unjustly." Rejoined Isaac: "If it is so, (then)
he shall not regard the majesty of the Lord." R. Itz'hak says again: It
is written \[Ps. cxl. 9\]: "Grant not, O Lord, the longings of the
wicked: suffer not his wicked device to succeed: lest they exalt
themselves. Selah." Said Jacob before the Holy One, blessed be He:
Creator of the Universe! do not grant to Esau the wicked longing of his
heart; "his wicked device to succeed," meaning Germamia of Edom, for if
they would go out they would destroy the whole world. He says again: If
one will say to you: I have exerted myself, and not found, do not
believe him; if one will say, I have not exerted myself, and have found,
do not believe him. But if he will say, I have exerted myself, and have
found, then believe him. This is all in the studying of the Law, but in
business it is a matter of fortune sent from Heaven. And even in
studying the Law you must not believe in his sagacity; but if he says
what he has learned he has retained without much trouble, you may
believe him, because this can be a help from Heaven. He says again: If
you have seen a wicked man on whom fortune smiles, do not provoke him,
as it is written \[Ps. xxxvii. 7\]: "Do not fret thyself because of the
evil-doers"; so much the more when in his ways he is successful, as it
is written \[ibid. x. 5\]: "Prosperous are his ways at all times." And
not only this, but he always wins in a lawsuit, as it is written
\[ibid., ibid.\]: "Far in the height remain thy punishments from him;"
and not this only, but he sees vengeance on his enemies, as it is
written \[ibid.\]: "All his assailants, he puffeth at them." This is not
so? Did not R. Johanan say in the name of R. Simeon b. Yochi, that one
may provoke the wicked in this world? As it is written \[Prov. xxviii.
4\]: "They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but such as observe
the law contend with them." And we have learned also in a Boraitha: R.
Dusthai bar Mathun said: A man may provoke the wicked in this world?
\[And lest one say: "Do not fret thyself because of the evil-doers,
neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity," this can be
said only about him whose heart trembles. But the interpretation of this
passage is thus: "Do not strive to be like the wicked, neither be thou
envious to be like the workers of iniquity," as it is written \[Prov.
xxiii. 17\]: "Let not thy heart be envious against sinners."\] (Hence we
see that the wicked may be provoked?) It presents no difficulty, for if
it is in his own interest he shall not do so; but if in heavenly things,
he may. And if you like, I can say: Both are

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

in his own interest; yet when he is a really upright man he may do so,
but when he is not really upright he shall not do so. As R. Huna said:
It is written \[Habakkuk, i. 13\]: "Wherefore wilt thou look upon those
that deal treacherously; and be silent when the wicked swalloweth up him
that is more righteous than he?" From this we may infer that the wicked
swallows him who is more righteous than he, but him who is really
upright he cannot swallow. And if you wish, I can say: with him whom
fortune favors it is different.

MISHNA: If the Megilla had been read in the first Adar, and the year
declared (by the Sanhedrin) to be intercalary, it must be again read in
the second Adar. There is no difference between the first Adar and
second, but in the reading of the Megilla and the gifts to the poor.

GEMARA: The Mishna says that the two Adars do not differ; that is to
say, in the order of the portions that must be read from the Bible on
the Sabbaths of the four weeks of Adar, the two Adars are equal.
According to whom is the Mishna?

Not according to the first Tana, and not according to R. Eliezer b. R.
Jose, and not according to R. Simeon b. Gamaliel of the following
Boraitha: If they have read only the Megilla in the first Adar, and the
year becomes intercalary, it must be read again in the second Adar,
because all the duties that are obligatory in the second Adar are so
also on the first Adar, except the reading of the Megilla. R. Eliezer b.
R. Jose said: It must not be read in the second Adar, because all the
duties customary in the second are so also in the first. R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel in the name of R. Jose said: It must be read also in the second
Adar, because all the duties obligatory in the second must not be done
in the first. And we asked there, is R. Simeon b. Gamaliel not saying
the same as the first Tana? And R. Papa answered: The order of the
portions is different between them. Hence our Mishna is not in
accordance with the first Tana, because of the gifts to the poor, which
according to the Tana of the Boraitha must be given in the first Adar
also; and not in accordance with R. Eliezer, who says the Megilla must
not be repeated at all in the second Adar; and not in accordance with R.
Simeon b. Gamaliel, as according to him there is a difference in the
order of the portions (as R. Papa explained). The Mishna is in
accordance with R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, but is not completed, and must
read thus: There is no difference between the fourteenth day of the
first Adar and the fourteenth day of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the second Adar, except in the reading of the Megilla and gifts to the
poor. But the next day, in respect to mourning and fasting, they are
equal. Concerning the order of the portions, the Mishna does not speak
about it. Said R. Hyya bar Abin in the name of R. Johanan: The Halakha
prevails according to what Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel said in the name of
R. Jose. Said R. Tabi: The reason why R. Simeon b. Gamaliel declares so
is, that one redemption (from Haman) should be near to another
redemption (from Egypt, Passover). R. Elazar said: The reason of R.
Simeon b. Gamaliel is, because it is written in Esther \[ix. 29\]: "To
confirm this letter of Purim the second time." "The second" means in the
second Adar.

R. Samuel bar Jehudah said: Esther sent to the sages the request:
"Establish me for the later generations." And they answered: "You want
to excite the envy of other nations against us." She rejoined: "My
history is already written in the chronicle of the kings of Media and
Persia." Rabh and R. Hanina, R. Johanan and R. Habiba (see Sukka, page
5), taught: Esther sent to the sages: "Write about me for later
generations." And they answered to her: It is written \[Prov. xxii.
20\]: "Have I not written for thee thrice?" <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_9) (thrice means, three times shall be
mentioned in the Torah the war with Amalek--in Exodus, in Deuteronomy,
and in I. Samuel): only thrice, and not four times. Finally, they found
a passage in the Pentateuch \[Ex. xvii. 14\]: "Write this for a memorial
in the book"; and they interpreted the passage thus: "Write this"--what
is written here and in Deuteronomy; "for a memorial"--*i.e.*, what is
written in the Prophets (Samuel); "in the book"--*i.e.*, what is written
in the Book of Esther. We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said:
The Book of Esther was dictated by the Holy Spirit, as it is written
\[Esther, v. 16\]: "And Haman said in his heart"; and if it were not by
the Holy Spirit, how could we know what he said in his heart? R. Aqiba
said: "Esther" was dictated by the Holy Spirit because it is written
\[ibid. ii. 15\]: "And Esther found favor in the eyes of all those that
beheld her" (this also could not be known, but for the Holy Spirit). R.
Meir said: "Esther" was dictated by the Holy Spirit, because it is
written \[ibid. 22\]: "And the thing became known to Mordecai" (and who
told him? We must say that it

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

was the Holy Spirit). R. Jose b. Durmaskes said: From this passage \[ix.
10\]: ''But to the spoil did they not stretch forth their hands" (and it
could not be known what was done in the one hundred and twenty-seven
provinces by everyone). Said Samuel: If I had been there, I would have
said a thing better than all these sayings: It is written \[ibid., ibid.
27\]: "The Jews confirmed it as a duty, and took it upon themselves."
That means, they confirmed in Heaven what they took upon themselves
below. Said Rabha: To all the above sayings I have objections, except to
Samuel, to whom it cannot be objected. What R. Eliezer said--that was
common sense. Haman knew there was not a man in the king's court that
was so respected as he himself, and it is self-evident that thus he
thought. What R. Aqiba said--perhaps it was as R. Elazar explains
farther on, that every nation thought Esther was of its race; and what
R. Meir said-perhaps it was as R. Hyya bar Abbi will explain farther on,
that Mordecai understood the language of Rigthau and Theres; and what R.
Jose b. Durmaskes said--perhaps they may have sent messengers to the
king; but to what Samuel said there is no objection. Said Rabbina: That
is as people say, it is better to have one pungent pepper-grain than a
full basket of cucumbers. R. Joseph said: From this passage \[ix. 28\]:
"And these days of Purim will not pass away" (and how can this be known?
Only from the Holy Spirit). And R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak said (from the end
of the verse): "Nor will their memorial cease from their seed."

''*Gifts to the poor*." R. Joseph taught: It is written \[ix. 22\]:
"Sending portions one to another." "Portions" in plural--two portions
should be sent to one man; "and gifts to the needy"--needy is in plural:
that means, no less than two portions to two men. R. Jehudah the
Second <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_10) sent to R. Oshyia a leg of a
third-born calf and a pitcher of wine, and the latter sent to him the
message: "The Master has confirmed both duties to send portions one to
another; and to give gifts to the needy." Rabha sent to Mari bar Mar
through Abayi a bag of dates and a goblet full of flour of dried wheat.
Said Abayi to him: Now Mari will say: When a countryman becomes a king,
he is still unable to remove the basket from his shoulder. And it is the
same with you: now you are the Head of the College, and send

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

to him commonplace articles. R. Mari bar Mar returned to Rabha through
Abayi a pouch (*tasca*, Lat.) of ginger and a goblet full of long
pepper. Said Abayi: Now the Master will say: I had sent him sweets, and
he has sent to me pungent things. Said Abayi again:, When I went out
from the house of my Master, I was sated. When I arrived there, they
furnished the table with sixty diverse dishes, and they ate all; and the
last dishes were called "roast of Kedar," and it was so good that I
wanted to eat up the dish with it. And this is what people say: "The
poor does not know even when he is hungry." Or, as people say: "The
stomach is wide enough for sweet things."

Abayi bar Abbin and R. Hanina bar Abbin used to change their meals on
Purim. Said Rabha: A man is obliged to intoxicate himself on Purim, till
he cannot distinguish between "cursed be Haman" and "blessed be
Mordecai." Rabha said again: If one has eaten the festive meal in the
night, he has not fulfilled his duty, because it is written, "*days* of
entertainment and joy."

R. Ashi was sitting in the presence of R. Kahana. It became dark, and
the rabbis had not yet come. Said R. Kahana to him: Why have not the
rabbis come yet? And he answered him: Perhaps they are engaged with the
festive meal? And he rejoined: Could they not have the festive meal in
the evening? Said R. Ashi: Has the Master not heard what Rabha said,
that if one has eaten the meal of Purim in the night, he has not
fulfilled his duty. And he rejoined: Did Rabha indeed say so? And he
answered: Yea. And he learned it from him forty times, and afterward it
was as if he had put it into his pocket.

MISHNA: There is no difference between Sabbath and festivals, except in
the preparation of food. There is no difference between the Sabbath and
the Day of Atonement, excepting that those who knowingly and wilfully
profane the Sabbath are punished by man, while those who wilfully
profane the Day of Atonement are punished with *Karoth* (by Heaven).

There is no difference between one who by a vow has interdicted himself
from receiving a benefit from another man and one whose vow was confined
to the interdiction of accepting any food from another, except that it
is not lawful for the first to set his foot in the house (or property)
of the other and to borrow vessels (of the other) which are not used for
the preparation of food, There is no difference between vows and
voluntary offerings,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

except that in the case of the first-mentioned the person who thus vows
is liable for the risk, but he is not liable for the last-mentioned.

GEMARA: "*Except in the preparation of food*." But in the preparations
for the preparing of food, they are equal.

"*He is punished with Karoth*." But in paying of damages, both are
equal. And the Mishna is in accordance with R. Nehunia b. Hakana of the
following Boraitha: He decided that the Day of Atonement is equal to
Sabbath with regard to damages: as on Sabbath, because it is a capital
punishment, no damages are to be paid, so on the Day of Atonement, as
the punishment is Karoth, he is exempt from damages.

"*Vessels which are not used*," etc. But in regard to vessels which are
used for the preparation of food, they are equal.

"*He is not liable for the last-mentioned*." But with regard to the
commandment, "Thou shalt not delay," they are equal. (This is explained
in Tract Rosh Hashana, page 5.)

MISHNA: There is no difference between a person laboring under an
involuntary emission of semen who has experienced it twice (on the same
day, or on the two following days) and one who has experienced it thrice
(in the same time, or within three days), excepting that the
last-mentioned must bring a sacrifice. There is no difference between a
leprous person who has only been shut up and one whom the priest has
declared as leprous, excepting that the latter must go with rent
clothes, and suffer the hair of his head to grow wild. There is no
difference between the leper declared clean after being shut up and one
who has been cured of that disease, excepting that the latter must be
shaved, and bring offerings of birds.

There is no difference between the Holy Books and Thephilin and
Mezuzoth, except that the first-mentioned may be written in any
language, but the latter in Assyrian characters only. Rabban Simeon b.
Gamaliel says: The permission to write the Holy Books in another
language was limited to the Greek language only.

There is no difference between a high-priest anointed with the sacred
oil and one whose dignity was marked by additional sacerdotal vestments
only, except the bull which the first-mentioned is to offer, in case he
gave a wrong decision which led to a transgression of a precept. There
is no difference between an officiating high-priest and his late
substitute, except the bull offered on the Day of Atonement, and the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

tenth of the ephah of flour(which the real high-priest alone might
offer).

There is no difference between a large high place <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_11) and a small one, except the Paschal
offering. This is the rule: All offerings which are brought in
consequence of vows, and all peace-offerings, may be offered on a small
high place, but not sacrifices of another kind.

There was no, difference between the Tabernacle of Shiloh and the Temple
of Jerusalem, except that at the former place it was lawful to eat of
sacrifices having a minor degree of holiness, and of the second tithe,
in any place from whence Shiloh might be seen; but in Jerusalem it was
lawful to eat these within the walls only. In both places, however,
sacrifices which were most holy might be only eaten within the hangings
(of the court of the sanctuary). The holiness of Shiloh had subsequently
a period in which it became lawful (to offer sacrifices elsewhere), but
the holiness of Jerusalem has no such period.

GEMARA: "*Excepting that the last-mentioned must bring a sacrifice*."
But in respect to their lying, sitting, and the seven days which they
have to wait till it is allowed to take a legal bath, both are equal
(all this will be explained in Tract Zabim).

"*There is no difference between a leprous person*," etc. But in regard
to sending him away outside of the assembly and in respect to defilement
they are both equal (as will be explained in Tract Negaim).

"*There is no difference between the Holy Books*," etc. But to sew it
with dried veins of a clean animal and to make unclean the hand (see
Appendix, Sabbath) both are equal.

"*May be written in any language*." There is a contradiction to the
following Boraitha: If one wrote a Targum instead of portions of the
Holy Book (in the original); or, *vice versa*, if he wrote the
translation in characters of the original, and also if he wrote it not
in Assyrian but ancient Hebrew (square) characters, it is not holy to
make unclean the hand, until it should be written in Assyrian
characters, in a book and with ink (and there it has been said the
*Holy* Books can be written in all languages). It presents no
difficulty: the Boraitha meant, not Holy Books, but the Thephilin and
Mezuzoth, and the Mishna means Scripture. What is the reason that
Thephilin and Mezuzoth if written in

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

another tongue are not holy? Because it is written \[Deut. vi. 8\]:
"*They shall be* as frontlets between thy eyes." They shall be as
originally.

What is meant, if the Targum was written in the original characters? If
in the Torah, it is right. The words "Yegar Sahadutha" \[Gen. xxxi. 47\]
are Aramaic; but what Aramaic words are in the Thephilin? Therefore we
must answer the [contradiction](errata.htm#17) thus: The Boraitha refers
to the Book of Esther. Why must it not be written in other languages?
Because it is written \[Esther, viii. 9\]: "According to their writing,
and according to their language." But what Aramaic words are in the Book
of Esther? Said R. Papa \[in Chapter I., verse 20\], "The king's
*decree*" (Pithgam), which is not a Hebrew word, but Aramaic. R. Na'hman
bar Itz'hak said \[ibid., ibid.\]: The last word, "will show *respect*"
(Yekar), is not Hebrew. R. Ashi, however, said: That the Boraitha means,
not the Holy Scrolls (Pentateuch), but the Prophets and Hagiographa. And
this is in accordance with R. Jehudah of the following Boraitha:
Thephilin and Mezuzoth must be written only in Assyrian characters; and
our sages have not allowed they shall be written in any language, only
in Greek. And in addition to this Boraitha it is stated: Said R.
Jehudah: The sages allowed to write in Greek only the Pentateuch, but
not anything else. And this was also allowed only because of what
occurred with Ptolemy the king, as follows: It happened to Ptolemy the
king that he took seventy-two elders from Jerusalem, and placed them in
seventy-two separate chambers, and did not inform them to what purpose
he had brought them. And afterward he entered to each of them, and said
to them: Translate me the Torah of Moses from memory. And the Holy One,
blessed be He, sent into the heart of each of them a counsel, and they
all agreed to have one mind, and changed as follows: Instead of "In the
beginning God created the world," they wrote, "God created the world in
the beginning"; instead of Gen. i. 26 they wrote, "*I* will make a man
in an image"; instead of Gen. ii. 2 they wrote, "And God finished on the
sixth day, and rested on the seventh day"; instead of Gen. v. 2 they
wrote, "created *him*"; instead of Gen. xi. 7 they wrote, "Let *me* go
down"; \[xviii. 12\]: "And Sarah laughed among her relatives"; instead
of xlix. 6, "In their anger they slew an ox, and their self-will lamed a
fattened ox." And instead of Ex. iv. 20, "Set them on a porter
(man-carrier)"; instead of ibid. xii. 40, "Dwelt in Egypt and in *other
lands*"; and ibid. xxiv. as ibid.,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Against the
*respectable* men of Israel." Instead of Num. xvi. 15, "Not one precious
thing I took away"; and instead of Deut. iv. 19 they wrote, "assigned to
light for all nations"; instead of ibid. xvii. 3, "which I have not
commanded to worship"; and instead of Lev. xi. 6, "the hare," which is
expressed in the Bible "Arnebeth," as Ptolemy's wife was named so they
wrote, "and the beast that has small feet."

"*Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel says*," etc. Said R. Abahu in the name of R.
Johanan: The Halakha prevails according to R. Simeon b. Gamaliel. And he
says again: What is the reason of R. Simeon b. Gamaliel? Because it is
written \[Gen. ix. 27\]: "May God enlarge the boundaries of Japheth, and
may he dwell in the tents of Shem." That means to say, the most
beautiful thing which Japheth has--that is, the Greek language--shall
dwell in the tents of Shem.

"*There is no difference between a high-priest*," etc. But in respect to
the bullock of the Day of Atonement, and the tenth of an ephah, which
the high-priest must bring, both are equal.

"*There is no difference between Shiloh and Jerusalem*." Said R.
Itz'hak: I have heard that one may sacrifice in the Temple of Honin in
Egypt, even at this time. He holds that the Temple of Honin is not a
temple for idolatry, but for God, and also that the sanctitude of
Jerusalem was only while the Temple existed, but is not so for the
future, since its destruction. As it is written \[Deut. xii. 9\]: "For
ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance." "To the
rest," *i.e.*, the Tabernacle of Shiloh; "to the inheritance," *i.e.*,
the Temple of Jerusalem: and we see that the Tabernacle of Shiloh is
compared to the Temple of Jerusalem, as Shiloh, after the Tabernacle was
destroyed, ceased to be holy, and it was lawful to sacrifice elsewhere,
the same was with Jerusalem. The sages then said to R. Itz'hak: Do you
say so? And he answered: No. Said Rabha: I swear by God that he has said
so, and I have learned it from him. But what is the reason that he
himself receded from this? Because R. Mari objected to this, from a
Boraitha which states that the sanctitude of Shiloh was gone after the
Tabernacle was destroyed, but of Jerusalem the sanctitude was not gone
even after the Temple's destruction.

It is written: "And it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus." R. Levi,
according to others R. Jonathan, said: This is a tradition among us from
our ancestors--the men of the Great Assembly--that wherever it is
written ‏ויהי‎ (it came to pass),

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

was some disaster. Here there was Haman. In Ruth: "And it came to pass
in the days of the judges." There was hunger. Genesis, vi. 1: "And it
came to pass when men began to multiply," and soon after is written:
"And God saw that the wickedness of man was great"; \[ibid. xi. 2\]:
"And it came to pass as they journeyed toward the east." And there was
the dispersion. And ibid. xiv. 1. "And it came to pass in the days of
Amrophel." There was a war. In Joshua, v. 13: "It came to pass when
Joshua was by Jericho," it is written he saw a man with a drawn sword in
his hand; ibid. vi. 27: "And the Lord *was* with Joshua" (the Hebrew
expression is the same); and soon it is written: "And the children of
Israel committed a trespass"; I Samuel: "There *was* a certain man"; and
afterward it is written: "Hannah he loved, but the Lord had shut her
womb." Ibid. viii. 1: "It came to pass when Samuel was old." His sons
walked not in his way. Ibid. xviii. 14: "And David *was* successful in
all his ways," and soon comes: "Saul was in dread of him." II Samuel,
vii. 1: "And it came to pass when the king dwelt in his house." And he
was not allowed to build the Temple. But is it not written \[Gen. xxix.
16\]: "When Jacob saw Rachel," and in Genesis \[i. 5\]: "And it was
evening, and it was morning, the first day"--and so in many other
instances, and no disaster happened? Wherever it is said, "it came to
pass," there may or may not be a calamity; but whenever it is said, "and
it came to pass in the days," there surely happened a misfortune. There
are five expressions, "it came to pass in the days"; viz., in the days
of Ahasuerus, the judges, Amrophel, Ahaz \[Is. vii.\], and Yoiakim
\[Jerem. i.\], and in all instances there were troubles.

R. Levi says again: We have a tradition from our ancestors that Amuz and
Amaziah were brothers. What does he come to teach us? It is similar to
what R. Samuel b. Nahmani said in the name of R. Jonathan: A bride who
is chaste in the house of her husband's parents deserves that kings and
prophets should descend from her, and this we infer from Tamar, as it is
written \[Gen. xxxviii. 15\]: "And Judah saw her and thought her to be a
harlot, because she had covered her face." Because she had covered her
face he took her for a harlot? That means, she had covered her face when
she had been in his house, so that he did not know her. Therefore she
was rewarded that from her descended kings and prophets--kings from
David; and prophets, as R. Levi said above. Amuz

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

and Amaziah were brothers, and Isaiah the son of Amuz was a prophet.

R. Jonathan, when he came to lecture about the Book of Esther, began
with this passage \[Is. xiv. 22\]: "I will rise up against them," etc.,
"and I will cut from Babylon name and remnant, and son and grandson,
saith the Lord." Name, *i.e.*, they will not have their own writing;
"remnant," they will not have their own language; "son," they will not
have any kingdom; "grandchild," that means Vashti.

R. Simeon b. Nahmani, when he came to lecture, began his lecture with
the passage \[Is. lv. 13\]: "Instead of the thorn shall come up the
fir-tree, and instead of the nettle shall come up the myrtle." "Instead
of the thorn," *i.e.*, instead of Haman the wicked, who made himself an
idol, as it is written \[ibid. vii. 19\]. "All thorn-hedges"; "shall
come up the fir-tree," *i.e.*, Mordecai, who was the essence to all the
spices, as it is written \[Ex. xxx. 23\]: "And thou, take unto thyself
principal spices, of pure myrrh"--this is translated in the Aramaic
Mor-decai; "instead of the nettle," *i.e.*, Vashti the wicked, who was
granddaughter of Nebuchadnezzar the wicked, who had burnt the house of
God, shall rise Esther the upright, who was called Hadassa (Myrtle), as
it is written: "And he had brought up Hadassah--that is, Esther"
\[Esther, ii. 7\]; "And it shall be unto the Lord for a name," *i.e.*,
the reading of the Megilla; "for a sign of everlasting that shall not be
cut off," *i.e.*, the Days of Purim.

R. Joshua b. Levi began his lecture from this passage \[Deut. xxviii.
63\]: "And it shall come to pass that as the Lord rejoiced over you to
do you good, and to multiply you, so will the Lord rejoice over you to
bring you to nought, and to destroy you." Let us see. Does the, Holy
One, blessed be He, rejoice when the wicked are in misfortune? It is
written \[II Chron. xx. 21\]: "As they went out before the armed array,
and said: Give thanks unto the Lord. for unto everlasting endureth his
kindness." Said R. Johanan: Why is it not here said, as usually, "for He
is good"? Because the Holy One, blessed be He, rejoices not at the
misfortunes of the wicked. And R. Johanan said again: It is written
\[Ex. xiv. 20\]: "And the one came not unto the other all the night."
That means, the angels of heaven wanted to sing the usual song, and the
Holy One, blessed be He, said to them: My creatures are drowning in the
sea, and you want to sing songs! Said R. Elazar: He Himself does not
rejoice, but He makes others rejoice. And it seems to be

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

so, because it is not written: "As *he* rejoiced," etc., "so will he
rejoice" (others). <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_12)

R. Abba bar Kahana began his lecture with this passage \[Ecc. ii. 26\]:
"For to a man who is good in His presence He giveth wisdom and knowledge
and joy"--this means Mordecai the Upright; "but to the sinner he giveth
employment to gather up and to bring together"--that means Haman; "that
he may give it to him that is good before God," *i.e.*, Mordecai and
Esther, as it is written afterward \[Esther, viii. 2\]: "And Esther
appointed Mordecai over the house of Haman."

Rabba bar Upbron began his lecture with the following passage \[Jerem.
xlix. 38\]: "And I will set up my throne in Elam, and I will destroy
thence kings and princes." By kings is meant Vashti, and by princes
Haman and his ten sons.

And R. Dimi b. Itz'hak begins to lecture from this passage \[Ezra, ix.
9\]: "For we are bondmen; yet in our bondage hath our God not forsaken
us, but hath extended unto us kindness before the kings of Persia." And
that was in the time of Mordecai.

R. Hanina bar Papa begins his lecture from this passage \[Ps. lxvi.
12\]: "Thou hast caused men to ride on our heads: we entered into fire
and into water." "Into fire," in the time of Nebuchadnezzar; "into
water," in the time of Pharaoh. "But thou broughtest us to the enjoyment
of overflowing plenty." That was in the time of Haman.

R. Johanan began his lecture from this passage \[Ps. xcviii. 3\]: "He
hath remembered his kindness and his truth to the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God." When did all
the ends of the earth see it? In the time of Mordecai and Esther.

Resh Lakish began his lecture with this passage \[Prov. xxviii. 15\]:
"As a roaring lion and greedy hear, so is a wicked ruler over an
indigent people." "The roaring lion"--that is, "Nebuchadnezzar, as it is
written \[Jeremiah, iv. 7\]: "The lion is come up from his thicket." "A
greedy bear" is Ahasuerus, about whom it is written \[Daniel, vii, 5\]:
"And behold, there was another, a second beast, like a bear." An d R.
Joseph said: The Persians are meant, who eat and drink like a bear, and
are corpulent like a bear, and let their hair grow like a bear, and

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

have no repose, like a bear. "Wicked ruler," *i.e.*, Haman; "indigent
people," *i.e.*, Israel, who are poor in merits.

"R. Elazar begins his lecture with this passage \[Ecc. x. 18\]: "Through
slothful hands the rafters will sink, and through idleness of the hands
the house will become leaky." That means to say, because Israel became
idle, and did not observe the Law, the enemy of the Holy One, blessed be
He (meaning Him), becomes sunk, *i.e.*, poor.

R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak begins his lecture with this passage \[Ps. xxiv.
2\]. "If it had not been the Lord who was for us, when men rose up
against us." Men, and not a king (that is Haman).

Rabha begins his lecture with \[Prov. xxix. 2\]: "When the righteous are
in authority, the people will rejoice; but when the wicked beareth rule,
the people groan." When the righteous rule, *i.e.*, Mordecai and Esther,
the people rejoice, as it is written \[Esther, viii. 15\]: "And the city
of Shushan was glad and joyful." And when the wicked rule, *i.e.*,
Haman, the people groan, as it is written \[ibid. iv. 15\]: "But the
city of Shushan was perplexed."

R. Mathna begins with the following passage \[Deut. iv. 7\]: "For what
great nation is there that hath God so nigh unto it?"

R. Ashi begins with the following passage \[ibid., ibid. 34\]: "Or hath
God essayed to go to take to himself a nation from the midst of a
nation?" (What they lectured is not written.)

"*And it came to pass in the time of Ahasuerus*." Said Rabh: Woe! woe!
This is what is written \[ibid. xxviii. 68\]: "And there ye will offer
yourselves for sale unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen without
anyone to buy you." Samuel said: It is written \[Lev. xxvi. 44\]: "I
will not cast them away, neither will I loathe them, to destroy them
utterly." I have not cast them away--in the times of the Greek, and I
have not loathed them--in the time of Nebuchadnezzar; "to destroy
them"--in the time of Haman; "to break my covenant with them"--in the
time of the Persians; "for I am the Lord their God"--in the time of Gog
and Magog. A Boraitha stated: "I will not cast away"--in the times of
the Chaldeans, as in that time I raised for them Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah; and have not loathed men in the times of the
Greeks, when I gave them Simeon the Upright and the Maccabees; "to
destroy them"--in the time of Haman I gave them Mordecai

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and Esther; "to break my covenant"--in the time of Rome I gave them the
House of Rabbi and the sages of that generation; "for I am the Lord
their God"--in the future no nation or tongue will dominate over them.

R. Levi said: From this verse \[Num. xxxiii. 55\], and R. Hyya from
ibid. 56. (What they lectured is unknown.)

"*Ahasuerus*." Said Rabh: He was the brother of a head <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_13) and the companion of a head. "The brother
of a head," *i.e.*, brother of Nebuchadnezzar the wicked, who was called
"head," as it is written \[Daniel, ii. 38\]: "Thou art the head of
gold." "And the companion of a head"--what Nebuchadnezzar did, *he*
intended to do. Nebuchadnezzar killed, *he* intended; Nebuchadnezzar
destroyed, *he* had the intention. As it is written \[Ezra, iv.\]: "In
the beginning of the reign of Ahasuerus, they wrote slanders on the
inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem." Samuel said: Ahasuerus signifies
"black," <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_14) *i.e.*, in his time the
faces of the Jews were black as the bottoms of pots. R. Johanan says:
Ahasuerus signifies "woe to his head" (*ah, rosh*); and R. Hanina says
it signifies "poor" (*rash*)--his taxes were so heavy that men became
poor.

It is written \[Esther, i. 1\]: "The same Ahasuerus"--he was the same in
his wickedness from beginning to end. (Similarly) it is written \[in
Gen. xxxvi. 43\]: "This is Esau," *i.e.*, the same in wickedness from
beginning to end; and \[Num. xxvi. 9\]: "These are Dathan and Abiram,"
*i.e.*, they were the same in wickedness always; and \[II Chron. xxviii.
22\]: "He, King Ahaz," *i.e.*, the same in wickedness always; and on the
contrary, also \[I Chron. i. 27\]: "Abram--the same is Abraham," *i.e.*,
Abraham was the same in his righteousness from beginning to end; \[Ex.
vi. 26\]: "These are Aaron and Moses," *i.e.*, were the same in
righteousness from beginning to end; \[I Samuel, xvii. 14\]: "And David
was the youngest," that means, he was as in his youth from beginning to
end: as in his youth he humbled himself before one greater than be, so
also when he was a king he was modest before a man superior to him in
wisdom.

"*Who reigned*." Said Rabh: He was a self-made king. Some say, it was in
his praise, there was none so fit to be a king as he; and some say it is
to his disgrace--he was not fit to be a king, but he had much money, and
the money made him king.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

The rabbis taught: Three kings reigned over the whole world--Ahab,
Ahasuerus, and Nebuchadnezzar. Ahab, as it is written \[I Kings, xviii.
10\]: "As the Lord thy God liveth . . . he caused that kingdom and
nation to take an oath . . ."; and if they would not be under his
dominion, how could he cause them to take an oath? Nebuchadnezzar, as it
is written \[Jerem. xxvii. 8\]: "And it will come to pass that the
nation or kingdom which shall not serve Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
and not place its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylonia."
Ahasuerus, as stated in Sanhedrin, was king of the whole world. Are
these all? Was not Solomon also king of the whole world? Solomon was not
a king to the end of his life.

This is right, according to those who hold he was first a king and then
a common man; but according to those who say he was a king, a common
man, and then again a king, what can be said? Solomon is different. He
reigned over the beings above <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_15) and
below, as it is written \[I Chron. xxix. 23\]: "Solomon sat on the
throne of the Lord." (He is not reckoned with them.) But there is
Sennacherib? As it is written \[Is. xxxvi. 19\]: "Which of all the gods
of the lands have saved their countries from my hand?" There was
Jerusalem, which was not subject to him. But there is Darius? As it is
written \[Dan. vi. 26\]: "Darius the king wrote to all peoples, nations,
and tongues that live on the whole earth: Your peace shall be great."
There were seven countries not under his dominion; as it is written
\[ibid. 2\]: "It pleased Darius, and he raised over his kingdom 120
satraps" (while Ahasuerus reigned over 127). But there is Cyrus? As it
is written \[Ezra, i.\]: "So said Cyrus, king of Persia: All the
kingdoms of the earth the Lord hath given unto me." He only vaunted.

"When the king sat," and, "in the third year of his reign." That is a
contradiction? Nay, it is when be became firmly seated on the throne.

R. Na'hman b. Hisda lectured: It is written \[Is. xlv. 7\]: "Thus hath
said the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, 'Whom I have taken hold of by
his right hand.'" Was then Cyrus a Messiah? It is meant that God had
said to Messiah: I complain of Cyrus; I have thought he would build my
House, and gather all my people that were in exile, and he only says
\[Ezra, i. 3\]:

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Whoever among you
that is of all his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem" \[but did not command all to return\].

It is written in the first chapter: "The army of Persia and Media"; and
\[x. 2\] "The kings of Media and Persia." Why is Media here mentioned
first, and in the other verse Persia? Said Rabha: They made this
agreement between them: When one of our nation will be king, the
governors will be of your nation, and *vice versa*; \[ibid. i. 5\]: "And
when these days were completed." Rabh and Samuel say, one that he was a
wise king, and the other that he was a foolish king. One says he was a
wise king, because he made the feast first for the remote subjects,
because for his townsmen he could make it at any time; and the other
says he was a fool, for he should have made it first for his townsmen,
so that if those would rebel, these at least would defend him.

The disciples of R. Simeon b. Yochi asked their Master: By what sins had
the Israelites incurred the decree of Haman in that age? Answered he:
What is your opinion? They said: Because they enjoyed the feast which
Ahasuerus the wicked man made. If so, only those of Shushan should have
suffered. Why did those of all provinces? They said to him: Let the
Master explain. So he answered: Because they kneeled to the image. Said
the disciples to him: If so, they were guilty, and why were they not
killed? And he answered: They bowed to the image not because they
wanted, but only for appearance; so the decree against them was also for
appearance not carried out. And this is what is written \[Lam. iii.
33\]: "He doth not afflict of his own will."

"In the court of the garden of the king's palace." Rabh and Samuel--one
says every one was placed in the place be fitted: the court, garden, and
king's palace; and one says he first tried to place them in the court,
and it could not contain them; he then placed them in the garden, and it
also could not contain them, until he placed them in the king's palace.
A Boraitha, however, states that he placed them in the court from which
two doors opened, one into the garden and another into the palace.

"And the royal wine was in abundance" \[Esther, i. 7\]. Said Rabh: We
infer from this that he gave to each to drink wine that was older than
he.

"And the drinking was according to the order" \[ibid. 8\]. What is meant
by "according to the order"? R. Hanan said

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

in the name of R. Meir: It was according to the order of our Torah. As
in our Law eating precedes drinking, so he gave more to eat than to
drink.

"Without compulsion." Says R. Elazar: From this it can be learned that
to each was given to drink wine that grew in his country.

"On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine."
And till then, what did he do? Was he not till then merry with wine?
Said Rabha: The seventh day was Sabbath. When Israelites eat and drink
on Sabbath, they begin with sayings of the Law and praises to God; but
the nations, when they feast, speak about women. These said the Medians
are beautiful, and those said the Persian women are more fair. And
Ahasuerus said to them: The one that I have is neither Median nor
Persian, but Chaldean, and she is fairer than they all; and if you wish
you can see her. They said: Yea, we wish to see her, but she must be
naked. And the same measure which one uses, is used against one: as
Vashti used to take Israelite maidens, and make them work nude, on
Sabbath, so also it was decreed that she should be brought nude. And
this is what is written \[Esther, ii. 1\]: "After these events, as the
king's fury was appeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done,
and what had been decreed concerning her"; *i.e.*, the decree had been
the same as what she had done. "And the king was very wroth." What was
the cause? Said Rabh: She sent to him this message: "Thou groom of my
father, my father used to drink wine as a thousand persons, and never
had he committed such follies when he was drunk as thou." And therefore
he was so wroth.

"Then said Memuchan." We have learned in a Boraitha: Memuchan was Haman.
Why was he called Memuchan? Because he was *destined* <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_16) for the troubles that befell him
afterwards. R. Kahana said: From this we see that usually an ignorant
man comes forward first (as he is mentioned last in verse 14).

"That every man should bear rule in his own house." Said Rabha: But for
the first letters, there would have been left no remnant of Israel;
because the men laughed at such a decree, that every man should rule in
his own house. For even a tanner is in his own house a prince, and
therefore they did not pay so much attention to the second decree in the
later letters.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

"And let the king appoint officers." Said Rabh: It is written \[Prov.
xiii. 16\]: "Every prudent man acteth with knowledge, but a fool
spreadeth abroad his folly." "Every prudent man acteth with
knowledge"--that was David, as it is written \[I Kings, i. 2\]:
"Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let them seek out for my lord the
king a young virgin." Everyone who had a daughter, brought her himself
to the king. "But a fool spreadeth abroad his folly," *i.e.*, Ahasuerus,
who had to appoint officers, for whoso had a beautiful daughter hid her
from him,

"There was a certain Jew in Shushan the capital a Benjamite." What is
meant by "he was a Benjamite? If it is meant to give his genealogy, let
it have been traced to Benjamin; otherwise, why were the first three of
his ancestors mentioned? In a Boraitha it is explained that all the
three names are not those of his ancestors, but are his own. The son of
Yair, *i.e.*, the man who made the eyes of the Jews *light* <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_17) with his prayer; the son of Shimi, the man
whose prayer God *heard*; <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_17) the son of
Kish, *i.e.*, the man who *knocked* on the gates of *Mercy, and they*
were opened to him. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_17) Said R. Na'hman:
Mordecai was crowned with these fair names. It is written, "a Judean
man," and then, "a Benjamite." Which was he? Said Rabba bar bar Hana in
the name of R. Joshua b. Levi: His father was a Benjamite and his mother
was a Judean. The sages, however, said: The tribes disputed with each
other. Judah said: Through me Mordecai was born, for if David bad killed
Shimi b. Gera, he could not have been born; and Benjamin said, he
belongs to me, because he is of my tribe. Rabha says: On the contrary,
the Kneseth (congregation) of Israel said: See what Jehudah did to me,
and see what the Benjamites have done to me: Judah, because David did
not kill Shimi, made possible the birth of Mordecai, of whom Haman
became jealous; and because Saul had not killed Agag was born Haman, who
caused troubles to Israel.

R. Johanan said: He was a Benjamite. Why is he called a Judean? Because
he did not want to worship idols, and every Israelite who rejects idols
is called a Judean, as it is written in Daniel x. 12: "There are certain
*Judean* men," etc. "Thy gods they do not worship."

R. Simeon b. Pazzi, when he wanted to lecture about Chronicles,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

began thus: All the names which are mentioned in the Chronicles without
any explanation, we are nevertheless able to explain them. It is written
\[I Chronicles, iv. 18\]: "And his wife the Judean bore Jered the father
of Gedor, and Cheber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of
Zanoach. And there are the sons of Bithya the daughter of Pharaoh, whom
Mered had taken (for wife)." Why was she called "the Judean"? Because
she denied idolatry, as it is written \[Ex. ii. 5\]: "And the daughter
of Pharaoh went down to wash herself at the river." And R. Johanan said:
She went to cleanse herself of the idolatries of her father's house.

"Bore Jered." Did she bear him--she only reared him? From this we may
infer that whoso rears an orphan is the same as if she bore him.
Jered--that is, Moses. Why is he called Jered? Because in his day manna
*descended* <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_18) from heaven to Israel.
"Gedor," <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_18) *i.e.*, he fenced up the
breaches of Israel. "Cheber," <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_18)
*i.e.*, he *joined* the Israelites to their Heavenly Father. "Socho"
 <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_18)--he was to Israel as a tabernacle
(protection). "Jekuthiel"--the Israelites *hoped* to God in his
days. <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_19) Zanoach," *i.e.*, he
*abandoned* <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_19) or atoned for the sins
of Israel in his days. It is written three times "Abi" (father), *i.e.*,
he was the father of Torah, the father of Wisdom, and the father of
Prophets. And these are the sons of Bithya the daughter of Pharaoh, whom
Meret had taken. Was, then, his name Meret--it is known that his name
was Kaleb? The Holy One, blessed be He, said: "Kaleb, who
*rebelled* <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_19) against the advice of the
spies, shall take the daughter of Pharaoh, who had rebelled against the
idolatries of her father."

"Who had been carried away into exile from Jerusalem" \[ii. 6\]. Said
Rabha: He had not been exiled, but came by his own will.

"And he had brought up Hadassah." Is she called Hadassah and called
Esther? We have learned in a Boraitha, R. Meir said: Her right name was
Esther, but she was called Hadassah, because the upright are called
thus, as it is written \[Zechariah, i. 8\]: "He was standing among the
*myrtle*-trees." <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_19) R. Jehudah said:
Her right name was Hadassa. Why was she called Esther? Because she
*concealed* <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_19) her words, as it is
written \[ii. 10\]:

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Esther told
nothing." R. Nehemiah said: Her right name was Hadassah. Why was she
called Esther? Because the nations called her for her beauty "star"
(αστηρ). B. Azzai said: Esther was not tall or short, but of moderate
size, like a myrtle. R. Joshua b. Kar'ha said: Esther's complexion was
yellow, but she had grace.

"For she had neither father nor mother. And when her father and mother
were dead, Mordecai had taken her to himself as a daughter." Why this
superfluous repetition? Said R. Aha: To tell us that when the mother
became pregnant her father died, and when she was born the mother died.

"And the seven maidens who were selected to be given to her" \[ibid.
9\]. Says Rabha: By them she counted the days to know when Sabbath was.

"In the evening she went and in the morning she returned" \[ibid. 14\].
Said R. Johanan: Among the blameworthy actions of that wicked man, it
can be said in his praise that he had intercourse with women only by
night.

"And Esther found favor" \[15\]. Said R. Elazar: Every nation thought
her to belong to itself.

"And the king made a great feast" \[ibid. 18\]. And Esther still did not
tell her nation; he lightened the taxes of all nations, and she did not
tell; he sent presents to his governors, and she still did not tell; so
he asked the advice of Mordecai how to discover it; and he told him that
a woman becomes jealous only of another woman, and when he will take
other women she will tell (as a favor to him). But this availed not
either, as it is written: "And Esther had not yet told of her descent or
her people."

R. Elazar said: It is written \[Job, xxxvi. 7\]: "He withdraweth not his
eyes from the righteous." In reward of the modesty of Rachel, King Saul
descended from her; and in reward of Saul's modesty Esther descended
from him. Wherein was Rachel modest? It is written \[Gen. xxix. 12\]:
"And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother." Was he her
father's brother? He was the son of her father's sister! That means, he
asked her: Will you marry me? And she answered: Yes, but my father is a
trickster, and he will deceive you. To this he answered: I am his
brother in trickery. And she asked him: May an upright man do it? And he
answered: Yea, it is written in "Samuel, xxii. 27: "With the pure thou
wilt show thyself pure, and with the perverse thou wilt wage a contest."
And he asked Rachel: How can he cheat me? And

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

she replied: I have an elder sister, and he will not let me marry before
her. So he confided to her some signs by which to distinguish her. And
when Leah was brought in her stead, Rachel said: My sister will be put
to shame. So she confided to her the signs. And this is what is written:
"And it came to pass that in the morning, Behold, it is Leah." That
means, till the morning he knew it not. And therefore she was rewarded
by Saul's being descended from her.

And what was Saul's modesty? It is written \[II Sam. x. 16\]: "Of the
matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel had spoken, he told him not." For
this he was rewarded by Esther's being descended from him. R. Elazar
said again: When the Holy One, blessed be He, decrees greatness for a
man, it is for him and his descendants to the end of ages; as it is
written \[Job, xxxvi. 7\]: "He doth establish them forever, and they are
exalted." But if they become proud, he humbles them, as it is written
\[ibid. 8.\]: "If they be bound in fetters."

"In those days, while Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate, Bigthan
and Theresh . . . became wroth" \[Esther, ii. 21\]. Said R. Hyya bar
Abba in the name of R. Johanan: The Lord makes the masters wroth against
their servants, in order to do good to the upright; as it was in the
case of Joseph, as it is written \[Gen. xli. 12\]: "And there was with
us a Hebrew lad," etc. And he makes slaves wroth against their masters,
to perform a miracle for the good of the upright. And who is it?
Mordecai, as it is written: "And the thing became known to Mordecai." R.
Johanan said Bigthan and Theresh were *Tarsees*, and spoke their own
language, and said among themselves: "Since Esther has come into the
court, we know no sleep. Therefore let us put poison into the king's
drink, in order that he should die." And they knew not that Mordecai was
of the Great Sanhedrin, every one of whom knew seventy languages. Then
Bigthan said to Theresh: Our watches are not the same. He answered: I
will watch for you too (and say you are sick). "And the thing was
inquired into, and found true." What was found? That he had not been at
his post.

"After these events" \[ibid. iii. 1\]. What events? Said Rabha: After
the Holy One, blessed be He, had created a cure to their woe. Because
Resh Lakish said: The Holy One, blessed be He, afflicts not Israel
before He has prepared the cure for them in advance. As it is written
\[Hosea, viii.\]: "Should I desire to heal Israel, then would the
iniquity of

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Ephraim be laid open." But with idolatrous nations it is different.
First He smites them, then He heals them, as it is written \[Is. xix.
12\]: "And the Lord will thus strike Egypt, striking and healing."

"But it appeared too contemptible in his eyes to lay his hand on
Mordecai alone" \[6\]. Said Rabha: In the beginning he wanted to lay
hand on Mordecai alone, and later on the people of Mordecai, *i.e.*, the
scholars, and later on all the Jews.

"Some one cast the Tur, that is the lot" \[7\]. We have learned in a
Boraitha: When the lots fell on the month of Adar, Haman rejoiced very
much, for he said: It is the month in which Moses died. But he did not
know that on the 7th of Adar Moses had died, and also had been born.

"There is one people" \[ibid. 8\]. Said Rabha: There was no man who
could calumniate so well as Haman. He said to the king: Let them be
destroyed. And he answered: I am afraid of their God, lest he act toward
me as toward others that did evil to Israel. Then Haman replied: They no
longer observe their God's commandments. Then the king said: But there
are among them rabbis, who observe them. Then he rejoined: They are one
people, all are the same, no one observes. And if thou shouldst think I
shall leave a void in thy kingdom, thou must know that they are
scattered among all nations, and their extermination will not be
perceptible. And perhaps thou wilt say, thou derivest a benefit from
them. Know that they are like mules, <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_20)
that are unproductive. And if thou shouldst imagine there is one country
in which they dwell together, know that they are scattered in *all* the
provinces of thy kingdom.

"And their laws are different from those of every people," *i.e.*, they
do not eat with us, and do not intermarry with us.

"They do not execute the laws of the king." The whole year they find
excuses not to give the taxes, saying: Now is Sabbath, now is Passover.

"It is no profit for the king to tolerate them." Because they eat and
drink in a manner to disgrace the king, for if a fly fall into a goblet
of wine, they will take it out and drink it; but if the king should
touch the goblet of wine, they will pour it Out.

"If it be pleasing to the king, let it be written to destroy them, and
ten thousand talents of silver will I weigh out. Said

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Resh Lakish: It
was known to Him who said one word, and the world was created, that in
the future Haman would give talents of silver to buy Israel. Therefore
He had commanded that in the same month they should give Shekalim of
silver to the Lord, as we have learned in a Mishna that on the first day
of Adar it was heralded that the Shekalim be given. And the king said to
Haman: The silver is given to thee; that people also, to do therewith as
it seemeth good in thy eyes.

Said R. Abba: The parable of Ahasuerus and Haman resembles what? Two
men, one of whom had a hillock in his field and the other a valley (or
pit); he who had the valley, when he saw the hillock, said: If one would
sell it to me, I would buy it to fill tip the valley. Then it happened
they met, and he who had the valley said: Sell me the hill. And he
answered: Take it for nothing, so that you remove it. (So Ahasuerus also
had wanted to get rid of the Israelites, and when Haman came to him he
gave them away for nothing.)

"And the king drew his signet ring from off his hand." Said R. Abba bar
Kahana: The removal of this ring had a greater effect than forty-eight
prophets and seven prophetesses, who preached that Israel should better
its ways; but this made them really better.

The rabbis taught: Forty-eight prophets and seven prophetesses preached
to Israel, and subtracted or added nothing, save the reading of the
Megilla, which was instituted by the prophets alone. What basis had they
for that? Said R. Hyya bar Abbin in the name of R. Joshua b. Kar'ha:
They drew an *a fortiori* conclusion: if when Israel was delivered from
slavery to freedom they sang, so much the more when they were saved from
death to life. Why, then, do we not say Hallel on Purim? Because we do
not say Hallel for the miracles that happened outside of Palestine. But
the exodus from Egypt was also a miracle outside of Palestine? This is
in accordance with the teaching of the following Boraitha: Till Israel
entered Canaan, they said praises for all miracles, but since they
occupied Palestine they sang praise only for miracles in Palestine. R.
Na'hman, however, said: The reading of the Megilla, that is the same as
Hallel. Rabha said: There, when they went out of Egypt, it was right to
say Hallel, because it is said: "Praise, O ye servants of the Lord," and
not Pharaoh's; but now, how could they say so on Purim, since they
continued to be slaves of Ahasuerus?

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Who were the seven prophetesses? Sarah, Miriam, Deborah, Hannah,
Abigail, Huldah, Esther.

Sarah, as it is written \[Gen. xi. 29\]: "The father of Milcah and the
father of Yiscah." And R. Itz'hak said: By Yiscah is meant Sarah. Why
was she called Yiscah? Because that signifies *seeing*, and she was a
*seer* through the Holy Spirit. Miriam, as it is written \[Ex. xv. 26\]:
"Then took Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron." Aaron's, and not
Moses' sister? Said R. Na'hman in the name of Rabh: She had prophesied
even when she had been yet but Aaron's sister, before Moses' birth, and
she said: In the future my mother will give birth to a child that will
deliver the Israelites. Finally, when Moses was born, the whole house
was filled with light. And her father rose, and kissed her on her head,
and said: Daughter, thy prophecy is fulfilled. Afterward, when he was
cast into the river, the father asked: Daughter, what has become of thy
prophecy? And this is what is written \[ibid. ii. 4\]: "And his sister
placed herself afar off, to ascertain what would be done to him,"
*i.e.*, to know what would be the end of her prophecy.

Deborah, as it is written \[Judges, ix. 4\]: "And Deborah, a
prophetess."

Hannah, as it is written \[I Sam. ii. I\]: "And Hannah prayed and said,
My heart is glad in the Lord, my horn is exalted through the Lord." My
*horn* is exalted, and not my *flask*. David and Solomon, who were
anointed with the horn, their dynasty endured; but Saul and Jehu, who
were anointed with a flask, their dynasties did not last.

"There is none holy like the Lord, for there is none beside thee"
\[ibid. 2\]. The expression for "none beside thee" is ‏בלתך‎. Said R.
Jehudah b. Menassia: 'Do not read ‏בלתך‎, but ‏לבלותך‎, because not as a
human being is the Holy One, blessed be He: a human being is survived by
his own work, but God survives all His works. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_21)

"There is not any rock like our God," *i.e.*, there is no sculptor like
our God. Do not read ‏עור‎ (rock), but ‏צייר‎: <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_22) a man makes a statue, and cannot endow it
with a soul; but the Holy One, blessed be He, makes an image within an
image, and endows it with a soul and life, entrails, etc.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

Abigail, as it is written \[I Sam. xxv. 31\]: "And when the Lord will do
good unto my lord." She prophesied that he would be king.

Huldah, as it is said \[II Kings, xxii. 14\]: "Huldah the prophetess."

And Esther, because it is written \[Esther, v. 7\]: "Esther put on
royalty." <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_23) It should be written,
"royal apparel"? That means, she clothed herself in the Holy Spirit, and
this is inferred from an analogy of expression; here it is written, "she
put on," and in I Chron. xii. 18, "a spirit invested <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_24) Amassoi." As there the Holy Spirit is
meant, so here.

Said R. Na'hman: Pride does not become women. Two women were proud, and
they both had unlovely names: one was called Bee (Deborah) and one Cat
(Huldah). Of Deborah it is written \[Judges, iv. 6\]: "And she sent and
called Barak and went not herself"; and of Huldah it is said \[II Kings,
xxii. 15\]: "Say unto the man that hath sent you to me"; and she did not
say, "unto the king."

"And Mordecai ascertained all that had been done" \[Esther, iv. I\].
What had been done? Said Rabh: That Haman had persuaded Ahasuerus.

"Then called Esther for Hathach Said Rabh: Hathach is Daniel. Why was he
called Hathach? Because he was *cut* from, or deprived of, his
office. <span id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_25) Samuel says: On the
contrary, he had the office, but he was called Hathach because all laws
were *decided* <span id="fr_36"></span>[4](#fn_26) by him.

"And they told Mordecai the words of Esther" \[12\]. But he went not
himself to her? From this is inferred that an evil tiding must not be
brought personally.

"And Mordecai went about" \[17\]. Said Rabh: What is meant by "went
about"? He transgressed <span id="fr_37"></span>[5](#fn_27) by fasting
on the first day of Passover; he fasted three days, and the third was
Pesach. And Samuel says: It means "he passed." There was a piece of
water between the court and Shushan, and he crossed it.

"And it came to pass on the third day that Esther put on royalty" \[iv.
1\]. Said R. Elazar in the name of R. Hanina: From this we infer that
she clothed herself in the Holy Spirit, as explained above \[66\].

The same says again: The blessing of a common man shall

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

never be held light, because we find that two who were the greatest in
their generations were blessed by two common men, and the blessings have
been fulfilled, and they are David and Daniel. David, whom Araunah
blessed, as it is written \[II Samuel, xxiv. 23\]: "And Araunah said
unto the king, may the Lord thy God receive thee favorably." And Daniel,
whom Darius blessed, as it is written \[Dan. vi. 17\]: "May thy God,
whom thou worshippest, continually, truly deliver thee." The same
authority says again: Do not hold light the curse of a common man. For
Abimelech cursed Sarah, saying \[Gen. xx. 16\]: "This is to thee a
covering to the eyes," and it happened to her children as is written:
"And Isaac's eyes became dim" \[Gen. xxvii. 1\]. The same says again: He
who repeats something said by another, in that person's name, brings
salvation to the world, as it is written: "And Esther said it to the
queen in the name of Mordecai." And thus Israel was saved. He says
again: When an upright man is lost, he is lost to his generation; but
not he himself. He is like to a pearl, which may be lost to the owner,
but is and remains a pearl.

"Yet all this profiteth me nothing" \[v. 13\]. Said R. Elazar in the
name of R. Hanina: That was because Mordecai once had a πρεσβευταί, and
Haman had sold himself to him as a slave, as said R. Hisda. The same
said again: In the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will be Himself
a crown on the head of every upright man, as it is written \[Is. xxviii.
5\]: "On that day will the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory and a
diadem of beauty." What is meant by "a crown of glory and a diadem of
beauty"? It is to those who do His will, and hope for His glory. But
shall we assume, to all of them? Therefore it is written: "Unto the
residue of his people." That means, to those who are so modest that they
consider themselves like the remnant of the people.

"And for a spirit of judgment" \[ibid. 6\]. To those who judge their own
resolutions. "To him that sitteth in judgment." It is the judge who does
justice. "And for strength." It is to those who conquer their own
desires. "To those that drive back the battle." That means, the
disputing about the Law. "To the gate." That means, the scholars who
come to the gate of the houses of prayer and learning in the morning and
the evening. The Severity of justice said to the Holy One, blessed be
He: Creator of the world, what is the difference between the Israelites
and other nations? And He answered:

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Israel studied the Torah, and the idolaters did not. To this justice
replied \[ibid. 7\]: "But these also are now stumbling through wine, and
reeling through strong drink."

"And placed herself in the inner Court of the king's house" \[Esther, v.
1\]. Said R. Levi, as she came to the house of idols, the Shekhina left
her; so she began to say \[Ps. xxii. 2\]: "'My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?' Canst thou hold guilty one who does a thing
unintentionally as if she did it intentionally, and what she is forced
to do as if she did it voluntarily?"

"And it happened when the king saw Esther the queen" \[2\]. Said R.
Johanan: Three angels came to her help at the same time: one angel
raised her head, that the king might see her; one, who gave her grace;
and one who made longer the sceptre which the king stretched out to her.
How much did it become longer? Says R. Jeremiah: It was two ells long,
and became twelve ells long. And others say sixteen, and others say
twenty-four; and in a Boraitha we have learned sixty. Rabba bar Uphran
said in the name of R. Eliezer, who had heard it from his Master, and
his Master from *his* Master: It became longer two hundred ells.

"Let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet" \[v. 5\]. The
rabbis taught: Why did Esther invite Haman to the feast? R. Elazar says:
She spread for him a net, as it is written \[Ps. lxix. 23\]: "May their
table become a snare before them." R. Joshua says: She learned it in her
father's house, as it is written \[Prov. xxv. 21\]: "If thy enemy be
hungry, give him bread." R. Meir said that at the time when Ahasuerus
would be at the feast, Haman should not get wind of the matter, and
rebel. R. Jehudah said: She did it that it should not be noticed she was
a Jewess. R. Nehemiah said: That the Israelites say not, We have a
sister in the king's court. Therefore we need not pray to God. And R.
Jose said: He should be near, if she wanted him. R. Simeon b. Menassia
said: That He above should see that she was so humbled as to be forced
to flatter her enemy, and should perform a miracle. R. Joshua b. Korba
said: She meant to make herself agreeable to Haman, that the king might
become jealous, and should kill both him and her, whereby Israel would
be saved. R. Gamaliel said: Because she knew Ahasuerus was very fickle
(and if she told him to kill Haman, he might repent; but if he should be
in her house, it would be executed immediately). Said R. Gamaliel:

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After all, we must
still hear what the Median has said. As we learn in the following
Boraitha, R. Elazar of Media said: She had intended to make Haman
jealous of Ahasuerus, and Ahasuerus jealous of Haman. Rabha said: As it
is written \[in Prov. xvi. 18\]: "Before downfall goeth pride." Abayi
and Rabha both said: She intended to do as is written \[in Jeremiah, li.
39\]: "When they are heated I will prepare their drinking feasts and
will make them drunken." Rabba bar Abahu once found Elijah the prophet,
and asked him: What did Esther intend to do? And he answered: As all the
Tanaim and all the Amoraim opined.

"In that night sleep fled from the king" \[vi.\]. He thought, What could
be the meaning of Esther's invitation of Haman? Perhaps they conspired
against him to kill him? Then he considered that some friend of his
would be found to inform him. But then he said: Perhaps there are men
who have rendered me services, and I have not rewarded them. Therefore
people do not care to do me a kindness. As soon as this struck him, he
commanded to bring to him the Chronicles. "And they were read" by
themselves; *i.e.*, that place in the Chronicles turned up accidentally.

Said R. Ashi: R. Shila of the village Tamratha lectured: If what is
recorded about Israelites below is not erased, so much the more what is
written about them in Heaven above.

"There hath nothing been done with him" \[3\]. Says Rabha: They said so,
not because they loved Mordecai, but because they hated Haman.

"Do this to Mordecai" \[10\]. And Haman asked: Who is Mordecai? And the
king answered: The Jew. And he said again: There are many Jews by the
name of Mordecai. And he answered: The one that sits at the gate of the
king. He said: For this man it will suffice if thou wilt give him a
village, or the tolls of a river. And the king said: Give him this too.
Therefore it is written: "Leave out nothing of all that thou hast
spoken." "And Haman then took the apparel and the horse" \[11\]. As
Mordecai saw that Haman came to him on the royal horse, he trembled, and
said to the rabbis who sat near him: This man probably comes with an
order to put me to death. Go away from here, that you may not get harmed
through me. Mordecai wrapped himself, and stood up to pray. When Haman
entered, he sat down and waited till Mordecai ended the prayer. Then
Haman asked Mordecai: What was

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

your occupation when I entered? He replied: We studied the laws of a
handful \[Lev. vi. 8\]. We deliberated what a handful should be. Haman
answered: Your handful, which you have offered to God, has outweighed
the ten thousand talents that I had proposed to the king, for your
destruction. Then said he to him: Put on the royal apparel and mount the
horse, for the king wants you. Mordecai said: I must not put on the
royal garments before I wash myself. Haman took him himself to the bath,
and washed him, and cut his hair. Thereafter, he bade him mount the
horse. He replied: I cannot; I am too weak from fasting. So Haman bent
himself, and helped him to climb the horse, by letting him step on his
back.

"And proclaimed before him: Thus shall be done unto the man," etc.
\[11\]. Haman's daughter heard this, and saw from a distance a man
riding on a horse. She thought her father sat on the horse, and Mordecai
led him. When they came nearer, and she perceived her mistake, she threw
herself from the balcony, and died. And this is what is written: "Haman
hastened to his house, mourning, and having his head covered"--mourning
over his daughter, and his head covered, because of the disgrace.

"And Haman related to Zeres his wife and to all his friends" \[13\]. And
afterward it is written: "Then said unto him his wise men and Zeres his
wife." First they are called friends, and then wise men? Said R.
Johanan: A man even of the nations who says an intelligent thing may be
called wise.

"If Mordecai be of the seed of the Judeans." They said: If Mordecai is
descended from other tribes, you will get the better of him; but if he
be descended from one of these tribes--Jehudah, Benjamin, Ephraim,
Menasseh, then you cannot overcome him. From Jehudah because it is
written \[Gen. xlix. 8\]: "Thy hand shall be on the neck of thy
enemies"; and the other three, because it is written \[Ps. lxxx. 3\]:
"Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Menasseh, awaken thy might."

"But thou wilt surely fall before him." R. Jehudah b. Ilai lectured:
What is meant by "surely fall"? His wise men and wife said to him thus:
This nation \[Israel\] resembles earth, and resembles stars; when they
sink they sink to the dust, and when they rise they rise to the stars.

"When the king's chamberlains arrived" \[Esther, vi. 14\]: "and they
hastened." From this we infer that they brought him in a hurry,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

"For we have been sold, I and my people . . . for the adversary
regardeth not the damage of the king." She said to him: This enemy is
not worth the damage he causes to the king: when he became jealous of
Vashti, he killed her; and now he becomes jealous of me, and wants to
kill me too.

"And the king arose in his fury . . . and when the king returned" \[vii.
7, 8\]. From this we may infer that as he had gone out in fury, so he
returned in fury. "Haman was fallen upon the couch." It is not written
"fell," but "was fallen," from which we may infer that an angel came and
pushed him. And the king said: Woe inside, and woe outside!

"Then said Harbanah" \[9\]. Said R. Elazar: Harbanah the wicked had been
among those who had given the advice to make a gallows for Mordecai; but
as he saw his plan not fulfilled, he deserted Haman and went over to
Mordecai's friends, and this is written \[Job, xxvii. 22\]: "And will
cast upon him, and have no pity; out of his hand will surely escape."

"And the fury of the king was appeased" \[xii. 10\]. The expression is
‏שככה‎, which is plural. (What signifies the plural? His anger about
Vashti and about Esther was appeased.)

It is written \[Gen. xiv. 22\]: "To all of them he gave to each changes
of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave . . . five changes of raiment." Is
it possible that what gave trouble to Joseph's father, as Rabba bar
Me'hassia said in the name of Rabh (Sabbath, p. 19), *he* (Joseph), the
righteous man, should do? Said R. Benjamin b. Jepheth: That was a hint
that from him would descend a man who would wear five royal garments, as
it is written \[Esther, viii. 15\]: "And Mordecai went out in a royal
apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a
cloak of fine linen and purple."

"And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_28) . . ." \[Gen. xlv. 14\]: "How many necks
had he--he had only one? He wept for the two Temples, that would be
situated in Benjamin's land, and would be destroyed. "And Benjamin wept
upon his neck." He wept for the Tabernacle of Shiloh, that would be in
Joseph's part of the land, and would be destroyed. "And behold, your own
eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin" \[Gen. xlv. 12\]. Said R.
Elazar: Joseph said to them: Just as I have nothing in my heart against
Benjamin, who took

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

no part in my sale, so I have nothing against you." It is my mouth that
speaketh unto you." What I speak with my mouth, I think in my heart.
"And to his father he sent after this manner \[ibid. 23\] . . . with the
best things of Egypt." What is meant by the best things of Egypt? Said
R. Benjamin b. Jepheth in the name of R. Elazar: He sent him old wine,
which when old men drink they have their minds invigorated. "And Israel
bowed himself upon the head of the bed" \[xxxvii. 31\]. The same
authority said: When the fox is at the head, the people bow to him. "And
he comforted them, and spoke kindly unto them" \[l. 21\]. Said the same
authority again: He told them such things as are agreeable to be heard;
namely, ten lights could not extinguish one, much less could one light
put out ten.

"For the Jews there was light, and joy and gladness and honor" \[Esther,
viii. 16\]. Said R. Jehudah: By light is meant the Law, as it is written
\[Prov. vi. 23\]: "For the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light."
"Joy," that is, a holiday, as it is written \[Deut. xvi. 14\]: "And thou
shalt rejoice on thy feast." "Gladness" means circumcision, as it is
written \[Ps. cxix. 162\]: "I am rejoiced over thy promise." And by
"honor" is meant Thephilin, as it is written \[Deut. xxviii. 16\]: "And
all the nations of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name
of the Lord, and they shall be afraid of thee." And we have learned in a
Boraitha, R. Eliezer the Great said: By this are meant the Thephilin on
the head.

"And Parshandatha" \[Esther, ix. 7\]. R. Adda, from the city of Jopha,
said: The names of the sons of Haman and the phrase "and the ten" must
be pronounced in one breath. Why? Because their souls left their bodies
all at the same time. Said R. Johanan: The Vav of Vayzatha must be made
longer, that it look like a gallows, for all ten were hanged on one
gallows-tree.

"Words of peace and truth" \[30\]. Said R. Tanhum, and according to
others R. Ashi: We may infer from this that it should be written like
the Law of Truth; as that must be written on ruled parchment, so this.

"And the order of Esther confirmed" \[32\]. Said R. Johanan: Read
together the former verse and this: "The matters of the fastings, the
prayers, and the order of Esther confirmed."

"For Mordecai the Jew was the second in rank after King Ahasuerus, and
great among the Jews, and acceptable to the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

multitude of his brethren" \[x. 3\]. To the multitude, but not to all?
From this we may infer that a part of the Sanhedrin turned away from
him.

R. Joseph said: The study of the Law is greater than the saving of
lives, for before Mordecai was mentioned the fifth, and later the sixth.
It is written \[Ezra, ii. 2\]: "Who came, with Zerubbabel, Jeshua,
Nehemiah, Serayah, Realayah, Mordecai, Balshan;" and later, \[in
Nehemiah, vii. 7\] he is mentioned the sixth. (Rashi explains this thus:
From the return of Ezra to the return of Nehemiah twenty years elapsed,
and meanwhile Mordecai became of high rank, but before he had been more
of a scholar.)

Rabh, and according to others R. Samuel b. Martha, said: The study of
the Law is of more importance than the building of the Temple; for so
long as Barach b. Neriah lived, Ezra returned not to the land of Israel.
Said Rabha in the name of R. Itz'hak b. Samuel the son of Martha: The
study of the Law is more important than the honoring of the parents; for
in all the years that Jacob passed with Shem and Eber and studied the
Law, he was not chastised for failing during that time to honor his
father and his mother. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](meg02.htm#fr_0) In the time of the Mishna
the tribunals of justice kept the courts open on Mondays or Thursdays
for the sake of the men who came to the markets, which were usually on
these days. The reading of the Holy Scrolls in the synagogues was also
on these days, and therefore they were called "days of assembly."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](meg02.htm#fr_1) The text says it is written
"from India to Ethiopia" and refers to verse 9, chap. viii., but as
there it is written not about the Book of Esther, we have cited the
other verse.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](meg02.htm#fr_2) The open one, *e.g.*, ‏מ‎;
the closed one, as ‏ם‎, So also with the other letters.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:1](meg02.htm#fr_3) The Hebrew term for this is
"Batlonim." The true meaning is that every city must hire ten persons
who shall do nothing but study and pray.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[11:1](meg02.htm#fr_4) *Ham* is in Hebrew *hot*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[11:2](meg02.htm#fr_5) *Rakkath* in Aramaic means
the bank of a river.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[11:3](meg02.htm#fr_6) *Kinor* is a violin.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:1](meg02.htm#fr_7) *Rek* is in Hebrew *empty,
idle*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:2](meg02.htm#fr_9) Places for the worship of
idols in Rome.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[15:1](meg02.htm#fr_10) The expression is
*Shalishim*, which the Talmud translates literally, "thrice"--though in
Leeser it is different.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[16:1](meg02.htm#fr_11) We doubt whether it was
the second or the third, as there were also two Oshyias, one in the time
of the second and one in the time of the third. See Seder Hadoroth,
parag. Oshyia.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[19:1](meg02.htm#fr_12) High places are the
public altars on which they used to sacrifice before the erection of the
Temple at Jerusalem. Small places are altars of private persons.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[24:1](meg02.htm#fr_13) The Hebrew is ‏ישיש‎,
"he will make rejoice." "He will rejoice himself should have been
‏ישוש‎.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:1](meg02.htm#fr_14) *Ah* is brother and
*Ras* is head, and it is considered as composed of two words.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[26:2](meg02.htm#fr_15) *Sha'hor* is "black."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[27:1](meg02.htm#fr_16) According to Rashi--"the
demons."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[29:1](meg02.htm#fr_17) *Muchan* in Hebrew is
"prepared," "designed."

<span id="fn_17"></span>[30:1](meg02.htm#fr_20) *Our* is "light,"
*Shema* is "hear," *Kish* is "rap."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:1](meg02.htm#fr_24) *Jarod* is "to descend";
*Geder*, "fence"; *Habor*, "join"; *Sukka*, a "protection."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[31:2](meg02.htm#fr_29) *Jekan*, "hopes"; *El*,
"God"; *Zanoach*, "abandon"; *Marod*, "rebel"; *Hadas*, "myrtles";
*Haster*, "conceal."

<span id="fn_20"></span>[34:1](meg02.htm#fr_30) "Separated", ‏מפורד‎;
and ‏פרד‎ is "a mule."

<span id="fn_21"></span>[36:1](meg02.htm#fr_31) ‏בלה‎ is "to rot, fade,
dwindle, wear out."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[36:2](meg02.htm#fr_32) Which means "painter,
sculptor."

<span id="fn_23"></span>[37:1](meg02.htm#fr_33) In Hebrew it is so.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[37:2](meg02.htm#fr_34) In Hebrew it is the same
expression.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[37:3](meg02.htm#fr_35) *Hathach*, "cut."

<span id="fn_26"></span>[37:4](meg02.htm#fr_36) Which is in Hebrew
expressed by cutting.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[37:5](meg02.htm#fr_37) *Abor* has all these
meanings.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[42:1](meg02.htm#fr_38) In the Hebrew text the
plural is used.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[44:1](meg02.htm#fr_39) The Gemara proceeds to
prove this by certain calculations of the ages of Ishmael, Itz'hak, and
Jacob, deduced from scriptural passages; the proof being very flimsy and
complicated, we have omitted it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](meg03)
