[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](meg00)  [Next](meg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

#### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# VOLUME VIII.--TRACT MEGILLA.

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNAS I. and II. The Megilla is to be read from the eleventh till the
fifteenth of Adar. How so? Which cities are considered walled since the
time of Joshua b. Nun. By whom was made the Targum on the Pentateuch and
by whom that of the Prophets. What the Heavenly voice said then and how
the ground of Palestine trembled. Who were the men who were with Daniel
\[Daniel, x. 7\]? Who are obliged to hear the reading of the Megilla?
Which has the preference, the study of the Law or the reading of the
Megilla? Are women obliged to hear the Megilla read? What must be
considered a large town? What Rabbi used to do on Purim, the seventeenth
of Tamuz, and how he has abolished the fast on the ninth of Ab. The
explanation of the passage Zechar. ix. 7, and also the explanation of
the passage Ps. cxl. 9. Also what is to be inferred from Habakkuk, i.
13, [1](meg02.htm#page_1)-14

MISHNA III. When the Megilla was read in the first Adar and after wards
the year was declared intercalary. The request that Esther sent to the
sages. The Book of Esther was dictated by the Holy Spirit. Whence is
this deduced? The obligation of sending portions to friends and to give
charity to the poor, In what characters and language the Megilla must be
written? When is the festival meal on Purim to be eaten?
[14](meg02.htm#page_14)-17

MISHNAS IV. and V. Enumerate the difference of a number of things
between one another, among them the difference of the Greek language and
others, and why it has preference over all others except Hebrew. The
tradition of the men of the Great Assembly about the passages beginning
with the word "*Vahi*" (and it came to pass). What a bride who is chaste
in the house of her husband's parents deserves. The enumeration of the
passages with which the different Amoraim began their lectures on the
Book of Esther. The analysis of the name "Ahasuerus," and what the
different sages had to say about it. He was a self-made king. Is it to
his credit or to his discredit? The three kings that reigned over the
whole world. Why was Cyrus called the anointed of God? Why does the
Bible sometimes name Persia before Media and sometimes *vice versa*? By
what sins did the Israelites incur the decree of Haman in that age? Who
was Memuchan? Why was Mordecai called Benjamite and Judean? The
interpretation of the names mentioned in the Chronicles without any
explanation. Why did

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Esther not reveal
her nationality? The reward for the modesty of Rachel, of Saul, and of
Esther. How the Lord makes wroth the masters of their servants and the
servants of their masters in order to do good to the upright. The
explanation of the calamities of Haman. The parable of Ahasuerus and
Haman. The explanation of the passage, "There is not any rock like our
God." The seven prophetesses in Israel. Pride does not become women. Who
was Hathach? Why did Esther invite Haman to the feast, and what Elijah,
the prophet, said about this to Abahu? Why Israel resembles earth and
why stars? All the lecturing in detail about the conversation which
Esther had with Ahasuerus before the hanging of Haman. Why is Mordecai
mentioned in Ezra, ii. 2, the fifth, and in Nehemiah, vii. 7, the sixth?
[17](meg02.htm#page_17)-44

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNAS I. and II. Whence do we deduce that anyone that reads the
Megilla, in an irregular manner does not fulfil his duty, that the
Patriarchs must be mentioned in the prayer, that the Megilla must not be
read by heart, and that the name of the Lord must not be blessed any
more after the pronunciation of the eighteen benedictions? How is it
known that God called Jacob "El"? Regulations concerning the reading
from Assyrian characters, from writing in ink, and not to make long
pauses. If the inhabitants of an open town had gone to a walled town. If
one reads the Megilla which is bound together with other books. How the
schoolmen, repudiated the statement of an Halakha in the name of
Johanan, [45](meg03.htm#page_45)-54

MISHNAS III. to V. Who is qualified to read the Megilla? Which acts may
not be done before sunrise on the day on which they are obligatory, and
which may be done during the whole of the day on which they are
obligatory, [54](meg03.htm#page_54)-56

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNAS I. to VI. Is the Megilla to be read sitting or standing? What
benediction must be pronounced before and after the reading? Regulations
concerning the men to be called to read the Holy Scrolls in the prayer
houses on the prescribed days, and their number on each day. What is to
be done when men come into the synagogue after the prayer is finished?
What is the benediction for mourners? The number of men that must be
present when the name of God is mentioned in a benediction. How many
verses must each read who is called to read in the Holy Scrolls? Who is
allowed to act as minister? May a priest whose hands are deformed raise
his hands to bless the congregation? If one say he will not minister at
reading desk in colored clothes. If one say in his prayer, "The good
shall bless Thee" (see note, [p. 67](meg04.htm#page_67)). Which portions
of the Torah must be read and explained, and which are to be read
without explanation? [57](meg04.htm#page_57)-69

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNAS I. to III, Regulations concerning investment of the proceeds of
a sale of sacred public property. May one prayer house be exchanged for
another? Which articles used in a religious duty may be cast away, and

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

which must be hidden? What disposition of the Holy Scrolls when rotten?
May old Holy Scrolls be sold? When are Holy Scrolls allowed to be sold?
Rules of contribution to charity by a visitor of a town. May sacred
public property be sold to private individuals? The replies of many
sages when they were questioned for the reason of their longevity. What
is forbidden to be done in a prayer house, and may a man go in there for
the purpose of protecting himself against rain or sunshine? What is
meant by the saying of the Mishna: "Who uses the crown is lost"? Come
and see how the Israelites are beloved before the Holy One, etc. The
Heavenly voice about the Mount Sinai, [70](meg05.htm#page_70)-81

MISHNAS IV. and V. Treat about the portions of the Bible which are to be
read on the Sabbaths beginning two weeks before Purim up to Passover. on
each day of the Passover, and on each day of the other festivals, and
the different opinions about this, [81](meg05.htm#page_81)-90

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](meg02)
