[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab01)  [Next](rab03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

A. A suicide must be buried without any ceremony. R. Ishmael said: It
may be exclaimed: Alas, suicide! Alas, suicide! Said R. Aqiba to him:
Leave him alone. Do not honor nor abuse him. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[A1](#fn_17) No rending, no removal of shoes, and no
lamenting. They may, however, stand in line, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[A2](#fn_18) and say over

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

him the mourners' benedictions, because it is for the honor of the
living. This is the general rule: Whatever is for the honor of the
living may be done; but everything which is not for their sake, it is
not imperative for the congregation to do for such.

B. Who is to be considered a suicide? If one ascended to the top of a
tree or a roof, and he fell down and was killed, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[B1](#fn_19) he must not be considered a suicide,
unless he says previously: "I am going to drop myself!" and immediately
afterward it was observed that he did so; then it is to be considered a
suicide, and he shall be buried without any religious ceremonies.

C. When one is found hanging on a tree strangled, or lying on a sword
killed, he is not to be considered a suicide, and nothing may be
withheld from him.

D. It happened to the son of Gornos in Lud, who ran away from school,
that his father threatened him. Being afraid of his father, he drowned
himself in a pit. When R. Tarphon was inquired about him, he said:
Nothing shall be withheld from him.

E. It happened to a lad at the city of Bene-Berak, who broke a glass on
the Sabbath, that his father threatened him. Being afraid of his father,
he drowned himself in a pit. It was told to R. Aqiba, and he said:
Nothing shall be withheld from him. <span id="fr_20"></span>[E1](#fn_20)

F. From this the sages declared: One shall not threaten a child. He
shall either punish him immediately, or he shall keep silence. Said R.
Simeon b. Elazar: Lust, children, and women should be repulsed with the
left, and attracted with the right hand. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[F1](#fn_21)

G. Those who are put to death by the decision of a court must be buried
without any ceremonies. Their brothers and relatives may come and greet
the witnesses and the judges, to show them that the judgment is
considered just, and that they

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

have nothing against them; that they do not mourn for them loudly, but
are sorry for them, as sorrow is only in the heart. Rabbi Nathan,
however, said: There is no difference between silent sorrow and loud
weeping. <span id="fr_22"></span>[G1](#fn_22)

H. No funeral meal <span id="fr_23"></span>[H1](#fn_23) must be prepared
for them, as it is written \[Lev. xix. 26\]: "Ye shall not eat upon the
blood." <span id="fr_24"></span>[H2](#fn_24)

I. Whoever separates himself from the congregation, nobody shall have
anything to do with him. And when he is dead, his brothers and other
relatives may dress and wrap themselves in white, eat, drink, and
rejoice that the enemy of the Place <span id="fr_25"></span>[I1](#fn_25)
is lost \[Ps. cxxxix. 21\]. This verse, with the following, is to be
explained thus: Why do I hate them with the utmost hatred? Because they
have separated themselves from me, and become my enemies.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

J. The same is the case with those who steal the duties, or steal from
devoted things, they are considered as shedders of blood; and not merely
that, but also as idolaters, adulterers, and intentional violators of
the Sabbath. <span id="fr_26"></span>[J1](#fn_26)

K. From those who are killed by the government, nothing may be withheld,
nor from those who were drowned in the sea or a river, or were eaten by
a wild beast. From what time must the day of the mourning for them be
counted? Since the time that they have despaired of finding. If separate
limbs are found, it cannot be counted till the head and the greater part
of the body are found. R. Jehudah said: The backbone and the skull are
considered as the greater part of the body.

L. If a husband or wife, or parents, were crucified in the town, the
wife, the husband, or the children shall not live in that town, except
it be as large as Antioch, and even then they must remove to another
part. Until what term are they not allowed to live there? Till the flesh
is totally destroyed, and the bones cannot be recognized any
longer. <span id="fr_27"></span>[L1](#fn_27)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[3:A1](rab02.htm#fr_17)

### CHAPTER II.

A. With the saying that you lament him, you also blame him that he
committed suicide. It is, therefore, better that nothing should be said.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[3:A2](rab02.htm#fr_18) When the mourners return
from the burial, all those who accompanied them stand in two rows,
through which the <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> mourners pass, and each
one consoles them. So was the custom at that time, and in some
congregations it is still extant. The mourners' benediction (Tzidduk
Hadin) is said in the cemetery just after the interment.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[4:B1](rab02.htm#fr_19) *B*. Although he said he
would do so sometime previous.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[4:E1](rab02.htm#fr_20) *E*. According to Rashi,
Mishna A is incomplete, and must read thus: But if the suicide was a
minor, it is different. He said so, that the decisions of Aqiba and
Tarphon should not contradict it.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[4:F1](rab02.htm#fr_21) *F*. To all these three,
to which human beings are attracted naturally, it is advisable not to be
subject, but at the same time, when he attracts them with the right, he
shall try to repel them with the left when necessary.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[5:G1](rab02.htm#fr_22) *G*. *I.e.*, both are
permitted or prohibited.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[5:H1](rab02.htm#fr_23) *H*. It is customary
that when the mourner returns from the cemetery his consolers bring with
them food for the first meal, and in the ancient times they dined
together with him. The custom of dining together was abolished because
of the poor, who could not afford the outlay for it; so the costly
shrouds were also prohibited, as it is explained farther on. Put the
bringing of food to the mourner is in vogue even to-day. The reference
to the passage mentioned in the text means to say, you shall not dine
with such a mourner, whose death occurred for the crime of bloodshed (as
the capital punishment by the court was only for bloodshed, as will be
explained by us in Tract Sanhedrin). It is self-evident that the literal
translation of this passage does not mean so, but the sages took this
passage as a support to many things. They take this passage elsewhere as
a support that one must not eat before the morning prayers, and they
explain it: "Ye shall not eat before ye have prayed for your blood"; but
they nevertheless use the language as if it would be so written.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[5:H2](rab02.htm#fr_24) The continuation of this
Mishna will be found in Tract Sanhedrin in a Mishna in Chap. VI.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[5:I1](rab02.htm#fr_25) *I*. In many places the
Talmud gives to the Lord the appellation "Place," for the reason which
is explained elsewhere, that He, the Lord, is the place of the world (it
means that He bears the entire world), but the world is not the place of
Him (because He does not merely fill the world, but He also expands out
of the world). Others translate it "Omnipotent," which needs no
commentary. We will do the same in our further translations. We made an
exception here, however, to explain the meaning of this term in the
text.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[6:J1](rab02.htm#fr_26) *J*. We translate here
according to the corrections of Elias Wilna, as we follow his
corrections throughout the tract.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[6:L1](rab02.htm#fr_27) L. It refers to the
barbarous times in which, when the government hanged a person, the body
was never removed. We conclude this chapter here, as the following
Mishna is taken in in Kethuboth, as the proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](rab03)
