[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab06)  [Next](rab08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

A. The period of thirty days must be counted to the following: to
mourning, to calender clothes, to cutting of hair, to demand debts, to a
woman of handsome form, to betrothal, to marriage, to a virgin, to a
widow, to a Yebamah, <span id="fr_78"></span>[A1](#fn_78) to one who
vowed against his wife, and to an indefinite Nazarite.

B. "*To mourning*." How so? It is written \[Deut. xxxiv. 8\]: "And the
children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days."

"*Calender clothes*" means all garments which come out from under the
press. So is the decree of Rabbi. The sages, however, say: Colored but
not white. But R. Meir said the reverse: White but not newly colored;
old, however, is permitted in any case. *Funda, fascia, pileus*, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[B1](#fn_79) and helmets are also permitted. To give
garments to be pressed is permitted within the thirty days.

The rabbis taught: "It is not permitted to calender clothes, whether
new, or old ones which have just been removed from under the press,
during the full period of thirty days." Rabbi, however, said: "It
applies only to new ones." R. Elazar bar Simeon said: "They have
prohibited new white garments only." Abayi acted in accordance with
Rabbi. Rabha, however, acted in accordance with R. Eliezer bar R.
Simeon.

"*To cutting of hair*." He must not cut off the hair of his head, his
mustache, his beard, or any hair of his body. A woman, however, is
permitted to cut her hair after the seven days.

"*To demand debts*." If one lends money for an indefinite period, he
cannot demand it before thirty days.

C. "*To a woman of handsome form*." It is written \[Deut. xxi. 11\]:
"And hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldst take her to thee to
wife." She must shave off her hair, and pare her nails. So is the decree
of R. Meir; but R. Aqiba said: The hair must be shaved, and the nails
she must let grow. Said R.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Eliezer: As in both the head and nails the Torah prescribed a
doing, <span id="fr_80"></span>[C1](#fn_80) and as the doing what is
said by the head means that the hair shall be cut off, the same is the
case with the nails; but R. Aqiba said: As the doing what is said by the
head is meant to make her ugly, the same is the case with the nails (and
nothing is uglier than long nails). A support to R. Eliezer can be found
in II Samuel \[xix. 25\]: "And Mephibosheth the (grand-) son of Saul
came down to meet the king, and he had not dressed his feet, nor trimmed
his head." A support to R. Aqiba can be found in Daniel \[iv. 30\]:
"Till his hair was grown like eagles' (feathers), and his *nails* <span
id="fr_81"></span>[C2](#fn_81) were like birds' claws."

 <span id="fr_82"></span>[C3](#fn_82)Pin'has, the brother of Mar Samuel,
was in mourning. When Samuel came to condole with him and noticed that.
his nails were untrimmed, he said to him: "Why dost thou not trim them?"
And he answered him: "If this were the case with thee, wouldst thou
disrespect the mourning to such an extent?" And it was \[Eccl. x. 6\]
"like an error which proceedeth from the ruler." And a death occurred in
Samuel's family. When R. Pin'has came to condole with him, the former
trimmed his nails and threw the parings in his face, saying: "I see that
thou dost not pay any attention to the saying: Words are ominous, as
said R. Johanan. Whence is it deduced that words are ominous? It is
written \[Gen. xxii. 5\]: "And Abraham said unto his young men," etc.,
"and we will worship *and come again to you*"; and it so happened that
both of them returned. (Although Isaac was intended to be sacrificed.)
It was understood from Samuel's action that, the nails of the hand only
may be cut, but not those of the feet. R. Onan bar Ta'hlipha, however,
said: "It was explained to me by Samuel himself that there is no
distinction made." Said R. Hyya bar Ashi in the name of Rabh: "With a
nail file, however, it is not allowed."

 <span id="fr_83"></span>[C4](#fn_83)Rabh said (and Mar Zutra learned it
in a Boraitha): "A

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

couple from Hamthon once came before Rabbi and asked his permission to
cut their nails in their mourning, and he permitted them to do so; and
if even they would have asked his permission to trim their mustaches, he
would also have permitted them." Samuel added: "They actually did ask
his permission and he did permit them."

D. It is written \[Deut. xxi. 13\]: "And she shall put off the raiment
of her captivity." If she was dressed in white or black which becomes
her, or she had on jewelry, they must be removed from her, for the
purpose of making her unhandsome. The case is only if she has declined
to embrace the Jewish faith; but if she be inclined, she is dipped, is
freed from slavery, and he may marry her. The purpose for which all this
was done is to prevent mingling.

E. "*To betrothal*." How so? It is not allowed to make the feast of
betrothal within thirty days of the day of the funeral. "*To marriage*."
The feast of marriage is not allowed to be made within this period; but
if everything was prepared before the death occurred of one of his or
her parents he may marry, and have the first intercourse with her; but
after that they must be separated for seven days. This is only in case
one of his parents dies; but if his wife dies, he is not allowed to
marry again until three regular festivals have passed. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[E1](#fn_84) R. Jehudah, however, said: Two, and he
may marry at the third. This is the case when he has grown-up children;
but if they are yet little ones, or he is childless, he may marry even
within the thirty days. It happened that the wife of R. Tarphon died,
and R. Tarphon said to her sister within the period of mourning: "Enter
this house, and educate thy sister's children." Nevertheless, he had no
intercourse with her until the thirty days were over.

The rabbis taught: "One is not permitted to marry during the full period
of the thirty days. If he, however, mourns over his wife, he must not
remarry again until three festivals shall have passed. R. Jehudah,
however, allows after the first and second festival have passed." But if
he is childless he may remarry at once, in order not to restrict
reproduction; so also is

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the case if he has minor children, for they have to be brought up. It
happened that the wife of Joseph the priest died, and he said to the
deceased's sister while still on the burial ground: "Go and rear thy
sister's children." But still he did not cohabit with her for a long
while. For how long? Said R. Papa: "Until after the thirty days."

"*To a virgin*." The period in which to complain that one has not found
virginity <span id="fr_85"></span>[E2](#fn_85) is limited till thirty
days after the marriage. <span id="fr_86"></span>[E3](#fn_86)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[27:A1](rab07.htm#fr_78)

### CHAPTER VII.

A. Yebamah is called a woman whose husband died childless, leaving
living brothers \[Deut. xxv. 5\].

<span id="fn_79"></span>[27:B1](rab07.htm#fr_79) *B*. All these garments
have Roman names, and were used those days, and we do not think it
necessary to describe how they were made. The reader, however, will find
it in "Hamashbir" and similar works.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[28:C1](rab07.htm#fr_80) *C*. In the text it is
termed "Maasse," and in Yebamoth (48*a*) "Assiyah." The meaning of both
is doing, and Rashi there explains that, although the two
above-mentioned terms are not to be found in reference to the head, R.
Aqiba and R. Eliezer maintain that the cutting off of the hair is also
called a doing; hence the analogy.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[28:C2](rab07.htm#fr_81) The verse begins with,
"and from men was he driven away," and concludes that his nails were
like birds' claws; hence it is not an ornament.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[28:C3](rab07.htm#fr_82) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[28:C4](rab07.htm#fr_83) *Gemara* from Moed
Katan.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:E1](rab07.htm#fr_84) *E*. If she dies before
Passover, he may marry after Tabernacles; if after Passover, he must
wait till the three festivals Pentecost, Tabernacles, and Passover have
passed; and so on with the other festivals.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[30:E2](rab07.htm#fr_85) Deut. xxii. 14.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[30:E3](rab07.htm#fr_86) Concerning a widow and
the other subjects mentioned above, they are explained in their
respective tracts; therefore we have omitted them here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](rab08)
