[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rab12)  [Next](rab14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII.

A. One who gathers or guards the bones is exempt from reading Shema,
prayer, and all the precepts commanded in the Torah, and if he desires
to be rigorous with himself, he must not do so, for the honor of the
dead. R. Johanan b. Nuri, however, said: He should step outside a
distance of four ells and read. Ben Azai said: If they were with him in
a boat he should remove them to another place and read. R. Itzhak said:
Only from the bones of relatives he is exempt; from strangers, however,
he is not. R. Simeon said: He is exempt only on week-days, but not on
Sabbath. R. Nathan, however, said: He is exempt only when the bundle (of
the bones) is on his shoulders, because the duty of guarding it is on
him, but not of prayer.

B. One who removes bones or the Scriptures from one place to another,
must not place them in a wagon, a boat, nor on a beast under his seat:
however, in order to preserve them from thieves or robbers, he
may. <span id="fr_130"></span>[B1](#fn_130)

C. It is not allowed to pass through a cemetery with the phylacteries
on, nor the Scriptures in the hand, as it is considered disrespectful to
the dead. <span id="fr_131"></span>[C1](#fn_131)

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

D. One finding a corpse in a grave must not move it, unless he is
certain that the place was only borrowed for him. One finding bones on
marshy ground, must put them in a grave. Such is the decree of R. Aqiba.
The sages, however, say: He must not move them. One who finds bones in a
grotto or a cavity must not move them. A corpse or his bones must not be
moved from one place to another, even if they are equal in esteem, much
less if the other place is lower; he may, however, do so from a lower to
a higher place. However, if he moves them to a place on his estate, he
is allowed to do so, even if the former place is more esteemed. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[D1](#fn_132)

Two corpses must not be buried in one grave, nor a corpse with bones,
and *vice versa*. R. Jehudah, however, said: If they used to sleep
together when alive, they may be buried together.

E. A building over a grave which was vacated, no benefit may be derived
from it; if, however, it was excavated in a rock, and also the grave
itself, when it was vacated a benefit may be derived from it;
nevertheless, it must not be used for low purposes, such as a cow-house,
straw-barn, etc. A grave which was dug for a person who was yet alive
may be sold; but if for one who was already dead, it may not. The same
is the case with monumental stones.

No benefit may be derived from a vacated coffin. If it is made of stone
or clay, it must be broken, and if of wood--burned. Boards of the
cemetery must not be moved from their place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[57:B1](rab13.htm#fr_130)

### CHAPTER XIII.

B. Corrected from Berachoth.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[57:C1](rab13.htm#fr_131) *C*. The reason is
explained in Berachoth, because the dead are exempt from all the
commands given in the Law.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[58:D1](rab13.htm#fr_132) *D*. It means to say
that the estate belonged to the deceased, as it is agreeable to one to
be buried on his own grounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](rab14)
