[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](suc01)  [Next](suc03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

#### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# VOLUME VII.--TRACT SUCCAH. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA I. About the legal height and width of the booth which is to be
used during the seven days of Tabernacles. What was to be done when it
was higher or lower than the prescribed size? If one has placed four
poles and roofed them, how is the law? The different opinions of R.
Jacob and the sages on this point. Whence is deduced from biblical
passages the size prescribed by the sages? Did the Shekhina descend from
heaven to earth; and also Moses and Elijah, did they ascend to heaven,
or not? And in the latter case, how are to be explained the passages
which state that they did? The ells which are mentioned in the
Scriptures, how many spans did they contain? When there is a difference
in the biblical passages between the Massorah (*i.e.*, how they are
written) and the reading of it, what must be considered for practice?
How shall the Succah be considered--as a temporary or permanent
dwelling? The booths of potters or watchmen, can they be used for a
legal Succah? [1](suc03.htm#page_1)-10

MISHNAS II. to VIII. How about an old Succah? What is called an old
Succah? How about a Succah under a tree, or if a cloth was spread over
the roof of the Succah? If one Succah was over another? What kind of
material must be used for the roof of the Succah? How to beautify the
religious duties for the sake of the Lord, and from what passage of the
Scriptures this is deduced. If bundles of straw, wood, or twigs may be
used for the roof of the Succah. The two things which R. Jacob heard
from R. Johanan and the three things which Rabha bar bar Hana has heard
in the name of the same, and they could not imagine the real meaning of
then and how the latter Amoraim tried to find it out. What Hana bar
Abba, and R. Hisda in the name of Rabina bar Shila, and Meremar said and
lectured about the roofing of the Succah. How it is when one wants to
cover the

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

Succah with boards, the size of same, and how they are to be laid. What
is to be done if small rafters, over which is no ceiling, are to be used
for a booth. The difference of opinion between the schools of Shammai
and Hillel, and R. Jehudah and R. Meir, [10](suc03.htm#page_10)-19

MISHNAS IX. to XIII, If one likes to roof his booth with iron spits. If
one likes to suspend textile walls from the roof downwards. If the roof
was three spans distant from the walls. How is the case with a court
surrounded by balconies? The law of a crooked wall. If one likes to make
a Succah in the form of a cone. About a reed mat made for sleeping on,
whether a Succah can be covered with it; the size of it. A mat made of
bark or papyrus, if large, may be used for a cover,
[19](suc03.htm#page_19)-25

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNAS I. to VII. How is it when one sleeps under a bed in the booth?
About Tabbi, the slave of Rabban Gamaliel, who was a scholar. If one
likes to support the Succah with a bedstead. If a Succah is covered
thinly, what must be more-the sunshine or the shadow? If one constructs
a Succah on top of a wagon, or on board of a vessel. What happened to
Rabban Gamaliel and R. Aqiba when they were on board of a vessel, and
the latter made there a Succah. Whether a Succah can be made on the back
of a camel. Can a living animal be used as a wall to the Succah? How is
it with an elephant-a living or dead one? How is the law about a
partition not made by human hands, if it can be considered legally as a
wall to the Succah? If one makes a Succah between trees which form
side-walls. How is it about the delegates for religious purposes--are
they obliged to or exempted from the duty of the Succah? How is it with
a mourner, with a bridegroom and his attendants, concerning the duty of
the Succah? How is it with those who are on the road in the day-time,
and those who are on the road in the night-time only. How is it with the
watchman of a tower, or the gardens? How is it with the sick? How is it
about those who are afflicted? What Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai did when
two dates were brought to him to taste out of the Succah, and Rabban
Gamaliel when ajar of water was brought to him when he was out of the
Succah; and what R. Zadok did when food less than the size of an egg was
brought to him out of the Succah, [26](suc04.htm#page_26)-33

MISHNAS VIII. to X. How many meals must be eaten in the Succah during
the seven days? The difference of opinion between R. Eliezer and the
sages on that point. How they both deduce it from the passages of the
Scriptures. If one makes amends with extra dishes in the Succah, has he
done his duty? The manager of the house of Agrippa the king asked R.
Eliezer about his two Succahs and his two wives, which he had in two
different cities in Palestine, and what the latter answered. If it is
allowed to build a Succah in the intermediate days, and what is to be
done when a Succah becomes ruined during the seven days. Can one fulfil
his duties in his neighbor's Succah, or must each one have his own
Succah? What R. Eliezer said to R. Ilai when he came to visit him in the
city of Lud. What happened to R. Eliezer when he took his rest in the
booth of R. Johanan bar Ilai in the city of Kisri. There was not one
tribe in Israel from which a judge did not descend (see

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

the explanation of it, p. 35, footnote). What happened to the same when
he took his rest in Upper Galilea, and was asked thirty Halakhas about
the law of the Succah. What was said of Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai the
Master of R. Eliezer, of all his habits and customs, and that R. Eliezer
his disciple conducted himself similarly. About the eighty disciples of
Hillel the Elder. Who was the greatest of all, and who the least, and
what was said about the latter. What the Elders of the schools of
Shammai and Hillel said when they visited R. Johanan b. Hahoronith, and
found him sitting with his head and the greater part of his body in the
booth, and the table was in the house. How is it with women, slaves, and
minors-are they exempt from the Succah? What shall be the age of a minor
to be considered so? What Shammai the Elder did when his daughter-in-law
gave birth to a son during the Feast of Tabernacles. How the Succah
shall be used during the seven days of the festival as a regular
domicile, and the house as an occasional abode. How is it when it rains?
Where the finest vessels and utensils must be kept during the time of
Tabernacles, and which of the inferior of them are allowed to be kept in
the Succah. What R. Joseph did when a wind blew the chips of the
covering into the dish, when he was sitting in the Succah, and what
Abayi asked him. What an eclipse of the sun means to the whole world.
When the sun and the moon are eclipsed, it is an ill omen to the enemies
of Israel, so maintains R. Meir. On account of four things the sun is
eclipsed. For four things the property of householders becomes
annihilated, [33](suc04.htm#page_33)-41

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNAS I. to III. The law about the palm branch, the size of it, if it
was acquired by test or dried, or if it was from a grove. What R. Huna.
said to the sellers of myrtles--what they shall do when they buy myrtles
of Gentiles. How is the law if a public street is roofed for the purpose
of a Succah. What R. Na'hman said to the sages when an old woman
complained that the exilarch and all the sages of the house of the
exilarch are sitting in a robbed Succah. If a citron cannot be found,
can it be replaced by a lemon or not? If the point of the citron was
broken off. If the leaves of the palm branch were torn off. How the law
is if the "twins" of the Lulab are divided. The prescribed size of a
Lulab and a myrtle. How many boughs of myrtle? How the law is if a bough
of a myrtle has more berries than leaves. If it was a *Tzaphtzapha*. If
a greater number of leaves have dropped off. If the tip has been broken
off. If a Lulab must be tied up, and how it shall be tied together with
the myrtle and the willow. Of what places must a willow be taken. The
difference of opinion between R. Ishmael, R. Tarphon, and R. Aqiba about
the prescribed sizes of the Lulab, myrtle, willow, and citron. What
Samuel said to the sellers of myrtles, 42-50

MISHNAS IV. to VII. How is it with a citron which was taken off a tree
less than three years old? What, if it was of *Demai*? What is the
minimum size of a small citron and the maximum of a large one? How is
the law if a citron has been peeled and gets the color of a red date? If
it has a hole. How is an unripe citron? What makes a citron unbeautiful?
The Lulab which must be tied with its own kind only, according to R.
Jehudah,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

what is to be called its own kind? The objection of R. Meir, who relates
that the inhabitants of Jerusalem tied a Lulab with gold lace, and what
the sages answered to this. What Rabba said to the men who tied the
Hoshanoth for the exilarch. How to prevent an intervention between the
Lulab and the other things which are to be tied with it. The myrtle
bough used for religious duties--may it be smelled, or not? And how is
it with the citron? With what hands the Lulab and the citron must be
handled. Why do we pronounce the benediction on the Lulab only? When
must the Lulab be shaken? How is it to be shaken? What is the law if one
is on the road and has no Lulab? When is Hallel to be read? Who must
read it? From what chapters of the Psalms the Hallel is said. What the
reader shall say, and what the congregation shall answer in the saying
of Hallel. What verses are to be repeated in Hallel,
[50](suc05.htm#page_50)-56

MISHNAS VIII. to XI. What is the law when one buys a Lulab from a common
man in the Sabbatical year. Is a citron equal to a tree in all respects?
Does the fruit of the Sabbatical year become exchanged, if it is done in
the manner of buying and selling? The Sabbatical year holds the money
exchanged for its fruits. May both the fruit of Sabbatical year and of
second tithe be exchanged for wild game, cattle, and fowl, when they are
alive or slaughtered? How the Lulab was used in the second Temple, and
in the country at that time, and what R. Johanan b. Zakkai has ordained
after its destruction. When the first day of Tabernacles falls on a
Sabbath. What happened to Rabban Gamaliel, R. Elazar b. Azariah, and R.
Aqiba when the former bought a citron for a thousand Zuz, and what he
did with it. What R. Elazar b. Zadok relates how the custom of the men
of Jerusalem was. When the Lulab may be put in water, when water may be
added, and when it must be changed. At what age a minor has to shake the
Lulab, to perform the duties of Tzitzith, Tefilin, and his father to
teach him the Torah, and to read with him the Shema,
[56](suc05.htm#page_56)-61

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA I. The Lulab and willow to surround the altar were sometimes used
on six days, and sometimes on seven days of the festival. The Hallel and
the eating of peace-offerings took place on eight days, and the pipes
were played on sometimes five, sometimes six days, In which case was the
Lulab used seven days? Whence do we deduce this from the Scriptures? Why
do we use the Lulab seven days in memory of the Temple, and not the
willow? Do the Lulab and the willow violate the Sabbath or not? Can one
fulfil the ceremony of the willow with that which is tied to the Lulab?
May a man go more than ten Parsaoth on the eve of Sabbath?
[62](suc06.htm#page_62)-66

MISHNAS II. to IV. How was the commandment to take the willow fulfilled
in Jerusalem? What was said when they went around the altar with the
willow? The saying of R. Simeon b. Jochai, that he could exempt the
whole world from the day of judgment, since he was born till that time,
etc. Must the benediction on the Lulab be pronounced all the seven days,
or on the first day only? Shall the benediction of the time be
pronounced with the Lulab and the Succah, and when? Come and see: The
usages of the Holy One, blessed be He, are not as the usages of human
beings. Can the citron be eaten during the seven days, or on the eighth
day only? The difference

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of opinion between the Tanaim and Amoraim, if the ceremony of the willow
is based upon a tradition of the prophets, or it is only a custom of
theirs. Must the benediction of the time be pronounced on the eighth day
of the Tabernacles, which is a separate holiday? The Hallel and the
enjoying of the peace-offerings were for eight days. How so? How was the
pouring out of the water? Why the people called out to him who poured
out the water "Raise thy hand." Why were the holes of the two silver
basins of which the wine and water were poured out not equal in size?
The saying of R. Elazar, that the doing of charity is greater than all
the sacrifices. Charity is rewarded only in accordance with the kindness
with which it is done. in three things is the bestowing of favors
greater than charity, [66](suc06.htm#page_66)-75

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNAS I. and II. The difference of opinion about the music of the
sacrifices, if it was instrumental or vocal. How pious and distinguished
men danced before the people with lighted flambeaux in their hands, and
what they said. After reaching the gate they turned westward; what they
said about their ancestors and themselves. The beauty of the Temple
which was rebuilt by Herod the Great, and the advice which the sages
gave to him. The beauty of the diuplustin (double portico) of Alexandria
in Egypt, all that it contained, the seventy-one golden chairs for the
Sanhedrin, and how all this was destroyed by Alexander of Macedonia. The
separate places for males and females in the Temple, and how they were
changed in order to prevent levity. About the lamentation of the death
of Messiah ben Joseph, and the death of the evil angel. The tradition of
the two Messiahs, ben Joseph and ben David, and the different
explanations of the verse Zechariah, vii. 10, according to the believers
of the old tradition and the believers of the Messiahship of Christ.
About the evil angel--how he appears in the beginning and how he grows
in the nature of human beings. What the Messiah ben David will ask of
the Lord. The seven names of the evil angel. The evil angel is hidden in
man's heart. How he tempts scholars more than any one else. How Abayi
watched a man and a woman who went on the road. What one shall do when
the hideousness has attacked him. The three verses of the Scriptures
which clear Israel on the judgment day. Who are meant by the four
carpenters mentioned in Zechariah, ii. 3? Who are the seven shepherds
and the eight anointed men mentioned in Micah, v. 4? The four lads who
held jars of oil containing 120 lugs. Was it in all 120 lugs, or did
each jar contain so much? Who said: Well be to our youth which does not
disgrace our age? and who said *vice versa*? What Hillel the Elder said
when he was engaged in the enjoyment of the pouring of the water. For
what purpose the fifteen songs of degrees were said by David. What is
the meaning of "we belong to God" and "we raise our eyes to God"?
[76](suc07.htm#page_76)-85

MISHNAS III. to VI. How many times was the trumpet blown in the Temple
every day, and how many on the festivals? The different opinions of the
Tanaim about this point. When was the maximum of forty-eight times
blown? For what purpose were the seventy bullocks offered on the seven
days of the Feast of Tabernacles? And for what purpose was the one
bullock offered \[Numb. xxix. 36\]? Three times in the year all the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

twenty-four orders of priests were alike entitled to share the pieces of
offerings of the festival, and in the shewbread, for what purpose?
Whence do we deduce that all the orders of priests had equal shares in
the offerings; that were said to be sacrificed on the festivals? If a
festival falls before or after a Sabbath, all the twenty-four orders
share alike in the shewbread. What is meant by before or after? About
the order of Bilgah, when Miriam his daughter becomes an apostate, and
what she said when the enemy entered the sanctuary, and what was done to
the whole order, [85](suc07.htm#page_85)-92

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](suc02.htm#fr_0) See Introduction to
Synopsis in Tract Sabbath, Vol. I., p. xxix., also note at end of
Synopsis in Vol. V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](suc03)
