[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](suc04)  [Next](suc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# CHAPTER III.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING PALM BRANCHES, MYRTLES, WILLOWS, AND CITRONS USED
ON THE FIRST DAY OF THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES.

MISHNA: A palm branch <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) which has been
acquired by theft, or which is dried, is not valid. One which comes from
a grove (devoted to idolatry) or from a rejected town <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) is not valid; if the point has been broken
off, or the leaves torn off, it is not valid; if they are only
dissevered, it is valid. R. Jehudah says: It must be tied together at
the top. A palm branch from the Iron Mount <span
id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_14) is valid. A palm branch that is three
spans long, sufficient to shake it by, is valid.

GEMARA: The Mishna does not mention on which day it is valid, and on
which not; and from this we can infer that it is invalid even for the
second day. This would be right only in case of a dried one, because it
is written *hadar*, which means "beauty," which a dried one has not; but
a robbed one--that is prohibited only because it must be his own, as
stated above ([p. 34](suc04.htm#page_34))--but on the second day, which
is wholly rabbinical, why should it be invalid? Said R. Johanan in the
name of R. Simeon b. Jochi: Because it is a religious duty that is
performed by a sin. R. Johanan said again in the name of the same
authority: It is written \[Is. lxi. 8\]: "For I, the Lord, love justice:
I hate robbery with burnt-offering." It resembles a human king who
passed the custom-house and said to his servants: "Pay the duty to the
officers"; and the servants said to him: "Why shall we give duties? All
the duties are thine"; and he said: "All passengers shall learn it from
me, and shall not shirk to pay their duty." So the Holy One, blessed be
He, said: "I, the Lord, hate robbery with a burnt-offering of me shall
my children learn, and avoid robbery."

It was taught also in the name of R. Ami: A withered one

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

is invalid, because it has no beauty; and a robbed one is invalid,
because it is a religious duty done by a sin.

R. Huna said to the sellers of the myrtles: If you buy myrtles from the
heathen, do not cut them off yourselves, but let themselves cut off, and
give them to you. Why so? Because most heathen have robbed the ground
from the Israelites, and the robber is not considered the owner of the
ground, even when the original owner has despaired of it (but the law is
different about movable property). And therefore, if you will cut off
yourselves, that will be as taking a robbed thing; but when they cut
off, and as the original owners have despaired, the cut-off myrtle
boughs become theirs, and you may buy them.

The rabbis taught: A robbed Succah or a roof made in a public street, R.
Eliezer makes invalid, but the sages make it valid. Said R. Na'hman:
They differ only when the ground on which the Succah is built belongs to
his neighbor, and he put out the neighbor and took the Succah to
himself. This is according to R. Eliezer's theory, who said that one
cannot fulfil his duty in his neighbor's Succah. It is invalid in any
case. According to those who say that the robber of ground is considered
the owner of it, after the original owner has despaired, it is a robbed
Succah; and even according to those who say that he can never become the
owner of the ground, it is nevertheless a borrowed Succah (because it is
not a robbed one). But the sages hold to their theory that one can
fulfil his duty in a borrowed Succah, and also that ground cannot be
robbed; therefore it is valid, because it is considered as a borrowed
Succah. But if one has robbed wood, and made a roof, according to all,
the owner of the wood has only to claim his money, but the wood becomes
the property of the robber, and the Succah is valid. And he infers this
from the expression of the Mishna, "a robbed Succah or a roof made in
public ground," as in the latter case the ground was certainly not his,
so also the robbed Succah means, that the ground was also not his and he
has robbed it.

It happened once that an old woman came to R. Na'hman and said: The
exilarch, and all the sages of the house of the exilarch, are sitting in
a robbed Succah. She complained, but he did not answer her. Said she
again: A woman whose father had three hundred and eighteen slaves
complains before you, and you do not pay attention. R. Na'hman said to
the sages: The woman is only a prattler: she has to claim only the money
for the wood that has been taken for the use of the Succah.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Rabhina said: If a beam of the roof of a Succah has been robbed, the
sages have arranged that only money for it should be returned to the
owner, and not the beam itself. Is this not self-evident? What is the
difference between a beam and wood, as just mentioned above? One might
say wood can be found in any place, and one can buy it for the money;
but a beam, which is not so common, should be returned. They come to
teach us that during the seven days of the festival, one can lay claim
only to money, but after the festival it must be returned, provided one
has not attached it with clay; but if one has, even after the seven days
only the money shall be given.

We have learned in a Boraitha: A withered palm branch is invalid, but R.
Jehudah makes it valid. Said Rabha: They differ only about a Lulab that
is rabbinical. The sages hold that we compare a Lulab to a citron: as
the citron must be beautiful, because it is written *hadar* (beauty), so
the Lulab must be beautiful; and R. Jehudah does not hold this theory,
and says that a Lulab need not be beautiful, but a withered citron,
according to all, is invalid. Does R. Jehudah require that a citron
shall be beautiful? Did we not learn in a Boraitha: The four kinds that
are with the Lulab, as there must not be less, so nothing shall be added
to them? If one did not find a citron, he cannot replace it with a lemon
or a pomegranate, or anything else; and if they are withered they are
valid, but if dried, then invalid. R. Jehudah, however, said: Even when
dry, they are valid. And he says again: The inhabitants of great cities
used to transmit their Lulabs to their grandchildren. And they answered
him: This cannot prove, because the places where such things are
rarities do not prove. Hence we see that R. Jehudah said that even dry
ones are valid, and this includes also citrons? Nay, R. Jehudah meant
only the Lulab when he said dry ones are valid.

The text says: "If he cannot find a citron, he shall not replace it with
a lemon," etc. Is not this self-evident? One might say, he shall replace
it with something, lest the command. of a citron should be forgotten: it
comes to teach us that if it would be done so, the later generations
might use such things forever. Come and hear: An old citron is invalid,
but R. Jehudah says it is valid. Is this not a contradiction to the
saying of Rabha <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) above, that R.
Jehudah meant only the Lulab, and not a citron? Yea, it is

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

a contradiction. But how can R. Jehudah say that an old one is valid? is
it not written *hadar* (beautiful)? R. Jehudah explains the word
*hadar* <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) not to mean "beauty," but
"dwelling"; that means, a fruit which dwells on its tree the whole year.

"*If the point was broken off*." Said R. Huna: If it is broken off; but
if it is only split, it is valid. But have we not learned in a Boraitha:
A bristly Lulab or one crooked like a scythe, a split one, a hardened
one, is invalid. But if it seems hardened, and in reality is not, it is
valid. Hence we see that a split one is also invalid? Said R. Papa: By
"split" is here meant one growing as a fork, into two different
directions. "Crooked like a scythe," said Rabha; "that is only if it is
bent forward, but if backward it is natural, and it is valid." Said R.
Na'hman: If bent sideways, it is as if forward. According to others, R.
Na'hman says it is as if bent backward. Rabha said again: A Lulab that
has all the leaves on one side, and on the other side none at all, is
blemished and is invalid.

"*If the leaves were torn off*." Said R. Papa: By torn off is meant that
it is made like a broom. What is meant by dissevered? When the leaves
grow as branches of a tree, in different directions.

R. Papa put a question: If the "twins" of the Lulab are divided, how is
the law (the double leaves on a palm branch are called "twins")? Come
and hear: R. Mathun in the name of R. Joshuah b. Levi said: If the
"twins" are divided, it is as if the leaves were torn off, and it is
invalid.

"*R. Jehudah says*," etc. We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah said
in the name of R. Tarphon: The expression "branches of palm trees" is
*Kapoth Tmarim*. As the word *kapoth* signifies in Aramaic "bound,"
"tied," if the Lulab was separated, it must be tied together. Said
Rabhina to R. Ashi: How is it known that by Kapoth Tmarim is meant a
young Lulab that has been the first year on the tree? Perhaps the
branches are meant when they are two or three years old, when the leaves
spread on all sides? We require that they shall be tied together, and in
that case they cannot be tied at all.

"*A Lulab from the Iron Mount*." Said Abayi The case is only when the
top of one reaches the lower part of the one that grows over it; but if
not, they are invalid.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

"*A Lulab three spans long*." Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The
prescribed size for a myrtle bough and willow is three spans, and of the
Lulab four, so that the Lulab shall be one span higher than the myrtle
bough and willow when they are tied, R. Parnach in the name of R.
Johanan said: (Not the leaves, but) the back of the Lulab, should be one
span higher. Come and hear: The prescribed size of a myrtle bough and
willow is three spans, of a Lulab four spans: is it not meant with the
leaves? Nay, it is meant, besides the leaves. The Boraitha says farther
on: R. Tarphon says: It shall be measured with an ell of five spans.
Said Rabha: May the Lord forgive R. Tarphon for such teaching: A myrtle
bough of three spans is not to be found, and he calls for a myrtle bough
of the length of five spans. When Rabbin came from Palestine, he said
that R. Tarphon meant to say so: An ell which was five spans, consider
it as if it was six spans, and three spans of this take off for the
myrtle bough, and the remainder, which is about two and a half, for the
Lulab. If it is so, then it is a contradiction to Samuel, for according
to R. Tarphon the myrtle bough would be only two and a half spans, and
Samuel said it must be three spans? Samuel was not particular in his
decision, and said more rigorously, three. But, nevertheless, R. Huna
says in his name that the Halakha prevails according to R. Tarphon.

MISHNA: A myrtle bough which has been acquired by theft, or which is
dry, is not valid. One which comes from a grove or from a rejected town
is invalid. If the tip has been broken off, or the leaves torn off, or
if one has on it more berries than leaves, it is invalid; if the berries
are diminished in number it becomes valid, but this must not be done on
the festival. A willow of the brook, which has been acquired by theft,
or which is dry, is invalid. One which comes from a grove, or a rejected
town, is not valid. If the point has been broken off, or the leaves torn
off, or if it be a *Tzaphtzapha*, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) it
is invalid. One which is faded, or from which some leaves have dropped
off, or which has grown on dry ground (not near a bank), is valid.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It is written: "Boughs of the myrtle tree";
that is, a tree whose branches cover the whole tree, and this is only a
myrtle tree. Rabha said: We take a myrtle bough because it is written
\[Zechariah, viii. 19\]: "Only

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

love ye the truth and peace" (as a myrtle is an emblem of peace and
love, therefore we take it on the festival). <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

The rabbis taught: A branch that is twined like a chain, that is the
myrtle. R. Eliezer b. Jacob says: It is written: "The branch of a twined
tree." That means, a tree whose trunk and fruit have the same taste, and
that is a myrtle. In a Boraitha we have learned: A branch that is
twined, is valid; if not, it is invalid. What is meant by twined? Said
R. Jehudah: On each stem are three leaves. R. Kahna however, says: Even
if on one stem are two, and on the other one, it is also reckoned three.
R. A'ha the son of Rabha was looking for a myrtle bough which had two
and one and two and one because this has been announced by R. Kahna.
Said Mar bar Amemar to R. Ashi: My father calls such a myrtle a wild
myrtle.

The rabbis taught: If the greater number of leaves have dropped, and on
three stems they remained, it is valid. The rabbis taught: If the
greater part of the leaves on the bough have dried up and only three
twigs, each containing three leaves, remained, it is valid. Said R.
Hisda, provided that the remainder are on the top of each.

"*If the tip has been broken off*." Ulla bar Hinna taught: If the tip
has been broken off, and in its place is a green fruit like a date
(Rashi explains this, that on the top of a myrtle there happen to be
green fruits, with which women paint their vails), it is valid. R.
Jeremiah put a question: If the tip had been broken off on the eve of
the festival, and this green fruit grew up on the festival, how is the
law? Shall it be said that, because it was not fit on the eve, it has
been rejected, and cannot be used any more; or, the law of rejecting
does not apply to religious duties? This question is not decided. Shall
we assume that this is a point of difference between the following
Tanaim: We have learned: If one has transgressed, and cut off the
berries on the festival, it is invalid, according to R. Elazer b. R.
Zodok; but according to the sages it is valid? Must we not assume that
he who says it is invalid does it because he holds the law of rejecting
applies to religious duties, and as this branch with the berries was
rejected on the eve of the festival, it was rejected for the whole
festival, and he who says it is valid does so because he holds that the
law of rejecting does not apply to religious duties? Nay, all agree that

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the law of rejecting applies to the positive commandments of religious
duties, but in this case they differ whether a Lulab must be tied or
not, as on this point differ the Tanaim of the following Boraitha: A
Lulab, whether tied or not, is valid. R. Jehudah, however, said: A tied
one is valid; if not, it is invalid. What is the reason of R. Jehudah?
He infers it from an analogy of expression. It is written here \[Lev.
xxiii. 40\]: "Ye shall take unto yourselves on the first day," and \[in
Ex. xii. 22\] "and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop"; as there it is
plainly written a bunch, so also here it must be tied as a bunch, and
the sages do not take into consideration this analogy of
expression. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

"*If one has more berries on it than leaves*." R. Hisda said: The
following thing said our great rabbi (*i.e.*, Rabh), and the Lord come
to his help: The case is only if it was in one place, but if the berries
were in two or three places, then it is valid. Said Rabha to him: If it
was in two or three places, it seems spotted, and it is invalid?
Therefore if such a thing was taught, it was taught thus, said R. Hisda:
The following thing our great rabbi said, and may God come to his help:
The case is only when the berries were black; but if they were green,
they are the same as the myrtle bough, and it is valid.

"*If they have been diminished in number*," etc. They have been
diminished in number when? If before it was tied, it is self-evident,
and if after it was tied, then it was rejected for the festival, and how
made good? Infer from this that the law of rejecting does not apply to
religious duties! Nay, we can say that the case is even after it had
been tied, but the Tana of the Mishna holds that the tying is not
considered a construction, but only a preparation, and does not
therefore count it.

The rabbis taught: They must not be diminished in number on the
festival. In the name of R. Eliezer bar Simeon, however, it was said: It
maybe done. But is not this like repairing a utensil on the festival?
Said R. Ashi: R. Eliezer means to say, that if he took off the berries
for the purpose of eating, and he holds as his father, that a thing
which was done unintentionally is allowed.

The rabbis taught: If the *binding* of the Lulab was loosened on the
festival, one shall tie it as he usually ties a bundle of herbs. Why?
Let him tie it into a loop (not a knot). That is according to R.
Jehudah, who said in Sabbath (p. 233), that tying into a loop

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

is like a knot, for either is culpable. But according to R. Jehudah the
Lulab must be tied not as a bundle of herbs, but in a good knot? This
Tana holds as R. Jehudah in one thing, and differs from him in the
other.

"*A willow of the brook*," etc. The rabbis taught: It is written "A
willow of the brook." That means, they usually grow near every brook.
According to others, the willow of the brook means that it has leaves
smooth as a brook. In another Boraitha we have learned: The willows of
the brook! Whence do we deduce that willows from dry ground and
mountains are valid? It is written "willows," in the plural: all are
included. Abba Shaul, however, said: The plural signifies that two are
needed: one for the Lulab and one for the Temple. And whence do the
rabbis deduce that One for the Temple? They hold it is Sinaic (as will
be explained farther on).

The rabbis taught: Willows of the brook, that grow only at brooks; but
the *Tzaphtzapha*, which grows only between mountains, is excepted.

The rabbis taught: How can we recognize what is a willow and what is a
*Tzaphtzapha*? The willow's stem is red, with the leaves elongated and
their edges smooth. But a *Tzaphtzapha* has the stem white, and the
leaves round, and their edges like a scythe. But have we not learned, if
it is like a scythe, it is valid, and when like a saw it is invalid?
Said Abayi: This we learned of the willows of Hilpha Gila: they are
valid. Abayi said again: We may infer from this that the same willows
may be used for the seventh day when *Hosha'noth* are used. Is not this
self-evident? One would say that because the willows of Hilpha Gila have
an additional name, they are not valid, he comes to teach that it is not
so. But perhaps it is so? Because it is written in the plural, all are
included.

MISHNA: R. Ishmael says: Three myrtle boughs, two willows, one palm
branch, and one citron are needed. If two out of the three myrtle boughs
had the tips broken off, they may be used. R. Tarphon says: Even if all
three should have the tips broken off. R. Aqiba says-: As one Lulab and
one citron are needed, so are only one myrtle bough and one willow
needed.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha,: It is written: The fruit of the
tree *hadar*," in the singular. one fruit; "a branch of a palm tree," in
the singular, <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) one branch; "boughs

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of the myrtle tree, "in the plural, three; and "willows of the brook,"
also in the plural, two. And even if two had the tips broken off, it is
valid. R. Tarphon, however, said: Three are needed; and if all the tips
are broken off, it does not matter. R. Aqiba said: As the Lulab and the
citron are only one, so of the myrtle boughs and the willows is needed
only one. Said R. Eliezer to him: According to thee, the citron must be
tied together with the Lulab? And he answered: Did the verse say: "The
fruit of the tree *hadar and* a branch of a palm tree"? It mentions them
separately. If so, whence do we know that one depends upon the other?
Because it is written: "Ye shall take." That means, you shall take all
things that are enumerated, and not one without the other. How shall we
imagine the case, according to R. Ishmael? If all kinds have to be
entire, why are the myrtle boughs allowed if they are broken? And if it
is not required that they should be entire, let even the other kinds, if
broken, be used? Said Birah in the name of R. Ammi: R. Ishmael retracted
this decision. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: The Halakha
prevails according to R. Tarphon, and Samuel said this according to his
theory, because he said to the sellers of the myrtles: Make the price
lower, and if you will not do so, I will lecture that the Halakha
prevails according to R. Tarphon. Let him then lecture according to R.
Aqiba, who is more lenient, and says only one is needed? Three with the
tips broken are more easily procurable than one uninjured.

MISHNA: A citron which has been robbed, or is withered, is invalid. One
coming from a grove or a rejected town is invalid. One taken off a tree
less than three years old <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) is not
valid. Nor one taken from heave-offering that is unclean. From clean
heave-offering a man is not to take a citron; but if he has taken, he
has fulfilled his duty. One taken from *Demai* (fruit from which it is
doubtful whether the legal dues have been paid) Beth Shammai hold
invalid, but Beth Hillel hold it valid. A man is not to take a citron
from second tithe in Jerusalem; but if he has taken one, he has done his
duty. If a stain spread over the greater portion of the citron, if it
has lost its crown, or the fine rind has been peeled off, or if it is
split, or perforated, if ever so little thereof is wanting, it is not
valid. If, however, the stain is spread over the smaller portion of the
citron, if it has lost its stalk, or if that be perforated (but the
citron itself is entire) so

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

that no part, however small, be wanting, it is valid. A dark-colored one
is invalid, a leek-green one R. Meir pronounces valid, but R. Jehudah
invalid.

The minimum size of a small citron, R. Meir says, is like a nut; R.
Jehudah says, like an egg; and of a large citron, that one can hold two
in one hand. So is the decree of R. Jehudah; but R. Jose says, even one
must be taken with both hands.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: The fruit of the tree *hadar*; that is, a
tree whose wood and fruit have the same taste, and that is a citron.
Perhaps it is pepper, as we learn in the following Boraitha: R. Meir
used to say: Because it is written \[Lev. xix. 23\]: "Plant any kind of
tree, bearing edible fruit." Why was it needed to say, a tree bearing
edible fruit? Is it not self-evident that if it is bearing fruit it is
edible? From this we infer that to pepper, whose wood and fruit have the
same taste, the law of *Arlah* applies. And in the land of Israel
nothing is lacking (even pepper), as it is written \[Deut. viii. 9\]: "A
land . . . wherein thou shalt not lack anything"? Because it is
impossible: how shall we do? Shall we take one pepper-grain, that will
not be noticed at all, many of them; the law says one, not two or three;
and therefore it cannot be. R. Abahu says: Do not read *hadar*, but
ha-dar; that is, a thing that *dwells* on its tree the whole year. Ben
Azzai said: Do not read hadar, but *adur*, because in Greek they call
water ὕδωρ, and that means a tree which can grow in all waters, and that
is only a citron.

"*One that comes from a grove*," etc. Because it must be burned, and
therefore it is considered to have no size.

"*From a tree less than three years*," etc. Why so? R. Hiya bar Abbin
and R. Assi differed: one says, because it is not allowed to eat it, it
must not be used either; and one says, because at that time it is worth
nothing (because it must not be used for any purpose).

R. Assi said: With a citron of second tithe, according to R. Meir, a man
cannot fulfil his duty; but according to the sages, he can. The same is
the case with Matzah of second tithe. And dough of second tithe,
according to R. Meir, is exempt from Halah, and according to the sages,
is not.

"*From unclean heave-offering*." Because it is not allowed to eat it.
And from clean heave-offering? "*One shall not take*," etc. R. Ami and
R. Assi differ: one says, because he makes it subject to defilement, and
one says, because he spoils it (because, when he holds it in the hand,
it gets black, and is spoiled).

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

"*But if he has taken, it is valid*." According to those who say that it
must not be taken, because it is not allowed to be eaten, this law is
according to all; and according to those who say because it has no
value, this Mishna is only in accordance with the rabbis.

"*From Demai*." What is the reason of Beth Hillel? Because if one
wishes, he can relinquish his estates, and then he would be poor, and he
would be allowed to eat it; therefore now also we consider it proper.

"*If a stain*," etc. Said R. Hisda: The following thing our great rabbi
said, may the Lord come to his help: The case is only when it is in one
place (of the citron), but if it is in two or more places, it is like a
spotted one, and is invalid. Said Rabha: On its top, even if it is but
trifling, it is invalid.

"*Its crown*," etc. R. Itz'hak b. Elazar taught: The crown, but not the
stalk at the bottom.

"*Peeled off*," etc. Said Rabha: If a citron has been peeled, and gets
the color of a red date, it is valid. But did we not learn in our Mishna
that if peeled, it is invalid? It presents no difficulty. If it was in
part peeled off, it is like a spotted one, and invalid; but if entirely
peeled, it is valid.

"*Split or perforated*," etc. Ulla bar Hanina taught: When it is
perforated through and through, even if it is trifling, it is invalid;
but otherwise, then if the hole is of the size of an *Isar* (a coin), it
is also invalid, but if less it is valid.

A citron that is swollen, ill-smelling, soaked, boiled, black or white,
or spotted, is invalid. A citron round as a sphere (not elliptical) is
invalid. According to some, twins (two growing together) are also
invalid. An unripe citron R. Aqiba makes invalid, and the sages do not.
If it was made to grow in a mould, and it came out of an irregular
shape, it is invalid.

It was taught: "A citron that mice have perforated," said Rabh, "cannot
be called beautiful."

"*And of a large citron*," etc. We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jose
said it once happened to R. Aqiba that he came to a prayer-house with
his citron, and it was so large that he brought it on his shoulder. Said
R. Jehudah to him: It proves nothing, because the sages told him then:
This cannot be considered beautiful,

MISHNA: The Lulab must only be tied with its own kind (threads of palm
branches). So says R. Jehudah. But R. Meir says: It may be tied even
with twine. R. Meir also said: It

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

happened that the inhabitants of Jerusalem tied a Lulab with gold lace.
But the sages answered: Yes, they did so, but beneath the gold lace they
tied it with its own kind.

GEMARA: Said Rabha: With the bark or the root of the same tree it may be
tied. And he says again: What is, the reason of R. Jehudah's decree?
Because according to him the Lulab must not be used unless it is tied,
and if it be tied with another kind, it should be five kinds, and not
four. He says again: Whence do I deduce that the bark and the root of
the palm tree are considered of the same kind as the Lulab itself? From
the following Boraitha: It is written: "Ye shall dwell in booths." That
signifies, a booth of any materials: so is the decree of R. Meir. R.
Jehudah, however, said: A booth must be made only of the four kinds used
for the Lulab. And it seems to me that such is right, because if a Lulab
which is used only in the day, and not in the night, must have the four
kinds only, for a Succah which is used both by day and by night, so much
the more are the four kinds needed. Replied the sages to him: Every law
which is at the beginning more rigorous, and is finally more lenient, is
no law at all. And our case, according to your opinion, if one did not
find the four kinds, he should sit in his house, doing nothing; and the
Torah says: "Seven days ye shall dwell in booths." Therefore we say a
Succah should be made of any materials. And so it is written in
Nehemiah, viii. 15: "Go forth unto the mountain and fetch olive leaves,
and oleaster leaves, and myrtle leaves, and palm leaves, and leaves of
the three-leaved myrtle to make booths." R. Jehudah, however, explains
this verse thus: That olive leaves and oleaster leaves are for the walls
of the Succah, and myrtle leaves, etc., are for the covering. And we
have learned in a previous Mishna: It may be roofed with boards, so is
the decree of R. Jehudah. Hence we see that, although R. Jehudah
requires only the four kinds for the covering, nevertheless, if one has
covered it with boards, it is valid, because the boards of the bark and
of the roots of the same tree are considered by him of the same kind.
But have we not learned in a Boraitha that if one has covered it with
boards of cedar, it is valid according to R. Jehudah? By cedar is also
Meant myrtle, as Rabha bar R. Huna says elsewhere: There are ten kinds
of cedar, and the myrtle is among them, as it is written \[Is. xli.
19\]: "I will place in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia, the
myrtle."

Said Rabba to the men who tied the Hosha'noth for the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

exilarch When you tie them, leave the breadth of a hand at the bottom
there shall be no intervention between the hand and the Hosha'na. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) Said Rabha: All that was made to beautify
it, does not intervene. Rabba says again: A man shall not hold the
Hosha'na through a cloth, because it is written: "Ye shall take," with
your own hands. Rabha, however, said: Even if one takes it through
another thing, it is still called *taking*. Rabba says again: After the
Hosha'na and the myrtle bough have been tied, one shall not insert the
Lulab, lest some leaves be torn off from them, and they will be an
intervention between the Lulab and them. Rabba, however, said: A thing
of the same kind makes no intervention.

Rabba says again: A myrtle bough used for the religious purpose may not
be smelled, but a citron may. Why so? Because the myrtle is only used
because of its odor, and as it has been designated for a religious
purpose, it must not be smelled; but a citron, which is made for eating,
has been designated only for eating, and may be smelled. The same
authority says again: A myrtle attached to the ground may be smelled on
the festival, but a citron must not. Why so? Because a myrtle, which is
used only for smelling, if one will be allowed to smell it, when yet
attached to the ground, he will not cut off; but a citron, which is for
eating, if he will be allowed to smell, he will cut off, and eat. He
says again: The Lulab must be held in the right hand, and the citron in
the left hand. Why so? Because by the Lulab three duties are performed,
and by the citron only one.

Said R. Jeremiah to R.. Zrika: Why do we pronounce the benediction over
the Lulab only? Because it is higher than the other kinds. But let one
raise the citron, and pronounce the benediction over it? And he
answered: Because by *nature* it grows higher than the other kinds..

MISHNA: When must the Lulab be shaken? At the verse: "Praise ye the
Lord" (in the prayer), at the beginning and ending (of that part of the
prayer), and at the verse: "O Lord, we beseech thee, save us": so is the
decree of Beth Hillel. But Beth Shammai hold, also at the verse: "O
Lord, we beseech thee, prosper us." R. Aqiba said: I watched Rabban
Gamaliel and R. Joshuah (in the time of prayer), and I saw while all men
shook the Lulabs at both the above-mentioned verses, they shook theirs
only at: "O Lord," etc., "save us."

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

GEMARA: Where is it mentioned that it should be shaken? In the first
Mishna of this chapter: it teaches, a Lulab which is three spans long
"sufficient to shake it by"; and now it is asked, When shall it be
shaken? Said R. Johanan: The shaking shall be towards all four sides--to
the Creator, that all the sides are His; and it shall be raised and
lowered to Him to whom the heaven and the earth belong. In the West they
taught so: R. Hama bar Uqba in the name of R. Jose bar Hanina said: He
shall shake towards all sides, to prevent bad winds; and up and down, to
prevent bad dews.

MISHNA: If one is on the road, and has no Lulab, he must, when he gets
home, shake it before his meal. If he has not done it in the morning, he
must do it toward evening, as the duty may be done during the whole day.

If a slave, woman, or minor reads *hallel* (see Pesachim, Chap. X., pp.
242-46) to a man, he should repeat after them word for word, but it is a
disgrace to him (not to have learned to read). If a grown man reads to
him, he only responds "Hallelujah." At the places where certain verses
are said twice, he is to do so. Where they are recited once, he must do
so. Where a benediction is said after the Lulab, he must say it. In
every case he must do as is the custom of the country.

GEMARA: Rabha said: Great Halakhoth can be inferred from the custom of
saying Hallel: From the custom of our time, when almost all men can read
the Hallel themselves, nevertheless they repeat the beginnings of the
chapters after the reader, we may infer what are the essential portions
of Hallel, and how it was done in the ancient times, when the people
could not read themselves, and a man was wanted to read it, for them to
repeat after him. The Mishna says: He responds "Hallelujah." From this
we see that Hallelujah is of the essential portions which must be
responded. We see also in our time, when the reader begins: "Praise, O
ye servants of the Lord," and the people respond, "Hallelujah," we may
infer that if a grown man is the reader of the Hallel, it is sufficient
for the hearer to respond "Hallelujah," and not to repeat the whole
chapter (part of the prayer). From what we see, that when the reader
says, "Praise ye the Lord," they also repeat, "Praise ye the Lord," we
infer that it is a merit to repeat the first verses of the chapter.

\[It was also taught: R. Hanan bar Rabha said: It is a merit to repeat
the first verses of the chapter.\] When the reader says: "O Lord, save
us," they should repeat it. If the reader is a

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

minor, however, one must repeat after him word for word. When he says:
"O Lord, prosper us," they repeat it, and from this we see that if one
wishes to say it twice, he may do so. When he says, "Blessed be he that
cometh," they respond, "in the name of the Lord." From this we see that
he who listens to the prayer is equal to him who himself repeats it.

R. Hiya bar Abba was asked: If one has listened to the prayer, and not
responded, how is the law? And he answered: The sages, the scribes, the
heads of the people, the preachers, all have decided that he who has
listened, and not answered, has fulfilled his duty.

"*At the places where verses are said twice*," etc. We have learned in a
Boraitha: Rabbi used to say twice in the Hallel same parts. R. Elazar b.
Parta has added parts to the same prayer. What is meant by "added"? Said
Abayi: He added the manner of saying twice every verse from the 21st
verse of Psalm cxviii. to the end of that psalm.

"*When it is the custom to say a benediction*," etc. Said Abayi, that is
only at the end of the Hallel; but before, it is not a custom, but
obligatory. As R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: All the religious
duties must have a benediction pronounced before they are performed.

MISHNA: If one buys a Lulab from a man of the common people in a
Sabbatical year, he shall ask of him that the citron shall be given to
him as a gift, because it is not allowed to buy a citron in the
Sabbatical year.

GEMARA: But how is the law if the seller does not want to give him this
as a gift? Said R. Huna: He shall include the price of the citron in the
price for the Lulab. Why? Let him give it to him publicly? Because one
must not give money for fruits forbidden to be sold on the Sabbatical
year to a man of the common people. As we have learned in a Boraitha:
One must not give money for fruit on the Sabbatical year to a man of the
common people more than is sufficient for three meals; and if one has
done it, he shall say: This money that I give to this man shall be
exchanged for the fruit which I have in my house, and after that he uses
the fruit which he has had in the house only for purposes for which
fruit of the Sabbatical year may be used. When is that the case? When he
saw that the man sold to him fruit from a field left to the public,
which had no owner; but if he sold it from his own field, one must not
buy even for half an *isar*. If it is so, why only the citron? What is
the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

case with the palm branch? The Lulab cannot be of the Sabbatical year,
because it had been ripe on the sixth year. But the same is the case
with the citron? In case of a citron, it is not counted from the time of
its ripeness, but its removal from the tree (as is explained in Tract
Rosh Hashana, p. 19). But we know that according to both R. Gamaliel and
R. Eliezer, in reference to the Sabbatical year, in case of the citron
it is counted from the time of its budding. As we have learned in the
following Mishna: The citron is equal to a tree in three respects, and
to herbs in one respect--to a tree in three respects, to wit: Of *arla*
(the first three years), *rebai* (the fourth year) \[Lev. xix. 22-24\],
and of the Sabbatical year, in reference to which it is counted from the
time of its budding; and to a herb in one respect, that it must be
tithed when it is gathered (*i.e.*, the tithe must be used for the
purpose of that year). So is the decree of Rabban Gamaliel. R. Eliezer,
however, said: A citron is equal to a tree in all respects (hence we see
that all agree that in reference to the Sabbatical year it is counted in
case of the citron from the time of its ripeness, not of its budding).
The Tana of our Mishna holds as the Tana of the following Boraitha: R.
Jose said: Abtulmus testified in the name of five elders, thus: The
citron must be counted from the time when it is gathered for tithe. Our
Masters, however, have voted and decided in the city of Usha that in
reference both to tithe and Sabbatical year it is to be counted from the
time of its gathering. But where is here mentioned the Sabbatical year?
The Boraitha is not completed, and must read thus: The citron is counted
when gathered in reference to tithe, and from budding in reference to
the Sabbatical Year. Our Masters in Usha, however, have decided that in
both cases it is counted from the time of the gathering.

R. Elazar said: The fruit of the Sabbatical year does not become
exchanged, unless it is done in the manner of buying and selling. R.
Johanan, however, said: It becomes exchanged even through exchanging.
What is the reason of R. Elazar? Because it is written \[Lev. xxv. 13\]:
"In this year of the jubilee," and the next verse says, "shall he sell,"
from this we infer, only through buying and selling. What is the reason
of R. Johanan? Because it is written \[ibid., ibid. 12\]: "For it is the
jubilee, holy shall it be unto you"; and as in case of all holiness
there is no difference between selling and exchanging, the same is the
case with the fruit of the Sabbatical year. We have learned in one

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Boraitha in
accordance with R. Elazar, and in another Boraitha we have learned in
accordance with R. Johanan.

A Boraitha according to R. Elazar: The Sabbatical year holds the money
exchanged for its fruit, because it is written: "It is a jubilee year
and shall be holy." As the holy things hold the money exchanged for it,
and makes it holy, so also do the fruit of the Sabbatical year. But
should we assume, as the holy things become ordinary, when exchanged,
the same shall be with the Sabbatical year, therefore it is written:
"*It shall be*"--which means, so shall it stay. How so? *I.e.*, if one
bought for its fruit meat, both must be destroyed; if, however, he
bought fish for the meat, the fish becomes its substitute, and the meat
is free; the fish, again, exchanged for wine, the latter becomes the
substitute. The same is the case when the latter is exchanged for wine:
the very last always becomes the substitute of the preceding one, except
the original fruit, which remains as it was. Now, then, when the
Boraitha mentions at every exchange the word "*lokah*," which means
bought, we may infer from it that it was done only by purchase, but not
by exchange (hence R. Elazar's opinion).

A Boraitha according to R. Johanan: Both the fruit of the Sabbatical
year and of the second tithe may be exchanged for wild game, cattle, and
fowl when they are either alive or slaughtered. So is the decree of R.
Meir. But the sages say that only for slaughtered ones, but when alive
they must not be taken in exchange, lest he shall raise a herd from
them. Said Rabba: They differ only as to males, but females, all agree
that only slaughtered ones may be exchanged, but not living ones, for
the precautionary measure stated above.

Said R. Ashi: They differ only about the fruit exchanged already for the
Sabbatical fruit, but about the Sabbatical fruit itself all agree, only
through selling and not through exchanging. But have we not learned in a
Boraitha: The fruit of the Sabbatical year and second tithe may be
exchanged for animals, wild beasts, and fowls? By this is meant, not the
fruit but the money obtained for it. And this must be so, because it is
mentioned together with second tithe, and by second tithe could not be
meant the fruit itself, because it is written \[Deut. xiv. 25\]: "Bind
up the money in thy hand."

MISHNA: Formerly the Lulab was used in the Temple all the seven days of
the festival; in the country, however, only one day. When the Temple was
destroyed, R. Johanan b. Zakkai

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

ordained: In the country it shall also be used all the seven days, in
memory of the Temple. He ordained also at the same time that on the
sixteenth day of Nissan, called the day of Noph (the day of waving the
omer: Lev. xxiii. 11), it should not be allowed to eat new grain.

GEMARA: Whence do we infer that it must be done in memory of the Temple?
Said R. Johanan: Because it is written \[Jeremiah, xxx. 17\]: "This is
Zion, whom no one seeketh after." From this we infer that it must be
sought after.

"*The day of Noph*," etc. What is the reason? Said R. Na'hman bar
Itz'hak: R. Johanan b. Zakkai said this in accordance with the system of
R. Jehudah, who said that it is biblically prohibited to eat the whole
day, because it is written \[Lev. xxiii. 14\], "until the self-same
day"; and the self-same day means this day shall be included. Does R.
Johanan b. Zakkai indeed hold with R. Jehudah, did he not differ from
him? As we learn in the following Mishna: When the Temple was destroyed,
R. Johanan b. Zakkai ordained that the whole day of Noph it shall be
prohibited. And R. Jehudah said to him: Why such an ordinance? Is it not
biblically prohibited, as it is written, "on the self-same day," which
means to include the whole day? R. Jehudah erred, because he thought R.
Johanan b. Zakkai intended to make his ordinance rabbinical, and it was
not so; R. Johanan b. Zakkai ordained this biblically. If biblically,
what is meant by the expression "ordained"? Read: He lectured that this
is biblical and so ordained.

MISHNA: If the first day of the festival falls on a Sabbath, the people
bring their Lulabs to the synagogue on the eve of Sabbath and leave them
there, and on the next morning they come early to synagogue, and each
seeks out his own Lulab, and performs with it his duty, because the
sages bold that the duty cannot be fulfilled on the first day by means
of a Lulab belonging to his neighbor; but it can be fulfilled on the
subsequent days of the festival.

R. Jose says: If the first day of the festival falls on the Sabbath, and
one carries out the Lulab into public ground through forgetfulness, he
is not culpable, because he carried it out with the intention to do a
religious duty.

GEMARA: Whence is this deduced? From what the rabbis taught: It is
written \[Lev. xxiii. 40\]: "Ye shall take," that means, it shall be
taken with the hand; "unto yourselves," it shall be your own, but not a
borrowed one or robbed one; and

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

from this the sages said that one cannot fulfil his duty with the Lulab
of his neighbor on the first day, unless he has made of it a present to
him. And it happened to Rabban Gamaliel, R. Joshuah, R. Elazar b.
Azariah, and R. Aqiba, when they were on board a ship, that they had but
one Lulab, which was the property of Rabban Gamaliel, who had bought it
for a thousand Zuz; and R. Gamaliel performed with it his duty, and then
made of it a present to R. Joshuah; R. Joshuah did the same, and gave it
away to R. Elazar, who did the same, and gave it as a present to R.
Aqiba; and R. Aqiba, after having fulfilled his duty, returned it to
Rabban Gamaliel. To what purpose do they tell us that R. Aqiba returned
it to Rabban Gamaliel? It is to teach us by the way, that a present with
the condition that it shall be returned after, is called a present. As
Rabha said elsewhere: "If one say: I present to you this citron to
fulfil your duty with it, and afterwards you shall return it to me," if
the man returned it afterwards, he had fulfilled his duty, but if he
failed to return it, it is not counted as anything. And to what purpose
do they tell us that he bought it for a thousand Zuz? To let us know how
dear to them were religious duties. Said Mar bar Amemar to R. Ashi: My
father used to pray, holding the Lulab in his hand. We have learned in a
Boraitha: R. Elazar <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) bar Zadok says:
So was the custom of the men of Jerusalem: when one was going out of his
house, the Lulab was in his hand; when he went to the house of prayer,
the Lulab was in his hand; when he read the Shema and prayed, the Lulab
was in his hand; when he read in the Torah and raised his hands (when a
priest) to bless Israel, he laid it away, on the floor, and afterwards
took it up. If he went to visit the sick, or console mourners, the Lulab
was in his hand. When he went, however, to the house of learning, he
sent it away through his son, or servant, or messenger. To what purpose
is all this told? To let us know how mindful they were of religious
duties.

"*R. Jose said*," etc. Said Abayi: He is not culpable so long as he has
not fulfilled his duty with it; but if he has, he is. But has not the
duty been performed as soon as he has taken it into his hand and raised
it? Said Abayi: It means, if he carried it out inverted (because the
duty is not fulfilled so long as he does not hold it as it grows). Rabha
said: Even if he has not inverted it, but carried it out in a vessel.
But did not Rabha himself

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

say that taking through any other thing is called taking? That is, if he
took it thus to honor it; but if in a vessel not appropriate to a Lulab,
it is not called taking.

MISHNA: A woman may receive a Lulab out of the hand of her son or of her
husband, and put it back into water on the Sabbath. R. Jehudah says: On
the Sabbath it may be put back, on the festival they may add fresh
water, and on the intermediate days they may change the water. A minor
who understands how to shake the Lulab is bound to perform that duty.

GEMARA: Is this not self-evident? Lest one say, that because the Lulab
is not obligatory for a woman, she must not handle it, it comes to teach
us that she may.

"*A minor*," etc. The rabbis taught: A minor who knows how to shake the
Lulab is bound to perform this duty. If he knows how to wrap himself in
a cloth, he is bound to perform the duty of Tzitzith; if he is able to
take care of Tefilin, his father may buy for him Tefilin. As soon as he
can talk, his father shall teach him the Torah, and to read Shema.
\[What is meant by Torah? Said R. Hamnuna: The verse of Deuteronomy,
xxxiii. 4: "The law which Moses commanded us is the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob." What is meant by Shema? The first verse.\] (The
Boraitha says farther on): If he knows how to slaughter animals, it may
be eaten of his slaughtering. Said R. Huna: Only if an adult was
standing by. If he is capable to eat bread the size of an olive, one
must remove from him to the distance of four ells (if one has to pray or
to study), on certain occasions. Says R. Hisda: This is only if he can
eat the piece of bread in the same length of time that a grown person
can eat bread of the size of three eggs, or more. Said R. Hiya the son
of R. Yeba: In the case of a grown man who is sick and unable to eat as
much, in the above-mentioned length of time, one must nevertheless
remove four ells. Because it is written \[Eccl. i. 18\]: "Where there is
much wisdom, there is much vexation." If the minor is able to eat
roasted meat of the size of an olive, the Paschal offering may be
slaughtered for him, as it is written \[Ex. xii. 4\]: "Every man
according to what he eateth." R. Jehudah, however, said: It must not be
given to him until he is able to distinguish. How? If he is given a
chip, he drops it; but a nut, he accepts it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[42:1](suc05.htm#fr_12) Lev. xxiii. 40.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[42:2](suc05.htm#fr_13) Deut. xiii. 12.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[42:3](suc05.htm#fr_14) A mountain near
Jerusalem, southward, the palm branches of which wen very short.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[44:1](suc05.htm#fr_15) The name of Rabha is not
mentioned above, but it must have been known to him that Rabha said so.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[45:1](suc05.htm#fr_16) The word *hadar* in
Hebrew has two meanings: "Beauty" and *dar* means "dwelling" (see Ps.
lxxxiv. 11). Hence R. Jehudah explains this in the latter sense.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[46:1](suc05.htm#fr_17) The Gemara will explain
the term.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[47:1](suc05.htm#fr_18) Rashi explains it in
another manner, which is complicated. We, however, think that our
explanation is right.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[48:1](suc05.htm#fr_19) See page 14, lines
32-37, beginning "But according," etc., which also belong here.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[49:1](suc05.htm#fr_20) The word *Kapath* is
written in the singular, but is read *Kapoth*, in the plural.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[50:1](suc05.htm#fr_21) Lev. xix. 23.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[54:1](suc05.htm#fr_22) The Gemara calls
Hosha'na the Lulab, and the myrtle bough and willow tied together.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[60:1](suc05.htm#fr_23) See foot-note in Tract
Pesachim, p. 78.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](suc06)
