[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](suc03)  [Next](suc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 4: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*, tr. by
Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

# CHAPTER II.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE SITUATIONS IN WHICH A BOOTH MAY BE PLACED,
WHAT MUST BE DONE IN IT, ETC.

MISHNA: He who sleeps under a bed in the booth has not fulfilled his
duty (of sleeping there). Said R. Jehudah: We were in the habit of
sleeping under a bed in the presence of the elders, and they never said
anything to us. Said R. Simeon: It happened that Tabbi, the slave of R.
Gamaliel, used to sleep under a bed. But R. Gamaliel said to the elders:
Do you see my slave Tabbi? He is a scholar (Talmud Hakham), and knows
that slaves are exempt from the duty of Succah. Therefore he sleeps
under a bedstead. From this we infer that he who sleeps under a bed has
not fulfilled his duty.

GEMARA: Why? The bed is usually not ten spans high? Samuel explained
this, that the case is when the bed is high ten spans. (But if so,) what
is the reason of R. Jehudah's decree? This is according to his theory
elsewhere, that the Succah must be a permanent dwelling, and the bed is
only a temporary dwelling, and a temporary dwelling cannot make ignored
a permanent one. But did not R. Simeon held the same theory, that a
Succah must be a permanent dwelling (because his decree is that it must
have four walls), and nevertheless he does not allow to sleep under the
bed? This is the point of their difference: according to R. Simeon a
temporary dwelling makes ignored, and according to R. Jehudah it does
not.

"*It happened once that Tabbi the slave*," etc. We have learned in a
Boraitha: R. Simeon said: From R. Gamaliel's remarks we have learned two
things: That slaves are free from the duty of a Succah, and that one who
sleeps under a bed has not fulfilled the duty of Succah. Let him say,
"from R. Gamaliel's decree," he comes to teach us by the way that R.
A'ha bar Adda, according to others the same in the name of R. Hamnuna,
quoting Rabh, said: Whence do we know that even a remark of a scholar
must be studied? Because it is written \[Ps. i.\] "And the leaf does not
wither," even a slight thing as a leaf is not valueless.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

MISHNA: If one supports his Succah with a bedstead, it is valid. R.
Jehudah said: A Succah that cannot stand by itself is invalid.

GEMARA: What is the reason of R. Jehudah's decree? R. Zera and R. Abba
bar Mamel differed: One says: Because so it is not made a permanent
dwelling; and one says: Because he supports it with a thing subject to
defilement. What is the difference? If one put iron spits and covered
it, according to them who say because it is not permanent, the iron
spits are permanent; but according to those who say because he supports
with a thing subject to defilement, the iron spits are subject to
defilement, and are invalid. Said Abayi: They differ only if he supports
the booth with the bedstead; but if he has roofed the bed itself, all
agree it is valid. Why so? Because to them who say, because it is not
permanent, it can be said the bed is permanent; and to them who say
because he supports with a thing subject to defilement, it can be said
the roof is not subject to defilement.

MISHNA: A Succah covered thinly, if there is more shadow than sun, is
valid; if the covering is close, like the roof of a house, though the
stars are not visible through it, it is nevertheless valid.

GEMARA: What is meant by thin covering? Said Rabh: Scanty covering (too
much empty space between one stick and the other). And Samuel said:
Irregular covering--one twig down, one twig up, that is. Rabh
interpreted that the Mishna teaches only one case, a poor Succah, in
which there is more shadow than sun, is valid; and according to Samuel,
the Mishna teaches two things: first, that a Succah with an irregular
covering is valid; and secondly, that all Succahs where the shadow is
more than the sunshine are valid. Said Abayi: The Mishna refers to a
case where there is not three spans distance from one twig to the other;
but if there is, it is invalid. Rabha, however, said: Even if there were
three spans between, provided the twig was not wide at the top a span,
it is invalid; but if it was, it is valid, because we say: *Havit
rami*, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) and it is valid.

"*If there is more shadow than sun*." From this we may infer, that if
they were equal, it is not valid; but in the first chapter

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the Mishna teaches, if the sunshine was more than the shadow it is
invalid, from which we may infer that if they were equal it is valid? It
presents no difficulty. If on the top the empty place was equal to the
covering, because on the ground the sunshine would appear larger; but if
on the ground the sunshine and the shadow are equal, it is valid,
because then on the top there must be more covering than empty space.
Said R. Papa: This is according to what people say: If on the top it is
of the size of a Zuz, it appears on the ground the size of a Sela. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

"*If close like the roof of a house*." The rabbis taught: If it was
close as a roof of a house, although the stars cannot be seen through
it, it is valid; but if the rays of the sun do not penetrate, Beth
Shammai hold it is not valid, and Beth Hillel hold it is.

MISHNA: If one constructs a Succah on the top of a wagon, or on board a
vessel, it is valid, and he may ascend thereto on the festival. If he
has constructed the Succah on the top of a tree, or on the back of a
camel, it is valid; but he must not ascend thereto on the festival days.
If two walls are formed by a tree, and one by human hands, or two by
human hands and one by a tree, the Succah is valid, but one must not
ascend thereto on the festival. This is the rule: Whenever the Succah
can stand by itself, even should the tree be removed, the Succah is
valid, and it is lawful to ascend thereto on the festival.

GEMARA: This Mishna is in accordance with R. Aqiba only, as we have
learned in a Boraitha: If a Succah was made on a ship, Rabban Gamaliel
makes it invalid, and R. Aqiba makes it valid. It happened once that
Rabban Gamaliel and R. Aqiba were on a ship, and R. Aqiba constructed a
Succah on the ship. On the morrow a wind blew it off, and Rabban
Gamaliel said to him: Aqiba, where is thy Succah? Said Abayi: If the
Succah cannot withstand an ordinary wind from land, all agree that it is
not a Succah at all; if it can hold out a storm on land, all agree it
must be regarded as a Succah; but if it can hold out an ordinary wind
from land, but not an ordinary wind from the sea, there is the point of
their difference: R. Gamaliel holds it must be a permanent dwelling, and
as it cannot withstand an ordinary wind from the sea, it is not
considered as anything; but R. Aqiba holds that only a temporary
dwelling is needed, and so soon as it is proof against an ordinary wind
from land, it is called a temporary dwelling.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

"*Or on the back of a camel*." The Mishna is in accordance with R. Meir.
as we learn in the following Boraitha: If one has made his Succah on the
back of an animal, it is valid, according to R. Meir; but not according
to R. Jehudah. What is the reason of R. Jehudah? Because it is written
\[Deut. xvi. 13\]: "The feast of tabernacles shalt thou hold seven
days." From this we infer that a booth fit for all seven days may be
called a Succah, but not otherwise (and as the sages prohibited to mount
an animal on the festival, it is not fit for the first day of the
festival). But what would R. Meir answer to this? Biblically it is fit,
but only the rabbis prohibited as a precautionary measure to mount an
animal (and if biblically fit, it is called a Succah).

If the animal was used as a wall to the Succah? R. Meir makes it
invalid, and R. Jehudah makes it valid. Because R. Meir used to say: All
things which have life must not be made a wall to the Succah, nor a
side-beam to an entry, nor an enclosure to a well, nor a covering of a
grave; and in the name of R. Jose the Galilean it was said: Also, a
letter of divorce must not be written on it. What is the reason of R.
Meir? Abayi said: Because it may die. R. Zera said: Because it can run
away. If an elephant were tied to a wall and used as a wall, all agree
it is valid, because, even if it should die, its carcass measures more
than ten spans. In what they differ is, when the elephant is not tied:
according to them who fear its death, it is valid; but according to
those who fear its flight, it is not valid. But did Abayi say that R.
Meir feared its death, and R. Jehudah did not? Have we not heard the
contrary from him in Gittin, that R. Meir feared it, and R. Jehudah did
not? Read these conversely: Abayi said R. Meir feared its death, and R.
Jehudah did not. But did we not learn in Tract Yomah, R. Jehudah
declares: To the high-priest another wife must be prepared for the Day
of Atonement, lest his wife die? (So he apprehends death.) Is it not
taught, in addition to the same Mishna: R. Huna the son of R. Joshua
said, that for forgiving the sins an exceptional rule was made?

Let us see: According to both sages--who apprehend death or
flight--biblically it is valid as a wall; and only as a rabbinical
precautionary measure is it forbidden. Why is it not subject to
defilement when it covers a grave, according to R. Meir? Said R. A'ha
bar Jacob: R. Meir holds that all partitions not made by human hands are
not called partitions at all.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

MISHNA: If one makes a booth between trees which form side-walls, it is
valid.

GEMARA: A'ha bar Jacob said: All partitions that are not proof against
an ordinary wind are not partitions at all. An objection was raised from
our Mishna, which teaches that if the trees were used as walls, it is
valid; but did not the trees shake by an ordinary wind? The case is,
when they are old trees. But even if old trees, are there not branches?
If one weaves the branches into the walls. If it is so, what does he
come to teach us? Is it not self-evident? One might say that perhaps it
shall be prohibited as a precautionary measure, lest on the festival he
climb the tree, he comes to teach us that such a measure is not taken.

MISHNA: Delegates for a religious purpose are free from the duty of
Succah; also sick persons, and those who nurse them. One may
occasionally eat or drink something outside of the booth.

GEMARA: Whence do we deduce this? From what the rabbis taught: It is
written \[Deut. vi. 7\]: "When thou sittest in *thy* house": that means,
except when thou art occupied by a religious observance; \[ibid.\] "When
thou walkest by the way" means, except when thou goest to marry. From
this is said, that he who marries a virgin is exempt, but he who marries
a: widow is not. But how can this be inferred? Said R. Huna: From the
expression "on the way," as one goes on the way, means as a voluntary
act, and this is to exclude one occupied by a religious duty. R. Abba
bar Zabda said in the name of Rabh: A mourner is not exempt from the
duty of the Succah. Is not this self-evident? One might say, because the
same authority says elsewhere that one who is afflicted by something is
exempt from the duty of Succah, and a mourner is certainly afflicted,
one might say that he is exempt, he comes to teach us that it is when
the affliction is caused by the Succah; but here, when he afflicts
himself, he must divert his attention, and fulfil the duty of Succah.
The same says again in the name of Rabh: A bridegroom and his attendants
and all who belong to the wedding-party are exempt from the Succah all
the seven days. Why so? Because they must enjoy themselves. But let them
enjoy themselves in the Succah? No enjoyment can be had outside of the
house where the wedding is. But let them eat in the Succah and enjoy
themselves in the house. There is no enjoyment except where the banquet
is. But let the house where the wedding takes place

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

be made in the Succah? Abayi said, it cannot be made, because the bride
must not be left with strangers; and Rabha said, because the bridegroom
will find it inconvenient. What is the difference? when even in the
house, where men come in and go out, they are not in privacy, but it is
inconvenient. According to Abayi, it may be made in the Succah, and
according to Rabha it may not. R. Zera said: When I was a bridegroom, I
ate in the Succah, and enjoyed myself in the bride's house, and I
enjoyed myself the more because I fulfilled two religious duties.

The rabbis taught: A bridegroom and his attendants and all the
wedding-party are exempt from prayers, from phylacteries, but they must
read Shema. In the name of R. Shila it was said: Only the bridegroom is
exempt, but all the others are not. A Boraitha states, R. Hanania b.
Akabia said: Writers of the holy scrolls, or tefilin, or mezuzoth, they
and the wholesale sellers and the retail sellers, and all men engaged in
work for Heaven, including also the sellers of blue threads for
tzitzith, are exempt from the reading of Shema, from praying, from
tefilin, and all the religious duties commanded in the Torah. He said so
to confirm the words of R. Jose the Galilean, who said: Who is engaged
in one religious work, is free from another one.

The rabbis taught: Those who are on the road in the day are exempt from
the duty of Succah during the day, but not during the night; and if they
travel by night, it is conversely. If they travel during both, they are
exempt wholly. But who goes on a religious mission, is exempt from the
duty of Succah both by day and by night. As it happened, R. Hisda and
Rabha bar R. Huna coming on a Sabbath falling on one of the intermediate
days, to the exilarch to hear his lecture, they slept on the bank of a
river of Sura. They said, we are delegates for a religious purpose, and
exempt from the duty of Succah.

The rabbis taught: The watchmen of a tower who watch by day are exempt
from the Succah by day, but not by night; and those who watch by night
are exempt for the night, and those who watch during both are entirely
exempt. Those who watch gardens and vineyards are exempt from the Succah
by day and by night. But let them make the booths there, and sit in
them? Said Abayi: It is written: "Ye shall dwell in booths." It must be
where the dwellings are. And Rabha said: The hole brings the thief
(*i.e.*, he will not be able to watch carefully). What is the
difference? When the whole of the fruit would be visible from his
position in the Succah (he should sit in one).

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

"*Sick persons and their nurses*." The rabbis taught: Not only those who
are dangerously sick, but if there is no danger, if one has sore eyes or
a headache, he is also exempt. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel told: It once
happened I had sore eyes when I was in Cæsarea (Kisrin), and R. Jose the
Great allowed me and my servants to sleep outside of the Succah. Rabh,
however, allowed R. A'ha of Bardla to sleep under a canopy in a booth
(though ten spans high), to prevent mosquitoes. Rabha allowed R. A'ha
bar Ada to sleep outside of the Succah, because it was freshly
whitewashed. And Rabha acted according to his theory elsewhere, that
whoever suffers is exempt. But have we not learned in our Mishna that
only sick persons are exempt, and we may infer, not those who are in
sorrow? Nay, in case of a sick person, he and his nurses are exempt, but
he who is in sorrow may only himself stay out, not his servants.

"*Men may occasionally eat*," etc. What is meant by something? Said R.
Joseph: Two or three eggs. Said Abayi to him: But many times a man finds
three eggs sufficient for a meal? Therefore said Abayi: As much as a
young scholar partakes before he goes to hear the lecture.

The rabbis taught: One may eat a hasty meal outside of the Succah, but
one must not take a nap outside. Why so? Said R. Ashi: As a
precautionary measure, lest he fall profoundly asleep for the whole
night. Said Abayi to him: If it is so, why does a Boraitha allow a man
to take a nap with his tefilin on, but not to sleep long? Let it be
apprehended lest he fall asleep? Said R. Joseph bar Ilai: This is the
case when he has engaged a man to wake him up. Rabha, however, said:
There is no appointed time for sleeping; concerning the tefilin, it is
for a different reason (as will be explained in Tract Benedictions).
Rabh said: One must not sleep by day longer than a horse sleeps. How
long is it? So as to be able to make sixty respirations. Said Abayi: My
Master used to sleep by day as long as Rabh, and Rabh as Rabbi, and
Rabbi as King David, and David slept as long as a horse. And how long is
the sleep of a horse? Sixty respirations. Abayi himself sleeps as long
as it would take to walk from Pompeditha to Be Kubi. Exclaimed R. Joseph
about him the verse in Proverbs \[vi. 9\]: "How long, O sluggard, wilt
thou lie down? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?"

MISHNA: It happened that a dish was brought to R. Johanan b. Zakai to
taste, and two dates and a jar of water to Rabban Gamaliel. Each of them
said: Bring it to the booth.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But when food less
than an egg was brought to R. Zadok, he took it in the napkin, and ate
it outside of the booth, but did not pronounce the benediction after
meals for it.

GEMARA: Is it customary to adduce an act as a contradiction to the
former teaching of the Mishna above (which says a hasty meal may be
eaten outside of the Succah)? The above Mishna is not completed, and
must read so: If one wants to make it more rigorous for himself, he may
do so, without it being said he is vain; and it also happened with R.
Johanan b. Zakai and Rabban Gamaliel that a dish and dates were brought
to them, and they said they should be carried to the Succah.

"*And when food less than the size of an egg*," etc. But if the size of
a whole egg? Then the Succah is needed? Shall we assume that this will
be an objection to the teaching of R. Joseph and Abayi (which states
above, three eggs, or as much as a young scholar, which is at any rate
not less than an egg)? Nay, it may be explained that if it would be of
the size of an egg, the legal washing of hands before and benediction
after the meal would be needed (but Succah would not be needed).

MISHNA: Fourteen meals must be eaten in the Succah, one in the morning
and one at night (of each day of the festival), according to R. Eleazar;
but the sages say it is not fixed by law, except that one must eat in
the Succah on the first night. R. Eleazar said again: He who has not
eaten on the first night can make amends for it by eating in the booth
on the last night of the festival; but according to the sages no amends
can be made, and they apply it to the verse \[Eccl. i. 15\]: "What is
crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is defective cannot be
numbered."

GEMARA: What is the reason of R. Eleazar? Because it is written: "Ye
shall dwell." And as in a dwelling it is usually eaten in the morning
and in the evening, so must it be done also in the Succah; but according
to the sages, it is as a dwelling, where one eats or not, at his
pleasure. If it is so, why is he bound to eat the first evening of the
festival? Said R. Johanan in the name of R. Simeon b. Jehozodok: It is
written here in the fifteenth, and about the Passover the word fifteen
is written: there is an analogy of expression, as on Passover the first
night must Matzah be eaten, and later it is optional, so on the first
night of the Feast of Tabernacles it must be eaten in the Succah, and
henceforth it is optional. But whence is it known that on Passover it is
obligatory? Because it is written \[Ex. xii. 18\]: "At evening shall ye
eat unleavened bread." This verse makes it obligatory.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

"*R. Eliezer said again*," etc. But did not R. Eliezer say that it is
obligatory to eat fourteen meals in the Succah: every day one meal in
the morning and in the evening? Said Bira in the name of R. Ami: R.
Eliezer retracted what he had said. But with what shall he make amends?
Shall he eat another meal? A man cannot eat more than he needs. With
extra dishes for dessert. We have also learned in a Boraitha, if one
makes amends with extra dishes, he has done his duty. The manager of the
house of Agrippa the king (επιτροπος) asked R. Eliezer: I, for instance,
who eat only one meal in twenty-four hours, may I do so in the
Succah--eat one meal and fulfil my duty? And he answered him: Did you
not make every day many dishes of delicacies for the sake of yourself,
and can you not add one dish for the sake of your Creator? He asked him
again: I, for example, who have two wives, one in Tiberia and one in
Ziporeth, and have also two booths, one in Tiberia and one in Ziporeth,
may I go from one Succah to the other, and my duty shall be fulfilled?
And he answered: Nay, because I say who goes from one booth to another
abolishes the religious duty he has done in the first.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said: One must not go out from
one Succah to another (to eat in one and sleep in another), and a Succah
must not be made in the intermediate days. The sages, however, say: Both
may be done. All agree that if the Succah has fallen, he may rebuild it
on the intermediate days. What is the reason of R. Eliezer? Because it
is written \[Deut. xvi. 13\]: "Seven days shall ye hold the feast of
tabernacles." From this we infer the Succah shall be made to be fit for
seven days. The rabbis, however, explained this passage so: On the Feast
of the Tabernacles ye shall make a booth (during the whole feast). They
all agree that if the Succah falls, it may be rebuilt. Is not this
self-evident? We might assume that the second Succah cannot be made for
seven days, and therefore shall not be made at all. He comes to teach us
that it is not so.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said: As a man cannot fulful
his duty with a Lulab belonging to his neighbor on the first day, as it
is written \[Lev. xxiii. 40\]: "And ye shall take unto yourselves on the
first day the fruit of the tree hadar, branches of palm trees,"
etc.--"unto yourselves," that means, your own, but not those belonging
to your neighbor; so also a man cannot fulfil his duty in a Succah
belonging to his neighbor,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

because it is written: "Seven days shalt thou make unto thee the feast
of the tabernacles," and we infer from "for thee" it shall be thy own.
The sages, however, said: Although it was said that a man cannot fulfil
his duty with the Lulab of his neighbor, he may nevertheless do his duty
of Succah in the neighbor's Succah, because it is written \[ibid.\]:
"All that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths." From this we learn
that all Israelites may sit in one Succah. But how will the sages
account for the expression "unto thee"? They say it is to exclude a
robbed Succah, but a borrowed Succah may be used.

The rabbis taught: It happened once to R. Ilai that he came to see R.
Eliezer his Master in the city of Lud on the festival; and the latter
said to him: Ilai, thou art not of those who rest on the festival,
because R. Eliezer used to say: I praise the sluggards, who do not go
out on the festival from the house, because it is written \[Deut. xiv.
26\]: "Thou shalt rejoice, thou and thy household." This is not so: did
not R. Itz'hak say: Whence do we know that a man must visit his teacher
on the festival? Because it is written \[II Kings, iv. 23\]: "Wherefore
art thou going to him to-day? It is neither new moon nor Sabbath?" From
this we may infer that on a new moon and a Sabbath it is obligatory to
visit one's Master? It presents no difficulty: If one's Master is in the
same city, where one can go and return the same day, he must; but not
otherwise.

The rabbis taught: It happened once that R. Eliezer took his rest in the
booth of Johanan bar Ilai in the city of Kisri, of Upper Galilea,
according to others in Kisrion, and the sun reached the Succah. And the
host asked R. Eliezer: Shall I spread a sheet on it? And he answered:
There was not one tribe of Israel from which a judge did not
descend. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) The sun reached the middle
of the Succah, and he asked again: How if I should spread a sheet on it?
And he answered: There was not one tribe of Israel from which prophets
have not descended, and

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the tribes of Judah and Benjamin chose kings at the command of the
prophets. Finally the sun reached R. Eliezer's feet, and Johanan took a
sheet and spread it over the Succah; and R. Eliezer took his garments
and shouldered them, and left the booth. This was not because he did not
want to teach him the law, but because R. Eliezer never decided a thing
which he had not heard from his Master. But how could R. Eliezer do
this? Did he not himself declare that a man must not go out from one
Succah to another? They answered: That was not on the Feast of
Tabernacles at all; it was another festival, and they sat in the Succah
only for fresh air. But did not R. Eliezer declare: I praise the
sluggards who do not leave on a festival their houses? It was not on a
festival; it was an ordinary Sabbath.

The rabbis taught: It happened with R. Eliezer that he took rest in
Upper Galilea, and he was asked thirty Halakhoth about the law of
Succah. To twelve he answered: So I have heard; and to eighteen he
answered: I did not hear them. R. Jose b. R. Jehudah says: On the
contrary, to eighteen he answered: I have heard; and to twelve: I have
not heard. And they asked him: Are all your decisions only from what you
have heard? He answered: You compelled me to tell you one thing which I
had not heard from my Masters. That is, never in my life came a man to
the house of learning before me and I never slept in the house of
learning a long or a short time; I never left a man in the house of
learning when I went away, and I never talk about worldly affairs, and I
never decided a thing which I had not heard from my Masters.

It was said of R. Johanan b. Zakai: Never in his life did he talk of
worldly affairs; he never walked four ells without studying the Law and
without tefilin; he was never anticipated by another in turning to the
house of learning, and did not sleep in the house of learning even a
short time; he did not teach about the Law in dirty alleys; he did not
leave a man in the house of learning when he went away; he was never to
be found silent, but always studying aloud, and never anybody opened the
door for his disciples but himself; he never decided a thing he had not
heard from his Master, and he never said it was time to go out of the
house of learning except on the eves of Passover and on the eves of the
Days of Atonement. And R. Eliezer his disciple conducted himself
similarly.

The rabbis taught: Hillel the Elder had eighty disciples: thirty of them
were worthy that the Shekhina should rest on

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

them as on Moses our Master; thirty of them were worthy the sun should
be stopped for their sake, as it did before Joshua the son of Nun, and
twenty were mediocre. The greatest of all the disciples was Jonathan b.
Uziel, the least of all was R. Johanan b. Zakai. It was said of the
latter, that he did not leave out the Bible, the Mishna, the Gemara,
Halakhoth, and Agadoth (legends), the observations of the Bible,
observations of the Scribes, lenient ones and vigorous ones, the
analogies of expression, equinoxes, *geometries*, the language of the
angels and the language of the evil spirits and the language of the
trees, the fables, the great things, the heavenly chariots and small
things, the discussions of Abayi and Rabha, to confirm what is written
\[Prov. viii. 21\]: "That I may cause those that love me to inherit a
lasting possession and their treasures will I fill." And when the least
of all was so, how much the more was the greatest of all. It was said of
Jonathan b. Uziel, that when he studied the Law every bird that flew
over him was burned.

MISHNA: If the head and greater part of a man's body is in the booth,
and his table in the house, Beth Shammai say he has not fulfilled the
duty of Succah, but Beth Hillel say he has. Said Beth Hillel to Beth
Shammai: Did it not happen that the elders of Beth Shammai and those of
Beth Hillel visited R. Johanan b. Hahoronith, and found him sitting with
his head and greater part of his body in the booth, and his table was in
the house? and they said to him nothing. Beth Shammai replied: Do you
adduce this as a proof? They said to him: If such has always been your
custom, you have never in your life properly fulfilled the duty of
Succah.

Women, slaves, and minors are exempt from the Succah. A boy that needs
no longer the nursing of his mother must obey the command of Succah. It
happened that the daughter-in-law of Shammai the Elder gave birth to a
son on the festival, so he caused the roof to be taken off, and covered
it as a Succah for the sake of the infant.

GEMARA: Whence is all this deduced? From what the rabbis taught: The
verse could say *Ezrah* ("an Israelite born"). That would include the
women. But it is written *Ha'ezrah*, "*the* Israelites born," which
means the certain Israelites, and to exclude women. And by the word
"all" it is meant to include minors. Shall we assume that the expression
"Israelites born" includes women also? Did not we learn in a Boraitha
(concerning the Day of Atonement), where it is written, "the Israelite

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

born," which means to include women, for whom it is as obligatory to
fast as for males? From this we see that when it is written, "Israelites
born," only males are meant? Said Rabha: That is not deduced from the
passages, but it is all Sinaic, and the passages were taken as a
support. But which passage, and which Sinaic law? And, again, to what
purpose was a verse or a Sinaic law needed at all? Is not the Succah a
commandment dependent on a certain season, and from all commands
depending on certain seasons women are free? This is concerning Succah;
and concerning the Day of Atonement this is deduced from what R. Jehudah
says in the name of Rabh; and so also taught the disciples of R.
Ishmael. It is written \[Num. v. 6\]: "If any man or woman commit a
sin." From this we see that the verse made the man and the woman equal
in all penalties of the Torah. Said Abayi: That a woman is exempt from
the Succah is a Sinaic law, and nevertheless this support of a verse was
needed, because one might say it is written, "Ye shall dwell"; and as in
a dwelling are usually a man and wife, we might think that in the Succah
there should also be a man and wife, it comes to teach us that it is not
so. Rabha said: It is needed lest one say, by an analogy of expression,
it is written about Passover on the fifteenth, and here, as on Passover,
it is obligatory for women, so it is also on the Feast of Tabernacles,
it comes to teach us that it is not so. Now, when you say there is a
Sinaic law, why is the passage needed? It comes to include the
proselytes; one might say the Israelites born, but not a proselyte, we
are taught that they also are included. But the Day of Atonement, that
is inferred from the above saying of R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh. Why
is the Sinaic law here needed? This is needed for the addition to the
Day of Atonement from the preceding day, which is biblical, but has no
capital punishment. One might say that because the addition has no
punishment, the women are exempt; the Sinaic law comes to say it is not
so.

The Master says: *All*, to include the minors. But have we not learned
in our Mishna, that women, slaves, *minors*, are free from Succah? This
presents no difficulty: The Mishna means a case in which the minor is
not yet old enough to be trained in a religious duty, and the Boraitha
means a case of a minor old enough for that. But in case of a minor who
has reached such an age, the duty is only rabbinical? Yea, the passage
is taken only as a support.

"*A minor that needs not the nursing of his mother*." What is

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

meant by this? A minor [who](errata.htm#10) can obey the call of nature
without the aid of his mother. So said the disciples of R. Yanai. But
Resh Lakish said: A child that on awakening does not cry: Mother!
mother!

"*It happened that the daughter-in-law of Shammai*," etc. Is not this
act a contradiction to the former teaching? The Mishna is not completed.
It must be read so: "And Shammai the Elder is more rigorous, and it
happened also that his daughter-in-law gave birth to a son, so he caused
the roof to be removed, and covered it as a Succah for the sake of the
infant."

MISHNA: During the seven days of the festival one must use the booth as
the regular domicile, and the house only as an occasional abode. If it
rains, when is he permitted to remove from the Succah? When a mess of
porridge has been spoiled. The elders illustrate this by a comparison:
What does such a circumstance resemble? As if a servant presented a
goblet to his master, who throws a bowl full in his face.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: All the seven days one must use the booth as
one's regular domicile. How so? If he has fine utensils, he shall place
them in the Succah; if he has fine bedding, he should transfer it to the
Succah; and he should eat, and drink, and walk only in the Succah.
Whence is this deduced? From what the rabbis taught: It is written: "Ye
shall dwell"; it means, it shall be as a regular dwelling, and from this
was deduced that all the seven days one shall make the Succah his
regular dwelling, and his house a temporary one. He shall eat, drink,
and study in the Succah. Is it so? Did not Rabha say that only to read
the Bible and to learn a Mishna one may in the Succah, but study one may
not? This presents no difficulty. The Boraitha means to repeat what he
had studied already, and Rabha--to study something new, as Rabha and
Rami, while studying under R. Hisda, used to repeat his lecture among
themselves first, and afterwards tried to find out the reasons of it.
Rabha said: The vessels for drinking shall be kept in the Succah; but
the vessels for eating, outside. A pitcher of clay, outside of the
Succah, a candlestick of clay in the Succah, and according to others,
outside, and they do not differ; it means, in a large Succah it may; in
a small one, it may not, because it is dangerous.

"*If it rains*." We have learned in a Boraitha: When a mess of *gris* is
spoiled (which is spoiled easily).

Abayi was sitting in the presence of R. Joseph in the Succah,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
[](errata.htm#11)and a wind blew the chips from the covering into the
dish, and R. Joseph said: Take off the dishes, and we will go out. Said
Abayi to him: Have we not learned in the Mishna: Till the porridge is
spoiled? And he answered: As I am delicate, the chips do me as great
harm.

The rabbis taught: If one ate in the Succah and rain fell, and he went
away and took his meal in the house, when it clears again we do not
trouble him to interrupt his meal, and to go back to the Succah. If he
was sleeping in the Succah and it rained, and he went away to sleep in
the house, he is not aroused when it clears again, till the next
morning.

"*What does such a circumstance resemble*?" The schoolmen asked: What is
meant by this? Come and hear. We have learned in a Boraitha: As if the
master threw the pitcher into the servant's face, and said to him: I do
not want your service more.

The rabbis taught: An eclipse of the sun is an ill omen to the whole
world. What does this resemble? A human king making a banquet for his
servants, and placing a great lantern before them, when he gets angry he
says to his servant: Take away the light, let them sit in the dark.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Meir said: When the sun and the moon
are eclipsed, it is a bad sign to the enemies of the Israelites
(meaning, the Israelites themselves), because they are used to troubles:
it is equal to the teacher's coming to the school with his whip in his
hand. Who is more afraid? The child used to being beaten. This is the
case when Israel do not do the will of the Creator; but when they do,
they need not fear anything, as it is written \[Jeremiah, x. 82\]: "Thus
hath said the Lord: Do not habituate yourselves in the way of the
nations, and at the signs of the heavens be ye not dismayed; although
the nations should be dismayed at them."

The rabbis taught: On account of the following four things the sun
becomes eclipsed: When a chief judge dies, and is not lamented
becomingly; when a betrothed virgin calls for help in the town, and is
not aided; unnatural vice; when two brothers are killed on the same day;
and on account of the following four things both the sun and the moon
are eclipsed: Forgery, false witness, when fruit-bearing trees are cut
out, and when sheep and goats are kept in Palestine. On account of four
things the property of householders is transferred (confiscated) to the
government: When paid notes are kept; usury; and when men had the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

power to prevent, but would not; and when charity was promised to the
people, and was not given. Rabh said: For four things the property of
householders becomes annihilated: When they keep workers, and do not pay
them in time; for robbing them; when the strangers free themselves from
the yokes on their necks and put them on their neighbors' necks; and for
arrogance. And arrogance is the worst of all. But of those who are
modest is written \[Ps. xxxvii. 11\]: "But the meek shall inherit the
land, and shall delight themselves because of the abundance of peace."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[27:1](suc04.htm#fr_9) This expression has the
same meaning as *gad achith*, explained in Erubin, p. 6, and means, if
the twig was a span at the top, it is considered whether the top lies
over the empty place. And Rashi explains this, that the twigs were not
lying but standing upright, and therefore the top when wide a span is
considered to be lying.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[28:1](suc04.htm#fr_10) Two coins, the first a
one, the second very large.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[35:1](suc04.htm#fr_11) Rashi explains this as
follows: The Judges of the Book of Judges, *i.e.*, the Rulers of Israel
since Joshua's death to the prophet Samuel: From the tribe Ephraim was
Joshua; from Benjamin, Ehud; Manasseh, Gideon--that is, from the
children of Rachel. Samson was of Dan, Barak of Kaddesh was of
Naphtali--Bilha's children. Ibzan, or Boaz, from Judah; Eli of Levi,
Tola from Issachar, Elun from Zebulun; Othniel, Jephthah, Shamgar,
Abdan--it is not known of what tribes they were descended. From the
tribes of Reuben, Simeon, Gad, and Asher, I have not found, says Rashi,
explicitly that judges were descended from them. But it may be the
Judges whose tribes were not named were traditionally said to be of
those.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](suc05)
