[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf10)  [Next](dwf12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### HOW LUCIFER IS UNMASKED.

M. LE DOCTEUR BATAILLE is a mighty hunter before the face of the Lord in
the land of Masonry, and through the whole country of Hiram; great also
is Diana of the Palladians. After their monumental revelations and
confessions, those of all other seceders and penitents who have come out
of the mystery of iniquity, "are as moonlight unto sunlight, and as
water unto wine." My readers in the two previous chapters have drunk raw
spirit, and must now qualify it after the Scotch fashion. The aqueous
intellectuality and quiet stream of unpretending deposition peculiar to
M. Jean Kostka., will be well adapted to modify undue exaltations and
restore order to a universe which has been intoxicated by sorcerers. He
will show us how Lucifer is unmasked in an undemonstrative and
gentlemanly

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

fashion by a late Gnostic and initiate of the 33rd degree. He writes, as
he frankly tells us, in a spirit of reparation and gratitude, having
commerced freely with devils during a long series of unholy years.
"Blessed be the omnipotent Lord, and blessed the loving kindness which
drew me out of the abyss. . . . To glorify these I unmask the fallen
angel." The delicacy of the motive and its setting of chivalrous
sentiment will be appreciated even by the victim, and the tenderness of
the treatment will prompt Lucifer to pardon his reviler, who has been
already pardoned by M. Papus for betraying the order of the Martinists.
And to do justice towards an amiable writer, who has scarcely the
requisite qualities for seriously damaging or advancing any cause, it
may be kind to add that he has considerably exaggerated his own case.
After a careful examination of his statement, which is exceedingly
naïve, I am tempted to conclude that he has never been near an abyss; he
is innocent of either height or depth, and so far from having ever
plunged into the infernal void, he has scarcely so much as paddled

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

in a purgatorial puddle. His guilty transcendental experiences are in
reality the most infantile afternoon occultism, and his drawing-room
diablerie might be appropriately symbolised by the paper speaking-tube
of our old friend John King; there is nothing in it when the voice is
not speaking, and there is nothing in it when it is.

Since his conversion, M. Jean Kostka has exhibited much harmless
devotion towards Joan of Arc, an enthusiasm which originated among
occultists, and he has pious memories of St Stanislaus Kostka, for which
dispositions I trust that all my readers will have the complaisance to
commend him. He writes, furthermore, "in the decline of maturity, on the
threshold of age, in the late autumn of life," which is his dropsical
method of saying that he is past sixty, and he veils a "futile name"
under the patronymic of his favourite saint. Jean Kostka is not Jean
Kostka, but it is without intent to deceive that he evades any possible
responsibility in connection with his concealed identity; it is a kind
of pious self-effacement, I hope everyone will

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

believe what he says, and give him all credit for having "turned towards
the outraged Church." In matters of evidence, pseudonymous statements
are, however, objectionable, and I therefore identify our witness as
Jules Doinel, who was chiefly concerned in the restoration of the Gnosis
and the establishment of a "Gnostic church" in Paris about the year
1890, and is moreover not unknown as a Masonic orator, and in the world
of belles-lettres. M. Papus, with the generosity of a mystic, can only
speak well of the pious enthusiast who has betrayed his cause and
scandalised the school he represents; he explains that Jules Doinel is a
marvellous poet deficient in the scientific culture which might have
enabled him to explain in a peaceable fashion the phenomena squandered
upon him by the world invisible, so that there were only two courses
open for him—renunciation of the transcendental path, or madness. "Let
us bless heaven that the patriarch of the Gnosis has selected the
former." It is possibly showing gratitude for small mercies, because our
friend

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

has saved his reason, but is blood-guilty in the matter of common sense.
Meanwhile, the widowed Gnosis illuminates its Ichabod in the cryptic
*quartiers* of Paris, Lyons, and so forth.

Every one may agree with M. Papus that Jean Kostka is a very pretty
writer in a quiet and shallow way, but, with possibly one exception, he
must have withheld the flower of his phenomena in the order of the
spirit, for his book is full of sentimental and vapid experiences of the
school-miss order, while over the light and spongy soil he has now set
the ponderous paving-stones of his new explanation, and toils forward on
the road of unreason.

This apart, Jean Kostka, was evidently for many years, familiar with the
centres and workings of all the cross lights of esoteric thought which
meet and interlace in the night of French common thought. He has dwelt
among Gnostics, Martinists, Modern Albigenses, and Spiritualists; he
appears to have been identified with all, and though he does. not accuse
himself of the capital offence of conscious Satanism, he has been quite
well acquainted . with Satanism,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

and, next best to seeing the devil one's self, he has known many who
have.: In those days, he tells us, that Lucifer could be visited *chez
lui* in an earthly tabernacle, situated in an unfrequented street, from
whence the *lointain bruissement du Paris nocturne* might be heard by
the pensive traveller if he were not too intent on diabolising. Now, he
has found out that Lucifer was *chez lu*i everywhere. *Je vise Satan et
ses dogmes*. All his psychic faculties have concentrated into a
transcendental apparatus for scenting devildom, and he mournfully comes
forward to tell us, with a variation of Fludd's utterance; *Diabolus, in
quam, diabolus ubique repertus est, et omnia diabolus et diabolus*. "Let
it suffice to say that the demonologists have invented nothing and have
exaggerated nothing." To the spiritualists Lucifer is John King and
Allan Kardec; to the Gnostics, he is the Gnosis, Simon Magus, Helen
Ennoia, and anything that comes handy from the Nile valley in the fourth
century; to the Martinists, he is the *philosophe inconnu;* to the
Albigenses, if there are Parisian Albigenses, he is whatever

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Albigenses invoke,
if they invoke anything; to Madame X., he is Mary Stuart; to his own
adepts, within sound of the *lointain bruissement*, he is a *jeune homme
blond aux yeux bleus*, whom I understand to have worn a dalmatic, and to
have been curiously indebted to the author of *Aut Diabolus aut Nihil;*
for the Theosophists, he is that "illustrious demoniac," Madame
Blawatsky—his innate delicacy leads him to the permutation of the Typhon
V.; and then Freemasonry—it goes without saying that the little horn of
Lucifer has displaced all other horns in all the grades and lodges, that
the fraternity is his throne and his footstool, and the city of the
great king.

If we button-hole Jean Kostka, and ask him to tell us confidentially and
upon honour what it is that has changed his views, making him discover
the leer of Baal-Zeboub where he once saw the smile of the spiritual
Eos, he turns Trappist at once, and goes into retreat with M. Huysman;
there is not a syllable of information in all his *beau volume* as to
any intellectual process through which he passed on

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the way, and I suspect that his conversion partook of the nature of a
"penetration," to speak his own language, and was not an intellectual
operation, but a sudden *volte face*. Jean Kostka has changed his
*pinces-nez*, and that is the whole secret:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The reason why I cannot tell,  
 But now I hold it comes from hell."</span>

</div>

Here is the proof positive; he has nothing in the shape. of an
accusation; he gets his Lucifer-interpretation out of everything with
which he has cut off correspondence by a very simple and civil process
of instillation. "I sense it"; *je vise Lucifer*. Thus, the Order of the
Knights of Perfect Silence invite their initiates to become architects
of the Holy City. Jean Kostka, in possession of the latest tip, says,
"read Hell." The Martinists are concerned with the creation of Adam
Kadmon, the ideal humanity. Jean Kostka tells you that they are
concerned with nothing of the sort, and that Satan is the only person
who can really put us up to the secret, which is curious because

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

he immediately advises us himself that the exercise of the three
cardinal virtues to the profit of Lucifer is the sum of the whole
mystery and the real *sous-entendu* of Martinism. The Masonic grades
from Apprentice, Companion, Master, through Knight Rose-Cross to Knight
Kadosch, and so forward, are exploited after the same manner by the
baldest of processes, that of inverting everything. For example, the
sacred word of the 33rd degree in the French Rite, namely, Sovereign
Grand Inspector General, is *Deus meumque Jus*. That signifies, says
Jean Kostka, that "Lucifer is the sole God and that the material, like
the spiritual, world of right belongs to him." If you inquire the
process of extraction by which he gets that result, he answers: "I must
admit that I have had only a general intuition, but I assure you that it
is immense," and he will immediately cite you a password, invite you to
take every letter individually, and fit to it just that word which, by
another intuition, he perceives belongs to it, when you will see for
yourself. Thus, the Kadosch term *Nekam*, which signifies

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

vengeance, having been duly anatomised, will come out as follows:—N (ex)
E (xterminatio) K (risti) A (dversarii) M (agni), to wit: "Death,
Extermination of Christ, the Great Enemy." Wicked and wily Jean Kostka
to outrage the decencies of orthography and against all reason write the
name of the Liberator with a K, thereby concealing the true meaning,
which revealed for the first time is as follows:—N (equaquam) E (ritis)
K (ostka) A (rtium) M (agister), which being interpreted still further,
signifies that there was never such a clumsy device!

Now, it goes without saying that a writer with these methods is not to
be taken seriously, but it is worth while to appreciate the quality of
intelligence which is received with acclamation by the Catholic Church
in France as soon as it comes over from the enemy. "Lucifer Unmasked"
appeared originally in the pages of the newspaper *La Vérité*. It was
immediately reproduced in Spanish by the *Union Catolica;* the clerical
press boomed full-mouthed salvos in its honour, and his Eminence
Cardinal Parocchi

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

has blessed book or author, or both, and believes that it will make a
great impression, "undoubtedly contributing to enlighten minds and lead
them back to God."

Jean Kostka, as already indicated, is a spiritual sentimentalist; he has
passed by a rapid transition common to such natures from the Gnostic
transcendental initiate to the pious Catholic devotee, and he will make
an excellent Lourdes pilgrim. As there will be no need to recur to him
again, it will be permissible to justify my criticism by some account of
his personal experiences. M. Papus speaks of him as the founder and
patriarch of the Gnostic Church. Of this same patriarch and primate Jean
Kostka also speaks as of another person, recites the facts of his
conversion, and. hopes he will do better work for the Church of God than
he has done for Lucifer. Which is Dr Jekyll and which Mr Hyde in this
duadic personality is not of serious consequence, as they have both got
into a better way of thinking and acting. Now, since his demission from
these high functions, Jean Kostka has found that the chief piece of

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gnostic devilry is
in denying that the lost angels are eternally damned. On this point he
has attained what is rare in him, a touch of personal animosity. To
supply the antipodes of heaven, let us say, with a lethal chamber, as a
meaner order than that of theological charity does here, in the
interests of homeless and snappy dogs, would, in his present state of
grace, seem a very wicked proposition. Well, in 1890 Jean Kostka was
invited, as I understand, by the chief of the Gnostic Church, that is,
by himself, to a chapel in the palace of a lady who figures frequently
in his pages under the name of Madame X.; the author takes great credit
for concealing her real titles, but he has failed to conceal her
identity, and there can be no harm in saying that the reference is to
Lady Caithness. He was present upon serious business, in fact, nothing
short of assisting at a séance. A medium had been secured, the
proceedings began, rappings became audible, an intelligence desired to
communicate, and, finally, there was a message, with a name given. It
was Luciabel, "whom you know as Lucifer." To this day

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jean Kostka does
not seem conscious of any element of idiocy in the variation of the
old-fashioned name. In the revelation which followed, the intelligence,
who seemed amiably disposed despite his sinister connections, informed
the circle that, like Jesus, he was engendered eternally from God, that
he was exiled from the pleroma, and that he was the Sophia-Achamoth of
Valentine, the Helena-Ennoia of Simon Magus, the thought of God which
had become anathema, and that he was now in search of love and
consolation, both of which might take shape in a Gnostic church, and
would be highly acceptable. There is, so to speak, a commercial element
in the overtures which dries up the feeling of pity, or one might be
exceedingly sorry for this lost chord of eternal thought, hoping
charitably that we should still somehow hear it in heaven.

Since his conversion the unpretentious marvel of this séance has been a
dire trouble to Jean Kostka, partly on account of its eschatology, but
still more because the sitters were conscious at its close of a breath
passing over their faces,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

while he himself felt the presence of lips against his own. Poor Jean
Kostka! They were all abased on their knees, which happens occasionally,
even at séances, to pious people in Paris, and he concludes that he was
kissed by Helena-Ennoia, *alias* Lucifer, *alias* Luciabel, who is also
described on the charge-sheet of orthodox theology by other and more
objectionable titles. The shameful memory causes him to exclaim
fervently:—"May he who purged the lips of Isaiah with a burning coal
deign to purify mine by the sacred kiss of penitence and pardon: *in
osculo sancto*." There is a touch of sublimity in that, and the *basia*
of Baal-Zeboub may well enough be more demoralising than those of
Secundus. At the time, however, he founded the Gnostic Church.

We become acquainted with ghosts after various manners, according to our
psychic condition. There is the spontaneous and accidental ghost who is
seldom caught in the act; there is the able-bodied materialised ghost
whom we catch in the act occasionally, and preserve our mental balance
by clinging to his watch-chain and

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

seals; they may be distinguished as the timeless ghost and the ghost who
occasionally does time. Over and above these two generic specimens there
is the ghost that throws, who is separable from the ghost that *hurls*,
as our French friends put it. To hurl is to utter objectionable and
unreasonable yells, preferably in the dead of night and in lonely
places. This ghost is much sought after by specialists. It would be
tedious to name all the varieties, but I can guarantee the unequipped
that all known specimens have been carefully labelled, except possibly
the odorous ghost, the ghost, that is to say, who manifests exclusively
to the olfactory organ. This is an exceedingly withdrawn inappreciable
kind, but it is familiar to Jean Kostka, who is a connoisseur in the
smell supernatural, and has a trained psychic nose. He can distinguish
between the spiritual perfume which characterises, let us say, St
Stanislaus and the *odorem suavitatis* of Lucifer. He is also an
authority on conditions, and gives a ravishing description of the
voluptuous enervation diffused over all his limbs when he had

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

a private memorandum from Isis by means of raps during the reception of
a master in a blue lodge. On this occasion he tells us that he was
inspired to pronounce one of his most wicked and dangerous Masonic
discourses. Dear M. Kostka! Dynamite would lose its destroying power in
his harmless hands.

At another function—but this was in a red lodge—he was overwhelmed by
the presence of Lucifer, who elected and commissioned him to fight in
his cause. It was a moment of unwonted intelligence—these are his own
words—and he agreed, so incompetence chose its minister, and Frater
Diabolus again showed himself a short-sighted rogue, because has not his
emissary converted and passed over to the makers of pilgrimages? M.
Kostka also at this time was so wicked us to be guilty of a pact, but he
reserved two points, "the person of Christ and His mother." The
reservation of these sacraments is not specialised as to its kind, but,
*mon Dieu*, how distraught was Lucifer to be so palpably tricked by a
*trente troisième!* Both these matters were, however, personal to the
seer, and

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

the lodges, whether red or blue, seem to have been quite unconscious
that they had been entertaining divinity and demon unawares. M. Kostka
has, in fact, been distinguished from the common herd of Masons by many
favours of Lucifer, and he has naturally been ungrateful, for which I
admire M. Kostka.

In succeeding chapters he details at considerable length a variety of
hallucinations which he experienced on the subject of Helena-Ennoia, and
he has also had visions of Jansen, of a false Francis Xavier, a false
Christ, &c., but his most important experience was that which he terms
Penetration, commonly experienced in autumn seasons and during the mists
and mildness of October nights. On these occasions he was conscious of a
curious extension of personality by which he seemed to enter into all
Nature, and all Nature took voice and interpreted herself intelligibly
to him. After music came verbal communications, and then the apparition
of forms, chiefly of classical mythology. Most people would have termed
this poetic rapture

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

passing into lucidity, but our friend avers that it is the Enemy.

Such have been the experiences and adventures of Jean Kostka in the
psychic world, and they are of precisely the same calibre as his
critical method. I may say, in conclusion, that, if spared, he will do
better in his next book, for he promises another, which is to exhibit in
a convincing manner how Lucifer has been vanquished by Joan of Arc. In
the meantime we may part from him with due recognition of his absolute
good faith and extreme amiability we may congratulate him on his
conversion, and still more upon the very pleasant reading he provides;
he does not appear to have unmasked Lucifer, but he has let us into the
secret of the best that can be done in that way.

Lastly, the point to be marked in connection with the memoirs and
revelations of Jean Kostka is this, that neither in Paris nor elsewhere,
neither in Masonry nor in other secret associations, concerning which he
has had every opportunity to judge, has he come personally into contact
with a cultus of Satan or Lucifer; that he chooses to

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

term certain mystical opinions and practices diabolical, because they
are condemned by the Latin Church, is a matter which is perfectly
indifferent and exhibits only the forlorn position of a case which
resorts to the expedient. But it is highly significant that a man who
has mixed among mystics of all grades for probably thirty years, who is
affiliated to innumerable orders, and in his present mood would be glad
to expose everything, has nothing to tell us of the Palladium, though he
dwelt at its gates, and the circles he frequented were at a stone's cast
from the alleged Mother-Lodge Lotus of Paris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Vendetta of Signor Margiotta](dwf12)
