[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dwf16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7C6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Devil Worship in France*, by A.E. Waite, \[1896\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### CHAPTER XV

#### CONCLUSION

IT remains for us now to appreciate the exact position in which the
existence of the Palladian Order is left after all suspicious
information has been subtracted. We have examined in succession the
testimony of every witness to the discovery of Leo Taxil and M. Adolphe
Ricoux, and it has been made entirely evident that they are of a most
unsatisfactory kind. I make no pretence to pass a precise judgment upon
Leo Taxil, for I am not in a position to prove that the Palladian
rituals which appear in "Are there Women in Freemasonry?" can be
characterised as invented matter. Granting his personal good faith,
there are still many obvious questions, one of which is the connection
between the Palladians and Masonry. As regards the so-called Paris
triangle, from which the information was

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

obtained, as regards the ritual itself, there is obviously no such
connection, except the fantastic and arbitrary rule that initiation is
imparted exclusively to persons possessed of Masonic degrees. It is
patent that such an institution is not Masonic, though it possesses some
secrets of Masonry. The Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, as we have
seen, is an association based upon precisely the same regulation, but it
has no official position. Should a circle of Catholic priests conspire
for the formation of a society dedicated to black magic and the
celebration of the Satanic mass, that would not be the Church
diabolising. No institution, and no society, is responsible for the
unauthorised acts of individual members. At the same time, if it should
be advanced by hostile criticism that the invention of rituals is easy,
and that the literary antecedents of Leo Taxil are not precisely of that
kind which would lead any cautious person to place blind confidence in
his unchecked statements, I am compelled to say that I should find
considerable difficulty in challenging such a position.

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

Mgr. Meurin, the next witness, deserves, by his position and ability,
our very sincere respect; . compared with the octogenarian
sentimentalism of Jean Kostka, the violence of Signor Margiotta, and the
paste-pot of M. de la Rive, one breathes *à pleine poitrine* in the
altitudes of ecclesiastical erudition, artificial as their eminence
turns out; the art sacerdotal does not concern itself with preposterous
narratives, so that it disputes nothing with the art of Bataille; it has
never stood in need of conversion, and hence is exempt from the
hysterical ardours and languors of Diana Vaughan. But the archbishop's
interpretation of Masonry is based upon another interpretation of
Kabbalistic literature, which can be accepted by no person who is
acquainted therewith, and would have scarcely been attempted by himself
if he had known it at first hand. In the matter of Palladian. Masonry,
he can tell us only what he has learned from Ricoux.

It is agreed upon all sides that we dismiss Dr Bataille. He does not
disclose the name and nation which he adopted during his Masonic career,
and hence the persons whom he states

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

that he met are, with one exception, not in a position to contradict
him, because they are not in a position to identify him. The personality
of the one exception is not particularised, but may be guessed without
the exercise of much skill in divination, and here I must leave the
point, not because I am disinclined to speak plainly and thus risk the
possibility of being mistaken, but because Dr Bataille informs us that
this one confidant is in his power, and that he could procure for him or
her a term of penal servitude. Lastly, he is not in a position to
exhibit his Palladian diplomas, which were demanded by the dispensing
authorities when he first fell under their suspicion and have not been
returned to him. While we are therefore prevented from checking his
affirmations in what most concerns our inquiry, we see that at all
points where it is possible to control him he has completely broken
down; the miraculous element of his narrative transcends credit, and his
statements upon a multitude of ordinary matters of fact are beneath it.
When we connect these points with the mode of publication he has seen

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

fit to adopt, and remember the kind of motive which usually attaches to
that mode, we have no other course but to set him entirely outside
consideration. His book is evidentially valuable only to close the
question. He may have visited Charleston; he may have made the personal
acquaintance of Albert Pike, Gallatin Mackey, Phileas Walder, and his
daughter Sophia; three of these persons are dead and cannot testify; the
fourth acknowledges that he attended her medically at Naples; she
protests against his betrayal, but she does not betray in return his
Masonic identity, though I need scarcely add that she does not
substantiate his statements. On these points my readers may be
reasonably left to form their own judgments.

Miss Diana Vaughan is a lady who, in spite of much notoriety, is not in
evidence; with one exception no credible person has ever said that he
has seen her; that exception is Signor Margiotta. It would not, however,
be the strongest line of criticism to dispute her existence; we may
accept very gladly all that her Italian friend is good enough to say in
regard to her

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

personal characteristics, but we know that she has tried to deceive us,
with conspicuous ill-success it is true, yet in a gross and most wicked
manner. As to Signor Margiotta himself, with all his imperfections, he
is the strongest witness to the discovery of Leo Taxil. I have admitted
the great apparent force which belongs to his enormous array of
documentary evidence, and I have established the nature of the
complications which make that evidence extremely difficult to accept.

Lastly, Jean Kostka and M. A. C. de la Rive, though they came within the
scope of our inquiry, are not Palladian witnesses. It would appear,
therefore, that Leo Taxil and M. Adolphe Ricoux are, for the most part,
neither honoured in their witnesses nor in a position to stand alone.
The evidence which has grown out of their discovery is in an exceedingly
corrupt state, and in summing the Question of Lucifer, as an. impartial
critic, I shall therefore simply propose to my readers the following
general statement:—In the year 1891, Leo Taxil and M. Adolphe Ricoux
state that they have discovered certain

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

documents which show the existence of a Palladian Society, claimed to be
at the head of Masonry, and in the year 1895 Signor Domenico Margiotta
states that he belonged to that society and gives further particulars
concerning it. A number of other witnesses have also come forward whose
evidence must, for various reasons, be completely rejected. It is in all
respects much to be deplored that Signor Margiotta has largely and
approvingly cited the testimony of two of these witnesses who are most
open to condemnation, and that he has himself exercised an imperfect and
uncritical censorship over papers which have come into his hands. From
first to last all documents are open to strong suspicion.

Such is the slender residue which results from this sifting of Lucifer
if I have made my final statement thus indeterminate in its character,
it is because I wish my readers to form their own conclusions as to Leo
Taxil and Domenico Margiotta, and because I believe that, before long,
further evidence will be forthcoming. I have little personal doubt as to
the ultimate nature of the verdict, but at the present stage of

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

the inquiry, with all the exposures which I have had the satisfaction of
making fresh and clear in my mind, I would dissuade any one from saying
that there is "nothing in" the Question of Lucifer; it is at least
obvious that there is no end to its impostures, in which respect I do
not claim to have done more than trim the fringes of the question. It is
not therefore closed, and, if I may so venture to affirm, it assumes a
fresh interest with the appearance of this book. It deserves to rank
among the most extraordinary literary swindles of the present, perhaps
of any, century. The field which it covers is enormous, and there is
room, and more than room, for a score of other investigators who will
none fail of their reward. Within the limits of a moderate volume, it is
impossible to take into account the whole of the issues involved, while
the importance which is to be attributed to the subject should not be
lightly regarded, seeing that in France, at the time of writing, it
provides an apparently remunerative circulation to two monthly reviews,
and that its literature is otherwise still growing. At the present

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

moment, and for the purposes of this criticism, a few concluding
statements alone remain to be made; they concern the position of Italy
in connection with the so-called Universal Masonry, some aspects of the
history of the Scotch Rite in connection with the recent revelations,
and the interference of the Catholic Church, wisely or not, in the
question.

The one Mason whose rank corresponds in Italy to that of Albert Pike in
America is not Adriano Lemmi, but Signor Timoteo Riboli, Sovereign Grand
Commander of the 33rd and last degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scotch
Rite. Adriano Lemmi is, or was, Grand Master of the Craft Section of
Italy and Deputy Grand Commander only of the Supreme Council of Italy of
the 33°. The pretended Grand Central Directory of Naples, which governs
all Europe in the interests of Charleston, with Giovanni Bovio for
Sovereign Director, is a Masonic myth—*pace* Signor Margiotta. Signor
Bovio is a Member of the Grand Master's Council and a 33° at Rome. There
is a Neapolitan Section of the Ancient and Accepted Rite,

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

but it has powers only up to the 30°, and as such has no authority in
general government, nor does Bovio appear to be a member of the
Neapolitan section, though as a member of Lemmi's Council, and a 33°, he
no doubt has his share in the government of the Neapolitans.

The history of the Ancient and Accepted Rite as given by Signor
Margiotta and sketched in my second chapter is an incorrect history. The
facts are as follows:—A person named Isaac Long was engaged in
propagating the French Rite of Perfection of 25° in America before 1796;
in that year he gave the degrees to one de Grasse and also to de la
Hogue, who established a Consistory of the 25° at Charleston. In 1802
this Consistory had blossomed into a Supreme Grand Council, 33°, and at
a little later period they forged the name of Voltaire's friend,
Frederick the Great of Prussia, to what Mr Yarker terms "one of the most
stupidly concocted documents ever palmed upon an ignorant public."
However this may be, Long does not seem to have been at any time a
member of this body. This is how the "Mother

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Council of the
World" is said to have come into existence, and Charleston has
established Supreme Councils 33°, between 1811 and 1846, in France,
Ireland, Scotland, England, and elsewhere.

There is no foundation for the legend of the Charleston Templar relics,
namely, the skull of Jacques de Molay and the Baphomet, beyond the fact
that one of the grades, the 23° of the old Rite of Perfection and the
30° of the modern Rite, uses a representation of the Papal tiara in its
ceremonies and also of the crown of France, in allusion to Pope Clement
V. and Philip le Bel.

I can find no Mason, of what grade or rite soever, who has ever heard of
Pike's Sepher d’Hebarim, his book called Apadno, or lectures in which he
imparted extracts unacknowledged from Éliphas Lévi; they may rank with
triangular provinces, Lucifer *chez lui*, the skull of Molay, and the
Palladium; in other words, they are lying myths. Nothing which Pike has
or is known to have written has any Luciferian complexion. He has
collected into his lectures a mass of mystical material from

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

rites like Memphis and Misraïm, but it is alchemical, theosophical, or
dealing with ancient symbolism, the mysteries, pre-christian theology,
&c. As to Pike himself, a Mason of high authority observes in a private
letter:—"He was one of the greatest men who ever adorned our Order. He
was a giant among men, his learning was most profound, his eloquence
great, and his wisdom comprehensive; he was a scholar in many languages,
and a most voluminous writer. He was an ornament to the profession to
which he belonged, namely, Law; he fought the cause of the red man
against the American government many years ago, and prevailed in a large
degree. I believe he was a true and humble servant of the One True and
Living God, and a lover of humanity."

Having regard to all these facts, it is much to be regretted that the
Catholic Church should have warmly approved and welcomed the extremely
unsatisfactory testimony which connects Masonry with Diabolism. When the
report of Diabolism first reached the ears of English mystics, and it
was understood that the Church had concerned

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

herself very seriously in the matter, I must confess that a hidden
motive was immediately suspected. A recrudescence of mediaeval Black
Magic was in no sense likely to attain such proportions as to warrant
the august interference; it seemed much as if Her Majesty's government
should think it worth while to suppress the League of the White Rose.
But when it transpired that the Question of Lucifer was a new aspect of
the old question of Catholic hostility to Masonry, the astonishment
evaporated; it was at once seen that Modern Diabolism had acquired an
extrinsic importance because it was alleged to be connected with that
Fraternity which the Church has long regarded as her implacable enemy. I
must be permitted to register clearly the general conviction that if
black magic, sorcery, and the Sabbath up to date had been merely revived
demonomania, had been merely concerned with the black paternoster, the
black mass, or even with transcendental sensualism and the ordeal of the
pastos, the Roman hierarchy would not have taken action as it bias, nor
would the witnesses concerning

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

these things have been welcomed with open arms; as a fact, no interest
whatsoever is manifested in the doings of diabolists who operate apart
from Masonry. Now, the hostility of Continental Masons towards
Catholicism, in so far as it provably exists, has been largely or
exclusively created by the hostility of the Church, and we know that he
hates most who hates the first. In so far, therefore, as the Church has
concerned herself by encouragement, which has something of the aspect of
incitement, in the recent revelations, we shall have to bear in mind her
attitude, while the history of forged decretals and bogus apostolic
epistles will reveal to us that she does not invariably exercise a
searching criticism upon documents which serve her purpose.

The sorcery of the nineteenth century is under no circumstances likely
to justify the faggots of the fifteenth; it might be easier to justify
the sorcery. As much by mystics as by the Church Catholic, modern black
magic may be left to perish of its own corruption. But an attempt on the
part of the Church to fasten the charge of

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

diabolism on the Masonic Fraternity has credibly another motive than
that of political hostility, which seems held to justify almost any
weapon that comes to hand. At the bottom of her hatred of Masonry there
is also her dread of the mystic. Transcendental science claims to have
the key of her doctrines, and there is evidence that she fears that
claim. Black magic, which, by the hypothesis, is the use of the most
evil forces for the most evil purposes, she does not fear, for it wears
its 'condemnation on its forehead; but mysticism, which accepts her own
dogmas and interprets them in a sense which is not her own, which claims
a certitude in matters of religion that transcends the certitude of
faith, seems to hint that at one point it is possible to undermine her
foundations. Hence she has ever suspected the mystic, and a part of her
suspicion of Masonry has been by reason of its connection with the
mystic; she has intuitively divined that connection, which by Masons
themselves, for the most part, is not dreamed at this day, and when
suggested is generally somewhat lightly cast aside, It would

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

be quite out of place at the close of the present inquiry, which, from a
wholly independent standpoint, has sought to justify a great fraternity
from a singularly foul aspersion, to attempt enforcing upon Masons a
special view of their institution, but it is desirable, at the same
time, to be just towards the Catholic Church, and to affirm that we, as
mystics, are on this point substantially in agreement with her. The
connection in question was for a time visible, and. remains in
historical remembrance; from the beginning of its public appearance till
the close of the eighteenth century, the history of Masonry is part of
transcendental history. That connection has now ceased to manifest, but
there is another which is integral and permanent, and is a matter of
common principles and common objects. Let it be remembered, however,
that connection is not identity; it is not intended to say that the
threshold of Masonry is a gate of Mysticism, but that there is a
community of purpose, of symbolism, of history, and indirectly of
origin, between the two systems,

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

All true religion, all true morality, all true mysticism have but one
object, and that is to act on humanity, collective and individual, in
such a manner that it shall correspond efficiently with the great law of
development, and co-operate consciously therewith to achieve the end of
development. Under all the mysteries of its symbolism, behind the
impressive parables of its ritual, and as equally, but if possible more
effectually concealed, beneath the commonplace insistences of its moral
maxims, this end is also proposed by the occult initiations of Masonry;
and if it be defined more explicitly as the perfection of man both here
and hereafter, and his union with what is highest in the universe, we
shall see more clearly not only that it is the sole fundamental
principle of all religion, its very essence, divested of creed and
dogma, but also inherent in the nature of symbolical Masonry, and
"inwrought in the whole system of Masonic ceremonies."

As mystics, however, we consider that the ethical standard of Masonry
will produce good citizens to society and good brethren to the

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fraternity, but it
will not produce saints to Christ. There is an excellence which is other
than the moral, and stands to morality in precisely the same relation
that genius bears to talent. The moral virtues are not the *summum
bonum*, nor the totality of all forces at work in the development of
man, nor actually the perfect way, though they are the gate of the way
of perfection. Now, the mystic claims to be in possession of the higher
law which transcends the ethical, from which the ethical derives, and to
which it must be referred for its reason. That the lost secret of
Freemasonry is concerned with special applications of this higher law
which connect with mysticism, we, as mystics, do hold and can make
evident in its proper time and place. Here, and personally, I am
concerned only with a comprehensive statement. In addition to its body
of moral law, which is founded in the general conscience, or in the
light of nature, Masonry has a body of symbolism, of which the source is
not generally known, and by which it is identified with movements and
nodes of thought, and with

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

evolutionary processes, having reference to regions already described as
transcending the ethical world and concerned with the spiritual man.
From every Masonic candidate, ignoring the schismatic and excommunicated
sections, there is required a distinct attitude of mind towards the
world without and the world within. He is required to believe in the
existence of a Supreme Intelligence, with which his essential nature
corresponds in the possession of an indestructible principle of
conscious or understanding life. Beyond these doctrines, Masonry is
wholly unsectarian; it recognises no other dogmas; it accredits no form
of faith. Now, Mysticism is a body of spiritual methods and processes,
based, like the Masonic body of ethical methods and processes, on these
same doctrines. Every man who believes in God and immortality is the raw
material of a mystic; every man who believes that there is a
discoverable way to God is on the path of conscious mysticism. As this
path has been pursued in all ages and nations by persons of widely
divergent creeds, it is clear that however much

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

mysticism has been identified with special spheres of religious thought
and activity, it is independent of all.

But while Masonry would appear to regard the evolution of our physical,
intellectual, and moral nature as the best preparation for that larger
existence which is included in its central doctrine, and would thus work
inward from without, mysticism deems that the evolution of the spiritual
man and the production of a human spirit at one with the divine,
constitute the missing condition requisite for the reconstruction of
humanity, and would thus work outward from within. Neither Mason nor
Mystic, however, can ignore either method. The one supplements the
other; and seeing that the processes of mysticism are distinct from what
is still a subject of derision under the name of transcendental
phenomena, as they are wholly philosophical and interior, not to be
appreciated by the senses, a secret experience within the depths and
heights of our spiritual being, an institution which believes in God and
immortality, and by the fact of immortality in

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

the subsistence of an intimate relation between the spirit and God, will
not look suspiciously on mysticism when it comes to understand it
better.

I have spoken of Masonic symbolism, and the method of instruction in
Masonry is identical with that of mysticism;. both systems are "veiled
in allegory and illustrated by symbolism." The significance of this
correspondence would not be measurably weakened were there no similarity
in the typology, no trace of mystic influence in Masonic rite and
legend. But there is a resemblance, and the types are often identical,
though the accredited interpretation varies. Masonry, as a fact,
interprets the types which belong to our own science according to the
criterion of ethics, and thus provides a prolegomena to Mysticism, as
ethics are a necessary introduction to the inner science of the soul.
There is naturally a minor body of conventional typology which is
tolerably exclusive to the craft, but the grand and universal emblems,
characteristic of symbolical Masonry as distinct from the operative
art—these are our own

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

emblems. The All-Seeing Eye, the Burning Star, the Rough and Perfect
Ashlar, the Point within a Circle, the Pentalpha, the Seal of Solomon,
the Cubic Stone—all these belong to the most lofty and arcane order of
occult symbolism, but in mystic science they illumine more exalted zones
of the heaven of mind. The rites, legends, and mysteries of the great
Fraternity are also full of mystical allusions, and admit of mystical
interpretation in the same manner, but their evidential force is weaker,
because ceremonial and legend in. the hands of a skilful commentator can
be made to take any shape and any complexion; it is otherwise with the
symbols of the Brotherhood. which were possessed by us before the
historical appearance of Masonry. So also the Masonic reverence for
certain numbers which are apparently arbitrary in themselves is in
reality connected with a most recondite and curious system of mystic
methodical philosophy, while in the high titles of Masonic dignity there
is frequently a direct reference to Mysticism.

If we turn from these considerations and

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

approach the historical connection through those still undetermined
problems which concern the origin of Masonry, we shall discern not
unfortunately a way clear to their solution, but a significant
characteristic pervading every Masonic hypothesis almost without
exception—namely, an instinctive desire to refer Masonry in its original
form to sources that are provably mystic. In the fanciful and
extravagant period, when archæology and comparative mythology were as
yet in their childhood, this tendency was not less strong because it was
mostly quite unconscious. To pass in review before us the chief
institutions of antiquity with which Masonry was then said to be
connected, would be to sweep the whole field of transcendental history,
and when we come to a more sober period which recognised the better
claim of the building guilds to explain the beginnings of the
Fraternity, the link with Mysticism was not even then abandoned, and a
splendid variant of the Dionysian dream took back the mediæval
architects to the portals of Eleusis and of Thebes.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

When the history of Freemasonry becomes possible by the possession of
materials, its chief philosophical interest centres in one country of
Europe; there is no doubt that it exercised an immense influence upon
France during that century of quakings and quickenings which gave birth
to the great revolution, transformed civilisation in the West, and
inaugurated the modern era. Without being a political society, it was an
instrument eminently adaptable to the sub-surface determination of
political movements. At a later date it may have contributed to the
formation of Germany, as it did certainly to the creation of Italy, but
the point and centre of Masonic history is France in the eighteenth
century. To that country also is mainly confined the historical
connection between Masonry and mystic science, for the revival of
Mysticism which originated in Germany at the close of the eighteenth
century, and thence passed over to England, found its final field in
France at the period in question. There Rosicrucianism reappeared, there
Anton Mesmer recovered the initial process of transcendental

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

practice, there the Marquis de Puységur discovered clairvoyance, there
Martines de Pasqually instructed his disciples in the mysteries of
ceremonial magic; there the illustrious Saint-Martin, *le philosophe
inconnu*, developed a special system of spiritual reconstruction; there
alchemy flourished; there spiritual and political princes betook
themselves to extravagant researches after an elixir of life; there
also, as a consequence, rose up a line of magnificent impostors who
posed as initiates of the occult sciences, as possessors of the grand
secret and the grand mastery; there, finally, under the influences of
transcendental philosophy, emblematic Freemasonry took root and grew and
flourished, developing ten thousand splendours of symbolic grades, of
romantic legends, of sonorous names and titles. In a word, the Mysticism
of Europe concentrated its forces at Paris and Lyons, and all French
Mysticism gathered under the shadow of the square and compass. To that,
as to a centre, the whole movement gravitated, and thence it worked.
There is nothing to show that it endeavoured

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

to revolutionise Masonry in its own interest. The Fraternity naturally
attracted all Mystics to its ranks, and the development of the mystic
degrees took place as the result of that attraction.

By the year 1825 a variety of circumstances had combined to suspend
transcendental activity, and the connection with Masonry ended, but the
present revival of mystic thought is rapidly picking up the links of the
broken chain; secretly or unobtrusively the spirit of transcendentalism
is working within the Fraternity, and the bogus question of Lucifer is
simply a hostile and unscrupulous method of recognising that fact. If
Masonry and Mysticism could be shown in the historical world to be
separated by the great sea, the consanguinity of their intention would
remain, which is more important than external affinity, and they are
sisters by that bond. But they have not been so separated, and on either
side there is no need to be ashamed of the connection. With all brethren
of the Fraternity, "we also do believe in the resurrection of Hiram,"
and we regard

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the Temple as "an edifice immediately realisable, for we rebuild it in
our hearts." We also adore the Grand Architect, and offer our
intellectual homage, to the divine cipher which is in the centre of the
symbolic star; and we believe that some day the Mason will recognise the
Mystic. He is the heir of the great names of antiquity, the philosophers
and Hierarchs, and the spiritual kings of old; he is of the line of
Orpheus and Hermes, of the Essenes and the Magi. And all those
illustrious systems and all those splendid names with which Masonry has
ever claimed kindred belong absolutely to the history of Mysticism.

 

 

THE END

 

 

 

<span class="small">TURNBULL AND SPEARS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.</span>

 

 

 

 
