[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs48)  [Next](sfs50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_36"></span>

### XXXVI.--BULGARIAN HOSPITALITY.

ONCE upon a time, when the Lord had formed the world, he wished to see
how his people lived; he came down from heaven first of all on the
Balkan Mountains, took the form of a man with a long white beard and
white clothes; took a staff in his hand, and went about the world in the
Bulgarian land; he travelled much, a whole day long, over desolate
mountains. In the evening he came to a village to pass the night. He
went into the first house at the end of the village and sat down on the
threshold, said nothing, but meditated by himself. The mistress was in
her house doing some work, and did not see him. But now her husband came
from the field, from his plough, espied the old man, was delighted, and
said to him: 'Old man, you are very tired; you are a weary traveller.
Come into the house; rest yourself, if it is but a poor one. I will
entertain you with all that the Lord has given me--only say the word.'
The old man regarded him with cheerful eyes, went into the house and sat
down. The man and his wife quickly rose up and prepared a hospitable
meal according to what they possessed, and as nicely and as handsomely
as they could, and placed it on the table. The couple ate of their
homely meal, but the old man would not; he only smelt the homely
banquet, said nothing, but watched how the two persons enjoyed
themselves, and rejoiced. They urged him, they begged him. 'Old man, why
don't you eat? You will remain hungry. Take, and taste, and try what you
please. What we have is all here before you.' The old man only said
this: 'Eat you--eat; I am thinking of something'

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When they had
eaten their fill, they rose. The mistress went out to feed the child
because it was crying. Then said the old man to her husband: 'Do you
know what, master, if you wish to entertain me? I cannot eat everything,
but I wish for baked human flesh. Kill your little son, wash him nicely,
and place him whole on the frying-pan in the oven; only look out that
your wife does not see you, for she will weep.' He replied: 'Is this all
that you want, old man? Why did you not tell me long before, that you
might not have sat a hungry guest in the house? Did I not tell you that
all was yours that the Lord had given me? Indeed, I love you
exceedingly, old man; my heart tells me that you are good and worthy,
and now you shall see; only have a little patience, till I get ready
that which you desire.' The man went out of doors, and his wife had
begun to do some work, and had left her child to play by itself in the
moonlight till it fell asleep, without knowing what was about to take
place. Her husband stole the child, killed it with all haste, put it
entire in the frying-pan, and shut it up in the oven, that its mother
might not see it till it was cooked; he then went to the old man, sat
down by him and conversed cheerfully with him. They had not talked long,
when the old man became silent, sniffed with his nose, and said to the
servant lad: 'Go, look at the baked meat; it smells nicely; perhaps it
is cooked.'

The lad rose, went out, opened the oven to look at and take out the
baked meat. But what did he see? He was amazed and frightened at the
wonder; all the oven and all the house was glittering with the
brightness of the child. The frying-pan and the child had become gold,
and shone like the sun. The child was sitting in the frying-pan like a
big boy--handsome, cheerful, bright, and well. On his head was a crown
of pearls and precious stones; on the girdle at his waist was a sword.
In his right hand he held

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

a book of blessing; in his left hand he had a wheatsheaf full of ears;
and all this was shining more than fire, because it had all become gold.
He returned to tell the old man what a wonder had taken place, and to
ask what was to be done; but the old man was no longer there; he had
gone out in front of the house, and said to them: 'Fare ye well, and
live as ye have done till now, honourably and contentedly. Your good
hearts will have good from field and cattle, and blessing and peace upon
your children and children's children from the Lord. He will receive you
and entertain you in his heavenly house.' He then went away alone under
cover of the night, no one knows whither.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII. Cinderella](sfs50)
