[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs54)  [Next](sfs56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_41"></span>

### XLI.--THE SONS' OATH TO THEIR DYING FATHER.

THERE was an old man who had three sons and one daughter. When the time
came for the old man to die, he summoned all his three sons, and made
them promise under oath to give their sister to the first who came to
ask for her, whoever he might be. When some time had elapsed after the
father's death, an old man arrived in a two-wheeler, and asked for the
maiden in marriage. The two elder brothers would not give her to him
immediately, because he was old and poor; but the youngest insisted that
they should give her to him, reminding them of the oath they had sworn
to their father. And so they gave her in marriage to the old man, and
the old man took her away to his home. After some time, the elder
brother went on a visit to his sister. When he got there, it was a large
house, and couldn't be better. The sister was greatly delighted when she
saw her brother, and when he inquired of her how she was getting on, she
replied: 'Excellently; it can't be better.' When the brother arrived at
his sister's, the old man was not at home, but soon afterwards arrived,
and was very pleased when he saw his wife's brother, and said to him:
'We will feast and be merry; but first you shall go on my horse to fetch
him some grass, but you must cut it where the horse paws with his foot,
and not where you please.' His wife's

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

brother said to him: 'Good! brother-in-law, I will.' He then mounted the
horse and went off. As on he went, he came to a silver bridge. When he
espied the bridge and saw that it was all of silver, he became covetous,
dismounted, and pulled off a silver plate, saying: 'I may benefit
myself.' Afterwards he cut grass where he pleased, without waiting till
the horse pawed with his foot, mounted the horse again, and returned
back. On arriving at the house, he put the horse in the stable, placed
the grass before him, and went off into the house. When he arrived in
the house, the old man asked him whether he had satisfied the horse, and
whether the horse was eating the grass. He replied, 'Yes,' and that the
horse was eating. The old man said: 'It is good that I also look.' He
then went into the stable. When he got there, the horse had not touched
it. The old man understood that the grass had not been cut where he had
told him; he therefore at once sent off his brother-in-law supperless,
to go back whence he had come. On reaching home, he didn't tell his
brothers how he had fared at his brother-in-law's, but said to the
middle brother: 'Our brother-in-law salutes you, and wishes you to go to
be his guest.' After some time, the middle brother went on a visit to
his sister; but he, too, fared even as the first one. His sister's
husband sent him, too, for grass, and when he got to the silver bridge,
he, too, became covetous, like the first, pulled off a silver plate, and
did not cut the grass as his brother-in-law told him, but where he
thought fit. When he came back to his brother-in-law's house, his
brother-in-law caught him, too, out in a lie, and sent him home
supperless, like the first one. When he got home, he told nobody how he
had fared at his brother-in-law's, but said to the youngest brother:
'Our brother-in-law salutes you, and wishes you to go to visit him.'

After some time, the youngest brother, too, went off.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When his sister
espied him, she said to him: 'Only, brother, be sure not to do as our
two brothers have done.' He didn't know what they had done, and his
sister would not tell him anything more. When his sister's husband came
home, he, too, was delighted with his wife's brother, and said to him:
'We will feast and be merry, only go first on my horse and fetch him
some grass; but you will cut it there where the horse paws with his
foot, and not where you please.' He mounted the horse and went off for
the grass. When he arrived at the bridge, he was astonished at its
beauty, but was quite sorry that it hadn't those two plates; and when he
came to the middle, he looked on one side and the other, and saw under
it, where water was bubbling in a huge caldron, and human heads boiling
in it, and eagles pecking them from above. Afterwards, having passed
over the bridge, he came to a village, and, as he passed through it, saw
that there everything was sad and sorrowful, and wondered thereat, and
asked a man: 'How is this, brother, that all is so sorrowful with you?'
He replied: How should it not be sorrowful, when hail smites us every
hour, and we have nothing.' When he came out of the village, he found
two pigs on the road, and they were fighting without ceasing. He tried
to part them, but in vain, and, being unable to part them, went on
further. Thus proceeding, he came to another village, and, as he went
through, heard on all sides singing and merriment, and said to someone:
'I went through one village and found everything sorrowful, and why is
all so merry with you?' The villager answered him: 'Why should it not be
so, when every hour is productive to us, and we have all in abundance?'
Finally, the horse carried him to a very beautiful meadow. When they
were in the middle of the meadow, the horse stood still and pawed with
his foot, and he dismounted and cut grass, and returned back to the
house.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When he got to the
house, he led the horse into the stable, laid the grass before him, and
the horse immediately began to eat. When his sister's husband saw that
he had satisfied the horse, he was very pleased, and said to him: 'You
are my true brother-in-law; now let us be merry and feast.' Then they
sat down to table and began to sup. At supper the old man said to him:
'Now, tell me what you have seen.' He answered him: 'Oh, my
brother-in-law! what I have seen cannot be expressed. First I saw a very
beautiful silver bridge, but it was disfigured where it wanted a pair of
plates. Whoever took these away, the living God bath slain him!' The old
man thereupon told him: 'Your two brothers stole them. As they have
done, so have they fared. But tell me what you saw next.' His wife's
brother replied: 'At the middle under the bridge I saw a huge caldron,
where it was bubbling, and in it the heads of dead people, and eagles
were pecking them from above.' Thereupon his sister's husband said:
'Those are the eternal torments in that world. What did you see more?'
His wife's brother continued: 'I saw a village, and in it everything
miserable.' The old man said to him: 'There there is no union and no
truth, nor knowledge of God, What did you see further?' His wife's
brother said to him further: 'I saw two pigs fighting without ceasing.'
His sister's husband replied: 'Those are two brothers who do not live in
concord. What did you see further?' 'I saw another village, and in it
all was cheerful.' His sister's husband said to that: 'Those are people
after God's will; they gladly welcome and entertain everybody, and do
not drive the poor empty-handed from before their houses. Tell me what
you saw further.' His wife's brother said to him: 'I saw a very
beautiful meadow. I would stay there three days to view such beauty.'
His sister's husband replied: That is the paradise of that world, but it
is difficult to

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

attain to it.' After this they enjoyed each other's society for many
days. Finally, the wife's brother declared that he must go home, and his
sister's husband presented him with a large gift, and told him that he
recognised him immediately for an honourable man, because he had
insisted that his father's directions, which he had sworn to observe,
should be carried out, and that he would be prosperous, and his two
brothers unprosperous.

N.B.--There are two words for 'brother-in-law' in Servian: *shura*, the
wife's brother, and *zet*, the sister's husband. This makes the tale
read better in Servian than in English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII. The Wonderful Hair](sfs56)
