[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gio00)  [Next](gio02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# FOREWORD

EXCEPT for obvious differences in local color and religious background
the Mediaeval romances of Japan are much like those of Europe. Brave
knights perform incredible feats of valor, wicked tyrants are
circumvented or overthrown, supernatural influences play their good or
evil parts, and sometimes distressed damsels, as in the tragic little
story here retold, give up the quest of worldly happiness and resign
themselves to lives of prayer. The chief differences are these: the
frequency of suicide, for in the Orient the Almighty did not fix His
canon ’gainst self-slaughter; the position of women in a civilization
that knew nothing of the Mariolatry of our Middle Ages; and a weakening
of the motive of love between the sexes, which is counterbalanced by an
increased emphasis on the loyalty between squire and knight, knight and
overlord, and above all on the loyalty of wife to husband.

The Heike Monogatari, or Tales of the Heike Clan who were all-powerful
until the vices of their leader Kiyomori assisted the brave young
warriors of the Taira to overthrow them, were being sung to musical
accompaniment by the middle of the 13th Century. There were numerous
versions; and,

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

as in the case of the Homeric poems, later redactions probably show
traces of composite origin. One version seems to be as complete and
unified as Sir Thomas Mallory's Morte d’Arthur, and from this the
episode of the two dancing girls, Gio Gozen and Hotoke Gozen, has been
translated for separate publication by the Japan Society.

It might have been possible to reprint the story from the only complete
version of the Heike Monogatari existing in English--that of Professor
A. L. Sadler, published in the Transactions of the Asiatic Society of
Japan Vol. XLVI, Part II; but it seemed to the Committee in charge that
the use of this very scholarly translation, filled as it is with exact
terms literally rendered, would make the pathos and the beauty of the
tale, now first retold for itself alone, less easy of access to readers
who care rather for literature and life than. for exactness of
rendition; and under the expert guidance of Professor R. Tsunoda,
Curator of the Japanese Library at Columbia University, an entirely new
literal translation was prepared for us by Miss Helen B. Chapin whose
work then. was given over to an alchemist and transmuted into the gold
of simple English prose.

The illustration used as a frontispiece seems to have drawn its
inspiration from a version of the story in which Gio sat

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

beside Kiyomori while Hotoke danced; and the costume of the dancer is
not quite that described in our text. It is, however, the best known and
perhaps the most beautiful pictorial representation of the episode; and
that details of costume as well as of text may have changed in the
course of centuries is not surprising. The actual scene depicted is
supposed to have occurred in the latter part of the 12th Century. The
print was issued for New Years of 1765 and contains calendar marks for
that year. It is thought to have been designed by Harunobu, the most
brilliant as well as the most exquisite Ukiyo-ye artist of that time,
and the fact that it bears the signature and seal of Kyosen--the patron
or central figure of a group of artists to which Harunobu belonged--does
not necessarily invalidate that supposition.

The thanks of the Committee are due to Dr. Tsunoda, Miss Chapin and Mr.
Torrence, and are given with sincere appreciation.

L. V. L.

*New York, November* 1934

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Gio](gio02.md)
