<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu007)  [Next](deu009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 8

<span id="an_deu:8:1">1</span> All the
[commandments](errata.htm#1) which I command thee this day shall ye
observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the
land which the LORD swore unto your fathers. <span
id="an_deu:8:2">2</span> And thou shalt remember all the way which the
LORD thy God hath led thee these forty years in the wilderness, that He
might afflict thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart,
whether thou wouldest keep His commandments, or no. <span
id="an_deu:8:3">3</span> And He afflicted thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy
fathers know; that He might make thee know that man doth not live by
bread only, but by every thing that proceedeth out of the mouth of the
LORD doth man live. <span id="an_deu:8:4">4</span> Thy raiment waxed not
old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years. <span
id="an_deu:8:5">5</span> And thou shalt consider in thy heart, that, as
a man chasteneth his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thee. <span
id="an_deu:8:6">6</span> And thou shalt keep the commandments of the
LORD thy God, to walk in His ways, and to fear Him. <span
id="an_deu:8:7">7</span> For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a good
land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths, springing
forth in valleys and hills; <span id="an_deu:8:8">8</span> a land of
wheat and barley, and vines and fig-trees and pomegranates; a land of
olive-trees and honey; <span id="an_deu:8:9">9</span> a land wherein
thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing
in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest
dig brass. <span id="an_deu:8:10">10</span> And thou shalt eat and be
satisfied, and bless the LORD thy God for the good land which He hath
given thee. <span id="an_deu:8:11">11</span> Beware lest thou forget the
LORD thy God, in not keeping His commandments, and His ordinances, and
His statutes, which I command thee this day; <span
id="an_deu:8:12">12</span> lest when thou hast eaten and art satisfied,
and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; <span
id="an_deu:8:13">13</span> and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply,
and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is
multiplied; <span id="an_deu:8:14">14</span> then thy heart be lifted
up, and thou forget the LORD thy God, who brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; <span
id="an_deu:8:15">15</span> who led thee through the great and dreadful
wilderness, wherein were serpents, fiery serpents, and scorpions, and
thirsty ground where was no water; who brought thee forth water out of
the rock of flint; <span id="an_deu:8:16">16</span> who

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not; that
He might afflict thee, and that He might prove thee, to do thee good at
thy latter end; <span id="an_deu:8:17">17</span> and thou say in thy
heart: \`My power and the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth.'
<span id="an_deu:8:18">18</span> But thou shalt remember the LORD thy
God, for it is He that giveth thee power to get wealth; that He may
establish His covenant which He swore unto thy fathers, as it is this
day.

<span id="an_deu:8:19">19</span> And it shall be, if thou shalt forget
the LORD thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship
them, I forewarn you this day that ye shall surely perish. <span
id="an_deu:8:20">20</span> As the nations that the LORD maketh to perish
before you, so shall ye perish; because ye would not hearken unto the
voice of the LORD your God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 9](deu009)

</div>
