<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu024)  [Next](deu026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 25

<span id="an_deu:25:1">1</span> If there be a controversy between men,
and they come unto judgment, and the judges judge them,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

by justifying the righteous, and condemning the wicked, <span
id="an_deu:25:2">2</span> then it shall be, if the wicked man deserve to
be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten
before his face, according to the measure of his wickedness, by number.
<span id="an_deu:25:3">3</span> Forty stripes he may give him, he shall
not exceed; lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with
many stripes, then thy brother should be dishonoured before thine eyes.

<span id="an_deu:25:4">4</span> Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he
treadeth out the corn.

<span id="an_deu:25:5">5</span> If brethren dwell together, and one of
them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not be married
abroad unto one not of his kin; her husband's brother shall go in unto
her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of a husband's
brother unto her. <span id="an_deu:25:6">6</span> And it shall be, that
the first-born that she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother
that is dead, that his name be not blotted out of Israel. <span
id="an_deu:25:7">7</span> And if the man like not to take his brother's
wife, then his brother's wife shall go up to the gate unto the elders,
and say: \`My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a
name in Israel; he will not perform the duty of a husband's brother unto
me.' <span id="an_deu:25:8">8</span> Then the elders of his city shall
call him, and speak unto him; and if he stand, and say: \`I like not to
take her'; <span id="an_deu:25:9">9</span> then shall his brother's wife
draw nigh unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe
from off his foot, and spit in his face; and she shall answer and say:
\`So shall it be done unto the man that doth not build up his brother's
house.' <span id="an_deu:25:10">10</span> And his name shall be called
in Israel The house of him that had his shoe loosed.

<span id="an_deu:25:11">11</span> When men strive together one with
another, and the wife of the one draweth near to deliver her husband out
of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and
taketh him by the secrets; <span id="an_deu:25:12">12</span> then thou
shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall have no pity.

<span id="an_deu:25:13">13</span> Thou shalt not have in thy bag diverse
weights, a great and a small. <span id="an_deu:25:14">14</span> Thou
shalt not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small. <span
id="an_deu:25:15">15</span> A perfect and just weight shalt thou have; a
perfect and just measure shalt thou have; that thy days may be long upon
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. <span
id="an_deu:25:16">16</span> For all that do such things, even all that
do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_deu:25:17">17</span> Remember what Amalek did unto thee by
the way as ye came forth out of Egypt; <span
id="an_deu:25:18">18</span> how he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, all that were enfeebled in thy rear, when thou wast
faint and weary; and he feared not God. <span
id="an_deu:25:19">19</span> Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God
hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it,
that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven;
thou shalt not forget.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 26](deu026)

</div>
