<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu020)  [Next](deu022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_deu:21:1">1</span> If one be found slain in the land which
the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it
be not known who hath smitten him; <span id="an_deu:21:2">2</span> then
thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto
the cities which are round about him that is slain. <span
id="an_deu:21:3">3</span> And it shall be, that the city which is
nearest unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a
heifer of the herd, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not
drawn in the yoke. <span id="an_deu:21:4">4</span> And the elders of
that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which may
neither be plowed nor sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in
the valley. <span id="an_deu:21:5">5</span> And the priests the sons of
Levi shall come near—for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to minister
unto Him, and to bless in the name of the LORD; and according to their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be. <span
id="an_deu:21:6">6</span> And all the elders of that city, who are
nearest unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over tin heifer whose
neck was broken in the valley. <span id="an_deu:21:7">7</span> And they
shall speak and say: \`Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have
our eyes seen it. <span id="an_deu:21:8">8</span> Forgive, O LORD, Thy
people Israel whom Thou hast redeemed, and suffer not innocent blood to
remain in the midst of Thy people Israel.' And the blood shall be
forgiven them. <span id="an_deu:21:9">9</span> So shalt thou put away
the innocent blood from the midst of thee, when thou shalt do that which
is right in the eyes of the LORD.

 

‏כי תצא‎

<span id="an_deu:21:10">10</span> When thou goest forth to battle
against thine enemies, and the LORD thy God delivereth them into thy
hands, and thou carriest them away captive, <span
id="an_deu:21:11">11</span> and seest among the captives a woman of
goodly form, and thou hast a desire unto her, and wouldest take her to
thee to wife; <span id="an_deu:21:12">12</span> then thou shalt bring
her home to thy house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;
<span id="an_deu:21:13">13</span> and she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thy house, and bewail her
father and her mother a full month; and after that thou mayest go in
unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife. <span
id="an_deu:21:14">14</span> And it shall be, if thou have no delight in
her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not
sell her at all for money, thou shalt not deal with her as a slave,
because thou hast humbled her.

<span id="an_deu:21:15">15</span> If a man have two wives, the one
beloved, and the other hated, and they have borne him children, both the
beloved and the hated; and if the first-born son be hers that was hated;
<span id="an_deu:21:16">16</span> then it shall be, in the day that he
causeth his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

son of the beloved the first-born before the son of the hated, who is
the first-born; <span id="an_deu:21:17">17</span> but he shall
acknowledge the first-born, the son of the hated, by giving him a double
portion of all that he hath; for he is the first-fruits of his strength;
the right of the first-born is his.

<span id="an_deu:21:18">18</span> If a man have a stubborn and
rebellious son, that will not hearken to the voice of his father, or the
voice of his mother, and though they chasten him, will not hearken unto
them; <span id="an_deu:21:19">19</span> then shall his father and his
mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city,
and unto the gate of his place; <span id="an_deu:21:20">20</span> and
they shall say unto the elders of his city: \`This our son is stubborn
and rebellious, he doth not hearken to our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.' <span id="an_deu:21:21">21</span> And all the men of his city
shall stone him with stones, that he die; so shalt thou put away the
evil from the midst of thee; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.

<span id="an_deu:21:22">22</span> And if a man have committed a sin
worthy of death, and he be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree;
<span id="an_deu:21:23">23</span> his body shall not remain all night
upon the tree, but thou shalt surely bury him the same day; for he that
is hanged is a reproach unto God; that thou defile not thy land which
the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 22](deu022)

</div>
