<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu012)  [Next](deu014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 13

<span id="an_deu:13:1">1</span> All this word which I command you, that
shall ye observe to do; thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from
it.

<span id="an_deu:13:2">2</span> If there arise in the midst of thee a
prophet, or a dreamer of dreams—and he give thee a sign or a wonder,
<span id="an_deu:13:3">3</span> and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee—saying: \`Let us go after other gods, which
thou hast not known, and let us serve them'; <span
id="an_deu:13:4">4</span> thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that
prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams; for the LORD your God putteth
you to proof, to know whether ye do

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul. <span
id="an_deu:13:5">5</span> After the LORD your God shall ye walk, and Him
shall ye fear, and His commandments shall ye keep, and unto His voice
shall ye hearken, and Him shall ye serve, and unto Him shall ye cleave.
<span id="an_deu:13:6">6</span> And that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken perversion against
the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the house of bondage, to draw thee aside out of the
way which the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put
away the evil from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_deu:13:7">7</span> If thy brother, the son of thy mother,
or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend,
that is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying: \`Let us go and
serve other gods', which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;
<span id="an_deu:13:8">8</span> of the gods of the peoples that are
round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end
of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; <span
id="an_deu:13:9">9</span> thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken
unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare,
neither shalt thou conceal him; <span id="an_deu:13:10">10</span> but
thou shalt surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him
to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people. <span
id="an_deu:13:11">11</span> And thou shalt stone him with stones, that
he die; because he hath sought to draw thee away from the LORD thy God,
who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
<span id="an_deu:13:12">12</span> And all Israel shall hear, and fear,
and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is in the midst of
thee.

<span id="an_deu:13:13">13</span> If thou shalt hear tell concerning one
of thy cities, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to dwell there,
saying: <span id="an_deu:13:14">14</span> \`Certain base fellows are
gone out from the midst of thee, and have drawn away the inhabitants of
their city, saying: Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not
known'; <span id="an_deu:13:15">15</span> then shalt thou inquire, and
make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the
thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in the midst of thee;
<span id="an_deu:13:16">16</span> thou shalt surely smite the
inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it
utterly, and all that is therein and the cattle thereof, with the edge
of the sword. <span id="an_deu:13:17">17</span> And thou shalt gather
all the spoil of it into the midst of the broad place thereof, and shalt
burn with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, unto the
LORD thy God; and it shall be a heap for ever; it shall not be built
again. <span id="an_deu:13:18">18</span> And there shall cleave nought
of the devoted thing to thy hand, that the LORD may turn from the
fierceness of His anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon
thee, and multiply thee, as He hath sworn unto thy fathers; <span
id="an_deu:13:19">19</span> when thou shalt hearken to the voice of the
LORD thy God, to keep all His commandments which I command thee this
day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 14](deu014)

</div>
