<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu008)  [Next](deu010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEUTERONOMY CHAPTER 9

<span id="an_deu:9:1">1</span> Hear, O Israel: thou art to pass over the
Jordan this day, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier
than thyself, cities great and fortified up to heaven, <span
id="an_deu:9:2">2</span> a people great and tall, the sons of the
Anakim, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say: \`Who can
stand before the sons of Anak?' <span id="an_deu:9:3">3</span> Know
therefore this day, that the LORD thy God is He who goeth over before
thee as a devouring fire; He will destroy them, and He will bring them
down before thee; so shalt thou drive them out, and make them to perish
quickly, as the LORD hath spoken unto thee. <span
id="an_deu:9:4">4</span> Speak not thou in thy heart, after that the
LORD thy God hath thrust them out from before thee, saying: \`For my
righteousness the LORD hath brought me in to possess this land'; whereas
for the wickedness of these nations the LORD doth drive them out from
before thee. <span id="an_deu:9:5">5</span> Not for thy righteousness,
or for the uprightness of thy heart, dost thou go in to possess their
land; but for the wickedness of these nations the LORD thy God doth
drive them out from before thee, and that He may establish the word
which the LORD swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob. <span id="an_deu:9:6">6</span> Know therefore that it is not for
thy righteousness that the LORD thy God giveth thee this good land to
possess it; for thou art a stiffnecked people.

<span id="an_deu:9:7">7</span> Remember, forget thou not, how thou didst
make the LORD thy God wroth in the wilderness; from the day that thou
didst go forth out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place,
ye have been rebellious against the LORD. <span
id="an_deu:9:8">8</span> Also in Horeb ye made the LORD wroth, and the
LORD was angered with you to have destroyed you. <span
id="an_deu:9:9">9</span> When I was gone up into the mount to receive
the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made
with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights; I did
neither eat bread nor drink water. <span id="an_deu:9:10">10</span> And
the LORD delivered unto me the two tables of stone written with the
finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words, which
the LORD spoke with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the
day of the assembly. <span id="an_deu:9:11">11</span> And it came to
pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the LORD gave me
the two tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant. <span
id="an_deu:9:12">12</span> And the LORD said unto me: \`Arise, get thee
down quickly from hence; for thy people that thou hast brought forth out
of Egypt have dealt corruptly; they are quickly turned aside out of the
way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.' <span
id="an_deu:9:13">13</span> Furthermore the LORD spoke unto me, saying:
\`I have seen this people, and, behold,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

it is a stiffnecked people; <span id="an_deu:9:14">14</span> let Me
alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under
heaven; and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than
they.' <span id="an_deu:9:15">15</span> So I turned and came down from
the mount, and the mount burned with fire; and the two tables of the
covenant were in my two hands. <span id="an_deu:9:16">16</span> And I
looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the LORD your God; ye had
made you a molten calf; ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which
the LORD had commanded you. <span id="an_deu:9:17">17</span> And I took
hold of the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and broke
them before your eyes. <span id="an_deu:9:18">18</span> And I fell down
before the LORD, as at the first, forty days and forty nights; I did
neither eat bread nor drink water; because of all your sin which ye
sinned, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, to
provoke Him. <span id="an_deu:9:19">19</span> For I was in dread of the
anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the LORD was wroth against you to
destroy you. But the LORD hearkened unto me that time also. <span
id="an_deu:9:20">20</span> Moreover the LORD was very angry with Aaron
to have destroyed him; and I prayed for Aaron also the same time. <span
id="an_deu:9:21">21</span> And I took your sin, the calf which ye had
made, and burnt it with fire, and beat it in pieces, grinding it very
small, until it was as fine as dust; and I cast the dust thereof into
the brook that descended out of the mount.— <span
id="an_deu:9:22">22</span> And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at
Kibroth-hattaavah, ye made the LORD wroth. <span
id="an_deu:9:23">23</span> And when the LORD sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying: \`Go up and possess the land which I have given
you'; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the LORD your God, and
ye believed Him not, nor hearkened to His voice. <span
id="an_deu:9:24">24</span> Ye have been rebellious against the LORD from
the day that I knew you.— <span id="an_deu:9:25">25</span> So I fell
down before the LORD the forty days and forty nights that I fell down;
because the LORD had said He would destroy you. <span
id="an_deu:9:26">26</span> And I prayed unto the LORD, and said: \`O
Lord GOD, destroy not Thy people and Thine inheritance, that Thou hast
redeemed through Thy greatness, that Thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt with a mighty hand. <span id="an_deu:9:27">27</span> Remember Thy
servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stuhbornness of
this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin; <span
id="an_deu:9:28">28</span> lest the land whence Thou broughtest us out
say: Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land which He
promised unto them, and because He hated them, He hath brought them out
to slay them in the wilderness. <span id="an_deu:9:29">29</span> Yet
they are Thy people and Thine inheritance, that Thou didst bring out hy
Thy great power and by Thy outstretched arm.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 10](deu010)

</div>
