<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo036)  [Next](exo038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 37

<span id="an_exo:37:1">1</span> And Bezalel made the ark of acacia-wood:
two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the
breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it. <span
id="an_exo:37:2">2</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold within and
without, and made a crown of gold to it round about. <span
id="an_exo:37:3">3</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold, in the
four feet thereof: even two rings on the one side of it, and two rings
on the other side of it. <span id="an_exo:37:4">4</span> And he made
staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold. <span
id="an_exo:37:5">5</span> And he put the staves into the rings on the
sides of the ark, to bear the ark. <span id="an_exo:37:6">6</span> And
he made an ark-cover of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof. <span
id="an_exo:37:7">7</span> And <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> he made
two cherubim of gold: of beaten work made he them, at the two ends of
the ark-cover: <span id="an_exo:37:8">8</span> one cherub at the one
end, and one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the ark-cover
made he the cherubim at the two ends thereof. <span
id="an_exo:37:9">9</span> And the cherubim spread out their wings on
high, screening the ark-cover with their wings, with their faces one to
another; toward the ark-cover were the faces of the cherubim.

<span id="an_exo:37:10">10</span> And he made the table of acacia-wood:
two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and
a cubit and a half the height thereof. <span
id="an_exo:37:11">11</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made
thereto a crown of gold round about. <span
id="an_exo:37:12">12</span> And he made unto it a border of a
handbreadth round about, and made a golden crown to the border thereof
round about. <span id="an_exo:37:13">13</span> And he cast for it four
rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that were on the
four feet thereof. <span id="an_exo:37:14">14</span> Close by the border
were the rings, the holders for the staves to bear the table. <span
id="an_exo:37:15">15</span> And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and
overlaid them with gold, to bear the table. <span
id="an_exo:37:16">16</span> And he made the vessels which were upon the
table, the dishes thereof, and the pans thereof, and the bowls thereof,
and the jars thereof, wherewith to pour out, of pure gold.

<span id="an_exo:37:17">17</span> And he made the candlestick of pure
gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick, even its base, and its
shaft; its cups, its knops, and its flowers, were of one piece with it.
<span id="an_exo:37:18">18</span> And there were six branches going out
of the sides thereof: three branches of the candlestick out of the one
side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other
side thereof; <span id="an_exo:37:19">19</span> three cups made like
almond-blossoms in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three cups made
like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower. So for
the six branches going out of the candlestick. <span
id="an_exo:37:20">20</span> And in the candlesticks were four cups made
like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof; <span
id="an_exo:37:21">21</span> and a knop under two branches of one piece
with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a knop
under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out
of it. <span id="an_exo:37:22">22</span> Their knops and their branches
were of one piece with it; the whole of it was one beaten work of pure
gold. <span id="an_exo:37:23">23</span> And he made the lamps thereof,
seven, and the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, of pure gold.
<span id="an_exo:37:24">24</span> Of a talent of pure gold made he it,
and all the vessels thereof.

<span id="an_exo:37:25">25</span> And he made the altar of incense of
acacia-wood: a cubit was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof, four-square; and two cubits was the height thereof; the horns
thereof were of one piece with it. <span id="an_exo:37:26">26</span> And
he overlaid it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof
round about and the horns of it; and he made unto a crown of gold round
about. <span id="an_exo:37:27">27</span> And he made for it two golden
rings under the crown thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two
sides of it, for holders for staves wherewith to bear it. <span
id="an_exo:37:28">28</span> And he made the staves of acacia wood, and
overlaid them with gold. <span id="an_exo:37:29">29</span> And he made
the holy anointing oil;. and the pure incense of sweet spices, after the
art of the perfumer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 38](exo038)

</div>
