<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo011)  [Next](exo013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 12

<span id="an_exo:12:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron
in the land of Egypt, saying: <span id="an_exo:12:2">2</span> 'This
month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first
month of the year to you. <span id="an_exo:12:3">3</span> Speak ye unto
all the congregation of Israel, saying: In the tenth day of this month
they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers’
houses, a lamb for a household; <span id="an_exo:12:4">4</span> and if
the household be too little for a lamb, then shall he and his neighbour
next unto his house take one according to the number of the souls;
according to every man's eating ye shall make your count for the lamb.
<span id="an_exo:12:5">5</span> Your lamb shall <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> be without blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it
from the sheep, or from the goats; <span id="an_exo:12:6">6</span> and
ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month; and the
whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it at dusk.
<span id="an_exo:12:7">7</span> And they shall take of the blood, and
put it on the two side-posts and on the lintel, upon the houses wherein
they shall eat it. <span id="an_exo:12:8">8</span> And they shall eat
the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with
bitter herbs they shall eat it. <span id="an_exo:12:9">9</span> Eat not
of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; its head
with its legs and with the inwards thereof. <span
id="an_exo:12:10">10</span> And ye shall let nothing of it remain until
the morning; but that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall
burn with fire. <span id="an_exo:12:11">11</span> And thus shall ye eat
it: with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in
your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste—it is the LORD'S passover. <span
id="an_exo:12:12">12</span> For I will go through the land of Egypt in
that night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both
man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgments: I am the LORD. <span id="an_exo:12:13">13</span> And the
blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are; and when
I see the blood, I will pass over you, and there shall no plague be upon
you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:12:14">14</span> And this day shall be unto you for a
memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD; throughout your
generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever. <span
id="an_exo:12:15">15</span> Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread;
howbeit the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses; for
whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel. <span
id="an_exo:12:16">16</span> And in the first day there shall be to you a
holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy convocation; no manner
of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that
only may be done by you. <span id="an_exo:12:17">17</span> And ye shall
observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I
brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt; therefore shall ye observe
this day throughout your generations by an ordinance for ever. <span
id="an_exo:12:18">18</span> In the first, month, on the fourteenth day
of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and
twentieth day of the month at even. <span
id="an_exo:12:19">19</span> Seven days shall there be no leaven found in
your houses; for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, that soul
shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a
sojourner, or one that is born in the land. <span
id="an_exo:12:20">20</span> Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your
habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.'

<span id="an_exo:12:21">21</span> Then Moses called for all the elders
of Israel, and said unto them: 'Draw out, and take you lambs according
to your families, and kill the passover lamb. <span
id="an_exo:12:22">22</span> And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip
it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two
side-posts with the blood that is in the basin; and none of you shall go
out of the door of his house until the morning. <span
id="an_exo:12:23">23</span> For the LORD will pass through to smite the
Egyptians; and when He seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two
side-posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the
destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you. <span
id="an_exo:12:24">24</span> And ye shall observe this thing for an
ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever. <span
id="an_exo:12:25">25</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye be come
to the land which the LORD will give you, according as He <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> hath promised, that ye shall keep this
service. <span id="an_exo:12:26">26</span> And it shall come to pass,
when your children shall say unto you: What mean ye by this service?
<span id="an_exo:12:27">27</span> that ye shall say: It is the sacrifice
of the LORD'S passover, for that He passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when He smote the Egyptians, and delivered
our houses.' And the people bowed the head and worshipped. <span
id="an_exo:12:28">28</span> And the children of Israel went and did so;
as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_exo:12:29">29</span> And it came to pass at midnight, that
the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the
first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the first-born of the
captive that was in the dungeon; and all the first-born of cattle. <span
id="an_exo:12:30">30</span> And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and
all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in
Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead. <span
id="an_exo:12:31">31</span> And he called for Moses and Aaron by night,
and said: 'Rise up, get you forth from among my people, both ye and the
children of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said. <span
id="an_exo:12:32">32</span> Take both your flocks and your herds, as ye
have said, and he gone; and bless me also.' <span
id="an_exo:12:33">33</span> And the Egyptians were urgent upon the
people, to send them out of the land in haste; for they said: 'We are
all dead men.' <span id="an_exo:12:34">34</span> And the people took
their dough before it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound
up in their clothes upon their shoulders. <span
id="an_exo:12:35">35</span> And the children of Israel did according to
the word of Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment. <span id="an_exo:12:36">36</span> And the
LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they
let them have what they asked. And, they despoiled the Egyptians.

<span id="an_exo:12:37">37</span> And the children of Israel journeyed
from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, beside
children. <span id="an_exo:12:38">38</span> And a mixed multitude went
up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle. <span
id="an_exo:12:39">39</span> And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough
which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because
they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they
prepared for themselves any victual. <span
id="an_exo:12:40">40</span> Now the time that the children of Israel
dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years. <span
id="an_exo:12:41">41</span> And it came to pass at the end of four
hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that
all the hosts of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:12:42">42</span> It was a night of watching unto the LORD for
bringing them out from the land of Egypt; this same night is a night of
watching unto the LORD for all the children of Israel throughout their
generations.

<span id="an_exo:12:43">43</span> And the LORD said unto Moses and
Aaron: 'This is the ordinance of the passover: there shall no alien eat
thereof; <span id="an_exo:12:44">44</span> but every man's servant that
is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat
thereof. <span id="an_exo:12:45">45</span> A sojourner and a hired
servant shall not eat thereof. <span id="an_exo:12:46">46</span> In one
house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh
abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof. <span
id="an_exo:12:47">47</span> All the congregation of Israel shall keep
it. <span id="an_exo:12:48">48</span> And when a stranger shall sojourn
with thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as
<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> one that is born in the land; but no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. <span
id="an_exo:12:49">49</span> One law shall be to him that is home-born,
and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.' <span
id="an_exo:12:50">50</span> Thus did all the children of Israel; as the
LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_exo:12:51">51</span> And it came to pass the selfsame day
that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
by their hosts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 13](exo013)

</div>
