<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo009)  [Next](exo011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏בא‎

### EXODUS CHAPTER 10

<span id="an_exo:10:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Go in
unto Pharaoh; for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his
servants, that I might show these My signs in the midst of them; <span
id="an_exo:10:2">2</span> and that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy
son, and of thy son's son, what I have wrought upon Egypt, and <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> My signs which I have done among them; that ye
may know that I am the LORD.' <span id="an_exo:10:3">3</span> And Moses
and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD,
the God of the Hebrews: How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself
before Me? let My people go, that they may serve Me. <span
id="an_exo:10:4">4</span> Else, if thou refuse to let My people go,
behold, to-morrow will I bring locusts into thy border; <span
id="an_exo:10:5">5</span> and they shall cover the face of the earth,
that one shall not be able to see the earth; and they shall eat the
residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the
hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field;
<span id="an_exo:10:6">6</span> and thy houses shall be filled, and the
houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; as
neither thy fathers nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day
that they were upon the earth unto this day.' And he turned, and went
out from Pharaoh. <span id="an_exo:10:7">7</span> And Pharaoh's servants
said unto him: 'How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men
go, that they may serve the LORD their God; knowest thou not yet that
Egypt is destroyed?' <span id="an_exo:10:8">8</span> And Moses and Aaron
were brought again unto Pharaoh; and he said unto them: 'Go, serve the
LORD your God; but who are they that shall go?' <span
id="an_exo:10:9">9</span> And Moses said: 'We will go with our young and
with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and
with our herds we will go; for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.'
<span id="an_exo:10:10">10</span> And he said unto them: 'So be the LORD
with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones; see ye that evil
is before your face. <span id="an_exo:10:11">11</span> Not so; go now ye
that are men, and serve the LORD; for that is what ye desire.' And they
were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.

<span id="an_exo:10:12">12</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch
out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come
up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that
the hail hath left.' <span id="an_exo:10:13">13</span> And Moses
stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an
east wind upon the land all that day, and all the night; and when it was
morning, the east wind brought the locusts. <span
id="an_exo:10:14">14</span> And the locusts went up over all the land of
Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt; very grievous were they;
before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall
be such. <span id="an_exo:10:15">15</span> For they covered the face of
the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every
herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had
left; and there remained not any green thing, either tree or herb of the
field, through all the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_exo:10:16">16</span> Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in
haste; and he said: 'I have sinned against the LORD your God, and
against you. <span id="an_exo:10:17">17</span> Now therefore forgive, I
pray thee, my sin only this once, and entreat the LORD your God, that He
may take away from me this death only." <span
id="an_exo:10:18">18</span> And he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated
the LORD. <span id="an_exo:10:19">19</span> And the LORD turned an
exceeding strong west wind, which took up the locusts, and drove them
into the Red Sea; there remained not one locust in all the border of
Egypt. <span id="an_exo:10:20">20</span> But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's
heart, and he did not let the children of Israel go.

<span id="an_exo:10:21">21</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch
out thy hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of
Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. "And Moses stretched forth his
hand toward heaven; and <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> there was a
thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days; <span
id="an_exo:10:23">23</span> they saw not one another, neither rose any
from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light
in their dwellings. <span id="an_exo:10:24">24</span> And Pharaoh called
unto Moses, and said: 'Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and
yours herds be stayed; let your little ones also go with you.' <span
id="an_exo:10:25">25</span> And Moses said: 'Thou must also give into
our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the
LORD our God. <span id="an_exo:10:26">26</span> Our cattle also shall go
with us; there shall not a hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take
to serve the LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the
LORD, until we come thither.' <span id="an_exo:10:27">27</span> But the
LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go. <span
id="an_exo:10:28">28</span> And Pharaoh said unto him: 'Get thee from
me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou seest
my face thou shalt die.' <span id="an_exo:10:29">29</span> And Moses
said: 'Thou halt spoken well; I will see thy face again no more.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 11](exo011)

</div>
