<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_exo:7:1">1</span> <span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'See, I have set thee
in God's stead to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
<span id="an_exo:7:2">2</span> Thou shalt speak all that I command thee;
and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he let the children
of Israel go out of his land. <span id="an_exo:7:3">3</span> And I will
harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply My signs and My wonders in the land
of Egypt. <span id="an_exo:7:4">4</span> But Pharaoh will not hearken
unto you, and I will lay My hand upon Egypt, and bring forth My hosts,
My people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great
judgments. <span id="an_exo:7:5">5</span> And the Egyptians shall know
that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth My hand upon Egypt, and bring
out the children of Israel from among them.' <span
id="an_exo:7:6">6</span> And Moses and Aaron did so; as the LORD
commanded them, so did they. <span id="an_exo:7:7">7</span> And Moses
was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three <span
id="page_72">p. 72</span> years old, when they spoke unto Pharaoh.

<span id="an_exo:7:8">8</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying: <span id="an_exo:7:9">9</span> 'When Pharaoh shall speak
unto you, saying: Show a wonder for you; then thou shalt say unto Aaron:
Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it become a
serpent.' <span id="an_exo:7:10">10</span> And Moses and Aaron went in
unto Pharaoh, and they did so, as the LORD had commanded; and Aaron cast
down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a
serpent. <span id="an_exo:7:11">11</span> Then Pharaoh also called for
the wise men and the sorcerers; and they also, the magicians of Egypt,
did in like manner with their secret arts. <span
id="an_exo:7:12">12</span> For they cast down every man his rod, and
they became serpents; but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. <span
id="an_exo:7:13">13</span> And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken.

<span id="an_exo:7:14">14</span> And the LORD said unto Moses:
'Pharaoh's heart is stubborn, he refuseth to let the people go. <span
id="an_exo:7:15">15</span> Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he
goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink to
meet him; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in
thy hand. <span id="an_exo:7:16">16</span> And thou shalt say unto him:
The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying: Let My
people go, that they may serve Me in the wilderness; and, behold,
hitherto thou hast not hearkened; <span id="an_exo:7:17">17</span> thus
saith the LORD: In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD—behold, I
will smite with the rod that is in my hand upon the waters which are in
the river, and they shall be turned to blood. <span
id="an_exo:7:18">18</span> And the fish that are in the river shall die,
and the river shall become foul; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink
water from the river.'

<span id="an_exo:7:19">19</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Say unto
Aaron: Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt,
over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools, and over
all their ponds of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be
blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in
vessels of stone.' <span id="an_exo:7:20">20</span> And Moses and Aaron
did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the
waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight
of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned
to blood. <span id="an_exo:7:21">21</span> And the fish that were in the
river died; and the river became foul, and the Egyptians could not drink
water from the river; and the blood was throughout all the land of
Egypt. <span id="an_exo:7:22">22</span> And the magicians of Egypt did
in like manner with their secret arts; and Pharaoh's heart was hardened,
and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken. <span
id="an_exo:7:23">23</span> And Pharaoh turned and went into his house,
neither did he lay even this to heart. <span
id="an_exo:7:24">24</span> And all the Egyptians digged round about the
river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the
river. <span id="an_exo:7:25">25</span> And seven days were fulfilled,
after that the LORD had smitten the river.

<span id="an_exo:7:26">26</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Go in
unto Pharaoh, and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: Let My people go,
that they may serve Me. <span id="an_exo:7:27">27</span> And if thou
refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
<span id="an_exo:7:28">28</span> And the river shall swarm with frogs,
which shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy bed-chamber, and
upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, <span id="page_73">p.
73</span> and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy
kneading-troughs. <span id="an_exo:7:29">29</span> And the frogs shall
come up both upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
