<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 14

<span id="an_exo:14:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_exo:14:2">2</span> 'Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they turn back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the
sea, before Baal-zephon, over against it shall ye encamp by the sea.
<span id="an_exo:14:3">3</span> And Pharaoh will say of the children of
Israel: They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them
in. <span id="an_exo:14:4">4</span> And I will harden Pharaoh's heart,
and he shall follow after them; and I will get Me honour upon Pharaoh,
and upon all his host; and the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.'
And they did so. <span id="an_exo:14:5">5</span> And it was told the
king of Egypt that the people were fled; and the heart of Pharaoh and of
his servants was turned towards the people, and they said: 'What is this
we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?' <span
id="an_exo:14:6">6</span> And he made ready his chariots, and took his
people with him. <span id="an_exo:14:7">7</span> And he took six hundred
chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over all of
them. <span id="an_exo:14:8">8</span> And the LORD hardened the heart of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel; for
the children of Israel went out with a high hand. <span
id="an_exo:14:9">9</span> And the Egyptians pursued after them, all the
horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and
overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, in front of
Baal-zephon. <span id="an_exo:14:10">10</span> And when Pharaoh drew
nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the
Egyptians were marching after them; and they were sore afraid; and the
children of Israel cried out unto the LORD. <span
id="an_exo:14:11">11</span> And they said unto Moses: 'Because there
were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the
wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth
out of Egypt? <span id="an_exo:14:12">12</span> Is not this the word
that we spoke unto thee in Egypt, saying: Let us alone, that we may
serve the Egyptians? For it were better for us to serve the Egyptians,
than that we should die in the wilderness.' <span
id="an_exo:14:13">13</span> And Moses said unto the people: 'Fear ye
not, stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which He will work
for you to-day; for whereas ye have seen the Egyptians to-day, ye shall
see them again no more for ever. <span id="an_exo:14:14">14</span> The
LORD will fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.'

<span id="an_exo:14:15">15</span> And the LORD said unto Moses:
'Wherefore criest thou unto Me? speak unto the children of Israel, that
they go forward. <span id="an_exo:14:16">16</span> And lift thou up thy
rod, and stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it; and the
children of Israel shall go into the midst of the sea on dry ground.
<span id="an_exo:14:17">17</span> And I, behold, I will harden the
hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall go in after them; and I will get
Me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and
upon his horsemen. <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="an_exo:14:18">18</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am the
LORD, when I have gotten Me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and
upon his horsemen.' <span id="an_exo:14:19">19</span> And the angel of
God, who went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them;
and the pillar of cloud removed from before them, and stood behind them;
<span id="an_exo:14:20">20</span> and it came between the camp of Egypt
and the camp of Israel; and there was the cloud and the darkness here,
yet gave it light by night there; and the one came not near the other
all the night. <span id="an_exo:14:21">21</span> And Moses stretched out
his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a
strong east wind all the night, and made the sea dry land, and the
waters were divided. <span id="an_exo:14:22">22</span> And the children
of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground; and the
waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
<span id="an_exo:14:23">23</span> And the Egyptians pursued, and went in
after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his
chariots, and his horsemen. <span id="an_exo:14:24">24</span> And it
came to pass in the morning watch, that the LORD looked forth upon the
host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of cloud, and
discomfited the host of the Egyptians. <span
id="an_exo:14:25">25</span> And He took off their chariot wheels, and
made them to drive heavily; so that the Egyptians said: 'Let us flee
from the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the
Egyptians.'

<span id="an_exo:14:26">26</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch
out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come back upon the
Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.' <span
id="an_exo:14:27">27</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand over the
sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared; and
the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in
the midst of the sea. <span id="an_exo:14:28">28</span> And the waters
returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the host
of Pharaoh that went in after them into the sea; there remained not so
much as one of them. <span id="an_exo:14:29">29</span> But the children
of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. <span
id="an_exo:14:30">30</span> Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of
the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the
sea-shore. <span id="an_exo:14:31">31</span> And Israel saw the great
work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared the
LORD; and they believed in the LORD, and in His servant Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
