<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo020)  [Next](exo022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏משפטים‎

### EXODUS CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_exo:21:1">1</span> Now these are the ordinances which thou
shalt set before them. <span id="an_exo:21:2">2</span> If thou buy a
Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve; and in the seventh he shall go
out free for nothing. <span id="an_exo:21:3">3</span> If he come in by
himself, he shall go out by himself; if he be married, then his wife
shall go out with him. <span id="an_exo:21:4">4</span> If his master
give him a wife, and she bear him sons or daughters; the wife and her
children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself. <span
id="an_exo:21:5">5</span> But if the servant shall plainly say: I love
my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free; <span
id="an_exo:21:6">6</span> then his master shall bring him unto  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[a](#fn_84) God, and shall bring him to the door, or
unto the door-post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an
awl; and he shall serve him for ever. <span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span id="an_exo:21:7">7</span> And if a man sell his daughter to be a
maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do. <span
id="an_exo:21:8">8</span> If she please not her master, who hath
espoused her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed; to sell her
unto a foreign people he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt
deceitfully with her. <span id="an_exo:21:9">9</span> And if he espouse
leer unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.
<span id="an_exo:21:10">10</span> If he take him another wife, her food,
her raiment, and her conjugal rights, shall he not diminish. <span
id="an_exo:21:11">11</span> And if he do not these three unto her, then
shall she go out for nothing, without money.

<span id="an_exo:21:12">12</span> He that smiteth a man, so that he
dieth, shall surely be put to death. <span
id="an_exo:21:13">13</span> And if a man lie not in wait, but God cause
it to come to hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he may
flee.

<span id="an_exo:21:14">14</span> And if a man come presumptuously upon
his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from Mine
altar, that he may die.

<span id="an_exo:21:15">15</span> And he that smiteth his father, or his
mother, shall be surely put to death.

<span id="an_exo:21:16">16</span> And he that stealeth a man, and
selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to
death.

<span id="an_exo:21:17">17</span> And he that curseth his father or his
mother, shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_exo:21:18">18</span> And if men contend, and one smite the
other with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keep his bed;
<span id="an_exo:21:19">19</span> if he rise again, and walls abroad
upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit; only he shall pay
for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

<span id="an_exo:21:20">20</span> And if a man smite his bondman, or his
bondwoman, with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall surely be
punished. <span id="an_exo:21:21">21</span> Notwithstanding, if he
continue a day or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his money.

<span id="an_exo:21:22">22</span> And if men strive together, and hurt a
woman with child, so that her fruit depart, and yet no harm follow, he
shall be surely fined, according as the woman's husband shall lay upon
him; and he shall pay as the judges determine. <span
id="an_exo:21:23">23</span> But if any harm follow, then thou shalt give
life for life, <span id="an_exo:21:24">24</span> eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, <span
id="an_exo:21:25">25</span> burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe
for stripe.

<span id="an_exo:21:26">26</span> And if a man smite the eye of his
bondman, or the eye of his bondwoman, and destroy it, he shall let him
go free. for his eye's sake. <span id="an_exo:21:27">27</span> And if he
smite out his bondman's tooth, or his bond: woman's tooth, he shall let
him go free for his tooth's sake.

<span id="an_exo:21:28">28</span> And if an ox gore a man or a woman,
that they die, the ox shall be surely stoned, and its flesh shall not be
eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit. <span
id="an_exo:21:29">29</span> But if the ox was wont to gore in time past,
and warning hath been given to its owner, and he hath not kept it in,
but it hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and its
owner also shall be put to death. <span id="an_exo:21:30">30</span> If
there be laid on him a ransom, then he shall give for the redemption of
his life whatsoever is laid upon him. <span
id="an_exo:21:31">31</span> Whether it have gored a son, or have gored a
daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him. <span
id="an_exo:21:32">32</span> If the ox gore a bondman or a bondwoman, he
shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall
be stoned.

<span id="an_exo:21:33">33</span> And if a man shall open a pit, or if a
man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein,
<span id="an_exo:21:34">34</span> the owner of the pit shall make it
good; he shall give money unto the <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> owner
of them, and the dead beast shall be his.

<span id="an_exo:21:35">35</span> And if one man's ox hurt another's, so
that it dieth; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the price of
it; and the dead also they shall divide. <span
id="an_exo:21:36">36</span> Or if it be known that the ox was wont to
gore in time past, and its owner hath not kept it in; he shall surely
pay ox for ox, and the dead beast shall be his own.

<span id="an_exo:21:37">37</span> If a man steal an ox, or a sheep, and
kill it, or sell it, he shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep
for a sheep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[89:a](exo021.htm#fr_85) That is, the judges.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 22](exo022)

</div>
