<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo034)  [Next](exo036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏ויקהל‎

### EXODUS CHAPTER 35

<span id="an_exo:35:1">1</span> And Moses assembled all the congregation
of the children of Israel, and said unto them: 'These <span
id="page_109">p. 109</span> are the words which the LORD hath commanded,
that ye should do them. <span id="an_exo:35:2">2</span> Six days shall
work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a
sabbath of solemn rest to the LORD; whosoever doeth any work therein
shall be put to death. <span id="an_exo:35:3">3</span> Ye shall kindle
no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.'

<span id="an_exo:35:4">4</span> And Moses spoke unto all the
congregation of the children of Israel, saying: 'This is the thing which
the LORD commanded, saying: <span id="an_exo:35:5">5</span> Take ye from
among you an offering unto the LORD, whosoever is of a willing heart,
let him bring it, the LORD'S offering: gold, and silver, and brass;
<span id="an_exo:35:6">6</span> and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats’ hair; <span id="an_exo:35:7">7</span> and rams’
skins dyed red, and sealskins, and acacia-wood; <span
id="an_exo:35:8">8</span> and oil for the light, and spices for the
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense; <span
id="an_exo:35:9">9</span> and onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the
ephod, and for the breastplate. <span id="an_exo:35:10">10</span> And
let every wise-hearted man among you come, and make all that the LORD
hath commanded: <span id="an_exo:35:11">11</span> the tabernacle, its
tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its
pillars, and its sockets; <span id="an_exo:35:12">12</span> the ark, and
the staves thereof, the ark-cover, and the veil of the screen; <span
id="an_exo:35:13">13</span> the table, and its staves, and all its
vessels, and the showbread; <span id="an_exo:35:14">14</span> the
candlestick also for the light, and its vessels, and its lamps, and the
oil for the light; <span id="an_exo:35:15">15</span> and the altar of
incense, and its staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense,
and the screen for the door, at the door of the tabernacle; <span
id="an_exo:35:16">16</span> the altar of burnt-offering, with its
grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its
base; <span id="an_exo:35:17">17</span> the hangings of the court, the
pillars thereof, and their sockets, and the screen for the gate of the
court; <span id="an_exo:35:18">18</span> the pins of the tabernacle, and
the pins of the court, and their cords; <span
id="an_exo:35:19">19</span> the plaited garments, for ministering in the
holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of
his sons, to minister in the priest's office.'

<span id="an_exo:35:20">20</span> And all the congregation of the
children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses. <span
id="an_exo:35:21">21</span> And they came, every one whose heart stirred
him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and brought the
LORD'S offering, for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all the
service thereof, and for the holy garments. <span
id="an_exo:35:22">22</span> And they came, both men and women, as many
as were willing-hearted, and brought nose-rings, and ear-rings, and
signet-rings, and girdles, all jewels of gold; even every man that
brought an offering of gold unto the LORD. <span
id="an_exo:35:23">23</span> And every man, with whom was found blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and rams’ skins
dyed red, and sealskins, brought them. <span
id="an_exo:35:24">24</span> Every one that did set apart an offering of
silver and brass brought the LORD'S offering; and every man, with whom
was found acacia-wood for any, work of the service, brought it. <span
id="an_exo:35:25">25</span> And all the women that were wise-hearted did
spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, the blue,
and the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen. <span
id="an_exo:35:26">26</span> And all the women whose heart stirred them
up in wisdom spun the goats’ hair. <span id="an_exo:35:27">27</span> And
the rulers brought the onyx stones, and the stones to be set, for the
ephod, and for the breastplate; <span id="an_exo:35:28">28</span> and
the spice, and the oil, for the light, and for the anointing oil, and
for the sweet incense. <span id="an_exo:35:29">29</span> The children of
Israel brought a freewill-offering unto the LORD; every man and woman,
whose <span id="page_110">p. 110</span> heart made them willing to bring
for all the work, which the LORD had commanded by the hand of Moses to
be made.

<span id="an_exo:35:30">30</span> And Moses said unto the children of
Israel: 'See, the LORD hath called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the
son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. <span id="an_exo:35:31">31</span> And
He hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship. <span
id="an_exo:35:32">32</span> And to devise skilful works, to work in
gold, and in silver, and in brass, <span id="an_exo:35:33">33</span> and
in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all
manner of skilful workmanship. <span id="an_exo:35:34">34</span> And He
hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Oholiab, the son
of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. <span
id="an_exo:35:25">25</span> Them hath He filled with wisdom of heart, to
work all manner of workmanship, of the craftsman, and of the skilful
workman, and of the weaver in colours, in. blue, and in purple, in
scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any
workmanship, and of those that devise skilful works.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 36](exo036)

</div>
