<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 9

<span id="an_exo:9:1">1</span> Then the LORD said unto Moses:' Go in
unto Pharaoh, and tell him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of the Hebrews:
Let My people go, that they may serve Me. <span
id="an_exo:9:2">2</span> For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt
hold them still, <span id="an_exo:9:3">3</span> behold, the hand of the
LORD is upon thy cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon
the asses, upon the camels, upon the herds, and upon the flocks; there
shall be a very grievous murrain. <span id="an_exo:9:4">4</span> And the
LORD shall make a division between the cattle of Israel and the cattle
of Egypt; and there shall nothing die of all that belongeth to the
children of Israel.' <span id="an_exo:9:5">5</span> And the LORD
appointed a set time, saying: 'To-morrow the LORD shall do this thing in
the land.' <span id="an_exo:9:6">6</span> And the LORD did that thing on
the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the
children of Israel died not one. <span id="an_exo:9:7">7</span> And
Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of the cattle of
the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn, and he did
not let the people go.

<span id="an_exo:9:8">8</span> And the LORD said unto Moses and unto
Aaron: 'Take to you handfuls of soot of the furnace, and let Moses throw
it heavenward in the sight of Pharaoh. <span
id="an_exo:9:9">9</span> And it shall become small dust over all the
land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man
and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.' <span
id="an_exo:9:10">10</span> And they took soot of the furnace, and stood
before Pharaoh; and Moses threw it up heavenward; and it became a boil
breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast. <span
id="an_exo:9:11">11</span> And the magicians could not stand before
Moses because of the boils; for the boils were upon the magicians, and
upon all the Egyptians. <span id="an_exo:9:12">12</span> And the LORD
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the
LORD had spoken unto Moses.

<span id="an_exo:9:13">13</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Rise up
early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him: Thus
saith the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: Let My people go, that they may
serve Me. <span id="an_exo:9:14">14</span> For I will this time send all
My plagues upon thy person, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people;
that thou <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>mayest know that there is none
like Me in all the earth. <span id="an_exo:9:15">15</span> Surely now I
had put forth My hand, and smitten thee and thy people with pestilence,
and thou hadst been cut off from the earth. <span
id="an_exo:9:16">16</span> But in very deed for this cause have I made
thee to stand, to show thee My power, and that My name may be declared
throughout all the earth. <span id="an_exo:9:17">17</span> As yet
exaltest thou thyself against My people, that thou wilt not let them go?
<span id="an_exo:9:18">18</span> Behold, to-morrow about this time I
will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in
Egypt since the day it was founded even until now. <span
id="an_exo:9:19">19</span> Now therefore send, hasten in thy cattle and
all that thou hast in the field; for every man and beast that shall be
found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come
down upon them, and they shall die.' <span id="an_exo:9:20">20</span> He
that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his
servants and his cattle flee into the houses; <span
id="an_exo:9:21">21</span> and he that regarded not the word of the LORD
left his servants and his cattle in the field.

<span id="an_exo:9:22">22</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch
forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of
Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field,
throughout the land of Egypt.' <span id="an_exo:9:23">23</span> And
Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the LORD sent thunder
and hail, and fire ran down unto the earth; and the LORD caused to hail
upon the land of Egypt. <span id="an_exo:9:24">24</span> So there was
hail, and fire flashing up amidst the hail, very grievous, such as had
not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. <span
id="an_exo:9:25">25</span> And the hail smote throughout all the land of
Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote
every herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field. <span
id="an_exo:9:26">26</span> Only in the land of Goshen, where the
children of Israel were, was there no hail. <span
id="an_exo:9:27">27</span> And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and
Aaron, and said unto them: 'I have sinned this time; the LORD is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked. <span
id="an_exo:9:28">28</span> Entreat the LORD, and let there be enough of
these mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall
stay no longer.' <span id="an_exo:9:29">29</span> And Moses said unto
him: 'As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread forth my hands
unto the LORD; the thunders shall cease, neither shall there be any more
hail; that thou mayest know that the earth is the LORD'S. <span
id="an_exo:9:30">30</span> But as for thee and thy servants, I know that
ye will not yet fear the LORD God.'—<span id="an_exo:9:31">31</span> And
the flax and the barley were smitten; for the barley was in the ear, and
the flax was in bloom. <span id="an_exo:9:32">32</span> But the wheat
and the spelt were not smitten; for they ripen late.—<span
id="an_exo:9:33">33</span> And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh,
and spread forth his hands unto the LORD; and the thunders and hail
ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth. <span
id="an_exo:9:34">34</span> And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the
hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his
heart, he and his servants. <span id="an_exo:9:35">35</span> And the
heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the children of Israel
go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010)

</div>
