<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo019)  [Next](exo021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 20

<span id="an_exo:20:1">1</span> And God spoke all these words saying:

<span id="an_exo:20:2">2</span> I am the LORD thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_exo:20:3">3</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.
<span id="an_exo:20:4">4</span> Thou shalt not make unto, thee a graven
image, nor any manner of likeness, of any thing that is in heaven above,
or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth; <span id="an_exo:20:5">5</span> thou shalt not bow down unto
them, nor serve them; for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate Me; <span id="an_exo:20:6">6</span> and
showing mercy unto the thousandth <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
generation of them that love Me and keep My commandments.

<span id="an_exo:20:7">7</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD
thy God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh
His name in vain.

<span id="an_exo:20:8">8</span> Remember the sabbath day, to keep it
holy. <span id="an_exo:20:9">9</span> Six days shalt thou labour, and do
all thy work; <span id="an_exo:20:10">10</span> but the seventh day is a
sabbath unto the LORD thy God, in it thou shalt not do any manner of
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy
maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates;
<span id="an_exo:20:11">11</span> for in six days the LORD made heaven
and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested on the seventh
day; wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

<span id="an_exo:20:12">12</span> Honour thy father and thy mother, that
thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_exo:20:13">13</span> Thou shalt not murder.

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

Thou shalt not steal.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

<span id="an_exo:20:14">14</span> Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's
house; thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant,
nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbour's.

<span id="an_exo:20:15">15</span> And all the people perceived the
thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the horn, and the
mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood
afar off. <span id="an_exo:20:16">16</span> And they said unto Moses:
'Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us,
lest we die.' <span id="an_exo:20:17">17</span> And Moses said unto the
people: 'Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that His fear may
be before you, that ye sin not.' <span id="an_exo:20:18">18</span> And
the people stood afar off; but Moses drew near unto the thick darkness
where God was.

<span id="an_exo:20:19">19</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: Thus
thou shalt say unto the children of Israel: Ye yourselves have seen that
I have talked with you from heaven. <span id="an_exo:20:20">20</span> Ye
shall not make with Me—gods of silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not
make unto you. <span id="an_exo:20:21">21</span> An altar of earth thou
shalt make unto Me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt-offerings, and
thy peace-offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen; in every place where I
cause My name to be mentioned I will come unto thee and bless thee.
<span id="an_exo:20:22">22</span> And if thou make Me an altar of stone,
thou shalt not build it of hewn stones; for if thou lift up thy tool
upon it, thou hast profaned it. <span
id="an_exo:20:23">23</span> Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto Mine
altar, that thy nakedness be not uncovered thereon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 21](exo021)

</div>
