<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo033)  [Next](exo035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXODUS CHAPTER 34

<span id="an_exo:34:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Hew thee
two tables of stone like unto the first; and I will write upon the
tables the words that were on the first tables, which thou didst break.
<span id="an_exo:34:2">2</span> And be ready by the morning, and come up
in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to Me on the
top of the mount. <span id="an_exo:34:3">3</span> And no man shall come
up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount;
neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.' <span
id="an_exo:34:4">4</span> And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the
first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount
Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand two tables of
stone. <span id="an_exo:34:5">5</span> And the LORD descended in the
cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD.
<span id="an_exo:34:6">6</span> And the LORD passed by before him, and
proclaimed: 'The LORD, the LORD, God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; <span
id="an_exo:34:7">7</span> keeping mercy unto the thousandth generation,
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin; and that will by no means
clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and unto the
fourth generation.' <span id="an_exo:34:8">8</span> And Moses made
haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped. <span
id="an_exo:34:9">9</span> And he said: 'If now I have found grace in Thy
sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray Thee, go in the midst of us; for it
is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take
us for Thine inheritance.' <span id="an_exo:34:10">10</span> And He
said: 'Behold, I make a covenant; before all thy people I will do
marvels, such as have not been wrought in all the earth, nor in any
nation; and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of
the LORD that I am about to do with thee, that it is tremendous. <span
id="an_exo:34:11">11</span> Observe thou that which I am commanding thee
this day; behold, I am driving out before thee the Amorite, and the
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the
Jebusite. <span id="an_exo:34:12">12</span> Take heed to thyself, lest
thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou
goest, lest they be for a snare in the midst of thee. <span
id="an_exo:34:13">13</span> But ye shall break down their altars, and
dash in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their Asherim. <span
id="an_exo:34:14">14</span> For thou shalt bow down to no other god; for
the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous <span id="page_108">p.
108</span> God; <span id="an_exo:34:15">15</span> lest thou make a
covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go astray after
their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and they call thee, and
thou eat of their sacrifice; <span id="an_exo:34:16">16</span> and thou
take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go astray
after their gods, and make thy sons go astray after their gods. <span
id="an_exo:34:17">17</span> Thou shalt make thee no molten gods. <span
id="an_exo:34:18">18</span> The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou
keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee,
at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in the month Abib thou
earnest out from Egypt. <span id="an_exo:34:19">19</span> All that
openeth the womb is Mine; and of all thy cattle thou shalt sanctify the
males, the firstlings of ox and sheep. <span
id="an_exo:34:20">20</span> And the firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt
break its neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And
none shall appear before Me empty. <span id="an_exo:34:21">21</span> Six
days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest; in plowing
time and in harvest thou shalt rest. <span
id="an_exo:34:22">22</span> And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks,
even of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering
at the turn of the year. <span id="an_exo:34:23">23</span> Three times
in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord GOD, the God of
Israel. <span id="an_exo:34:24">24</span> For I will cast out nations
before thee, and enlarge thy borders; neither shall any man covet thy
land, when thou goest up to appear before the LORD thy God three times
in the year. <span id="an_exo:34:25">25</span> Thou shalt not offer the
blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the sacrifice
of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning. <span
id="an_exo:34:26">26</span> The choicest first-fruits of thy land thou
shalt bring unto the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a
kid in its mother's milk.'

<span id="an_exo:34:27">27</span> And the Lord said unto Moses: 'Write
thou these words, for after the tenor of these words I have made a
covenant with thee and with Israel.' <span
id="an_exo:34:28">28</span> And he was there with the Lord forty days
and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he
wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten words. <span
id="an_exo:34:29">29</span> And it came to pass, when Moses came down
from mount Sinai with the two tables of the testimony in Moses’ hand,
when he came down from the mount, that Moses knew not that the skin of
his face sent forth,  <span id="fr_91"></span>[a](#fn_88) beams while He
talked with him. <span id="an_exo:34:30">30</span> And when Aaron and
all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face sent
forth beams; and they were afraid to come nigh him. <span
id="an_exo:34:31">31</span> And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and
all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him; and Moses spoke to
them. <span id="an_exo:34:32">32</span> And afterward all the children
of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord
had spoken with him in mount Sinai. <span
id="an_exo:34:33">33</span> And when Moses had done speaking with them,
he put a veil on his face. <span id="an_exo:34:34">34</span> But when
Moses went in before the Lord that He: might speak with him, he took the
veil off, until he came out; and he came out, and spoke unto the
children of Israel that which he was commanded. <span
id="an_exo:34:35">35</span> And the children of Israel saw the face of
Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face sent forth beams; and Moses put the
veil back upon his face, until he went in to speak with Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[108:a](exo034.htm#fr_91) Heb. *horns*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 35](exo035)

</div>
