<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 8

<span id="an_gen:8:1">1</span> And God remembered Noah, and every living
thing, and all the cattle that were with him in the ark; and God made a
wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged; <span
id="an_gen:8:2">2</span> the fountains also of the deep and the windows
of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained. <span
id="an_gen:8:3">3</span> And the waters returned from off the earth
continually; and after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters
decreased. <span id="an_gen:8:4">4</span> And the ark rested in the
seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains
of Ararat. <span id="an_gen:8:5">5</span> And the waters decreased
continually until the tenth month; in the tenth month, on the first day
of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.

<span id="an_gen:8:6">6</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty
days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made. <span
id="an_gen:8:7">7</span> And he sent forth a raven, and it went forth to
and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth. <span
id="an_gen:8:8">8</span> And he sent forth a dove from him, to see if
the waters were abated from off the face of the ground. <span
id="an_gen:8:9">9</span> But the dove found no rest for the sole of her
foot, and she returned unto him to the ark, for the waters were on the
face of the whole earth; and he put forth his hand, and took her, and
brought her in unto him into the ark. <span
id="an_gen:8:10">10</span> And he stayed yet other seven days; and again
he sent forth the dove out of the ark. <span
id="an_gen:8:11">11</span> And the dove came in to him at eventide; and
to in her mouth an olive-leaf freshly plucked; so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth. <span
id="an_gen:8:12">12</span> And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent
forth the dove; and she returned not again unto him any more.

<span id="an_gen:8:13">13</span> And it came to pass in the six hundred
and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the
waters were dried up from off the earth; and Noah removed the covering
of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dried.
<span id="an_gen:8:14">14</span> And in the second month, on the seven
and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dry.

<span id="an_gen:8:15">15</span> And God spoke unto Noah, saying: <span
id="an_gen:8:16">16</span> 'Go forth from the ark, thou, and thy wife,
and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee. <span
id="an_gen:8:17">17</span> Bring forth with thee every living thing that
is with thee of all flesh, both fowl, and cattle, and every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may swarm in the earth,
and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.' <span
id="an_gen:8:18">18</span> And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his
wife, and his sons’ wives with him; <span
id="an_gen:8:19">19</span> every beast, every creeping thing, and every
fowl, whatsoever moveth upon the earth, after their families, went forth
out of the ark.

<span id="an_gen:8:20">20</span> And Noah builded an altar unto the
LORD; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and
offered burnt-offerings on the altar. <span
id="an_gen:8:21">21</span> And the LORD smelled the sweet savour; and
the LORD said in His <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> heart: 'I will not
again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of
man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more
every thing living, as I have done. <span
id="an_gen:8:22">22</span> While the earth remaineth, seedtime and
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
shall not cease.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009)

</div>
