<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen018)  [Next](gen020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 19

<span id="an_gen:19:1">1</span> And the two angels came to Sodom at
even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom; and Lot saw them, and rose up to
meet them; and he fell down on his face to the earth; <span
id="an_gen:19:2">2</span> and he said: 'Behold now, my lords, turn
aside, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and
wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your way.' And
they said: 'Nay; but we will abide in the broad place all night.' <span
id="an_gen:19:3">3</span> And he urged them greatly; and they turned in
unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did
bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. <span
id="an_gen:19:4">4</span> But before they lay down, the men of the city,
even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both young and old,
all the people from every quarter. <span id="an_gen:19:5">5</span> And
they called unto Lot, and said unto him: 'Where are the men that came in
to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.'
<span id="an_gen:19:6">6</span> And Lot went out unto them to the door,
and shut the door after him. <span id="an_gen:19:7">7</span> And he
said: 'I pray you, my brethren, do not so wickedly. <span
id="an_gen:19:8">8</span> Behold now, I have two daughters that have not
known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to
them as is good in your eyes; only unto these men do nothing; forasmuch
as they are come under the shadow of my roof.' <span
id="an_gen:19:9">9</span> And they said: 'Stand back.' And they said:
'This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs play the judge;
now will we deal worse with thee, than with them.' And they pressed sore
upon the man, even Lot, and drew near to break the door. <span
id="an_gen:19:10">10</span> But the men put forth their hand, and
brought Lot into the house to <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> them, and
the door they shut. <span id="an_gen:19:11">11</span> And they smote the
men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and
great; so that they wearied themselves to find the door. <span
id="an_gen:19:12">12</span> And the men said unto Lot: 'Hast thou here
any besides? son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whomsoever
thou hast in the city; bring them out of the place; <span
id="an_gen:19:13">13</span> for we will destroy this place, because the
cry of them is waxed great before the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to
destroy it.' <span id="an_gen:19:14">14</span> And Lot went out, and
spoke unto his sons-in-law, who married his daughters, and said: 'Up,
get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy the city.' But he
seemed unto his sons-in-law as one that jested. <span
id="an_gen:19:15">15</span> And when the morning arose, then the angels
hastened Lot, saying: 'Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that
are here; lest thou be swept away in the iniquity of the city.' <span
id="an_gen:19:16">16</span> But he lingered; and the men laid hold upon
his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two
daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him. And they brought him forth,
and set him without the city. <span id="an_gen:19:17">17</span> And it
came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said:
'Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the
Plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be swept away.' <span
id="an_gen:19:18">18</span> And Lot said unto them: 'Oh, not so, my
lord; <span id="an_gen:19:19">19</span> behold now, thy servant hath
found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou
hast shown unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the
mountain, lest the evil overtake me, and I die. <span
id="an_gen:19:20">20</span> Behold now, this city is near to flee unto,
and it is a little one; oh, let me escape thither—is it not a little
one?—and my soul shall live.' <span id="an_gen:19:21">21</span> And he
said unto him: 'See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also,
that I will not overthrow the city of which thou hast spoken. <span
id="an_gen:19:22">22</span> Hasten thou, escape thither; for I cannot do
any thing till thou be come thither.'—Therefore the name of the city was
called  <span id="fr_24"></span>[a](#fn_23) Zoar.—<span
id="an_gen:19:23">23</span> The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot
came unto Zoar. <span id="an_gen:19:24">24</span> Then the LORD caused
to rain upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD
out of heaven; <span id="an_gen:19:25">25</span> and He overthrew those
cities, and all the Plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and
that which grew upon the ground. <span id="an_gen:19:26">26</span> But
his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
<span id="an_gen:19:27">27</span> And Abraham got up early in the
morning to the place where he had stood before the LORD. <span
id="an_gen:19:28">28</span> And he looked out toward Sodom and Gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the Plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of
the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.

<span id="an_gen:19:29">29</span> And it came to pass, when God
destroyed the cities of the Plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent
Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when He overthrew the cities in
which Lot dwelt.

<span id="an_gen:19:30">30</span> And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt
in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell
in Zoar; and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters. <span
id="an_gen:19:31">31</span> And the first-born said unto the younger:
'Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto
us after the manner of all the earth. <span
id="an_gen:19:32">32</span> Come, let us make our father drink wine, and
we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.' <span
id="an_gen:19:33">33</span> And they made their father drink wine that
night. And the first-born went in, and lay with her father; and he knew
<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> not when she lay down, nor when she
arose. <span id="an_gen:19:34">34</span> And it came to pass on the
morrow, that the first-born said unto the younger: 'Behold, I lay
yesternight with my father. Let us make him drink wine this night also;
and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our
father.' <span id="an_gen:19:35">35</span> And they made their father
drink wine that night also. And the younger arose, and lay with him; and
he knew not when she lay down, nor when she arose. <span
id="an_gen:19:36">36</span> Thus were both the daughters of Lot with
child by their father. <span id="an_gen:19:37">37</span> And the
first-born bore a son, and called his name Moab—the same is the father
of the Moabites unto this day. <span id="an_gen:19:38">38</span> And the
younger, she also bore a son, and called his name Ben-ammi—the same is
the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[21:a](gen019.htm#fr_24) That is, *Little*, see
verse 20.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 20](gen020)

</div>
