<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏וירא‎

### GENESIS CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_gen:18:1">1</span> And the LORD appeared unto him by the
terebinths of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;
<span id="an_gen:18:2">2</span> and he lifted up his eyes and looked,
and, lo, three men stood over against him; and when he saw them, he ran
to meet them from the tent door, and bowed down to the earth, <span
id="an_gen:18:3">3</span> and said: 'My lord, if now I have found favour
in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. <span
id="an_gen:18:4">4</span> Let now a little water be fetched, and wash
your feet, and recline yourselves under the tree. <span
id="an_gen:18:5">5</span> And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and stay
ye your heart; after that ye shall pass on; forasmuch as ye are come to
your servant.' And they said: 'So do, as thou hast said.' <span
id="an_gen:18:6">6</span> And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah,
and said: 'Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and
make cakes.' <span id="an_gen:18:7">7</span> And Abraham ran unto the
herd, and fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it unto the servant;
and he hastened to dress it. <span id="an_gen:18:8">8</span> And he took
curd, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before
them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat. <span
id="an_gen:18:9">9</span> And they said unto him: 'Where is Sarah thy
wife?' And he said: 'Behold, in the tent.' <span
id="an_gen:18:10">10</span> And He said: 'I will certainly return unto
thee when the season cometh round; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a
son.' And Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.—<span
id="an_gen:18:11">11</span> Now Abraham and Sarah were old, and well
stricken in age; it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of
women.—<span id="an_gen:18:12">12</span> And Sarah laughed within
herself, saying: 'After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord
being old also?' <span id="an_gen:18:13">13</span> And the LORD said
unto Abraham: 'Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying: Shall I of a surety
bear a child, who am old? <span id="an_gen:18:14">14</span> Is any thing
too hard for the LORD? At the set time I will return unto thee, when the
season cometh round, and Sarah shall have a son.' <span
id="an_gen:18:15">15</span> Then Sarah denied, saying: 'I laughed not';
for she was afraid. And He said: 'Nay; but thou didst laugh.'

<span id="an_gen:18:16">16</span> And the men rose up from thence, and
looked out toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to bring them on the
way. <span id="an_gen:18:17">17</span> And the LORD said: 'Shall I hide
from Abraham that which I am doing; <span
id="an_gen:18:18">18</span> seeing that Abraham shall surely become a
great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him? <span id="an_gen:18:19">19</span> For I have known him,
to the end that he may command his children and his household after him,
that they may keep the way of the LORD, to do righteousness and justice;
to the end that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which He hath
spoken of him.' <span id="an_gen:18:20">20</span> And the LORD said:
'Verily, the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and, verily, their sin
is exceeding grievous. <span id="an_gen:18:21">21</span> I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of
it, which <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> is come unto Me; and if not, I
will know.' <span id="an_gen:18:22">22</span> And the men turned from
thence, and went toward Sodom; but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.
<span id="an_gen:18:23">23</span> And Abraham drew near, and said: 'Wilt
Thou indeed sweep away the righteous with the wicked? <span
id="an_gen:18:24">24</span> Peradventure there are fifty righteous
within the city; wilt Thou indeed sweep away and not forgive the place
for the fifty righteous that are therein? <span
id="an_gen:18:25">25</span> That be far from Thee to do after this
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, that so the righteous
should be as the wicked; that be far from Thee; shall not the Judge of
all the earth do justly?' <span id="an_gen:18:26">26</span> And the LORD
said: 'If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will
forgive all the place for their sake.' <span
id="an_gen:18:27">27</span> And Abraham answered and said: 'Behold now,
I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes.
<span id="an_gen:18:28">28</span> Peradventure there shall lack five of
the fifty righteous; wilt Thou destroy all the city for lack of five?'
And He said: 'I will not destroy it, if I find there forty and five.'
<span id="an_gen:18:29">29</span> And he spoke unto Him yet again, and
said: 'Peradventure there shall be forty found there.' And He said: 'I
will not do it for the forty's sake.' <span
id="an_gen:18:30">30</span> And he said: 'Oh, let not the Lord be angry,
and I will speak. Peradventure there shall thirty be found there.' And
He said: 'I will not do it, if I find thirty there.' <span
id="an_gen:18:31">31</span> And he said: 'Behold now, I have taken upon
me to speak unto the Lord. Peradventure there shall be twenty found
there.' And He said: 'I will not destroy it for the twenty's sake.'
<span id="an_gen:18:32">32</span> And he said: 'Oh, let not the Lord be
angry, and I will speak yet but this once. Peradventure ten shall be
found there.' And He said: 'I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.'
<span id="an_gen:18:33">33</span> And the LORD went His way, as soon as
He had left off speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned unto his
place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019)

</div>
