<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen040)  [Next](gen042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‏מקץ‎

### GENESIS CHAPTER 41

<span id="an_gen:41:1">1</span> And it came to pass at the end of two
full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[a](#fn_65) river. <span
id="an_gen:41:2">2</span> And, behold, there came up out of the river
seven kine, well-favoured and fat-fleshed; and they fed in the
reed-grass. <span id="an_gen:41:3">3</span> And, behold, seven other
kine came up after them out of the river, ill-favoured and lean-fleshed;
and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river. <span
id="an_gen:41:4">4</span> And the ill-favoured and lean-fleshed kine did
eat up the seven well-favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke. <span
id="an_gen:41:5">5</span> And he slept and dreamed a second time: and,
behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good. <span
id="an_gen:41:6">6</span> And, behold, seven ears, thin and blasted,
with the east wind, sprung up after them. <span
id="an_gen:41:7">7</span> And the thin ears swallowed up the seven rank
and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream. <span
id="an_gen:41:8">8</span> And it came to pass in the morning that his
spirit was troubled; m and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Egypt, and all the wise men thereof; and Pharaoh told them his dream;
but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh. <span
id="an_gen:41:9">9</span> Then spoke the chief butler unto Pharaoh,
saying: 'I make mention of my faults this day: <span
id="an_gen:41:10">10</span> Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put
me in the ward of the house of the captain of the guard, me and the
chief baker. <span id="an_gen:41:11">11</span> And we dreamed a dream in
one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation
of his dream. <span id="an_gen:41:12">12</span> And there was with us
there a young man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we
told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to
his dream he did interpret. <span id="an_gen:41:13">13</span> And it
came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was: I was restored unto
mine office, and he was hanged.' <span id="an_gen:41:14">14</span> Then
Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the
dungeon. And he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in
unto Pharaoh. <span id="an_gen:41:15">15</span> And Pharaoh said unto
Joseph: 'I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret
it; and I have heard say of thee, that when thou hearest a dream thou
canst interpret it.' <span id="an_gen:41:16">16</span> And Joseph
answered Pharaoh, saying: 'It is not in me; God will give Pharaoh an
answer of peace.' <span id="an_gen:41:17">17</span> And Pharaoh spoke
unto Joseph: 'In my dream, behold, I stood upon the brink of the river.
<span id="an_gen:41:18">18</span> And, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, fat-fleshed <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> and
well-favoured; and they fed in the reed-grass. <span
id="an_gen:41:19">19</span> And, behold, seven other kine came up after
them, poor and very ill-favoured and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw
in all the land of Egypt for badness. <span
id="an_gen:41:20">20</span> And the lean and ill-favoured kine did eat
up the first seven fat kine. <span id="an_gen:41:21">21</span> And when
they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them;
but they were still ill-favoured as at the beginning. So I awoke. <span
id="an_gen:41:22">22</span> And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven
ears came up upon one stalk, full and good. <span
id="an_gen:41:23">23</span> And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and
blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them. <span
id="an_gen:41:24">24</span> And the thin ears swallowed up the seven
good ears. And I told it unto the magicians; but there was none that
could declare it to me.' <span id="an_gen:41:25">25</span> And Joseph
said unto Pharaoh: 'The dream of Pharaoh is one; what God is about to do
He hath declared unto Pharaoh. <span id="an_gen:41:26">26</span> The
seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven
years: the dream is one. <span id="an_gen:41:27">27</span> And the seven
lean and ill-favoured kine that came up after them are seven years, and
also the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind; they shall be
seven years of famine. <span id="an_gen:41:28">28</span> That is the
thing which I spoke unto Pharaoh: what God is about to do He hath shown
unto Pharaoh. <span id="an_gen:41:29">29</span> Behold, there come seven
years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_gen:41:30">30</span> And there shall arise after them seven years
of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land; <span
id="an_gen:41:31">31</span> and the plenty shall not be known in the
land by reason of that famine which followeth; for it shall be very
grievous. <span id="an_gen:41:32">32</span> And for that the dream was
doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because the thing is established by
God, and God will shortly bring it to pass. <span
id="an_gen:41:33">33</span> Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man
discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_gen:41:34">34</span> Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint
overseers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt
in the seven years of plenty. <span id="an_gen:41:35">35</span> And let
them gather all the food of these good years that come, and lay up corn
under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities, and let them keep it.
<span id="an_gen:41:36">36</span> And the food shall be for a store to
the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land
of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.' <span
id="an_gen:41:37">37</span> And the thing was good in the eyes of
Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants. <span
id="an_gen:41:38">38</span> And Pharaoh said unto his servants: 'Can we
find such a one as this, a man in whom the spirit of God is?' <span
id="an_gen:41:39">39</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph: 'Forasmuch as
God hath shown thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as
thou. <span id="an_gen:41:40">40</span> Thou shalt be over my house, and
according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled; only in the throne
will I be greater than thou.' <span id="an_gen:41:41">41</span> And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph: 'See, I have set thee over all the land of
Egypt.' <span id="an_gen:41:42">42</span> And Pharaoh took off his
signet ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed
him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.
<span id="an_gen:41:43">43</span> And he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cried before him: 'Abrech'; and he set
him over all the land of Egypt. <span id="an_gen:41:44">44</span> And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph: 'I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man
lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt.' <span
id="an_gen:41:45">45</span> And Pharaoh called Joseph's name
Zaphenath-paneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of
Poti-phera priest of On. And Joseph went out over the land of <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> Egypt.—<span id="an_gen:41:46">46</span> And
Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of
Egypt.—And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went
throughout all the land of Egypt. <span id="an_gen:41:47">47</span> And
in the seven years of plenty the earth brought forth in heaps. <span
id="an_gen:41:48">48</span> And he gathered up all the food of the seven
years which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the
cities; the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he
up in the same. <span id="an_gen:41:49">49</span> And Joseph laid up
corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until they left off numbering;
for it was without number. <span id="an_gen:41:50">50</span> And unto
Joseph were born two sons before the year of famine came, whom Asenath
the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On bore unto him. <span
id="an_gen:41:51">51</span> And Joseph called the name of the first-born
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[a](#fn_66) Manasseh: 'for God hath made me
forget all my toil, and all my father's house.' <span
id="an_gen:41:52">52</span> And the name of the second called he  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[b](#fn_67) Ephraim: 'for God hath made me fruitful in
the land of my affliction.' <span id="an_gen:41:53">53</span> And the
seven years of plenty, that was in the land of Egypt, came to an end.
<span id="an_gen:41:54">54</span> And the seven years of famine began to
come, according as Joseph had said; and there was famine in all lands;
but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. <span
id="an_gen:41:55">55</span> And when all the land of Egypt was famished,
the people cried to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh said unto all the
Egyptians: 'Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.' <span
id="an_gen:41:56">56</span> And the famine was over all the face of the
earth; and Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the
Egyptians; and the famine was sore in the land of Egypt. <span
id="an_gen:41:57">57</span> And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph
to buy corn; because the famine was sore in all the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[50:a](gen041.htm#fr_66) That is, the Nile.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[52:a](gen041.htm#fr_67) That is, *Making to
forget*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[52:b](gen041.htm#fr_68) From a Hebrew word
signifying *to be fruitful*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 42](gen042)

</div>
