<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 44

<span id="an_gen:44:1">1</span> And he commanded the steward of his
house, saying: 'Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can
carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth. <span
id="an_gen:44:2">2</span> And put my goblet, the silver goblet, in the
sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money.' And he did according
to the word that Joseph had spoken. <span id="an_gen:44:3">3</span> As
soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their
asses. <span id="an_gen:44:4">4</span> And when they were gone out of
the city, and were not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward: 'Up,
follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them:
Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? <span
id="an_gen:44:5">5</span> Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and
whereby he indeed divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.' <span
id="an_gen:44:6">6</span> And he overtook them, and he spoke unto them
these words. <span id="an_gen:44:7">7</span> And they said unto him:
'Wherefore speaketh my lord such words as these? Far be it from thy
servants that they should do such a thing. <span
id="an_gen:44:8">8</span> Behold, the money, which we found in our
sacks' mouths, we brought back unto thee out of the land of Canaan; how
then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold? <span
id="an_gen:44:9">9</span> With whomsoever of thy servants it be found,
let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.' <span
id="an_gen:44:10">10</span> And he said: 'Now also let it be according
unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my bondman; and ye
shall be blameless.' <span id="an_gen:44:11">11</span> Then they
hastened, and took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened
every man his sack. <span id="an_gen:44:12">12</span> And he searched,
beginning at the eldest, and leaving off at the youngest; and the goblet
was found in Benjamin's sack. <span id="an_gen:44:13">13</span> Then
they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to
the city. <span id="an_gen:44:14">14</span> And Judah and his brethren
came to Joseph's house, and he was yet there; and they fell before him
on the ground. <span id="an_gen:44:15">15</span> And Joseph said unto
them: 'What deed is this that ye have done? know ye <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> not that such a man as I will indeed divine?'
<span id="an_gen:44:16">16</span> And Judah said: 'What shall we say
unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God
hath found out the iniquity of thy servants; behold, we are my lord's
bondmen, both we, and he also in whose hand the cup is found.' <span
id="an_gen:44:17">17</span> And he said: Far be it from me that I should
do so; the man in whose hand the goblet is found, he shall be my
bondman; but as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.'

‏ויגש‎

<span id="an_gen:44:18">18</span> Then Judah came near unto him, and
said: 'Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my
lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant; for thou
art even as Pharaoh. <span id="an_gen:44:19">19</span> My lord asked his
servants, saying: Have ye a father, or a brother? <span
id="an_gen:44:20">20</span> And we said unto my lord: We have a father,
an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is
dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
<span id="an_gen:44:21">21</span> And thou saidst unto thy servants:
Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him. <span
id="an_gen:44:22">22</span> And we said unto my lord: The lad cannot
leave his father; for if he should leave his father, his father would
die. <span id="an_gen:44:23">23</span> And thou saidst unto thy
servants: Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see
my face no more. <span id="an_gen:44:24">24</span> And it came to pass
when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my
lord. <span id="an_gen:44:25">25</span> And our father said: Go again,
buy us a little food. <span id="an_gen:44:26">26</span> And we said: We
cannot go down; if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go
down; for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be
with us. <span id="an_gen:44:27">27</span> And thy servant my father
said unto us: Ye know that my wife bore me two sons; <span
id="an_gen:44:28">28</span> and the one went out from me, and I said:
Surely he is torn in pieces; and I have not seen him since; <span
id="an_gen:44:29">29</span> and if ye take this one also from me, and
harm befall him, ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave. <span id="an_gen:44:30">30</span> Now therefore when I come to
thy servant my father, and the lad is not with us; seeing that his soul
is bound up with the lad's soul; <span id="an_gen:44:31">31</span> it
will come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he
will die; and thy servants will bring down the gray hairs of thy servant
our father with sorrow to the grave. <span
id="an_gen:44:32">32</span> For thy servant became surety for the lad
unto my father, saying: If I bring him not unto thee, then shall I bear
the blame to my father for ever. <span id="an_gen:44:33">33</span> Now
therefore, let thy servant, I pray thee, abide instead of the lad a
bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren. <span
id="an_gen:44:34">34</span> For how shall I go up to my father, if the
lad be not with me? lest I look upon the evil that shall come on my
father.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045)

</div>
