<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen023)  [Next](gen025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GENESIS CHAPTER 24

<span id="an_gen:24:1">1</span> And Abraham was old, well stricken in
age; and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things. <span
id="an_gen:24:2">2</span> And Abraham said unto his servant, the elder
of his house, that ruled over all that he had: 'Put, I pray thee, thy
hand under my thigh. <span id="an_gen:24:3">3</span> And I will make
thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that
thou shalt not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, among whom I dwell. <span id="an_gen:24:4">4</span> But thou
shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son,
even for Isaac.' <span id="an_gen:24:5">5</span> And the servant said
unto him: 'Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto
this land; must I needs bring thy son back unto the land from whence
thou tamest?' <span id="an_gen:24:6">6</span> And Abraham said unto him:
'Beware thou that thou bring not my son back thither. <span
id="an_gen:24:7">7</span> The LORD, the God of heaven, who took me from
my father's house, and from the land of my nativity, and who spoke unto
me, and who swore unto me, saying: Unto thy seed will I give this land;
He will send His angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife for my
son from thence. <span id="an_gen:24:8">8</span> And if the woman be not
willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath; only
thou shalt not bring my son back thither.' <span
id="an_gen:24:9">9</span> And the servant put his hand under the thigh
of Abraham his master, and swore to him concerning this matter. <span
id="an_gen:24:10">10</span> And the servant took ten camels, of the
camels of his master, and departed; having all goodly things of his
master's in his hand; and he arose, and went to  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[a](#fn_26) Aram-naharaim, unto the city of Nahor.
<span id="an_gen:24:11">11</span> And he made the camels to kneel down
without the city by the well of water at the time of evening, the time
that women go out to draw water. <span id="an_gen:24:12">12</span> And
he said: 'O LORD, the God of my master Abraham, send me, I pray Thee,
good speed this day, and show kindness unto my master Abraham. <span
id="an_gen:24:13">13</span> Behold, I stand by the fountain of water;
and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water. <span
id="an_gen:24:14">14</span> So let it come to pass, that the damsel to
whom I shall say: Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink;
and she shall say: Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also; let the
same be she that Thou hast appointed for Thy servant, even for Isaac;
and thereby shall I know that Thou hast shown kindness unto my master.'
<span id="an_gen:24:15">15</span> And it came to pass, before he had
done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel
the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her
pitcher upon her shoulder. <span id="an_gen:24:16">16</span> And the
damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known
her; and she went down to the fountain, and filled her pitcher, and came
up. <span id="an_gen:24:17">17</span> And the servant ran to meet her,
and said: 'Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little water of thy
pitcher.' <span id="an_gen:24:18">18</span> And she said: 'Drink, my
lord'; and she hastened, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and
gave him drink. <span id="an_gen:24:19">19</span> And when she had done
giving him drink, she said: 'I will draw for thy camels also, until they
have done drinking.' <span id="an_gen:24:20">20</span> And she <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span> hastened, and emptied her pitcher into the
trough, and ran again unto the well to draw, and drew for all his
camels. <span id="an_gen:24:21">21</span> And the man looked stedfastly
on her; holding his peace, to know whether the LORD had made his journey
prosperous or not. <span id="an_gen:24:22">22</span> And it came to
pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden ring
of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels
weight of gold; <span id="an_gen:24:23">23</span> and said: 'Whose
daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee. Is there room in thy father's
house for us to lodge in?' <span id="an_gen:24:24">24</span> And she
said unto him: 'I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she
bore unto Nahor.' <span id="an_gen:24:25">25</span> She said moreover
unto him: 'We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge
in.' <span id="an_gen:24:26">26</span> And the man bowed his head, and
prostrated himself before the LORD. <span
id="an_gen:24:27">27</span> And he said: 'Blessed be the LORD, the God
of my master Abraham, who hath not forsaken His mercy and His truth
toward my master; as for me, the LORD hath led me in the way to the
house of my master's brethren.' <span id="an_gen:24:28">28</span> And
the damsel ran, and told her mother's house according to these words.
<span id="an_gen:24:29">29</span> And Rebekah had a brother, and his
name was Laban; and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the fountain. <span
id="an_gen:24:30">30</span> And it came to pass, when he saw the ring,
and the bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words
of Rebekah his sister, saying: 'Thus spoke the man unto me,' that he
came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the fountain.
<span id="an_gen:24:31">31</span> And he said: 'Come in, thou blessed of
the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have cleared the house,
and made room for the camels.' <span id="an_gen:24:32">32</span> And the
man came into the house, and he ungirded the camels; and he gave straw
and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet and the feet of
the men that were with him. <span id="an_gen:24:33">33</span> And there
was set food before him to eat; but he said: 'I will not eat, until I
have told mine errand.' And he said: 'Speak on.' <span
id="an_gen:24:34">34</span> And he said: 'I am Abraham's servant. <span
id="an_gen:24:35">35</span> And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly;
and he is become great; and He hath given him flocks and herds, and
silver and gold, and men-servants and maidservants, and camels and
asses. <span id="an_gen:24:36">36</span> And Sarah my master's wife bore
a son to my master when she was old; and unto him hath he given all that
he hath. <span id="an_gen:24:37">37</span> And my master made me swear,
saying: Thou shalt not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, in whose land I dwell. <span id="an_gen:24:38">38</span> But
thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife
for my son. <span id="an_gen:24:39">39</span> And I said unto my master:
Peradventure the woman will not follow me. <span
id="an_gen:24:40">40</span> And he said unto me: The LORD, before whom I
walk, will send His angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt
take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house; <span
id="an_gen:24:41">41</span> then shalt thou be clear from my oath, when
thou comest to my kindred; and if they give her not to thee, thou shalt
be clear from my oath. <span id="an_gen:24:42">42</span> And I came this
day unto the fountain, and said: O LORD, the God of my master Abraham,
if now Thou do prosper my way which I go: <span
id="an_gen:24:43">43</span> behold, I stand by the fountain of water;
and let it come to pass, that the maiden that cometh forth to draw, to
whom I shall say: Give me, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher
to drink; <span id="an_gen:24:44">44</span> and she shall say to me:
Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels; let the same be
the woman whom the LORD hath appointed <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>
for my master's son. <span id="an_gen:24:45">45</span> And before I had
done speaking to my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher
on her shoulder; and she went down unto the fountain, and drew. And I
said unto her: Let me drink, I pray thee. <span
id="an_gen:24:46">46</span> And she made haste, and let down her pitcher
from her shoulder, and said: Drink, and I will give thy camels drink
also. So I drank, and she made the camels drink also. <span
id="an_gen:24:47">47</span> And I asked her, and said: Whose daughter
art thou? And she said: The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom
Milcah bore unto him. And I put the ring upon her nose, and the
bracelets upon her hands. <span id="an_gen:24:48">48</span> And I bowed
my head, and prostrated myself before the LORD, and blessed the LORD,
the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way to take my
master's brother's daughter for his son. <span
id="an_gen:24:49">49</span> And now if ye will deal kindly and truly
with my master, tell me; and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the
right hand, or to the left.' <span id="an_gen:24:50">50</span> Then
Laban and Bethuel answered and said: 'The thing proceedeth from the
LORD; we cannot speak unto thee bad or good. <span
id="an_gen:24:51">51</span> Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her,
and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath
spoken.' <span id="an_gen:24:52">52</span> And it came to pass, that,
when Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself down to the
earth unto the LORD. <span id="an_gen:24:53">53</span> And the servant
brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and
gave them to Rebekah; he gave also to her brother and to her mother
precious things. <span id="an_gen:24:54">54</span> And they did eat and
drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and
they rose up in the morning, and he said: 'Send me away unto my master.'
<span id="an_gen:24:55">55</span> And her brother and her mother said:
'Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that
she shall go.' <span id="an_gen:24:56">56</span> And he said unto them:
'Delay me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that
I may go to my master.' <span id="an_gen:24:57">57</span> And they said
'We will call the damsel, and inquire at her mouth.' <span
id="an_gen:24:58">58</span> And they called Rebekah, and said unto her:
'Will thou go with this man?' And she said: 'I will go.' <span
id="an_gen:24:59">59</span> And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and
her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men. <span
id="an_gen:24:60">60</span> And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her:
'Our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of ten thousands, and let
thy seed possess the gate of those that hate them.' <span
id="an_gen:24:61">61</span> And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they
rode upon the camels, and followed the man. And the servant took
Rebekah, and went his way. <span id="an_gen:24:62">62</span> And Isaac
came from the way of Beer-lahai-roi; for he dwelt in the land of the
South. <span id="an_gen:24:63">63</span> And Isaac went out to meditate
in the field at the eventide; and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and,
behold, there were camels coming. <span id="an_gen:24:64">64</span> And
Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she alighted from
the camel. <span id="an_gen:24:65">65</span> And she said unto the
servant: 'What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us?' And
the servant said: 'It is my master.' And she took her veil, and covered
herself. <span id="an_gen:24:66">66</span> And the servant told Isaac
all the things that he had done. <span id="an_gen:24:67">67</span> And
Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and
she became his wife; and he loved her. And Isaac was comforted for his
mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26:a](gen024.htm#fr_27) That is, Mesopotamia.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 25](gen025)

</div>
