<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg006)  [Next](jdg008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 7

<span id="an_jdg:7:1">1</span> Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all
the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside
En-harod; and the camp of Midian was on the north side of them, by
Gibeath-moreh, in the valley.

<span id="an_jdg:7:2">2</span> And the LORD said unto Gideon: \`The
people that are with thee are too many for Me to give the Midianites
into their hand, lest Israel vaunt themselves against Me, saying: Mine
own hand hath saved me. <span id="an_jdg:7:3">3</span> Now therefore
make proclamation in the ears of the people, saying: Whosoever is
fearful and trembling, let him return and depart early from mount
Gilead.' And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and
there remained ten thousand.

<span id="an_jdg:7:4">4</span> And the LORD said unto Gideon: \`The
people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try
them for thee there; and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee: This
shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say
unto thee: This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.' <span
id="an_jdg:7:5">5</span> So he brought down the people unto the water;
and the LORD said unto Gideon: \`Every one that lappeth of the water
with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself;
likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.' <span
id="an_jdg:7:6">6</span> And the number of them that lapped, putting
their hand to their mouth, was three hundred men; but all the rest of
the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water. <span
id="an_jdg:7:7">7</span> And the LORD said unto Gideon: \`By the three
hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into
thy hand; and let all the people go every man unto his place.' <span
id="an_jdg:7:8">8</span> So they took the victuals of the people in
their hand, and their horns; and he sent all the men of Israel every man
unto his tent, but retained the three hundred men; and the camp of
Midian was beneath him in the valley.

<span id="an_jdg:7:9">9</span> And it came to pass the same night, that
the LORD said unto him: \`Arise, get thee down upon the camp; for I have
delivered it into thy hand. <span id="an_jdg:7:10">10</span> But if thou
fear to go down, go thou with Purah thy servant down to the camp. <span
id="an_jdg:7:11">11</span> And thou shalt hear what they say; and
afterward shall thy hands be strengthened to go down upon the camp.'
Then went he down with Purah his servant unto the outermost part of the
armed men that were in the camp. <span id="an_jdg:7:12">12</span> Now
the Midianites and

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley
like locusts for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the
sand which is upon the sea-shore for multitude. <span
id="an_jdg:7:13">13</span> And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a
man telling a dream unto his fellow, and saying: \`Behold, I dreamed a
dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian,
and came unto the tent, and smote it that it fell, and turned it upside
down, that the tent lay flat.' <span id="an_jdg:7:14">14</span> And his
fellow answered and said: \`This is nothing else save the sword of
Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: into his hand God hath
delivered Midian, and all the host.'

<span id="an_jdg:7:15">15</span> And it was so, when Gideon heard the
telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he
worshipped; and he returned into the camp of Israel, and said: \`Arise;
for the LORD hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.' <span
id="an_jdg:7:16">16</span> And he divided the three hundred men into
three companies, and he put into the hands of all of them horns, and
empty pitchers, with torches within the pitchers. <span
id="an_jdg:7:17">17</span> And he said unto them: \`Look on me, and do
likewise; and, behold, when I come to the outermost part of the camp, it
shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do. <span
id="an_jdg:7:18">18</span> When I blow the horn, I and all that are with
me, then blow ye the horns also on every side of all the camp, and say:
For the LORD and for Gideon!'

<span id="an_jdg:7:19">19</span> So Gideon, and the hundred men that
were with him, came unto the outermost part of the camp in the beginning
of the middle watch, when they had but newly set the watch; and they
blew the horns, and broke in pieces the pitchers that were in their
hands. <span id="an_jdg:7:20">20</span> And the three companies blew the
horns, and broke the pitchers, and held the torches in their left hands,
and the horns in their right hands wherewith to blow; and they cried:
\`The sword for the LORD and for Gideon!' <span
id="an_jdg:7:21">21</span> And they stood every man in his place round
about the camp; and all the host ran; and they shouted, and fled. <span
id="an_jdg:7:22">22</span> And they blew the three hundred horns, and
the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all
the host; and the host fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as
far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath. <span
id="an_jdg:7:23">23</span> And the men of Israel were gathered together
out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued
after Midian. <span id="an_jdg:7:24">24</span> And Gideon sent
messengers throughout all the hill-country of Ephraim, saying: \`Come
down against Midian, and take before them the waters, as far as
Beth-barah, and also the Jordan.' So all the men of Ephraim were
gathered together, and took the waters as far as Beth-barah, and also
the Jordan. <span id="an_jdg:7:25">25</span> And they took the two
princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb at the Rock of
Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the Winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian;
and they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon beyond the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 8](jdg008)

</div>
