<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg012)  [Next](jdg014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 13

<span id="an_jdg:13:1">1</span> And the children of Israel again did
that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered
them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.

<span id="an_jdg:13:2">2</span> And there was a certain man of Zorah, of
the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was
barren, and bore not. <span id="an_jdg:13:3">3</span> And the angel of
the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto her: \`Behold now, thou
art barren, and hast not borne; but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.
<span id="an_jdg:13:4">4</span> Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and
drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing. <span
id="an_jdg:13:5">5</span> For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son;
and no razor shall come upon his head; for the child shall be a Nazirite
unto God from the womb; and he shall begin to save Israel out of the
hand of the Philistines.' <span id="an_jdg:13:6">6</span> Then the woman
came and told her husband, saying: \`A man of God came unto me, and his
countenance was like the countenance of the angel of God, very terrible;
and I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name; <span
id="an_jdg:13:7">7</span> but he said unto me: Behold, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, and
eat not any unclean thing; for the child shall be a Nazirite unto God

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

from the womb to the day of his death.'

<span id="an_jdg:13:8">8</span> Then Manoah entreated the LORD, and
said: \`Oh, Lord, I pray Thee, let the man of God whom Thou didst send
come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that
shall be born.' <span id="an_jdg:13:9">9</span> And God hearkened to the
voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she
sat in the field; but Manoah her husband was not with her. <span
id="an_jdg:13:10">10</span> And the woman made haste, and ran, and told
her husband, and said unto him: \`Behold, the man hath appeared unto me,
that came unto me that day.' <span id="an_jdg:13:11">11</span> And
Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said
unto him: \`Art thou the man that spokest unto the woman?' And he said:
\`I am.' <span id="an_jdg:13:12">12</span> And Manoah said: \`Now when
thy word cometh to pass, what shall be the rule for the child, and what
shall be done with him?' <span id="an_jdg:13:13">13</span> And the angel
of the LORD said unto Manoah: \`Of all that I said unto the woman let
her beware. <span id="an_jdg:13:14">14</span> She may not eat of any
thing that cometh of the grape-vine, neither let her drink wine or
strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing; all that I commanded her let
her observe.' <span id="an_jdg:13:15">15</span> And Manoah said unto the
angel of the LORD: \`I pray thee, let us detain thee, that we may make
ready a kid for thee.' <span id="an_jdg:13:16">16</span> And the angel
of the LORD said unto Manoah: \`Though thou detain me, I will not eat of
thy bread; and if thou wilt make ready a burnt-offering, thou must offer
it unto the LORD.' For Manoah knew not that he was the angel of the
LORD. <span id="an_jdg:13:17">17</span> And Manoah said unto the angel
of the LORD: \`What is thy name, that when thy words come to pass we may
do thee honour?' <span id="an_jdg:13:18">18</span> And the angel of the
LORD said unto him: \`Wherefore askest thou after my name, seeing it is
hidden?' <span id="an_jdg:13:19">19</span> So Manoah took the kid with
the meal-offering, and offered it upon the rock unto the LORD; and \[the
angel\] did wondrously, and Manoah and his wife looked on. <span
id="an_jdg:13:20">20</span> For it came to pass, when the flame went up
toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in
the flame of the altar; and Manoah and his wife looked on; and they fell
on their faces to the ground. <span id="an_jdg:13:21">21</span> But the
angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah or to his wife. Then
Manoah knew that he was the angel of the LORD. <span
id="an_jdg:13:22">22</span> And Manoah said unto his wife: \`We shall
surely die, because we have seen God.' <span
id="an_jdg:13:23">23</span> But his wife said unto him: \`If the LORD
were pleased to kill us, He would not have received a burnt-offering and
a meal-offering at our hand, neither would He have shown us all these
things, nor would at this time have told such things as these.'

<span id="an_jdg:13:24">24</span> And the woman bore a son, and called
his name Samson; and the child grew, and the LORD blessed him. <span
id="an_jdg:13:25">25</span> And the spirit of the LORD began to move him
in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 14](jdg014)

</div>
