<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg002)  [Next](jdg004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUDGES CHAPTER 3

<span id="an_jdg:3:1">1</span> Now these are the nations which the LORD
left, to prove Israel by them, even as many as had not known all the
wars of Canaan; <span id="an_jdg:3:2">2</span> only that the generations
of the children of Israel

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

might know, to teach them war, at the least such as beforetime knew
nothing thereof; <span id="an_jdg:3:3">3</span> namely, the five lords
of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Zidonians, and the
Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the
entrance of Hamath. <span id="an_jdg:3:4">4</span> And they were there,
to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the
commandments of the LORD, which He commanded their fathers by the hand
of Moses. <span id="an_jdg:3:5">5</span> And the children of Israel
dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites; <span
id="an_jdg:3:6">6</span> and they took their daughters to be their
wives, and gave their own daughters to their sons, and served their
gods.

<span id="an_jdg:3:7">7</span> And the children of Israel did that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD, and forgot the LORD their God, and
served the Baalim and the Asheroth. <span
id="an_jdg:3:8">8</span> Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled
against Israel, and He gave them over into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim
king of Aramnaharaim; and the children of Israel served
Cushan-rishathaim eight years. <span id="an_jdg:3:9">9</span> And when
the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a saviour
to the children of Israel, who saved them, even Othniel the son of
Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother. <span id="an_jdg:3:10">10</span> And the
spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out
to war, and the LORD delivered Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram into his
hand; and his hand prevailed against Cushan-rishathaim. <span
id="an_jdg:3:11">11</span> And the land had rest forty years. And
Othniel the son of Kenaz died.

<span id="an_jdg:3:12">12</span> And the children of Israel again did
that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD strengthened
Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD. <span id="an_jdg:3:13">13</span> And
he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek; and he went and
smote Israel, and they possessed the city of palm-trees. <span
id="an_jdg:3:14">14</span> And the children of Israel served Eglon the
king of Moab eighteen years. <span id="an_jdg:3:15">15</span> But when
the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised them up a
saviour, Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a man left-handed; and the
children of Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon the king of Moab.
<span id="an_jdg:3:16">16</span> And Ehud made him a sword which had two
edges, of a cubit length; and he girded it under his raiment upon his
right thigh. <span id="an_jdg:3:17">17</span> And he offered the present
unto Eglon king of Moab-now Eglon was a very fat man. <span
id="an_jdg:3:18">18</span> And when he had made an end of offering the
present, he sent away the people that bore the present. <span
id="an_jdg:3:19">19</span> But he himself turned back from the quarries
that were by Gilgal, and said: \`I have a secret errand unto thee, O
king.' And he said: \`Keep silence.' And all that stood by him went out
from him. <span id="an_jdg:3:20">20</span> And Ehud came unto him; and
he was sitting by himself alone in his cool upper chamber. And Ehud
said: \`I have a message from God unto thee.' And he arose out of his
seat. <span id="an_jdg:3:21">21</span> And Ehud put forth his left hand,
and took the sword from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly.
<span id="an_jdg:3:22">22</span> And the haft also went in after the
blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, for he drew not the sword out
of his belly; and it came out behind. <span
id="an_jdg:3:23">23</span> Then Ehud went forth into the porch, and shut
the doors of the upper chamber upon him, and locked them. <span
id="an_jdg:3:24">24</span> Now when he was gone out, his servants came;
and they saw, and, behold, the doors of the upper chamber were locked;
and they

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

said: \`Surely he is covering his feet in the cabinet of the cool
chamber.' <span id="an_jdg:3:25">25</span> And they tarried till they
were ashamed; and, behold, he opened not the doors of the upper chamber;
therefore they took the key, and opened them; and, behold, their lord
was fallen down dead on the earth. <span id="an_jdg:3:26">26</span> And
Ehud escaped while they lingered, having passed beyond the quarries, and
escaped unto Seirah. <span id="an_jdg:3:27">27</span> And it came to
pass, when he was come, that he blew a horn in the hill-country of
Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the
hill-country, and he before them. <span id="an_jdg:3:28">28</span> And
he said unto them: \`Follow after me; for the LORD hath delivered your
enemies the Moabites into your hand.' And they went down after him, and
took the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites, and suffered not a
man to pass over. <span id="an_jdg:3:29">29</span> And they smote of
Moab at that time about ten thousand men, every lusty man, and every man
of valour; and there escaped not a man. <span
id="an_jdg:3:30">30</span> So Moab was subdued that day under the hand
of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years.

<span id="an_jdg:3:31">31</span> And after him was Shamgar the son of
Anath, who smote of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox-goad; and
he also saved Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 4](jdg004)

</div>
