<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 22

<span id="an_jos:22:1">1</span> Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and
the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, <span
id="an_jos:22:2">2</span> and said unto them: 'Ye have kept all that
Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have hearkened unto my
voice in all that I commanded you; <span id="an_jos:22:3">3</span> ye
have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept
the charge of the commandment of the LORD your God. <span
id="an_jos:22:4">4</span> And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto
your brethren, as He spoke unto them; therefore now turn ye, and get you
unto your tents, unto the land of your possession, which Moses the
servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan. <span
id="an_jos:22:5">5</span> Only take diligent heed to do the commandment
and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, to love
the LORD your God, and to walk in all His ways, and to keep His
commandments, and to cleave unto Him, and to serve Him with all your
heart and with all your soul.' <span id="an_jos:22:6">6</span> So Joshua
blessed them, and sent them away; and they went unto their tents.

<span id="an_jos:22:7">7</span> Now to the one half-tribe of Manasseh
Moses had given inheritance in Bashan; but unto the other half gave
Joshua among their brethren beyond the Jordan westward. Moreover when
Joshua sent them away unto their tents, he blessed them, <span
id="an_jos:22:8">8</span> and spoke unto them, saying: 'Return with much
wealth unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with
gold, and with brass,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

and with iron, and with very much raiment; divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.'

<span id="an_jos:22:9">9</span> And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed
from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of
Canaan, to go unto the land of Gilead, to the land of their possession,
whereof they were possessed, according to the commandment of the LORD by
the hand of Moses. <span id="an_jos:22:10">10</span> And when they came
unto the region about the Jordan, that is in the land of Canaan, the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of
Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, a great altar to look upon.
<span id="an_jos:22:11">11</span> And the children of Israel heard say:
'Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar in the forefront of the land
of Canaan, in the region about the Jordan, on the side that pertaineth
to the children of Israel.' <span id="an_jos:22:12">12</span> And when
the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the
children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up
against them to war.

<span id="an_jos:22:13">13</span> And the children of Israel sent unto
the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the
half-tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of
Eleazar the priest; <span id="an_jos:22:14">14</span> and with him ten
princes, one prince of a fathers' house for each of the tribes of
Israel; and they were every one of them head of their fathers' houses
among the thousands of Israel. <span id="an_jos:22:15">15</span> And
they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and
to the half-tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spoke
with them, saying: <span id="an_jos:22:16">16</span> 'Thus saith the
whole congregation of the LORD: What treachery is this that ye have
committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from
following the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, to rebel this
day against the LORD? <span id="an_jos:22:17">17</span> Is the iniquity
of Peor too little for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves
unto this day, although there came a plague upon the congregation of the
LORD, <span id="an_jos:22:18">18</span> that ye must turn away this day
from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to-day against
the LORD, that to-morrow He will be wroth with the whole congregation of
Israel. <span id="an_jos:22:19">19</span> Howbeit, if the land of your
possession be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession
of the LORD, wherein the LORD'S tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession
among us; but rebel not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in
building you an altar besides the altar of the LORD our God. <span
id="an_jos:22:20">20</span> Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a
trespass concerning the devoted thing, and wrath fell upon all the
congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his
iniquity.'

<span id="an_jos:22:21">21</span> Then the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered, and spoke unto
the heads of the thousands of Israel: <span
id="an_jos:22:22">22</span> 'God, God, the LORD, God, God, the LORD, He
knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
treachery against the LORD—save Thou us not this day—<span
id="an_jos:22:23">23</span> that we have built us an altar to turn away
from following the LORD; or if to offer thereon burnt-offering or
meal-offering, or if to offer sacrifices of peace-offerings thereon, let
the LORD Himself require it; <span id="an_jos:22:24">24</span> and if we
have not rather out of anxiety about a matter done this, saying: In time
to come your children might

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

speak unto our children, saying: What have ye to do with the LORD, the
God of Israel? <span id="an_jos:22:25">25</span> for the LORD hath made
the Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and
children of Gad; ye have no portion in the LORD; so might your children
make our children cease from fearing the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:22:26">26</span> Therefore we said: Let us now prepare to
build us an altar, not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice; <span
id="an_jos:22:27">27</span> but it shall be a witness between us and
you, and between our generations after us, that we may do the service of
the LORD before Him with our burnt-offerings, and with our sacrifices,
and with our peace-offerings; that your children may not say to our
children in time to come: Ye have no portion in the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:22:28">28</span> Therefore said we: It shall be, when they so
say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we shall say:
Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made, not
for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice; but it is a witness between us
and you. <span id="an_jos:22:29">29</span> Far be it from us that we
should rebel against the LORD, and turn away this day from following the
LORD, to build an altar for burnt-offering, for meal-offering, or for
sacrifice, besides the altar of the LORD our God that is before His
tabernacle.'

<span id="an_jos:22:30">30</span> And when Phinehas the priest, and the
princes of the congregation, even the heads of the thousands of Israel
that were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them
well. <span id="an_jos:22:31">31</span> And Phinehas the son of Eleazar
the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad,
and to the children of Manasseh: 'This day we know that the LORD is in
the midst of us, because ye have not committed this treachery against
the LORD; now have ye delivered the children of Israel out of the hand
of the LORD.' <span id="an_jos:22:32">32</span> And Phinehas the son of
Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of
Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto
the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them back
word. <span id="an_jos:22:33">33</span> And the thing pleased the
children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and spoke no
more of going up against them to war, to destroy the land wherein the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad dwelt. <span
id="an_jos:22:34">34</span> And the children of Reuben and the children
of Gad called the altar—:'for it is a witness between us that the LORD
is God.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
