<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos002)  [Next](jos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 3

<span id="an_jos:3:1">1</span> And Joshua rose up early in the morning,
and they removed from Shittim, and came to the Jordan, he and all the
children of Israel; and they lodged there before they passed over. <span
id="an_jos:3:2">2</span> And it came to pass after three days, that the
officers went through the midst of the camp; <span
id="an_jos:3:3">3</span> and they commanded the people, saying: 'When ye
see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the
Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it. <span id="an_jos:3:4">4</span> Yet there shall be a space between
you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure; come not near unto it,
that ye may know the way by which ye must go; for ye have not passed
this way heretofore.'

<span id="an_jos:3:5">5</span> And Joshua said unto the people:
'Sanctify yourselves; for to-morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.'
<span id="an_jos:3:6">6</span> And Joshua spoke unto the priests,
saying: 'Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass on before the
people.' And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the
people.

<span id="an_jos:3:7">7</span> And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'This day
will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may
know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. <span
id="an_jos:3:8">8</span> And thou shalt command the priests that bear
the ark of the covenant, saying: When ye are come to the brink of the
waters of the Jordan, ye shall stand still in the Jordan.'

<span id="an_jos:3:9">9</span> And Joshua said unto the children of
Israel: 'Come hither, and hear the words of the LORD your God.' <span
id="an_jos:3:10">10</span> And Joshua said: 'Hereby ye shall know that
the living God is among you, and that He will without fail drive out
from before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the
Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite. <span
id="an_jos:3:11">11</span> Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord
of all the earth passeth on before you over the Jordan. <span
id="an_jos:3:12">12</span> Now therefore take you twelve men out of the
tribes of Israel, for every tribe a man. <span
id="an_jos:3:13">13</span> And it shall come to pass, when the soles of
the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all
the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, that the waters of
the Jordan shall be cut off, even the waters that come down from above;
and they shall stand in one heap.' <span id="an_jos:3:14">14</span> And
it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over
the Jordan, the priests that bore the ark of the covenant being before
the people; <span id="an_jos:3:15">15</span> and when they that bore

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

the ark were come unto the Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bore
the ark were dipped in the brink of the water—for the Jordan overfloweth
all its banks all the time of harvest—<span
id="an_jos:3:16">16</span> that the waters which came down from above
stood, and rose up in one heap, a great way off from Adam, the city that
is beside Zarethan; and those that went down toward the sea of the
Arabah, even the Salt Sea, were wholly cut off; and the people passed
over right against Jericho. <span id="an_jos:3:17">17</span> And the
priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry
ground in the midst of the Jordan, while all Israel passed over on dry
ground, until all the nation were passed clean over the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 4](jos004)

</div>
