<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos022)  [Next](jos024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 23

<span id="an_jos:23:1">1</span> And it came to pass after many days,
when the LORD had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round
about, and Joshua was old and well stricken in years; <span
id="an_jos:23:2">2</span> that Joshua called for all Israel, for their
elders and for their heads, and for their judges and for their officers,
and said unto them: 'I am old and well stricken in years. <span
id="an_jos:23:3">3</span> And ye have seen all that the LORD your God
hath done unto all these nations because of you; for the LORD your God,
He it is that hath fought for you. <span
id="an_jos:23:4">4</span> Behold, I have allotted unto you for an
inheritance, according to your tribes, these nations that remain, from
the Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the
Great Sea toward the going down of the sun. <span
id="an_jos:23:5">5</span> And the LORD your God, He shall thrust them
out from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall
possess their land, as the LORD your God spoke unto you. <span
id="an_jos:23:6">6</span> Therefore be ye very courageous to keep and to
do all that is written

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the
right hand or to the left; <span id="an_jos:23:7">7</span> that ye come
not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make
mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither
serve them, nor worship them; <span id="an_jos:23:8">8</span> but cleave
unto the LORD your God, as ye have done unto this day; <span
id="an_jos:23:9">9</span> wherefore the LORD hath driven out from before
you great nations and mighty; but as for you, no man hath stood against
you unto this day. <span id="an_jos:23:10">10</span> One man of you hath
chased a thousand; for the LORD your God, He it is that fought for you,
as He spoke unto you. <span id="an_jos:23:11">11</span> Take good heed
therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD your God. <span
id="an_jos:23:12">12</span> Else if ye do in any wise go back, and
cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among
you, and make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you;
<span id="an_jos:23:13">13</span> know for a certainty that the LORD
your God will no more drive these nations from out of your sight; but
they shall be a snare and a trap unto you, and a scourge in your sides,
and pricks in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which
the LORD your God bath given you. <span id="an_jos:23:14">14</span> And,
behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth; consider ye
therefore in all your heart and in all your soul, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spoke
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, not one thing hath failed
thereof. <span id="an_jos:23:15">15</span> And it shall come to pass,
that as all the good things are come upon you of which the LORD your God
spoke unto you, so shall the LORD bring upon you all the evil things,
until He have destroyed you from off this good land which the LORD your
God hath given you. <span id="an_jos:23:16">16</span> When ye transgress
the covenant of the LORD your God, which He commanded you, and go and
serve other gods, and worship them; then shall the anger of the LORD be
kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land
which He hath given unto you.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 24](jos024)

</div>
