<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos023)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 24

<span id="an_jos:24:1">1</span> And Joshua gathered all the tribes of
Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their
heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented
themselves before God. <span id="an_jos:24:2">2</span> And Joshua said
unto all the people: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Your
fathers dwelt of old time beyond the River, even Terah, the father of
Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and they served other gods. <span
id="an_jos:24:3">3</span> And I took your father Abraham from beyond the
River, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him Isaac. <span id="an_jos:24:4">4</span> And I gave
unto Isaac Jacob and Esau; and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess
it; and Jacob and his children went down into Egypt. <span
id="an_jos:24:5">5</span> And I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued
Egypt, according to that which I did in the midst thereof; and afterward
I brought you out. <span id="an_jos:24:6">6</span> And I brought your
fathers out of Egypt; and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians
pursued after your fathers with chariots and with horsemen unto the Red
Sea. <span id="an_jos:24:7">7</span> And when they cried out unto the
LORD, He put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea
upon them, and covered them; and your eyes saw what I did in Egypt; and
ye dwelt in the wilderness many days. <span
id="an_jos:24:8">8</span> And I brought you into the land of the
Amorites, that dwelt beyond the Jordan; and they fought with you;

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

and I gave them into your hand, and ye possessed their land; and I
destroyed them from before you. <span id="an_jos:24:9">9</span> Then
Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel;
and he sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you. <span
id="an_jos:24:10">10</span> But I would not hearken unto Balaam;
therefore he even blessed you; so I delivered you out of his hand. <span
id="an_jos:24:11">11</span> And ye went over the Jordan, and came unto
Jericho; and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorite, and the
Perizzite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Girgashite, the
Hivite, and the Jebusite; and I delivered them into your hand. <span
id="an_jos:24:12">12</span> And I sent the hornet before you, which
drove them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; not
with thy sword, nor with thy bow. <span id="an_jos:24:13">13</span> And
I gave you a land whereon thou hadst not laboured, and cities which ye
built not, and ye dwell therein; of vineyards and olive-yards which ye
planted not do ye eat. <span id="an_jos:24:14">14</span> Now therefore
fear the LORD, and serve Him in sincerity and in truth; and put away the
gods which your fathers served beyond the River, and in Egypt; and serve
ye the LORD. <span id="an_jos:24:15">15</span> And if it seem evil unto
you to serve the LORD, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether
the gods which your fathers served that were beyond the River, or the
gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my
house, we will serve the LORD.'

<span id="an_jos:24:16">16</span> And the people answered and said: 'Far
be it from us that we should forsake the LORD, to serve other gods;
<span id="an_jos:24:17">17</span> for the LORD our God, He it is that
brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage, and that did those great signs in our sight, and preserved
us in all the way wherein we went, and among all the peoples through the
midst of whom we passed; <span id="an_jos:24:18">18</span> and the LORD
drove out from before us all the peoples, even the Amorites that dwelt
in the land; therefore we also will serve the LORD; for He is our God.'

<span id="an_jos:24:19">19</span> And Joshua said unto the people: 'Ye
cannot serve the LORD; for He is a holy God; He is a jealous God; He
will not forgive your transgression nor your sins. <span
id="an_jos:24:20">20</span> If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange
gods, then He will turn and do you evil, and consume you, after that He
hath done you good.'

<span id="an_jos:24:21">21</span> And the people said unto Joshua: 'Nay;
but we will serve the LORD.' <span id="an_jos:24:22">22</span> And
Joshua said unto the people: 'Ye are witnesses against yourselves that
ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve Him.—And they said: 'We are
witnesses.'—<span id="an_jos:24:23">23</span> Now therefore put away the
strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD,
the God of Israel.' <span id="an_jos:24:24">24</span> And the people
said unto Joshua: 'The LORD our God will we serve, and unto His voice
will we hearken.'

<span id="an_jos:24:25">25</span> So Joshua made a covenant with the
people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
<span id="an_jos:24:26">26</span> And Joshua wrote these words in the
book of the law of God; and he took a great stone, and set it up there
under the oak that was by the sanctuary of the LORD. <span
id="an_jos:24:27">27</span> And Joshua said unto all the people:
'Behold, this stone shall be a witness against us; for it hath heard all
the words of the LORD which He spoke unto us; it shall be therefore a
witness against you, lest ye deny your God.' <span
id="an_jos:24:28">28</span> So Joshua sent the people away, every man
unto his inheritance.

<span id="an_jos:24:29">29</span> And it came to pass after these
things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being
a

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

hundred and ten years old. <span id="an_jos:24:30">30</span> And they
buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-serah, which is
in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
<span id="an_jos:24:31">31</span> And Israel served the LORD all the
days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, and
had known all the work of the LORD, that He had wrought for Israel.
<span id="an_jos:24:32">32</span> And the bones of Joseph, which the
children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in
the parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father
of Shechem for a hundred pieces of money; and they became the
inheritance of the children of Joseph. <span
id="an_jos:24:33">33</span> And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they
buried him in the Hill of Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
Ephraim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
