<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos020)  [Next](jos022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_jos:21:1">1</span> Then came near the heads of fathers'
houses of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son
of Nun, and unto the heads of fathers' houses of the tribes of the
children of Israel; <span id="an_jos:21:2">2</span> and they spoke unto
them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying: 'The LORD commanded by the
hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the open land
thereabout for our cattle.' <span id="an_jos:21:3">3</span> And the
children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance,
according to the commandment of the LORD, these cities with the open
land about them.

<span id="an_jos:21:4">4</span> And the lot came out for the families of
the Kohathites; and the children of Aaron the priest, who were of the
Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of
the Simeonites, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

<span id="an_jos:21:5">5</span> And the rest of the children of Kohath
had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the
tribe of Dan, and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.

<span id="an_jos:21:6">6</span> And the children of Gershon had by lot
out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of
Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half-tribe of
Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span id="an_jos:21:7">7</span> The children of Merari according to
their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of
Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.

<span id="an_jos:21:8">8</span> And the children of Israel gave by lot
unto the Levites these cities with the open land about them, as the LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_jos:21:9">9</span> And they gave out of the tribe of the
children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these
cities which are here mentioned by name. <span
id="an_jos:21:10">10</span> And they were for the children of Aaron, of
the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi; for
theirs was the first lot. <span id="an_jos:21:11">11</span> And they
gave them Kiriath-arba, which Arba was the father of  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[a](#fn_105) Anak—the same is Hebron—in the
hill-country of Judah, with the open land round about it. <span
id="an_jos:21:12">12</span> But the fields of the city, and the villages
thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.

<span id="an_jos:21:13">13</span> And unto the children of Aaron the
priest they gave Hebron with the open land about it, the city of refuge
for the manslayer, and Libnah with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:14">14</span> and Jattir with the open land about it, and
Eshtemoa with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:15">15</span> and Holon with the open land about it, and
Debir with the open land about it; <span id="an_jos:21:16">16</span> and
Ain with the open land about it, and Juttah with the open land about it,
and Beth-shemesh with the open land about it; nine cities out of those
two tribes. <span id="an_jos:21:17">17</span> And out of the tribe of
Benjamin, Gibeon with the open land about it, Geba with the open land
about it; <span id="an_jos:21:18">18</span> Anathoth with the open land
about it, and Almon with the open land about it; four cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:19">19</span> All the cities of the children of Aaron, the
priests, were thirteen cities with the open land about them.

<span id="an_jos:21:20">20</span> And the families of the children of
Kohath, the Levites, even the rest of the children of Kohath, they had
the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim. <span
id="an_jos:21:21">21</span> And they gave them Shechem with the open
land about it in the hill-country of Ephraim, the city of refuge for the
manslayer, and Gezer with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:22">22</span> and Kibzaim with the open land about it, and
Beth-horon with the open land about it; four cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:23">23</span> And out of the tribe of Dan, Elteke with the
open land about it, Gibbethon with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:24">24</span> Aijalon with the open land about it,
Gathrimmon with the open land about it; four cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:25">25</span> And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Taanach with the open land about it, and Gath-rimmon with the open land
about it; two cities. <span id="an_jos:21:26">26</span> All the cities
of the families of the rest of the children of Kohath were ten with the
open land about them.

<span id="an_jos:21:27">27</span> And unto the children of Gershon, of
the families of the Levites, out of the half-tribe of Manasseh they gave
Golan in Bashan with the open land about it, the city of refuge for the
manslayer; and Beeshterah with the open land about it; two cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:28">28</span> And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishion
with the open land about it, Dobrath with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:29">29</span> Jarmuth with the open land about it,
En-gannim with the open land about it; four cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:30">30</span> And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with
the open land about it, Abdon with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:31">31</span> Helkath with the open land about it, and
Rehob with the open land about it; four cities. <span
id="an_jos:21:32">32</span> And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in
Galilee with the open

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

land about it, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Hammoth-dor
with the open land about it, and Kartan with the open land about it;
three cities. <span id="an_jos:21:33">33</span> All the cities of the
Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with the
open land about them.

<span id="an_jos:21:34">34</span> And unto the families of the children
of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam
with the open land about it, and Kartah with the open land about it;
<span id="an_jos:21:35">35</span> Dimnah with the open land about it,
Nahalal with the open land about it; four cities. \[ <span
id="fr_109"></span>[a](#fn_106) <span id="an_jos:21:36">36</span> And
out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with the open land about it, and Jahaz
with the open land about it; <span id="an_jos:21:37">37</span> Kedemoth
with the open land about it, and Mephaath with the open land about it;
four cities.\] <span id="an_jos:21:38">38</span> And out of the tribe of
Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with the open land about it, the city of refuge
for the manslayer, and Mahanaim with the open land about it; <span
id="an_jos:21:39">39</span> Heshbon with the open land about it, Jazer
with the open land about it; four cities in all. <span
id="an_jos:21:40">40</span> All these were the cities of the children of
Merari according to their families, even the rest of the families of the
Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.

<span id="an_jos:21:41">41</span> All the cities of the Levites—forty
and eight cities with the open land about them—shall be in the midst of
the possession of the children of Israel, <span
id="an_jos:21:42">42</span> even these cities, every one with the open
land round about it; thus it shall be with all these cities.

<span id="an_jos:21:43">43</span> So the LORD gave unto Israel all the
land which He swore to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it,
and dwelt therein. <span id="an_jos:21:44">44</span> And the LORD gave
them rest round about, according to all that He swore unto their
fathers;, and there stood not a man of all their enemies against them;
the LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand. <span
id="an_jos:21:45">45</span> There failed not aught of any good thing
which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[286:a](jos021.htm#fr_108) Heb. *Anok*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[287:a](jos021.htm#fr_109) These two verses,
taken from I Chron. vi. 63-64, are excluded from the text in
authoritative codices and placed in the margin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 22](jos022)

</div>
