<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos003)  [Next](jos005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOSHUA CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_jos:4:1">1</span> And it came to pass, when all the nation
were clean passed over the Jordan, that the LORD spoke unto Joshua,
saying: <span id="an_jos:4:2">2</span> 'Take you twelve men out of the
people, out of every tribe a man, <span id="an_jos:4:3">3</span> and
command ye them, saying: Take you hence out of the midst of the Jordan,
out of the place where the priests' feet stood, twelve stones made
ready, and carry them over with you, and lay them down in the
lodging-place, where ye shall lodge this night.'

<span id="an_jos:4:4">4</span> Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom
he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man;
<span id="an_jos:4:5">5</span> and Joshua said unto them: 'Pass on
before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of the Jordan, and
take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto
the number of the tribes of the children of Israel; <span
id="an_jos:4:6">6</span> that this may be a sign among you, that when
your children ask in time to come, saying: What mean ye by these stones?
<span id="an_jos:4:7">7</span> then ye shall say unto them: Because the
waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the
LORD; when it passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut
off; and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of
Israel for ever.' <span id="an_jos:4:8">8</span> And the children of
Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the
midst of the Jordan, as the LORD spoke unto Joshua, according to the
number of the tribes of the children of Israel; and they carried them
over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down
there. <span id="an_jos:4:9">9</span> Joshua also set up twelve stones
in the midst of the Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests
that bore the ark of the covenant stood; and they are there unto this
day. <span id="an_jos:4:10">10</span> And the priests that bore the ark
stood in the midst of the Jordan, until every thing was finished that
the LORD commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all
that Moses commanded Joshua; and the people hastened and passed over.
<span id="an_jos:4:11">11</span> And it came to pass, when all the
people were clean passed over, that the ark of the LORD passed on, and
the priests, before the people. <span id="an_jos:4:12">12</span> And the
children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh, passed on armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spoke
unto them; <span id="an_jos:4:13">13</span> about forty thousand ready
armed for war passed on in the presence of the LORD unto battle, to the
plains of Jericho.

<span id="an_jos:4:14">14</span> On that day the LORD magnified Joshua
in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses,
all the days of his life.

<span id="an_jos:4:15">15</span> And the LORD spoke unto Joshua, saying:
<span id="an_jos:4:16">16</span> 'Command the priests that bear the ark
of the testimony, that they come up out of the Jordan.' <span
id="an_jos:4:17">17</span> Joshua therefore commanded the priests,
saying: 'Come ye up out of

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the Jordan.' <span id="an_jos:4:18">18</span> And it came to pass, as
the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD came up out of
the midst of the Jordan, as soon as the soles of the priests' feet were
drawn up unto the dry ground, that the waters of the Jordan returned
unto their place, and went over all its banks, as aforetime. <span
id="an_jos:4:19">19</span> And the people came up out of the Jordan on
the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, on the east
border of Jericho. <span id="an_jos:4:20">20</span> And those twelve
stones, which they took out of the Jordan, did Joshua set up in Gilgal.
<span id="an_jos:4:21">21</span> And he spoke unto the children of
Israel, saying: 'When your children shall ask their fathers in time to
come, saying: What mean these stones? <span
id="an_jos:4:22">22</span> then ye shall let your children know, saying:
Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. <span
id="an_jos:4:23">23</span> For the LORD your God dried up the waters of
Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God
did to the Red Sea, which He dried up from before us, until we were
passed over, <span id="an_jos:4:24">24</span> that all the peoples of
the earth may know the hand of the LORD, that it is mighty; that ye may
fear the LORD your God for ever.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 5](jos005)

</div>
