<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1015)  [Next](kg1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 16

<span id="an_kg1:16:1">1</span> And the word of the LORD came to Jehu
the son of Hanani against Baasa, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:16:2">2</span> 'Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust,
and made thee prince over My people Israel; and thou hast walked in the
way of Jeroboam, and hast made My people Israel to sin, to provoke Me
with their sins; <span id="an_kg1:16:3">3</span> behold, I will utterly
sweep away Baasa and his house; and I will make thy house like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. <span id="an_kg1:16:4">4</span> Him that
dieth of Baasa in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his
in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.'

<span id="an_kg1:16:5">5</span> Now the rest of the acts of Baasa, and
what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel? <span id="an_kg1:16:6">6</span> And
Baasa slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg1:16:7">7</span> And moreover by the hand of the prophet
Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the LORD against Baasa, and
against his house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight
of the LORD, to provoke Him with the work of his hands, in being like
the house of Jeroboam, and because he smote him.

<span id="an_kg1:16:8">8</span> In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king
of Judah began Elah the son of Baasa to reign over Israel in Tirzah, and
reigned two years. <span id="an_kg1:16:9">9</span> And his servant
Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him; now he was
in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the
household in Tirzah; <span id="an_kg1:16:10">10</span> and Zimri went in
and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa
king of Judah, and reigned in his stead. <span
id="an_kg1:16:11">11</span> And it came to pass, when he began to reign,
as soon as he sat on his throne, that he smote all the house of Baasa;
he left him not a single man-child, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
friends. <span id="an_kg1:16:12">12</span> Thus did Zimri destroy all
the house of Baasa, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke
against Baasa by Jehu the prophet, <span id="an_kg1:16:13">13</span> for
all the sins of Baasa, and the sins of Elah his son, which they sinned,
and wherewith they made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD, the God of
Israel, with their vanities.

<span id="an_kg1:16:14">14</span> Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_kg1:16:15">15</span> In the twenty and seventh year of Asa
king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were
encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines. <span
id="an_kg1:16:16">16</span> And the people that were encamped heard say:
Zimri hath conspired,

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

and hath also smitten the king'; wherefore all Israel made Omri, the
captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp. <span
id="an_kg1:16:17">17</span> And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all
Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. <span
id="an_kg1:16:18">18</span> And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the
city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's house, and
burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died; <span
id="an_kg1:16:19">19</span> for his sins which he sinned in doing that
which was evil in the sight of the LORD, in walking in the way of
Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.

<span id="an_kg1:16:20">20</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_kg1:16:21">21</span> Then were the people of Israel divided
into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri. <span
id="an_kg1:16:22">22</span> But the people that followed Omri prevailed
against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath; so Tibni died,
and Omri reigned.

<span id="an_kg1:16:23">23</span> In the thirty and first year of Asa
king of Judah began Omri to xeign over Israel, and reigned twelve years;
six years reigned he in Tirzah. <span id="an_kg1:16:24">24</span> And he
bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver; and he
built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after
the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria. <span
id="an_kg1:16:25">25</span> And Omri did that which was evil in the
sight of the LORD, and dealt wickedly above all that were before him.
<span id="an_kg1:16:26">26</span> For he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins wherewith he made Israel to
sin, to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, with their vanities.

<span id="an_kg1:16:27">27</span> Now the rest of the acts of Omri which
he did, and his might that he showed, are they not written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? <span
id="an_kg1:16:28">28</span> And Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_kg1:16:29">29</span> And in the thirty and eighth year of
Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel; and
Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two
years. <span id="an_kg1:16:30">30</span> And Ahab the son of Omri did
that which was evil in the sight of the LORD above all that were before
him. <span id="an_kg1:16:31">31</span> And it came to pass, as if it had
been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the
Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him. <span
id="an_kg1:16:32">32</span> And he reared up an altar for Baal in the
house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. <span
id="an_kg1:16:33">33</span> And Ahab made the Asherah; and Ahab did yet
more to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, than all the kings of
Israel that were before him.

<span id="an_kg1:16:34">34</span> In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite
build Jericho; with Abiram his first-born he laid the foundation
thereof, and with his youngest son Segub he set up the gates thereof;
according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by the hand of Joshua
the son of Nun.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 17](kg1017)

</div>
