<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 18

<span id="an_kg1:18:1">1</span> And it came to pass after many days,
that the word of the LORD came to Elijah, in the third year, saying:
\`Go, show thyself unto Ahab, and I will send rain upon the land.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:2">2</span> And Elijah went to show himself unto Ahab.

And the famine was sore in Samaria. <span id="an_kg1:18:3">3</span> And
Ahab called Obadiah, who was

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

over the household.—Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly; <span
id="an_kg1:18:4">4</span> for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the
prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them
fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.—<span
id="an_kg1:18:5">5</span> And Ahab said unto Obadiah: \`Go through the
land, unto all the springs of water, and unto all the brooks;
peradventure we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that
we lose not all the beasts.' <span id="an_kg1:18:6">6</span> So they
divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab went one way
by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.

<span id="an_kg1:18:7">7</span> And as Obadiah was in the way, behold,
Elijah met him; and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said: \`Is it
thou, my lord Elijah?' <span id="an_kg1:18:8">8</span> And he answered
him: \`It is I; go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:9">9</span> And he said: \`Wherein have I sinned, that
thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?
<span id="an_kg1:18:10">10</span> As the LORD thy God liveth, there is
no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee; and
when they said: He is not here, he took an oath of the kingdom and
nation, that they found thee not. <span id="an_kg1:18:11">11</span> And
now thou sayest: Go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here. <span
id="an_kg1:18:12">12</span> And it will come to pass, as soon as I am
gone from thee, that the spirit of the LORD will carry thee whither I
know not; and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he
will slay me; but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth. <span
id="an_kg1:18:13">13</span> Was it not told my lord what I did when
Jezebel slew the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred men of the
LORD'S prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
<span id="an_kg1:18:14">14</span> And now thou sayest: Go, tell thy
lord: Behold, Elijah is here; and he will slay me.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:15">15</span> And Elijah said: \`As the LORD of hosts
liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself unto him to-day.'

<span id="an_kg1:18:16">16</span> So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told
him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah. <span id="an_kg1:18:17">17</span> And
it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him: \`Is it
thou, thou troubler of Israel?' <span id="an_kg1:18:18">18</span> And he
answered: \`I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's
house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou
hast followed the Baalim. <span id="an_kg1:18:19">19</span> Now
therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the
prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah
four hundred, that eat at Jezebel's table.'

<span id="an_kg1:18:20">20</span> And Ahab sent unto all the children of
Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel. <span
id="an_kg1:18:21">21</span> And Elijah came near unto all the people,
and said: \`How long halt ye between two opinions? if the LORD be God,
follow Him; but if Baal, follow him.' And the people answered him not a
word. <span id="an_kg1:18:22">22</span> Then said Elijah unto the
people: \`I, even I only, am left a prophet of the LORD; but Baal's
prophets are four hundred and fifty men. <span
id="an_kg1:18:23">23</span> Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and
let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and
lay it on the wood, and put no fire under; and I will dress the other
bullock, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under. <span
id="an_kg1:18:24">24</span> And call ye on the name of your god, and I
will call on the name of the LORD; and the God that answereth by fire,
let him be God.' And all the people answered and said: \`It is well
spoken.'

<span id="an_kg1:18:25">25</span> And Elijah said unto the prophets of
Baal: \`Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

ye are many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under.'
<span id="an_kg1:18:26">26</span> And they took the bullock which was
given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from
morning even until noon, saying: O Baal, answer us.' But there was no
voice, nor any that answered. And they danced in halting wise about the
altar which was made. <span id="an_kg1:18:27">27</span> And it came to
pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said: \`Cry aloud; for he is
a god; either he is musing, or he is gone aside, or he is in a journey,
or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:28">28</span> And they cried aloud, and cut themselves
after their manner with swords and lances, till the blood gushed out
upon them. <span id="an_kg1:18:29">29</span> And it was so, when midday
was past, that they prophesied until the time of the offering of the
evening offering; but there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor
any that regarded.

<span id="an_kg1:18:30">30</span> And Elijah said unto all the people:
'Come near unto me'; and all the people came near unto him. And he
repaired the altar of the LORD that was thrown down. <span
id="an_kg1:18:31">31</span> And Elijah took twelve stones, according to
the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the
LORD came, saying: \`Israel shall be thy name.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:32">32</span> And with the stones he built an altar in the
name of the LORD; and he made a trench about the altar, as great as
would contain two measures of seed. <span
id="an_kg1:18:33">33</span> And he put the wood in order, and cut the
bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood. <span
id="an_kg1:18:34">34</span> And he said: \`Fill four jars with water,
and pour it on the burnt-offering, and on the wood.' And he said: 'Do it
the second time'; and they did it the second time. And he said: \`Do it
the third time'; and they did it the third time. <span
id="an_kg1:18:35">35</span> And the water ran round about the altar; and
he filled the trench also with water. <span
id="an_kg1:18:36">36</span> And it came to pass at the time of the
offering of the evening offering, that Elijah the prophet came near, and
said: \`O LORD, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it be
known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that I am Thy servant,
and that I have done all these things at Thy word. <span
id="an_kg1:18:37">37</span> Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people
may know that Thou, LORD, art God, for Thou didst turn their heart
backward.' <span id="an_kg1:18:38">38</span> Then the fire of the LORD
fell, and consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and
the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. <span
id="an_kg1:18:39">39</span> And when all the people saw it, they fell on
their faces; and they said: \`The LORD, He is God; the LORD, He is God.'
<span id="an_kg1:18:40">40</span> And Elijah said unto them: \`Take the
prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape.' And they took them; and
Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.

<span id="an_kg1:18:41">41</span> And Elijah said unto Ahab: \`Get thee
up, eat and drink; for there is the sound of abundance of rain.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:42">42</span> So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And
Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed himself down upon the
earth, and put his face between his knees. <span
id="an_kg1:18:43">43</span> And he said to his servant: \`Go up now,
look toward the sea.' And he went up, and looked, and said: \`There is
nothing.' And he said: \`Go again seven times.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:44">44</span> And it came to pass at the seventh time,
that he said: \`Behold, there ariseth a cloud out of the sea, as small
as a man's hand.' And he said: \`Go up, say unto Ahab: Make ready thy
chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.' <span
id="an_kg1:18:45">45</span> And it came to pass in a little while, that

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

the heaven grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain.
And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel. <span
id="an_kg1:18:46">46</span> And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and
he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
