<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1011)  [Next](kg1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 12

<span id="an_kg1:12:1">1</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem; for all
Israel were come to Shechem to make him king. <span
id="an_kg1:12:2">2</span> And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of
Nebat heard of it—for he was yet in Egypt, whither he had fled from the
presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt, <span
id="an_kg1:12:3">3</span> and they sent and called him—that Jeroboam and
all the congregation of Israel came, and spoke unto Rehoboam, saying:
<span id="an_kg1:12:4">4</span> 'Thy father made our yoke grievous; now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.' <span
id="an_kg1:12:5">5</span> And he said unto them: \`Depart yet for three
days, then come again to me.' And the people departed.

<span id="an_kg1:12:6">6</span> And king Rehoboam took counsel with the
old men, that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived,
saying: \`What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?'
<span id="an_kg1:12:7">7</span> And they spoke unto him, saying: \`If
thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.' <span
id="an_kg1:12:8">8</span> But he forsook the counsel of the old men
which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that were
grown up with him, that stood before him. <span
id="an_kg1:12:9">9</span> And he said unto them: \`What counsel give ye,
that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me, saying:
Make the yoke that thy father did put upon us lighter?' <span
id="an_kg1:12:10">10</span> And the young men that were grown up with
him spoke unto him, saying: \`Thus shalt thou say unto this people that
spoke unto thee, saying: Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou
it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou speak unto them: My little finger is
thicker than my father's loins. <span id="an_kg1:12:11">11</span> And
now whereas my father did burden you with a heavy yoke, I will add to
your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
with scorpions.'

<span id="an_kg1:12:12">12</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying: \`Come to me again the
third day.' <span id="an_kg1:12:13">13</span> And the king answered the
people roughly, and forsook the counsel of the old men which they had
given him; <span id="an_kg1:12:14">14</span> and spoke to them after the
counsel of the young men, saying: \`My father made your yoke heavy, but
I will add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions.' <span id="an_kg1:12:15">15</span> So the
king hearkened not unto the people; for it was a thing brought about of
the LORD, that He might establish His word, which the LORD spoke by the
hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

<span id="an_kg1:12:16">16</span> And when all Israel saw that the king
hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying: \`What
portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of
Jesse; to your tents, O Israel; now see to thine own house, David.' So
Israel departed unto their tents. <span id="an_kg1:12:17">17</span> But
as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah,
Rehoboam reigned over them. <span id="an_kg1:12:18">18</span> Then king
Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the levy; and all Israel stoned him
with stones, so that he died. And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up
to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem. <span
id="an_kg1:12:19">19</span> So Israel rebelled against the house of
David,unto this day. <span id="an_kg1:12:20">20</span> And it came to
pass,when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was returned, that they sent
and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel;
there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah
only.

<span id="an_kg1:12:21">21</span> And when Rehoboam was come to
Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, and the tribe of
Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men that were
warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom
back to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. <span
id="an_kg1:12:22">22</span> But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the
man of God, saying: <span id="an_kg1:12:23">23</span> 'Speak unto
Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of
Judah and Benjamin, and to the rest of the people, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:12:24">24</span> Thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not go up, nor
fight against your brethren the children of Israel; return every man to
his house; for this thing is of Me.' So they hearkened unto the word of
the LORD, and returned and went their way, according to the word of the
LORD.

<span id="an_kg1:12:25">25</span> Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the
hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and he went out from thence,
and built Penuel. <span id="an_kg1:12:26">26</span> And Jeroboam

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

said in his heart: \`Now will the kingdom return to the house of David.
<span id="an_kg1:12:27">27</span> If this people go up to offer
sacrifices in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then will the heart of
this people turn back unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah;
and they will kill me, and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.' <span
id="an_kg1:12:28">28</span> Whereupon the king took counsel, and made
two calves of gold; and he said unto them: \`Ye have gone up long enough
to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt.' <span id="an_kg1:12:29">29</span> And he set the one
in Beth-el, and the other put he in Dan. <span
id="an_kg1:12:30">30</span> And this thing became a sin; for the people
went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. <span
id="an_kg1:12:31">31</span> And he made houses of high places, and made
priests from among all the people, that were not of the sons of Levi.
<span id="an_kg1:12:32">32</span> And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the
eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast
that is in Judah, and he went up unto the altar; so did he in Beth-el,
to sacrifice unto the calves that he had made; and he placed in Beth-el
the priests of the high places that he had made. <span
id="an_kg1:12:33">33</span> And he went up unto the altar which he had
made in Beth-el on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in the
month which he had devised of his own heart; and he ordained a feast for
the children of Israel, and went up unto the altar, to offer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 13](kg1013)

</div>
