<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1004)  [Next](kg1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 5

<span id="an_kg1:5:1">1</span> And Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms
from the River unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of
Egypt; they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his
life.

<span id="an_kg1:5:2">2</span> And Solomon's provision for one

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

day was thirty measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal;
<span id="an_kg1:5:3">3</span> ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the
pastures, and a hundred sheep, beside harts, and gazelles, and roebucks,
and fatted fowl. <span id="an_kg1:5:4">4</span> For he had dominion over
all the region on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over
all the kings on this side the River; and he had peace on all sides
round about him. <span id="an_kg1:5:5">5</span> And Judah and Israel
dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig-tree, from Dan
even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_kg1:5:6">6</span> And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. <span
id="an_kg1:5:7">7</span> And those officers provided victual for king
Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in
his month; they let nothing be lacking. <span
id="an_kg1:5:8">8</span> Barley also and straw for the horses and swift
steeds brought they unto the place where it should be, every man
according to his charge.

<span id="an_kg1:5:9">9</span> And God gave Solomon wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand
that is on the sea-shore. <span id="an_kg1:5:10">10</span> And Solomon's
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east, and all the
wisdom of Egypt. <span id="an_kg1:5:11">11</span> For he was wiser than
all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the
sons of Mahol; and his fame was in all the nations round about. <span
id="an_kg1:5:12">12</span> And he spoke three thousand proverbs; and his
songs were a thousand and five. <span id="an_kg1:5:13">13</span> And he
spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop
that springeth out of the wall; he spoke also of beasts, and of fowl,
and of creeping things, and of fishes. <span
id="an_kg1:5:14">14</span> And there came of all peoples to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, who had heard of his
wisdom.

<span id="an_kg1:5:15">15</span> And Hiram king of Tyre sent his
servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king
in the room of his father; for Hiram was ever a lover of David. <span
id="an_kg1:5:16">16</span> And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying: <span
id="an_kg1:5:17">17</span> 'Thou knowest how that David my father could
not build a house for the name of the LORD his God for the wars which
were about him on every side, until the LORD put them under the soles of
my feet. <span id="an_kg1:5:18">18</span> But now the LORD my God hath
given me rest on every side; there is neither adversary, nor evil
occurrence. <span id="an_kg1:5:19">19</span> And, behold, I purpose to
build a house for the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD spoke unto
David my father, saying: Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy
room, he shall build the house for My name. <span
id="an_kg1:5:20">20</span> Now therefore command thou that they hew me
cedar-trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants;
and I will give thee hire for thy servants according to all that thou
shalt say; for thou knowest that there is not among us any that hath
skill to hew timber like unto the Zidonians.'

<span id="an_kg1:5:21">21</span> And it came to pass, when Hiram heard
the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said: \`Blessed be
the LORD this day, who hath given unto David a wise son over this great
people.' <span id="an_kg1:5:22">22</span> And Hiram sent to Solomon,
saying: \`I have heard that which thou hast sent unto me; I will do all
thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of cypress.
<span id="an_kg1:5:23">23</span> My servants shall bring them down from
Lebanon unto the sea; and I will make them into rafts to go by sea unto
the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be broken
up there,

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

and thou shalt receive them; and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in
giving food for my household.' <span id="an_kg1:5:24">24</span> So
 <span id="fr_137"></span>[a](#fn_133) Hiram gave Solomon timber of
cedar and timber of cypress according to all his desire. <span
id="an_kg1:5:25">25</span> And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand
measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of
beaten oil; thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year. <span
id="an_kg1:5:26">26</span> And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as He
promised him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they
two made a league together.

<span id="an_kg1:5:27">27</span> And king Solomon raised a levy out of
all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men. <span
id="an_kg1:5:28">28</span> And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a
month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home;
and Adoniram was over the levy. <span id="an_kg1:5:29">29</span> And
Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bore burdens, and fourscore
thousand that were hewers in the mountains; <span
id="an_kg1:5:30">30</span> besides Solomon's chief officers that were
over the work, three thousand and three hundred, who bore rule over the
people that wrought in the work. <span id="an_kg1:5:31">31</span> And
the king commanded, and they quarried great stones, costly stories, to
lay the foundation of the house with hewn stone. <span
id="an_kg1:5:32">32</span> And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders
and the Gebalites did fashion them, and prepared the timber and the
stones to build the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[409:a](kg1005.htm#fr_137) Heb. *Hirom*, and in
verse 32.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 6](kg1006)

</div>
