<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Kings Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I Kings Chapter 13

<span id="an_kg1:13:1">1</span> And, behold, there came a man of God out
of Judah by the word of the LORD unto Beth-el; and Jeroboam was standing
by the altar to offer. <span id="an_kg1:13:2">2</span> And he cried
against the altar by the word of the LORD, and said: \`O altar, altar,
thus saith the LORD: Behold, a son shall be born unto the house of
David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he sacrifice the priests of
the high places that offer upon thee, and men's bones shall they burn
upon thee.' <span id="an_kg1:13:3">3</span> And he gave a sign the same
day, saying: \`This is the sign which the LORD hath spoken: Behold, the
altar shall be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured
out.' <span id="an_kg1:13:4">4</span> And it came to pass, when the king
heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in
Beth-el, that Jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying: \`Lay
hold on him.' And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so
that he could not draw it back to him. <span
id="an_kg1:13:5">5</span> The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured
out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given
by the word of the LORD. <span id="an_kg1:13:6">6</span> And the king
answered and said unto the man of God: \`Entreat now the favour of the
LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me.' And the
man of God entreated the LORD, and the king's hand was restored him, and
became as it was before. <span id="an_kg1:13:7">7</span> And the king
said unto the man of God: 'Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I
will give thee a reward.' <span id="an_kg1:13:8">8</span> And the man of
God said unto the king: \`If thou wilt give me half thy house, I will
not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this
place. <span id="an_kg1:13:9">9</span> For so was it charged me by the
word of the LORD, saying: Thou shalt eat no bread, nor drink water,
neither return by the way that thou earnest.' <span
id="an_kg1:13:10">10</span> So he went another way, and returned not by
the way that he came to Beth-el.

<span id="an_kg1:13:11">11</span> Now there dwelt an old prophet in
Beth-el; and one of his sons came and told him all the works that the
man of God had done that day in

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Beth-el, and the
words which he had spoken unto the king, and they told them unto their
father. <span id="an_kg1:13:12">12</span> And their father said unto
them: \`What way went he?' For his sons had seen what way the man of God
went, that came from Judah. <span id="an_kg1:13:13">13</span> And he
said unto his sons: \`Saddle me the ass.' So they saddled him the ass;
and he rode thereon. <span id="an_kg1:13:14">14</span> And he went after
the man of God, and found him sitting under a terebinth; and he said
unto him: \`Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah?' And he
said: \`I am.' <span id="an_kg1:13:15">15</span> Then he said unto him:
\`Come home with me, and eat bread.' <span
id="an_kg1:13:16">16</span> And he said: \`I may not return with thee,
nor go in with thee; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee
in this place. <span id="an_kg1:13:17">17</span> For it was said to me
by the word of the LORD: Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there,
nor turn back to go by the way that thou earnest.' <span
id="an_kg1:13:18">18</span> And he said unto him: \`I also am a prophet
as thou art; and an angel spoke unto me by the word of the LORD, saying:
Bring him back with thee into thy house, that he may eat bread and drink
water.'—He lied unto him.—<span id="an_kg1:13:19">19</span> So he went
back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water.

<span id="an_kg1:13:20">20</span> And it came to pass, as they sat at
the table, that the word of the LORD came unto the prophet that brought
him back. <span id="an_kg1:13:21">21</span> And he cried unto the man of
God that came from Judah, saying: \`Thus saith the LORD: Forasmuch as
thou hast rebelled against the word of the LORD, and hast not kept the
commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee, <span
id="an_kg1:13:22">22</span> but earnest back, and hast eaten bread and
drunk water in the place of which He said to thee: Eat no bread, and
drink no water; thy carcass shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy
fathers.' <span id="an_kg1:13:23">23</span> And it came to pass, after
he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the
ass, namely, for the prophet whom he had brought back. <span
id="an_kg1:13:24">24</span> And when he was gone, a lion met him by the
way, and slew him; and his carcass was cast in the way, and the ass
stood by it; the lion also stood by the carcass. <span
id="an_kg1:13:25">25</span> And, behold, men passed by, and saw the
carcass cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcass; and they
came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.

<span id="an_kg1:13:26">26</span> And when the prophet that brought him
back from the way heard thereof, he said: \`It is the man of God, who
rebelled against the word of the LORD; therefore the LORD hath delivered
him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the
word of the LORD, which He spoke unto him.' <span
id="an_kg1:13:27">27</span> And he spoke to his sons, saying: \`Saddle
me the ass.' And they saddled it. <span id="an_kg1:13:28">28</span> And
he went and found his carcass cast in the way, and the ass and the lion
standing by the carcass; the lion had not eaten the carcass, nor torn
the ass. <span id="an_kg1:13:29">29</span> And the prophet took up the
carcass of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it
back; and he came to the city of the old prophet, to lament, and to bury
him. <span id="an_kg1:13:30">30</span> And he laid his carcass in his
own grave; and they made lamentation for him: \`Alas, my brother!' <span
id="an_kg1:13:31">31</span> And it came to pass, after he had buried
him, that he spoke to his sons, saying: \`When I am dead, then bury me
in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside
his bones. <span id="an_kg1:13:32">32</span> For the saying which he
cried by the word of the LORD against the altar in Beth-el, and against
all

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall
surely come to pass.'

<span id="an_kg1:13:33">33</span> After this thing Jeroboam returned not
from his evil way, but made again from among all the people priests of
the high places; whosoever would, he consecrated him, that he might be
one of the priests of the high places. <span
id="an_kg1:13:34">34</span> And by this thing there was sin unto the
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the
face of the earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
