<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Kings Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2002)  [Next](kg2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II Kings Chapter 3

<span id="an_kg2:3:1">1</span> Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to
reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king
of Judah, and reigned twelve years. <span id="an_kg2:3:2">2</span> And
he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; but not like his
father, and like his mother; for he put away the pillar of Baal that his
father had made. <span id="an_kg2:3:3">3</span> Nevertheless he cleaved
unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to
sin; he departed not therefrom.

<span id="an_kg2:3:4">4</span> Now Mesha king of Moab was a
sheep-master; and he rendered unto the king of Israel the wool of a
hundred thousand lambs, and of a hundred thousand rams. <span
id="an_kg2:3:5">5</span> But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that
the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel. <span
id="an_kg2:3:6">6</span> And king Jehoram went out of Samaria at that
time, and mustered all Israel. <span id="an_kg2:3:7">7</span> And he
went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying: \`The king of
Moab hath rebelled against me; wilt thou go with me against Moab to
battle?' <span id="an_kg2:3:8">8</span> And he said: \`I will go up; I
am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.' 'And
he said: \`Which way shall we go up?' And he answered: \`The way of the
wilderness of Edom.' <span id="an_kg2:3:9">9</span> So the king of
Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom; and they made
a circuit of seven days' journey; and there was no water for the host,
nor for the beasts that followed them. <span
id="an_kg2:3:10">10</span> And the king of Israel said: \`Alas! for the
LORD hath called these three kings together to deliver them into the
hand of Moab.' <span id="an_kg2:3:11">11</span> But Jehoshaphat said:
\`Is there not here a prophet of the LORD, that we may inquire of the
LORD by him?' And one of the king of

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel's servants
answered and said: \`Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who poured water
on the hands of Elijah.' <span id="an_kg2:3:12">12</span> And
Jehoshaphat said: \`The word of the LORD is with him.' So the king of
Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

<span id="an_kg2:3:13">13</span> And Elisha said unto the king of
Israel: \`What have I to do with thee? get thee to the prophets of thy
father, and to the prophets of thy mother.' And the king of Israel said
unto him: \`Nay; for the LORD hath called these three kings together to
deliver them into the hand of Moab.' <span
id="an_kg2:3:14">14</span> And Elisha said: \`As the LORD of hosts
liveth, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the
presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee,
nor see thee. <span id="an_kg2:3:15">15</span> But now bring me a
minstrel.' And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand
of the LORD came upon him. <span id="an_kg2:3:16">16</span> And he said:
\`Thus saith the LORD: Make this valley full of trenches. <span
id="an_kg2:3:17">17</span> For thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not see
wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with
water; and ye shall drink, both ye and your cattle and your beasts.
<span id="an_kg2:3:18">18</span> And this is but a light thing in the
sight of the LORD; He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand.
<span id="an_kg2:3:19">19</span> And ye shall smite every fortified
city, and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop
all fountains of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.'
<span id="an_kg2:3:20">20</span> And it came to pass in the morning,
about the time of making the offering, that, behold, there came water by
the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water.

<span id="an_kg2:3:21">21</span> Now when all the Moabites heard that
the kings were come up to fight against them, they gathered themselves
together, all that were able to put on armour, and upward, and stood on
the border. <span id="an_kg2:3:22">22</span> And they rose up early in
the morning, and the sun shone upon the water, and the Moabites saw the
water some way off as red as blood; <span id="an_kg2:3:23">23</span> and
they said: \`This is blood: the kings have surely fought together, and
they have smitten each man his fellow; now therefore, Moab, to the
spoil.' <span id="an_kg2:3:24">24</span> And when they came to the camp
of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they
fled before them. And they smote the land, even Moab, mightily. <span
id="an_kg2:3:25">25</span> And they beat down the cities; and on every
good piece of land they cast every man his stone, and filled it; and
they stopped all the fountains of water, and felled all the good trees;
until there was left only Kir-hareseth with the stones of the wall
thereof; so the slingers encompassed it, and smote it. <span
id="an_kg2:3:26">26</span> And when the king of Moab saw that the battle
was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew
sword, to break through unto the king of Edom; but they could not. <span
id="an_kg2:3:27">27</span> Then he took his eldest son that should have
reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the
wall. And there came great wrath upon Israel; and they departed from
him, and returned to their own land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Kings Chapter 4](kg2004)

</div>
