<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev020)  [Next](lev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_lev:21:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Moses: Speak unto
the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them:

There shall none defile himself for the dead among his people; <span
id="an_lev:21:2">2</span> except for his kin, that is near unto him, for
his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter,
and for his brother; <span id="an_lev:21:3">3</span> and for his sister
a virgin, that is near unto him, that hath had no husband, for her may
he defile himself. <span id="an_lev:21:4">4</span> He shall not defile
himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself. <span
id="an_lev:21:5">5</span> They shall not make baldness upon their head,
neither shall they shave off the corners of their beard, nor make any
cuttings in their flesh. <span id="an_lev:21:6">6</span> They shall be
holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God; for the
offerings of the LORD made by fire, the bread of their God, they do
offer; therefore they shall be holy. <span
id="an_lev:21:7">7</span> They shall not take a woman that is a harlot,
or profaned; neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband;
for he is holy unto his God. <span id="an_lev:21:8">8</span> Thou shalt
sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God; he shall
be holy unto thee; for I the LORD, who sanctify you, am holy. <span
id="an_lev:21:9">9</span> And the daughter of any priest, if she profane
herself by playing the harlot, she profaneth her father: she shall be
burnt with fire.

<span id="an_lev:21:10">10</span> And the priest that is highest among
his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil is poured, and that is
consecrated to put on the garments, shall not let the hair of his head
go loose, nor rend his clothes; <span
id="an_lev:21:11">11</span> neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor
defile himself for his father, or for his mother; <span
id="an_lev:21:12">12</span> neither shall he go out of the sanctuary,
nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the consecration of the
anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD. <span
id="an_lev:21:13">13</span> And he shall take a wife in her virginity.
<span id="an_lev:21:14">14</span> A widow, or one divorced, or a
profaned woman, or a harlot, these shall he not take; but a virgin of
his own people shall he take to wife. <span
id="an_lev:21:15">15</span> And he shall not profane his seed among his
people; for I am the LORD who sanctify him.

<span id="an_lev:21:16">16</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_lev:21:17">17</span> Speak unto Aaron, saying:

Whosoever he be of thy seed throughout their generations that hath a
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God. <span
id="an_lev:21:18">18</span> For whatsoever man he be that hath a
blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath
any thing maimed, or anything too long, <span id="page_146">p.
146</span> <span id="an_lev:21:19">19</span> or a man that is
broken-footed, or broken-handed, <span id="an_lev:21:20">20</span> or
crook-backed, or a dwarf, or that hath his eye overspread, or is
scabbed, or scurvy, or hath his stones crushed; <span
id="an_lev:21:21">21</span> no man of the seed of Aaron the priest, that
hath a blemish, shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD made
by fire; he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of
his God. <span id="an_lev:21:22">22</span> He may eat the bread of his
God, both of the most holy, and of the holy. <span
id="an_lev:21:23">23</span> Only he shall not go in unto the veil, nor
come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not
My holy places; for I am the LORD who sanctify them.

<span id="an_lev:21:24">24</span> So Moses spoke unto Aaron, and to his
sons, and unto all the children of Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 22](lev022)

</div>
