<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev024)  [Next](lev026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEVITICUS CHAPTER 25

<span id="an_lev:25:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses in mount
Sinai, saying: <span id="an_lev:25:2">2</span> Speak unto the children
of Israel, and say unto them:

When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a
sabbath unto the LORD. <span id="an_lev:25:3">3</span> Six years thou
shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and
gather in the produce thereof. <span id="an_lev:25:4">4</span> But in
the seventh year shall be a sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a
sabbath unto the LORD; thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy
vineyard. <span id="an_lev:25:5">5</span> That which groweth of itself
of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, and the grapes of thy undressed vine
thou shalt not gather; it shall be a year of solemn rest for the land.
<span id="an_lev:25:6">6</span> And the sabbath-produce of the land
shall be for food for you: for thee, and for thy servant and for thy
maid, and for thy hired servant and for the settler by thy side that
sojourn with thee; <span id="an_lev:25:7">7</span> and for thy cattle,
and for the beasts that are in thy land, shall all the increase thereof
be for food.

<span id="an_lev:25:8">8</span> And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of
years unto thee, seven times seven years; and there shall be unto thee
the days of seven sabbaths of years, even forty and nine years. <span
id="an_lev:25:9">9</span> Then shalt thou make proclamation with the
blast of the horn on the tenth day of the seventh month; in the day of
atonement shall ye make proclamation with the horn throughout all your
land. <span id="an_lev:25:10">10</span> And ye shall hallow the fiftieth
year, and proclaim liberty throughout the land unto all the inhabitants
thereof; it shall be a jubilee unto you; and ye shall return every man
unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.
<span id="an_lev:25:11">11</span> A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be
<span id="page_151">p. 151</span> unto you; ye shall not sow, neither
reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of
the undressed vines. <span id="an_lev:25:12">12</span> For it is a
jubilee; it shall be holy unto you; ye shall eat the increase thereof
out of the field. <span id="an_lev:25:13">13</span> In this year of
jubilee ye shall return every man unto his possession. <span
id="an_lev:25:14">14</span> And if thou sell aught unto thy neighbour,
or buy of thy neighbour's shall not wrong one another. <span
id="an_lev:25:15">15</span> According to the number of years after the
jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and according unto the number
of years of the crops he shall sell unto thee. <span
id="an_lev:25:16">16</span> According to the multitude of the years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of the
years thou shalt diminish the price of it; for the number of crops Both
he sell unto thee. <span id="an_lev:25:17">17</span> And ye shall not
wrong one another; but thou shalt fear thy God; for I am the LORD your
God. <span id="an_lev:25:18">18</span> Wherefore ye shall do My
statutes, and keep Mine ordinances and do them; and ye shall dwell in
the land in safety. <span id="an_lev:25:19">19</span> And the land shall
yield her fruit, and ye shall eat until ye have enough, and dwell
therein in safety. <span id="an_lev:25:20">20</span> And if ye shall
say: 'What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we may not sow, nor
gather in our increase'; <span id="an_lev:25:21">21</span> then I will
command My blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth
produce for the three years. <span id="an_lev:25:22">22</span> And ye
shall sow the eighth year, and eat of the produce, the old store; until
the ninth year, until her produce come in, ye shall eat the old store.
<span id="an_lev:25:23">23</span> And the land shall not be sold in
perpetuity; for the land is Mine; for ye are strangers and settlers with
Me. <span id="an_lev:25:24">24</span> And in all the land of your
possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.

<span id="an_lev:25:25">25</span> If thy brother be waxen poor, and sell
some of his possession, then shall his kinsman that is next unto him
come, and shall redeem that which his brother hath sold. <span
id="an_lev:25:26">26</span> And if a man have no one to redeem it, and
he be waxen rich and find sufficient means to redeem it; <span
id="an_lev:25:27">27</span> then let him count the years of the sale
thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; and
he shall return unto his possession. <span
id="an_lev:25:28">28</span> But if he have not sufficient means to get
it back for himself, then that which he hath sold shall remain in the
hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubilee; and in the
jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession.

<span id="an_lev:25:29">29</span> And if a man sell a dwelling-house in
a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is
sold; for a full year shall he have the right of redemption. <span
id="an_lev:25:30">30</span> And if it be not redeemed within the space
of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made
sure in perpetuity to him that bought it, throughout his generations; it
shall not go out in the jubilee. <span id="an_lev:25:31">31</span> But
the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be
reckoned with the fields of the country; they may be redeemed, and they
shall go out in the jubilee. <span id="an_lev:25:32">32</span> But as
for the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their
possession, the Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption.
<span id="an_lev:25:33">33</span> And if a man purchase of the Levites,
then the house that was sold in the city of his possession, shall go out
in the jubilee; for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their
possession among the children of Israel. <span
id="an_lev:25:34">34</span> But the fields of the open land about their
cities may not be sold; for that is their perpetual possession. <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span id="an_lev:25:35">35</span> And if thy brother be waxen poor, and
his means fail with thee; then thou shalt uphold him: as a stranger and
a settler shall he live with thee. <span
id="an_lev:25:36">36</span> Take thou no interest of him or increase;
but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee. <span
id="an_lev:25:37">37</span> Thou shalt not give him thy money upon
interest, nor give him thy victuals for increase. <span
id="an_lev:25:38">38</span> I am the LORD your God, who brought you
forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, to be
your God.

<span id="an_lev:25:39">39</span> And if thy brother be waxen poor with
thee, and sell himself unto thee, thou shalt not make him to serve as a
bondservant. <span id="an_lev:25:40">40</span> As a hired servant, and
as a settler, he shall be with thee; he shall serve with thee unto the
year of jubilee. <span id="an_lev:25:41">41</span> Then shall he go out
from thee, he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own
family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return. <span
id="an_lev:25:42">42</span> For they are My servants, whom I brought
forth out of the land of Egypt; they shall not be sold as bondmen. <span
id="an_lev:25:43">43</span> Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour;
but shalt fear thy God. <span id="an_lev:25:44">44</span> And as for thy
bondmen, and thy bondmaids, whom thou mayest have: of the nations that
are round about you, of them shall ye buy bondmen and bond-maids. <span
id="an_lev:25:45">45</span> Moreover of the children of the strangers
that do sojourn among you, of them may ye buy, and of their families
that are with you, which they have begotten in your land; and they may
be your possession. <span id="an_lev:25:46">46</span> And ye may make
them an inheritance for your children after you, to hold for a
possession: of them may ye take your bondmen for ever; but over your
brethren the children of Israel ye shall not rule, one over another,
with rigour.

<span id="an_lev:25:47">47</span> And if a stranger who is a settler
with thee be waxen rich, and thy brother be waxen poor beside him, and
sell himself unto the stranger who is a settler with thee, or to the
offshoot of a stranger's family, <span id="an_lev:25:48">48</span> after
that he is sold he may be redeemed; one of his brethren may redeem him;
<span id="an_lev:25:49">49</span> or his uncle, or his uncle's son, may
redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem
him; or if he be waxen rich, he may redeem himself. <span
id="an_lev:25:50">50</span> And he shall reckon with him that bought him
from the year that he sold himself to him unto the year of jubilee; and
the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years;
according to the time of a hired servant shall he be with him. <span
id="an_lev:25:51">51</span> If there be yet many years, according unto
them he shall give back the price of his redemption out of the money
that he was bought for. <span id="an_lev:25:52">52</span> And if there
remain but few years unto the year of jubilee, then he shall reckon with
him; according unto his years shall he give back the price of his
redemption. <span id="an_lev:25:53">53</span> As a servant hired year by
year shall he be with him; he shall not rule with rigour over him in thy
sight. <span id="an_lev:25:54">54</span> And if he be not redeemed by
any of these means, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, he, and
his children with him. <span id="an_lev:25:55">55</span> For unto Me the
children of Israel are servants; they are My servants whom I brought
forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 26](lev026)

</div>
