<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num033)  [Next](num035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 34

<span id="an_num:34:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:34:2">2</span> \`Command the children of Israel, and
say unto them: When ye come into the land of Canaan, this shall be the
land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even the land of
Canaan according to the borders thereof. <span
id="an_num:34:3">3</span> Thus your south side shall be from the
wilderness of Zin close by the side of Edom, and your south border shall
begin at the end of the Salt Sea eastward; <span
id="an_num:34:4">4</span> and your border shall turn about southward of
the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass along to Zin; and the goings out
thereof shall be southward of Kadesh-barnea; and it shall go forth to
Hazaraddar, and pass along to Azmon; <span id="an_num:34:5">5</span> and
the border shall turn about from Azmon unto the Brook of Egypt, and the
goings out thereof shall be at the Sea. <span
id="an_num:34:6">6</span> And for the western border, ye shall have the
Great Sea for a border; this shall be your west border. <span
id="an_num:34:7">7</span> And this shall be your north border: from the
Great Sea ye shall mark out your line unto mount Hor; <span
id="an_num:34:8">8</span> from mount Hor ye shall mark out a line unto
the entrance to Hamath; and the goings out of the border shall be at
Zedad; <span id="an_num:34:9">9</span> and the border shall go forth to
Ziphron, and the goings out thereof shall be at Hazar-enan; this shall
be your north border. <span id="an_num:34:10">10</span> And ye shall
mark out your line for the east border from Hazar-enan to Shepham; <span
id="an_num:34:11">11</span> and the border shall go down from Shepham to
Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall go down, and shall
strike upon the slope of the sea of Chinnereth eastward; <span
id="an_num:34:12">12</span> and the border shall go down to the Jordan,
and the goings out thereof shall be at the Salt Sea; this shall be your
land according to the borders thereof round about.'

<span id="an_num:34:13">13</span> And Moses commanded the children of
Israel, saying: \`This is the land wherein ye shall receive inheritance
by lot, which the LORD hath commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and
to the half-tribe; <span id="an_num:34:14">14</span> for the tribe of
the children of Reuben according to their fathers' houses, and the tribe
of the children of Gad according to their fathers' houses, have

received, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received, their
inheritance; <span id="an_num:34:15">15</span> the two tribes and the
half-tribe have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan at Jericho
eastward, toward the sunrising.'

<span id="an_num:34:16">16</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:34:17">17</span> \`These are the names of the men that
shall take possession of the land for you: Eleazar the priest, and
Joshua the son of Nun. <span id="an_num:34:18">18</span> And ye shall
take one prince of every tribe, to take possession of the land. <span
id="an_num:34:19">19</span> And these are the names of the men: of the
tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh. <span
id="an_num:34:20">20</span> And of the tribe of the children of Simeon,
Shemuel the son of Ammihud. <span id="an_num:34:21">21</span> Of the
tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon. <span
id="an_num:34:22">22</span> And of the tribe of the children of Dan a
prince, Bukki

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

the son of Jogli. <span id="an_num:34:23">23</span> Of the children of
Joseph: of the tribe of the children of Manasseh a prince, Hanniel the
son of Ephod; <span id="an_num:34:24">24</span> and of the tribe of the
children of Ephraim a prince, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan. <span
id="an_num:34:25">25</span> And of the tribe of the children of Zebulun
a prince, Elizaphan the son of Parnach. <span
id="an_num:34:26">26</span> And of the tribe of the children of Issachar
a prince, Paltiel the son of Azzan. <span
id="an_num:34:27">27</span> And of the tribe of the children of Asher a
prince, Ahihud the son of Shelomi. <span id="an_num:34:28">28</span> And
of the tribe of the children of Naphtali a prince, Pedahel the son of
Ammihud. <span id="an_num:34:29">29</span> These are they whom the LORD
commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the
land of Canaan.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 35](num035)

</div>
