<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 8

‏בהעל.טך‎

<span id="an_num:8:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:8:2">2</span> \`Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him:
When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front
of the candlestick.' <span id="an_num:8:3">3</span> And Aaron did so: he
lighted the lamps thereof so as to give light in

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

front of the candlestick, as the LORD commanded Moses. <span
id="an_num:8:4">4</span> And this was the work of the candlestick,
beaten work of gold; unto the base thereof, and unto the flowers
thereof, it was beaten work; according unto the pattern which the LORD
had shown Moses, so he made the candlestick.

<span id="an_num:8:5">5</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:8:6">6</span> \`Take the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and cleanse them. <span id="an_num:8:7">7</span> And
thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle the water of
purification upon them, and let them cause a razor to pass over all
their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and cleanse themselves.
<span id="an_num:8:8">8</span> Then let them take a young bullock, and
its meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, and another young
bullock shalt thou take for a sin-offering. <span
id="an_num:8:9">9</span> And thou shalt present the Levites before the
tent of meeting; and thou shalt assemble the whole congregation of the
children of Israel. <span id="an_num:8:10">10</span> And thou shalt
present the Levites before the LORD; and the children of Israel shall
lay their hands upon the Levites. <span id="an_num:8:11">11</span> And
Aaron shall offer the Levites before the LORD for a wave-offering from
the children of Israel, that they may be to do the service of the LORD.
<span id="an_num:8:12">12</span> And the Levites shall lay their hands
upon the heads of the bullocks; and offer thou the one for a
sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, unto the LORD, to make
atonement for the Levites. <span id="an_num:8:13">13</span> And thou
shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them
for a wave-offering unto the LORD. <span id="an_num:8:14">14</span> Thus
shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel; and
the Levites shall be Mine. <span id="an_num:8:15">15</span> And after
that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tent of meeting;
and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for a wave-offering. <span
id="an_num:8:16">16</span> For they are wholly given unto Me from among
the children of Israel; instead of all that openeth the womb, even the
first-born of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto Me.
<span id="an_num:8:17">17</span> For all the first-born among the
children of Israel are Mine, both man and beast; on the day that I smote
all the first-born in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for Myself.
<span id="an_num:8:18">18</span> And I have taken the Levites instead of
all the first-born among the children of Israel. <span
id="an_num:8:19">19</span> And I have given the Levites—they are given
to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the
service of the children of Israel in the tent of meeting, and to make
atonement for the children of Israel, that there be no plague among the
children of Israel, through the children of Israel coming nigh unto the
sanctuary.' <span id="an_num:8:20">20</span> Thus did Moses, and Aaron,
and all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the Levites;
according unto all that the LORD commanded Moses touching the Levites,
so did the children of Israel unto them. <span
id="an_num:8:21">21</span> And the Levites purified themselves, and they
washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them for a sacred gift before
the LORD; and Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them. <span
id="an_num:8:22">22</span> And after that went the Levites in to do
their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron, and before his sons;
as the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto
them.

<span id="an_num:8:23">23</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:8:24">24</span> \`This is that which pertaineth unto
the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in
to perform the service in the work of the tent of meeting; <span
id="an_num:8:25">25</span> and from the age of fifty years they shall
return from the service of the work,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

and shall serve no more; <span id="an_num:8:26">26</span> but shall
minister with their brethren in the tent of meeting, to keep the charge,
but they shall do no manner of service. Thus shalt thou do unto the
Levites touching their charges.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009)

</div>
