<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num017)  [Next](num019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 18

<span id="an_num:18:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Aaron: \`Thou and
thy sons and thy fathers' house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the
sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of
your priesthood. <span id="an_num:18:2">2</span> And thy brethren also,
the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou near with thee,
that they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee, thou and thy
sons with thee being before the tent of the testimony. <span
id="an_num:18:3">3</span> And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge
of all the Tent; only they shall not come nigh unto the holy furniture
and unto the altar, that they die not, neither they, nor ye. <span
id="an_num:18:4">4</span> And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep
the charge of the tent of meeting, whatsoever the service of the Tent
may be; but a common man shall not draw nigh unto you. <span
id="an_num:18:5">5</span> And ye shall keep the charge of the holy
things, and the charge of the altar, that there be wrath no more upon
the children of Israel. <span id="an_num:18:6">6</span> And I, behold, I
have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel;
for you they are given as a gift unto the LORD, to do the service of the
tent of meeting. <span id="an_num:18:7">7</span> And thou and thy sons
with thee shall keep your priesthood in everything that pertaineth to
the altar, and to that within the veil; and ye shall serve; I give you
the priesthood as a service of gift; and the common man that draweth
nigh shall be put to death.'

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span id="an_num:18:8">8</span> And the LORD spoke unto Aaron: \`And I,
behold, I have given thee the charge of My heave-offerings; even of all
the hallowed things of the children of Israel unto thee have I given
them for a consecrated portion, and to thy sons, as a due for ever.
<span id="an_num:18:9">9</span> This shall be thine of the most holy
things, reserved from the fire: every offering of theirs, even every
meal-offering of theirs, and every sin-offering of theirs, and every
guilt-offering of theirs, which they may render unto Me, shall be most
holy for thee and for thy sons. <span id="an_num:18:10">10</span> In a
most holy place shalt thou eat thereof; every male may eat thereof; it
shall be holy unto thee. <span id="an_num:18:11">11</span> And this is
thine; the heave-offering of their gift, even all the wave-offerings of
the children of Israel; I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and
to thy daughters with thee, as a due for ever; every one that is clean
in thy house may eat thereof. <span id="an_num:18:12">12</span> All the
best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the corn, the
first part of them which they give unto the LORD, to thee have I given
them. <span id="an_num:18:13">13</span> The first-ripe fruits of all
that is in their land, which they bring unto the LORD, shall be thine;
every one that is clean in thy house may eat thereof. <span
id="an_num:18:14">14</span> Every thing devoted in Israel shall be
thine. <span id="an_num:18:15">15</span> Every thing that openeth the
womb, of all flesh which they offer unto the LORD, both of man and
beast, shall be thine; howbeit the first-born of man shalt thou surely
redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem. <span
id="an_num:18:16">16</span> And their redemption-money— from a month old
shalt thou redeem them—shall be, according to thy valuation, five
shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary—the same is twenty
gerahs. <span id="an_num:18:17">17</span> But the firstling of an ox, or
the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not
redeem; they are holy: thou shalt dash their blood against the altar,
and shalt make their fat smoke for an offering made by fire, for a sweet
savour unto the LORD. <span id="an_num:18:18">18</span> And the flesh of
them shall be thine, as the wave-breast and as the right thigh, it shall
be thine. <span id="an_num:18:19">19</span> All the heave-offerings of
the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the LORD, have
I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, as a due for
ever; it is an everlasting covenant of salt before the LORD unto thee
and to thy seed with thee.'

<span id="an_num:18:20">20</span> And the LORD said unto Aaron: \`Thou
shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any
portion among them; I am thy portion and thine inheritance among the
children of Israel. <span id="an_num:18:21">21</span> And unto the
children of Levi, behold, I have given all the tithe in Israel for an
inheritance, in return for their service of the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_num:18:22">22</span> And henceforth the children of Israel shall
not come nigh the tent of meeting, lest they bear sin, and die. <span
id="an_num:18:23">23</span> But the Levites alone shall do the service
of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear their iniquity; it shall be
a statute for ever throughout your generations, and among the children
of Israel they shall have no inheritance. <span
id="an_num:18:24">24</span> For the thithe of the children of Israel,
which they set apart as a gift unto the LORD, I have given to the
Levites for an inheritance; therefore I have said unto them: Among the
children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.'

<span id="an_num:18:25">25</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:18:26">26</span> \`Moreover thou shalt speak unto the
Levites, and say unto them: When ye take of the children of Israel the
tithe which I have given you from them for your inheritance,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

then ye shall set apart of it a gift for the LORD, even a tithe of the
tithe. <span id="an_num:18:27">27</span> And the gift which ye set apart
shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the
threshing-floor, and as the fulness of the wine-press. <span
id="an_num:18:28">28</span> Thus ye also shall set apart a gift unto the
LORD of all your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and
thereof ye shall give the gift which is set apart unto the LORD to Aaron
the priest. <span id="an_num:18:29">29</span> Out of all that is given
you ye shall set apart all of that which is due unto the LORD, of all
the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of it. <span
id="an_num:18:30">30</span> Therefore thou shalt say unto them: When ye
set apart the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the
Levites as the increase of the threshing-floor, and as the increase of
the winepress. <span id="an_num:18:31">31</span> And ye may eat it in
every place, ye and your households; for it is your reward in return for
your service in the tent of meeting. <span
id="an_num:18:32">32</span> And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it,
seeing that ye have set apart from it the best thereof; and ye shall not
profane the holy things of the children of Israel, that ye die not.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 19](num019)

</div>
