<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num032)  [Next](num034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 33

‏מסעי‎

<span id="an_num:33:1">1</span> These are the stages of the children of
Israel, by which they went forth out of the land of Egypt by their hosts
under the hand of Moses and Aaron. <span id="an_num:33:2">2</span> And
Moses wrote their goings forth, stage by stage, by the commandment of
the LORD; and these are their stages at their goings forth. <span
id="an_num:33:3">3</span> And they journeyed from Rameses in the first
month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the
passover the children of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight
of all the Egyptians, <span id="an_num:33:4">4</span> while the
Egyptians were burying them that the LORD had smitten among them, even
all their first-born; upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments.
<span id="an_num:33:5">5</span> And the children of Israel journeyed
from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth. <span
id="an_num:33:6">6</span> And they journeyed from Succoth, and pitched
in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness. <span
id="an_num:33:7">7</span> And they journeyed from Etham, and turned back
unto Pi-hahiroth, which is before Baal-zephon; and they pitched before
Migdol. <span id="an_num:33:8">8</span> And they journeyed from
Pene-hahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into the
wilderness; and they went three days' journey in the wilderness of
Etham, and pitched in Marah. <span id="an_num:33:9">9</span> And they
journeyed from Marah, and came unto Elim; and in Elim were twelve
springs of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees; and they pitched
there. <span id="an_num:33:10">10</span> And they journeyed from Elim,
and pitched by the Red Sea. <span id="an_num:33:11">11</span> And they
journeyed from the Red Sea, and pitched in the wilderness of Sin. <span
id="an_num:33:12">12</span> And they journeyed from the wilderness of
Sin, and pitched in Dophkah. <span id="an_num:33:13">13</span> And they
journeyed from Dophkah, and pitched in Alush. <span
id="an_num:33:14">14</span> And they journeyed from

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alush, and pitched
in Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink. <span
id="an_num:33:15">15</span> And they journeyed from Rephidim, and
pitched in the wilderness of Sinai. <span
id="an_num:33:16">16</span> And they journeyed from the wilderness of
Sinai, and pitched in Kibroth-hattaavah. <span
id="an_num:33:17">17</span> And they journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah,
and pitched in Hazeroth. <span id="an_num:33:18">18</span> And they
journeyed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah. <span
id="an_num:33:19">19</span> And they journeyed from Rithmah, and pitched
in Rimmon-perez. <span id="an_num:33:20">20</span> And they journeyed
from Rimmon-perez, and pitched in Libnah. <span
id="an_num:33:21">21</span> And they journeyed from Libnah, and pitched
in Rissah. <span id="an_num:33:22">22</span> And they journeyed from
Rissah, and pitched in Kehelah. <span id="an_num:33:23">23</span> And
they journeyed from Kehelah, and pitched in mount Shepher. <span
id="an_num:33:24">24</span> And they journeyed from mount Shepher, and
pitched in Haradah. <span id="an_num:33:25">25</span> And they journeyed
from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth. <span
id="an_num:33:26">26</span> And they journeyed from Makheloth, and
pitched in Tahath. <span id="an_num:33:27">27</span> And they journeyed
from Tahath, and pitched in Terah. <span id="an_num:33:28">28</span> And
they journeyed from Terah, and pitched in Mithkah. <span
id="an_num:33:29">29</span> And they journeyed from Mithkah, and pitched
in Hashmonah. <span id="an_num:33:30">30</span> And they journeyed from
Hashmonah, and pitched in Moseroth. <span
id="an_num:33:31">31</span> And they journeyed from Moseroth, and
pitched in Benejaakan. <span id="an_num:33:32">32</span> And they
journeyed from Bene-jaakan, and pitched in Hor-haggidgad. <span
id="an_num:33:33">33</span> And they journeyed from Hor-haggidgad, and
pitched in Jotbah. <span id="an_num:33:34">34</span> And they journeyed
from Jotbah, and pitched in Abronah. <span
id="an_num:33:35">35</span> And they journeyed from Abronah, and pitched
in Ezion-geber. <span id="an_num:33:36">36</span> And they journeyed
from Ezion-geber, and pitched in the wilderness of Zin—the same is
Kadesh. <span id="an_num:33:37">37</span> And they journeyed from
Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.—
<span id="an_num:33:38">38</span> And Aaron the priest went up into
mount Hor at the commandment of the LORD, and died there, in the
fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month. <span
id="an_num:33:39">39</span> And Aaron was a hundred and twenty and three
years old when he died in mount Hor. <span
id="an_num:33:40">40</span> And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who
dwelt in the South in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the
children of Israel.— <span id="an_num:33:41">41</span> And they
journeyed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah. <span
id="an_num:33:42">42</span> And they journeyed from Zalmonah, and
pitched in Punon. <span id="an_num:33:43">43</span> And they journeyed
from Punon, and pitched in Oboth. <span id="an_num:33:44">44</span> And
they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched in Ije-abarim, in the border of
Moab. <span id="an_num:33:45">45</span> And they journeyed from Ijim,
and pitched in Dibon-gad. <span id="an_num:33:46">46</span> And they
journeyed from Dibon-gad, and pitched in Almon-diblathaim. <span
id="an_num:33:47">47</span> And they journeyed from Almon-diblathaim,
and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, in front of Nebo. <span
id="an_num:33:48">48</span> And they journeyed from the mountains of
Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
<span id="an_num:33:49">49</span> And they pitched by the Jordan, from
Bethjeshimoth even unto Abel-shittiim in the plains of Moab.

<span id="an_num:33:50">50</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the
plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying: <span
id="an_num:33:51">51</span> \`Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them: When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan, <span
id="an_num:33:52">52</span> then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants
of the land from before you, and destroy all their figured stones, and
destroy all their molten images, and demolish all their high places.
<span id="an_num:33:53">53</span> And ye shall drive out the inhabitants
of the land, and dwell therein; for unto you have

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

I given the land to possess it. <span id="an_num:33:54">54</span> And ye
shall inherit the land by lot according to your families—to the more ye
shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer thou shalt give the
less inheritance; wheresoever the lot falleth to any man, that shall be
his; according to the tribes of your fathers shall ye inherit. <span
id="an_num:33:55">55</span> But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants
of the land from before you, then shall those that ye let remain of them
be as thorns in your eyes, and as pricks in your sides, and they shall
harass you in the land wherein ye dwell. <span
id="an_num:33:56">56</span> And it shall come to pass, that as I thought
to do unto them, so will I do unto you.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 34](num034)

</div>
