<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num027)  [Next](num029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 28

<span id="an_num:28:1">1</span> And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
<span id="an_num:28:2">2</span> Command the children of Israel, and say
unto them:

My food which is presented unto Me for offerings made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto Me, shall ye observe to offer unto Me in its due
season. <span id="an_num:28:3">3</span> And thou shalt say unto them:
This is the offering made by fire which ye shall bring unto the LORD:
he-lambs of the first year without blemish, two day by day, for a
continual burnt-offering. <span id="an_num:28:4">4</span> The one lamb
shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at
dusk; <span id="an_num:28:5">5</span> and the tenth part of an ephah of
fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with the fourth part of a hin of
beaten oil. <span id="an_num:28:6">6</span> It is a continual
burnt-offering, which was offered in mount Sinai, for a sweet savour, an
offering made by fire unto the LORD. <span id="an_num:28:7">7</span> And
the drink-offering thereof shall be the fourth part of a hin for the one
lamb; in the holy place shalt thou pour out a drink-offering of strong
drink unto the LORD. <span id="an_num:28:8">8</span> And the other lamb
shalt thou present at dusk; as the meal-offering of the morning, and as
the drink-offering thereof, thou shalt present it, an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="an_num:28:9">9</span> And on the sabbath day two he-lambs of
the first year without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine
flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, and the drink-offering
thereof. <span id="an_num:28:10">10</span> This is the burnt-offering of
every sabbath, beside the continual burnt-offering, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:28:11">11</span> And in your new moons ye shall present
a burnt-offering unto the LORD: two young bullocks, and one ram, seven
he-lambs of the first year without blemish; <span
id="an_num:28:12">12</span> and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine
flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, for each bullock; and two
tenth parts of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, for the
one ram; <span id="an_num:28:13">13</span> and a several tenth part of
fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering unto every lamb; for a
burnt-offering of a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the
LORD. <span id="an_num:28:14">14</span> And their drink-offerings shall
be half a hin of wine for a bullock, and the third part of a hin for the
ram, and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt-offering
of every new moon throughout the months of the year. <span
id="an_num:28:15">15</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering unto the
LORD; it shall be offered beside the continual burnt-offering, and the
drink-offering thereof.

<span id="an_num:28:16">16</span> And in the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month, is the LORD's passover. <span
id="an_num:28:17">17</span> And on the fifteenth day of this month shall
be a feast; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten. <span
id="an_num:28:18">18</span> In the first day shall be a holy
convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work; <span
id="an_num:28:19">19</span> but ye shall present an offering made by
fire, a burnt-offering unto the LORD: two young bullocks, and one ram,
and seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without
blemish; <span id="an_num:28:20">20</span> and their meal-offering, fine
flour mingled with oil; three tenth parts shall ye offer for a bullock,
and two tenth parts for the ram; <span id="an_num:28:21">21</span> a
several

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

tenth part shalt thou offer for every lamb of the seven lambs; <span
id="an_num:28:22">22</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, to make
atonement for you. <span id="an_num:28:23">23</span> Ye shall offer
these beside the burnt-offering of the morning, which is for a continual
burnt-offering. <span id="an_num:28:24">24</span> After this manner ye
shall offer daily, for seven days, the food of the offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; it shall be offered beside the
continual burnt-offering, and the drink-offering thereof. <span
id="an_num:28:25">25</span> And on the seventh day ye shall have a holy
convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work.

<span id="an_num:28:26">26</span> Also in the day of the first-fruits,
when ye bring a new meal-offering unto the LORD in your feast of weeks,
ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no manner of servile work;
<span id="an_num:28:27">27</span> but ye shall present a burnt-offering
for a sweet savour unto the LORD: two young bullocks, one ram, seven
he-lambs of the first year; <span id="an_num:28:28">28</span> and their
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for each
bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram, <span
id="an_num:28:29">29</span> a several tenth part for every lamb of the
seven lambs; <span id="an_num:28:30">30</span> one he-goat, to make
atonement for you. <span id="an_num:28:31">31</span> Beside the
continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, ye shall offer
them—they shall be unto you without blemish—and their drink-offerings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 29](num029)

</div>
