<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num035)  [Next](deu001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUMBERS CHAPTER 36

<span id="an_num:36:1">1</span> And the heads of the fathers' houses of
the family of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spoke
before Moses, and before the princes, the heads of the fathers' houses
of the children of Israel; <span id="an_num:36:2">2</span> and they
said: \`The LORD commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by
lot to the children of Israel; and my lord was commanded by the LORD to
give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters. <span
id="an_num:36:3">3</span> And if they be married to any of the sons of
the other tribes of the children of Israel, then will their inheritance
be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers, and will he added to
the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they shall belong; so will it be
taken away from the lot of our inheritance. <span
id="an_num:36:4">4</span> And when the jubilee of the children of Israel
shall be, then will their inheritance be added unto the inheritance of
the tribe whereunto they shall belong; so will their inheritance be
taken away from the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.' <span
id="an_num:36:5">5</span> And Moses commanded the children of Israel
according to the word of the LORD, saying: \`The tribe of the sons of
Joseph speaketh right. <span id="an_num:36:6">6</span> This is the thing
which the LORD hath commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad,
saying: Let them be married to whom they think best; only into the
family of the tribe of their father shall they be married. <span
id="an_num:36:7">7</span> So shall no inheritance of the children of
Israel remove from tribe to tribe; for the children of Israel shall
cleave every one to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. <span
id="an_num:36:8">8</span> And every daughter, that possesseth an
inheritance in any trihe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto
one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of
Israel may possess every man the inheritance of his fathers. <span
id="an_num:36:9">9</span> So shall no inheritance remove from one tribe
to another tribe; for the tribes of the children of Israel shall cleave
each one to its own inheritance.' <span id="an_num:36:10">10</span> Even
as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad. <span
id="an_num:36:11">11</span> For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah,
and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons. <span id="an_num:36:12">12</span> They were married into
the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their
inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.

<span id="an_num:36:13">13</span> These are the commandments and the
ordinances, which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses unto the
children of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001)

</div>
