<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 16

<span id="an_sa1:16:1">1</span> And the LORD said unto Samuel: \`How
long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from being
king over Israel? fill thy horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to
Jesse the Beth-lehemite; for I have provided Me a king among his sons.'
<span id="an_sa1:16:2">2</span> And Samuel said: \`How can I go? if Saul
hear it, he will kill me.' And the LORD said: \`Take a heifer with thee,
and say: I am come to sacrifice to the LORD. <span
id="an_sa1:16:3">3</span> And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will
tell thee what thou shalt do; and thou shalt anoint unto Me him whom I
name unto thee.' <span id="an_sa1:16:4">4</span> And Samuel did that
which the LORD spoke, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the city
came to meet him trembling, and said: \`Comest thou peaceably?' <span
id="an_sa1:16:5">5</span> And he said : \`Peaceably; I am come to
sacrifice unto the LORD; sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the
sacrifice.' And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice. <span id="an_sa1:16:6">6</span> And it came to pass, when
they were come, that he beheld Eliab, and said: \`Surely the LORD'S
anointed is before Him.' <span id="an_sa1:16:7">7</span> But the LORD
said unto Samuel: \`Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his
stature; because I have rejected him; for it is not as man seeth: for
man looketh on the outward appearance, but the LORD looketh on the
heart.' <span id="an_sa1:16:8">8</span> Then Jesse called Abinadab, and
made him pass before Samuel. And he said: \`Neither hath the LORD chosen
this.' <span id="an_sa1:16:9">9</span> Then Jesse made Shammah to pass
by. And he said: \`Neither hath the LORD chosen this.' <span
id="an_sa1:16:10">10</span> And Jesse made seven of his sons to pass
before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse: \`The LORD hath not chosen
these.' <span id="an_sa1:16:11">11</span> And Samuel said unto Jesse:
\`Are here all thy children?' And he said: \`There remaineth yet the
youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep.' And Samuel said unto
Jesse: \`Send and fetch him; for we will not sit down till he come
hither.' <span id="an_sa1:16:12">12</span> And he sent, and brought him
in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of beautiful eyes, and goodly to look
upon. And the LORD said: \`Arise, anoint him; for this is he.' <span
id="an_sa1:16:13">13</span> Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and
anointed him in the midst of his brethren; and the spirit of the LORD
came mightily upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and
went to Ramah.

<span id="an_sa1:16:14">14</span> Now the spirit of the LORD had
departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the LORD terrified him.
<span id="an_sa1:16:15">15</span> And Saul's servants said unto him:
\`Behold now, an evil spirit from God

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

terrifieth thee. <span id="an_sa1:16:16">16</span> Let our lord now
command thy servants, that are before thee, to seek out a man who is a
skilful player on the harp; and it shall be, when the evil spirit from
God cometh upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt
be well.' <span id="an_sa1:16:17">17</span> And Saul said unto his
servants: \`Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to
me.' <span id="an_sa1:16:18">18</span> Then answered one of the young
men, and said: \`Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth-lehemite,
that is skilful in playing, and a mighty man of valour, and a man of
war, and prudent in affairs, and a comely person, and the LORD is with
him.' <span id="an_sa1:16:19">19</span> Wherefore Saul sent messengers
unto Jesse, and said: \`Send me David thy son, who is with the sheep.'
<span id="an_sa1:16:20">20</span> And Jesse took an ass laden with
bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son
unto Saul. <span id="an_sa1:16:21">21</span> And David came to Saul, and
stood before him; and he loved him greatly; and he became his
armour-bearer. <span id="an_sa1:16:22">22</span> And Saul sent to Jesse,
saying: \`Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found
favour in my sight.' <span id="an_sa1:16:23">23</span> And it came to
pass, when the \[evil\] spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took
the harp, and played with his hand; so Saul found relief, and it was
well with him, and the evil spirit departed from him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 17](sa1017)

</div>
