<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1003)  [Next](sa1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 4

<span id="an_sa1:4:1">1</span> And the word of Samuel came to all
Israel.

Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched
beside Eben-ezer; and the Philistines pitched in Aphek. <span
id="an_sa1:4:2">2</span> And the Philistines put themselves in array
against Israel; and when the battle was spread, Israel was smitten
before the Philistines; and they slew of the army in the field about
four thousand men. <span id="an_sa1:4:3">3</span> And when the people
were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said: \`Wherefore hath the
LORD smitten us to-day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of
the covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh unto us, that He may come among
us, and save us out of the hand of our enemies.' <span
id="an_sa1:4:4">4</span> So the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought
from thence the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, who sitteth
upon the cherubim; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of God. <span
id="an_sa1:4:5">5</span> And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD
came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the
earth rang. <span id="an_sa1:4:6">6</span> And when the Philistines
heard the noise of the shout, they said: \`What meaneth the noise of
this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?' And they knew that the ark
of the LORD was come into the camp. <span id="an_sa1:4:7">7</span> And
the Philistines were afraid, for they said: \`God is come into the
camp.' And they said: \`Woe unto us! for there was not such a thing
yesterday and the day before. <span id="an_sa1:4:8">8</span> Woe unto
us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? these are
the gods that smote the Egyptians with all manner of plagues and in the
wilderness. <span id="an_sa1:4:9">9</span> Be strong, and quit
yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the
Hebrews, as they have been to you; quit yourselves like men, and fight.'
<span id="an_sa1:4:10">10</span> And the Philistines fought, and Israel
was smitten, and they fled every man to his tent; and there was a very
great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen. <span
id="an_sa1:4:11">11</span> And the ark of God was taken; and the two
sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.

<span id="an_sa1:4:12">12</span> And there ran a man of Benjamin out of
the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and
with earth upon his head. <span id="an_sa1:4:13">13</span> And when he
came, lo, Eli sat upon his seat by the wayside watching; for his heart
trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and
told it, all the city cried out. <span id="an_sa1:4:14">14</span> And
when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said: \`What meaneth the
noise of this tumult?' And the man made haste, and came and told Eli.
<span id="an_sa1:4:15">15</span> Now Eli was ninety and eight years old;
and his eyes were set, that he could not see. <span
id="an_sa1:4:16">16</span> And the man said unto Eli: \`I am he that
came out of the army, and I fled to-day out of the army.' And he said:
\`How went the matter, my son?' <span id="an_sa1:4:17">17</span> And he
that brought

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

the tidings answered and said: \`Israel is fled before the Philistines,
and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two
sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.'
<span id="an_sa1:4:18">18</span> And it came to pass, when he made
mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off his seat backward by
the side of the gate, and his neck broke, and he died; for he was an old
man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.

<span id="an_sa1:4:19">19</span> And his daughter-in-law, Phinehas'
wife, was with child, near to be delivered; and when she heard the
tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father-in-law and
her husband were dead, she bowed herself and brought forth; for her
pains came suddenly upon her. <span id="an_sa1:4:20">20</span> And about
the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her: \`Fear
not; for thou hast brought forth a son.' But she answered not, neither
did she regard it. <span id="an_sa1:4:21">21</span> And she named the
child  <span id="fr_118"></span>[a](#fn_115) Ichabod, saying: \`The
glory is departed from Israel'; because the ark of God was taken, and
because of her father-in-law and her husband. <span
id="an_sa1:4:22">22</span> And she said: \`The glory is departed from
Israel; for the ark of God is taken.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[330:a](sa1004.htm#fr_118) That is, *There is
no glory*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 5](sa1005)

</div>
