<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1013)  [Next](sa1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 14

<span id="an_sa1:14:1">1</span> Now it fell upon a day, that Jonathan
the son of Saul said unto the young man that bore his armour: \`Come and
let us go over to the Philistines' garrison, that is on yonder side.'
But he told not his father. <span id="an_sa1:14:2">2</span> And Saul
tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under the pomegranate-tree which
is in Migron; and the people that were with him were about six hundred
men, <span id="an_sa1:14:3">3</span> and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub,
Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of
the LORD in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that
Jonathan was gone. <span id="an_sa1:14:4">4</span> And between the
passes, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines'
garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side, and a rocky crag on
the other side; and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the
other Seneh. <span id="an_sa1:14:5">5</span> The one crag rose up on the
north in front of Michmas, and the other on the south in front of Geba.

<span id="an_sa1:14:6">6</span> And Jonathan said to the young man that
bore his armour: \`Come and let us go over unto the garrison of these
uncircumcised; it may be that the LORD will work for us; for there is no
restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:7">7</span> And his armour-bearer said unto him: \`Do all
that is in thy heart; turn thee, behold I am with thee according to thy
heart.' <span id="an_sa1:14:8">8</span> Then said Jonathan: \`Behold, we
will pass over unto the men, and we will disclose ourselves unto them.
<span id="an_sa1:14:9">9</span> If they say thus unto us: Tarry until we
come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up
unto them. <span id="an_sa1:14:10">10</span> But if they say thus: Come
up unto us; then we will go up; for the LORD hath delivered them into
our hand; and this shall be the sign unto us.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:11">11</span> And both of them disclosed themselves unto
the garrison of the Philistines; and the Philistines said: \`Behold
Hebrews coming forth out of the holes where they hid themselves.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:12">12</span> And the men of the garrison spoke to
Jonathan and his armour-bearer, and said: \`Come up to us, and we will
show you a thing.' And Jonathan said unto his armour-bearer: \`Come up
after me; for the LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.'
<span id="an_sa1:14:13">13</span> And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands
and upon his feet, and his armour-bearer after him; and they fell before
Jonathan; and his armour-bearer slew them after him. <span
id="an_sa1:14:14">14</span> And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and
his armour-bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half a
furrow's length in an acre of land. <span
id="an_sa1:14:15">15</span> And there was a trembling in the camp in the
field, and among all the people; the garrison, and the spoilers, they
also trembled; and the earth quaked; so it grew into a terror from God.
<span id="an_sa1:14:16">16</span> And the watchmen of Saul in
Gibeath-benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and
they went hither and thither.

<span id="an_sa1:14:17">17</span> Then said Saul unto the people that
were with him: \`Number now, and see who is gone from us.' And when they
had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armour-bearer were not there.
<span id="an_sa1:14:18">18</span> And Saul said unto Ahijah: \`Bring
hither the ark of God.' For the ark of God was there at that time with
the children of Israel. <span id="an_sa1:14:19">19</span> And it came to
pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the tumult that was in the
camp of the Philis-

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

tines went on and increased; and Saul said unto the priest: \`Withdraw
thy hand.' <span id="an_sa1:14:20">20</span> And Saul and all the people
that were with him were gathered together, and came to the battle; and,
behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very
great discomfiture. <span id="an_sa1:14:21">21</span> Now the Hebrews
that were with the Philistines as beforetime, and that went up with them
into the camp round about; even they also turned to be with the
Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan. <span
id="an_sa1:14:22">22</span> Likewise all the men of Israel that had hid
themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, when they heard that the
Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.
<span id="an_sa1:14:23">23</span> So the LORD saved Israel that day; and
the battle passed on as far as Beth-aven.

<span id="an_sa1:14:24">24</span> And the men of Israel were distressed
that day; but Saul adjured the people, saying: \`Cursed be the man that
eateth any food until it be evening, and I be avenged on mine enemies.'
So none of the people tasted food. <span id="an_sa1:14:25">25</span> And
all the people came into the forest; and there was honey upon the
ground. <span id="an_sa1:14:26">26</span> And when the people were come
unto the forest, behold a flow of honey; but no man put his hand to his
mouth; for the people feared the oath. <span
id="an_sa1:14:27">27</span> But Jonathan heard not when his father
charged the people with the oath; and he put forth the end of the rod
that was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and put his hand
to his mouth; and his eyes brightened. <span
id="an_sa1:14:28">28</span> Then answered one of the people, and said:
\`Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying: Cursed be
the man that eateth food this day; and the people are faint.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:29">29</span> Then said Jonathan: \`My father hath
troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes are brightened,
because I tasted a little of this honey. <span
id="an_sa1:14:30">30</span> How much more, if haply the people had eaten
freely to-day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? had there
not been then a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?' <span
id="an_sa1:14:31">31</span> And they smote of the Philistines that day
from Michmas to Aijalon; and the people were very faint. <span
id="an_sa1:14:32">32</span> And the people flew upon the spoil, and took
sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground; and the people
did eat them with the blood. <span id="an_sa1:14:33">33</span> Then they
told Saul, saying: \`Behold, the people sin against the LORD, in that
they eat with the blood.' And he said: \`Ye have dealt treacherously;
roll a great stone unto me this day.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:34">34</span> And Saul said: \`Disperse yourselves among
the people, and say unto them: Bring me hither every man his ox, and
every man his sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against
the LORD in eating with the blood.' And all the people brought every man
his ox with him that night, and slew them there. <span
id="an_sa1:14:35">35</span> And Saul built an altar unto the LORD; the
same was the first altar that he built unto the LORD.

<span id="an_sa1:14:36">36</span> And Saul said: \`Let us go down after
the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and
let us not leave a man of them.' And they said: \`Do whatsoever seemeth
good unto thee.' Then said the priest: \`Let us draw near hither unto
God.' <span id="an_sa1:14:37">37</span> And Saul asked counsel of God:
\`Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt Thou deliver them into the
hand of Israel?' But He answered him not that day. <span
id="an_sa1:14:38">38</span> And Saul said: \`Draw nigh hither, all ye
chiefs of the people; and know and see wherein this sin hath been this
day. <span id="an_sa1:14:39">39</span> For, as the LORD liveth, who
saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

surely die.' But there was not a man among all the people that answered
him. <span id="an_sa1:14:40">40</span> Then said he unto all Israel:
\`Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other
side.' And the people said unto Saul: \`Do what seemeth good unto thee.'
<span id="an_sa1:14:41">41</span> Therefore Saul said unto the LORD, the
God of Israel: \`Declare the right.' And Jonathan and Saul were taken by
lot; but the people escaped. <span id="an_sa1:14:42">42</span> And Saul
said: \`Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son.' And Jonathan was
taken. <span id="an_sa1:14:43">43</span> Then Saul said to Jonathan:
\`Tell me what thou hast done.' And Jonathan told him, and said: \`I did
certainly taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my
hand; here am I: I will die.' <span id="an_sa1:14:44">44</span> And Saul
said: \`God do so and more also; thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.' <span
id="an_sa1:14:45">45</span> And the people said unto Saul: \`Shall
Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? Far from
it; as the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground; for he hath wrought with God this day.' So the people rescued
Jonathan, that he died not. <span id="an_sa1:14:46">46</span> Then Saul
went up from following the Philistines; and the Philistines went to
their own place.

<span id="an_sa1:14:47">47</span> So Saul took the kingdom over Israel,
and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and
against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings
of Zobah, and against the Philistines; and whithersoever he turned
himself, he put them to the worse. <span id="an_sa1:14:48">48</span> And
he did valiantly, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of
the hands of them that spoiled them.

<span id="an_sa1:14:49">49</span> Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan,
and Ishvi, and Malchi-shua; and the names of his two daughters were
these: the name of the first-born Merab, and the name of the younger
Michal; <span id="an_sa1:14:50">50</span> and the name of Saul's wife
was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz; and the name of the captain of his
host was  <span id="fr_124"></span>[a](sa1015.htm#fn_121) Abner, the son
of Ner, Saul's uncle. <span id="an_sa1:14:51">51</span> And Kish was the
father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

<span id="an_sa1:14:52">52</span> And there was sore war against the
Philistines all the days of Saul; and when Saul saw any mighty man, or
any valiant man, he took him unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 15](sa1015)

</div>
