<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I Samuel Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1011)  [Next](sa1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SAMUEL CHAPTER 12

<span id="an_sa1:12:1">1</span> And Samuel said unto all Israel:
\`Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me,
and have made a king over you. <span id="an_sa1:12:2">2</span> And now,
behold, the king walketh before you; and I am old and gray-headed; and,
behold, my sons are with you; and I have walked before you from my youth
unto this day. <span id="an_sa1:12:3">3</span> Here I am; witness
against me before the LORD, and before His anointed: whose ox have I
taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? or whom have
I oppressed? or of whose hand have I taken a ransom to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you.' <span
id="an_sa1:12:4">4</span> And they said: \`Thou hast not defrauded us,
nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken aught of any man's hand.'
<span id="an_sa1:12:5">5</span> And he said unto them: \`The LORD is
witness against you, and His anointed is witness this day, that ye have
not found aught in my hand.' And they said: \`He is witness.'

<span id="an_sa1:12:6">6</span> And Samuel said unto the people: \`It is
the LORD that made Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out
of the land of Egypt. <span id="an_sa1:12:7">7</span> Now therefore
stand still, that I may plead with you before the LORD concerning all
the righteous acts of the LORD, which He did to you and to your

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

fathers. <span id="an_sa1:12:8">8</span> When Jacob was come into Egypt,
then your fathers cried unto the LORD, and the LORD sent Moses and
Aaron, who brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and they were made
to dwell in this place. <span id="an_sa1:12:9">9</span> But they forgot
the LORD their God, and He gave them over into the hand of Sisera,
captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and
into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. <span
id="an_sa1:12:10">10</span> And they cried unto the LORD, and said: We
have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD, and have served the
Baalim and the Ashtaroth; but now deliver us out of the hand of our
enemies, and we will serve Thee. <span id="an_sa1:12:11">11</span> And
the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and
delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye
dwelt in safety. <span id="an_sa1:12:12">12</span> And when ye saw that
Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto
me: Nay, but a king shall reign over us; when the LORD your God was your
king. <span id="an_sa1:12:13">13</span> Now therefore behold the king
whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have asked for; and, behold, the LORD
hath set a king over you. <span id="an_sa1:12:14">14</span> If ye will
fear the LORD, and serve Him, and hearken unto His voice, and not rebel
against the commandment of the LORD, and both ye and also the king that
reigneth over you be followers of the LORD your God—; <span
id="an_sa1:12:15">15</span> but if ye will not hearken unto the voice of
the LORD, but rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the
hand of the LORD be against you, and against your fathers. <span
id="an_sa1:12:16">16</span> Now therefore stand still and see this great
thing, which the LORD will do before your eyes. <span
id="an_sa1:12:17">17</span> Is it not wheat harvest to-day? I will call
unto the LORD, that He may send thunder and rain; and ye shall know and
see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of
the LORD, in asking you a king.' <span id="an_sa1:12:18">18</span> So
Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and rain that
day; and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel. <span
id="an_sa1:12:19">19</span> And all the people said unto Samuel: \`Pray
for thy servants unto the LORD thy God, that we die not; for we have
added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king.' <span
id="an_sa1:12:20">20</span> And Samuel said unto the people: \`Fear not;
ye have indeed done all this evil; yet turn not aside from following the
LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart; <span
id="an_sa1:12:21">21</span> and turn ye not aside; for then should ye go
after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain.
<span id="an_sa1:12:22">22</span> For the LORD will not forsake His
people for His great name's sake; because it hath pleased the LORD to
make you a people unto Himself. <span
id="an_sa1:12:23">23</span> Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I
should sin against the LORD in ceasing to pray for you; but I will
instruct you in the good and the right way. <span
id="an_sa1:12:24">24</span> Only fear the LORD, and serve Him in truth
with all your heart; for consider how great things He hath done for you.
<span id="an_sa1:12:25">25</span> But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye
shall be swept away, both ye and your king.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Samuel Chapter 13](sa1013)

</div>
