<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2023)  [Next](kg1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 24

<span id="an_sa2:24:1">1</span>  And again the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Israel, and He moved David against them, saying: \`Go,
number Israel and Judah.' <span id="an_sa2:24:2">2</span>  And the king
said to Joab the captain of the host that was with him: \`Go now to and
fro through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, and
number ye the people, that I may know the sum of the people.' <span
id="an_sa2:24:3">3</span>  And Joab said unto the king: \`Now the LORD
thy God add unto the people, how many soever they may be, a hundredfold,
and may the eyes of my lord the king see it; but why doth my lord the
king delight in this thing?' <span id="an_sa2:24:4">4</span> 
Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the
captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out
from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel. <span
id="an_sa2:24:5">5</span>  And they passed over the Jordan, and pitched
in Aroer, on the right side of the city that is in the middle of the
valley of Gad, and unto Jazer; <span id="an_sa2:24:6">6</span>  then
they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi; and they came to
Dan-jaan, and round about to Zidon, <span id="an_sa2:24:7">7</span>  and
came to the stronghold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites,
and of the Canaanites; and they went out to the south of Judah, at
Beer-sheba. <span id="an_sa2:24:8">8</span>  So when they had gone to
and fro through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine
months and twenty days. <span id="an_sa2:24:9">9</span>  And Joab gave
up the sum of the numbering of the people unto the king; and there were
in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and
the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.

<span id="an_sa2:24:10">10</span>  And David's heart smote him after
that he had numbered the people.  And David said unto the LORD: \`I have
sinned greatly in what I have done; but now, O LORD, put away, I beseech
Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.'
<span id="an_sa2:24:11">11</span>  And when David rose up in the
morning, the word of the LORD came unto the prophet of Gad, David's
seer, saying:  <span id="an_sa2:24:12">12</span>  \`Go and speak unto
David: Thus saith the LORD:  I lay upon thee three things; choose thee
one of them, that I may do it unto thee.' <span
id="an_sa2:24:13">13</span>  So Gad came to David, and told him, and
said unto him:  \`Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy
land? or wilt thou flee three months before thy foes while they pursue
thee?  or shall there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise
thee, and consider what answer I shall return to Him that sent me.' 
<span id="an_sa2:24:14">14</span>  And David said unto Gad: \`I am in a
great strait; let us fall now into the hand of the LORD; for His mercies
are great; and let me not fall into the hand of man.'

<span id="an_sa2:24:15">15</span>  So the LORD sent a pestilence upon
Israel from the morning even to the time appointed; and there died of
the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba seventy thousand men.  <span
id="an_sa2:24:16">16</span>  And when the angel stretched out his hand
toward Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented Him of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed the people: \`It is enough; now stay
thy hand.' And the angel of the LORD was by the threshing-floor of
Araunah the Jebusite. <span id="an_sa2:24:17">17</span>  And David spoke
unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said: 
\`Lo, I have sinned, and I have done iniquitously; but these sheep, what

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

have they done? let Thy hand, I pray Thee, be against me, and against my
father's house.'

<span id="an_sa2:24:18">18</span>  And Gad came that day to David, and
said unto him: \`Go up, rear an altar unto the LORD in the
threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.' <span
id="an_sa2:24:19">19</span>  And David went up according to the saying
of Gad, as the LORD commanded. <span id="an_sa2:24:20">20</span>  And
Araunah looked forth, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward
him; and Araunah went out, and bowed down before the king with his face
to the ground. <span id="an_sa2:24:21">21</span>  And Araunah said:
\`Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?' And David said:
\`To buy the threshing-floor of thee, to build an altar unto the LORD,
that the plague may be stayed from the people.' <span
id="an_sa2:24:22">22</span>  And Araunah said unto David: \`Let my lord
the king take and offer up what seemedeth good unto him; behold the oxen
for the burnt-offering, and the threshing-instruments and the furniture
of the oxen for the wood.' <span id="an_sa2:24:23">23</span>  All this
did Araunah the king give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king:
\`The LORD thy God accept thee.' <span id="an_sa2:24:24">24</span>  And
the king said unto Araunah: \`Nay; but I will verily buy it of thee at a
price; neither will I offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD my God which
cost me nothing.' So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for
fifty shekels of silver. <span id="an_sa2:24:25">25</span>  And David
built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings. So the LORD was entreated for the land, and the plague
was stayed from Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I Kings Chapter 1](kg1000)

</div>
