<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2010)  [Next](sa2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 11

<span id="an_sa2:11:1">1</span>  And it came to pass, at the return of
the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that David sent Joab,
and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the
children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_sa2:11:2">2</span>  And it came to pass at eventide, that
David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's
house; and from the roof he saw a woman bathing; and the woman was very
beautiful to look upon. <span id="an_sa2:11:3">3</span>  And David sent
and inquired after the woman. And one said: \`Is not this Bath-sheba,
the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?' <span
id="an_sa2:11:4">4</span>  And David sent messengers, and took her; and
she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her
uncleanness; and she returned unto her house. <span
id="an_sa2:11:5">5</span>  And the woman conceived; and she sent and
told David, and said: \`I am with child.'

<span id="an_sa2:11:6">6</span>  And David sent to Joab \[, saying\]:
\`Send me Uriah the Hittite.' And Joab sent Uriah to David. <span
id="an_sa2:11:7">7</span>  And when Uriah was come unto him, David asked
of him how Joab did, and how the people fared, and how the war
prospered. <span id="an_sa2:11:8">8</span>  And David said to Uriah:
\`Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.' And Uriah departed out of
the king's house, and there followed him a mess of food from the king.
<span id="an_sa2:11:9">9</span>  But Uriah slept at the door of the
king's house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his
house. <span id="an_sa2:11:10">10</span>  And when they had told David,
saying: \`Uriah went not down unto his house', David said unto Uriah:
\`Art thou not come from a journey? wherefore didst thou not go down
unto thy house?' <span id="an_sa2:11:11">11</span>  And Uriah said unto
David: \`The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in booths; and my lord
Joab, and the servants

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

of my lord, are encamped in the open field; shall I then go into my
house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and
as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.' <span
id="an_sa2:11:12">12</span>  And David said to Uriah: \`Tarry here
to-day also, and to-morrow I will let thee depart.' So Uriah abode in
Jerusalem that day, and the morrow. <span id="an_sa2:11:13">13</span> 
And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he
made him drunk; and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the
servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

<span id="an_sa2:11:14">14</span>  And it came to pass in the morning,
that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.
<span id="an_sa2:11:15">15</span>  And he wrote in the letter, saying:
\`Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye
from him, that he may be smitten, and die.' <span
id="an_sa2:11:16">16</span>  And it came to pass, when Joab kept watch
upon the city, that he assigned Uriah unto the place where he knew that
valiant men were. <span id="an_sa2:11:17">17</span>  And the men of the
city went out, and fought with Joab; and there fell some of the people,
even of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also. <span
id="an_sa2:11:18">18</span>  Then Joab sent and told David all the
things concerning the war; <span id="an_sa2:11:19">19</span>  and he
charged the messenger, saying: \`When thou hast made an end of telling
all the things concerning the war unto the king, <span
id="an_sa2:11:20">20</span>  it shall be that, if the king's wrath
arise, and he say unto thee: Wherefore went ye so nigh unto the city to
fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall? <span
id="an_sa2:11:21">21</span>  who smote Abimelech the son of
Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the
wall, that he died at Thebez? why went ye so nigh the wall? then shalt
thou say: Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.'

<span id="an_sa2:11:22">22</span>  So the messenger went, and came and
told David all that Joab had sent him for. <span
id="an_sa2:11:23">23</span>  And the messenger said unto David: \`The
men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we
were upon them even unto the entrance of the gate. <span
id="an_sa2:11:24">24</span>  And the shooters shot at thy servants from
off the wall; and some of the king's servants are dead, and thy servant
Uriah the Hittite is dead also.' <span id="an_sa2:11:25">25</span>  Then
David said unto the messenger: \`Thus shalt thou say unto Joab: Let not
this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth in one manner or
another; make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it;
and encourage thou him.'

<span id="an_sa2:11:26">26</span>  And when the wife of Uriah heard that
Uriah her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband. <span
id="an_sa2:11:27">27</span>  And when the mourning was past, David sent
and took her home to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a
son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 12](sa2012)

</div>
