<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2001)  [Next](sa2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 2

<span id="an_sa2:2:1">1</span>  And it came to pass after this, that
David inquired of the LORD, saying: \`Shall I go up into any of the
cities of Judah?' And the LORD said unto him: \`Go up.' And David said:
\`Whither shall I go up?' And He said: \`Unto Hebron.' <span
id="an_sa2:2:2">2</span>  So David went up thither, and his two wives
also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the
Carmelite. <span id="an_sa2:2:3">3</span>  And his men that were with
him did David bring up, every man with his household; and they dwelt in
the cities of Hebron. <span id="an_sa2:2:4">4</span>  And the men of
Judah came, and they there anointed David king over the house of Judah.

And they told David, saying: \`The men of Jabesh-gilead were they that
buried Saul.' <span id="an_sa2:2:5">5</span>  And David sent messengers
unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said unto them: \`Blessed be ye of
the LORD, that ye have shown this kindness unto your lord, even unto
Saul, and have buried him. <span id="an_sa2:2:6">6</span>  And now the
LORD show kindness and truth unto you; and I also will requite you this
kindness, because ye have done this thing. <span
id="an_sa2:2:7">7</span>  Now therefore let your hands be strong, and be
ye valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and also the house of Judah have
anointed me king over them.'

<span id="an_sa2:2:8">8</span>  Now Abner the son of Ner, captain of
Saul's host, had taken Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over
to Mahanaim; <span id="an_sa2:2:9">9</span>  and he made him king over
Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and
over Benjamin, and over all Israel. <span id="an_sa2:2:10">10</span> 
Ish-bosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over
Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
<span id="an_sa2:2:11">11</span>  And the time that David was king in
Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.

<span id="an_sa2:2:12">12</span>  And Abner the son of Ner, and the
servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gibeon. <span
id="an_sa2:2:13">13</span>  And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the
servants of David, went out; and they met together by the pool of
Gibeon, and sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other
on the other side of the pool. <span id="an_sa2:2:14">14</span>  And
Abner said to Joab: \`Let the young men, I pray thee, arise and play
before us.' And Joab said: \`Let them arise.' <span
id="an_sa2:2:15">15</span>  Then they arose and passed over by number:
twelve for Benjamin, and for Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of
the servants of David. <span id="an_sa2:2:16">16</span>  And they caught
every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's
side; so they fell down together; wherefore that place was called  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[a](#fn_125) Helkath-hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
<span id="an_sa2:2:17">17</span>  And the battle was very sore that day;
and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of
David.

<span id="an_sa2:2:18">18</span>  And the three sons of Zeruiah were
there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel; and Asahel was as light of foot as
one of the roes that are in the field. <span id="an_sa2:2:19">19</span> 
And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right
hand nor to the left from following Abner. <span
id="an_sa2:2:20">20</span>  Then Abner looked behind him, and said: \`Is
it thou, Asahel?' And he answered: \`It is I.' <span
id="an_sa2:2:21">21</span>  And Abner said to him: \`Turn thee aside to
thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young
men, and take thee his armour.' But Asahel would not turn aside from
following him. <span id="an_sa2:2:22">22</span>  And Abner said again to
Asahel. \`Turn thee aside from following me; wherefore should I smite
thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy
brother?' <span id="an_sa2:2:23">23</span>  Howbeit he refused to turn
aside, wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him in the
groin, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and
died in the same place; and it came to pass, that as many as came to the
place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.

<span id="an_sa2:2:24">24</span>  But Joab and Abishai pursued after
Abner; and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah,
that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon. <span
id="an_sa2:2:25">25</span>  And the children of Benjamin gathered
themselves together after Abner, and became one band, and stood on the
top of a hill. <span id="an_sa2:2:26">26</span>  Then Abner called to
Joab, and said: \`Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that
it will be bitterness in the end? how long shall it be then, ere thou
bid the people return from following their brethren?' <span
id="an_sa2:2:27">27</span>  And Joab said: \`As God liveth, if thou
hadst not spoken, surely then only after the morning the people had gone
away, every one from following his brother.' <span
id="an_sa2:2:28">28</span>  So Joab blew the horn, and all the people
stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any
more. <span id="an_sa2:2:29">29</span>  And Abner and his men went all
that night through the Arabah; and they passed over the Jordan, and went
through all Bithron, and came to Mahanaim.

<span id="an_sa2:2:30">30</span>  And Joab returned from following
Abner; and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of
David's servants nineteen men and Asahel. <span
id="an_sa2:2:31">31</span>  But the servants of David had smitten of
Benjamin, even of Abner's men—three hundred and three-score men died.
<span id="an_sa2:2:32">32</span>  And they took up Asahel, and buried
him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Beth-lehem. And Joab
and his men went all night, and the day broke upon them at Hebron.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[368:a](sa2002.htm#fr_128) That is, *The field
of the sharp knives*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 3](sa2003)

</div>
