<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2020)  [Next](sa2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 21

<span id="an_sa2:21:1">1</span>  And there was a famine in the days of
David three years, year after year; and David sought the face of the
LORD. And the LORD

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

said: \`It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he put to
death the Gibeonites.' <span id="an_sa2:21:2">2</span>  And the king
called the Gibeonites, and said unto them —now the Gibeonites were not
of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the
children of Israel had sworn unto them; and Saul sought to slay them in
his zeal for the children of Israel and Judah —<span
id="an_sa2:21:3">3</span>  and David said unto the Gibeonites: \`What
shall I do for you? and wherewith shall I make atonement, that ye may
bless the inheritance of the LORD?' <span id="an_sa2:21:4">4</span>  And
the Gibeonites said unto him: \`It is no matter of silver or gold
between us and Saul, or his house; neither is it for us to put any man
to death in Israel.' And he said: \`What say ye that I should do for
you?' <span id="an_sa2:21:5">5</span>  And they said unto the king:
\`The man that consumed us, and that devised against us, so that we have
been destroyed from remaining in any of the borders of Israel, <span
id="an_sa2:21:6">6</span>  let seven men of his sons be delivered unto
us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen
of the LORD.' And the king said: \`I will deliver them.'

<span id="an_sa2:21:7">7</span>  But the king spared Mephibosheth, the
son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the LORD's oath that was
between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul. <span
id="an_sa2:21:8">8</span>  But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the
daughter of Aiah, whom she bore unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and
the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Adriel
the son of Barzillai the Meholathite; <span id="an_sa2:21:9">9</span> 
and he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged
them in the mountain before the LORD, and they fell all seven together;
and they were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, at
the beginning of barley harvest.

<span id="an_sa2:21:10">10</span>  And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took
sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of
harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven; and she suffered
neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of
the field by night. <span id="an_sa2:21:11">11</span>  And it was told
David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.
<span id="an_sa2:21:12">12</span>  And David went and took the bones of
Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, who
had stolen them from the broad place of Beth-shan, where the Philistines
had hanged them, in the day that the Philistines slew Saul in Gilboa;
<span id="an_sa2:21:13">13</span>  and he brought up from thence the
bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the
bones of them that were hanged. <span id="an_sa2:21:14">14</span>  And
they buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of
Benjamin in Zela, in the sepulchre of Kish his father; and they
performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was entreated
for the land.

<span id="an_sa2:21:15">15</span>  And the Philistines had war again
with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought
against the Philistines; and David waxed faint. <span
id="an_sa2:21:16">16</span>  And Ishbi-benob, who was of the sons of the
giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in
weight, he being girded with new armour, thought to have slain David.
<span id="an_sa2:21:17">17</span>  But Abishai the son of Zeruiah
succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of
David swore unto him, saying: Thou shalt go no more out with us to
battle, that thou quench not the lamp of Israel.'

<span id="an_sa2:21:18">18</span>  And it came to pass after this, that
there was again war with the Philistines at Gob; then Sibbecai

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

the Hushathite slew Saph, who was of the sons of the giant. <span
id="an_sa2:21:19">19</span>  And there was again war with the
Philistines at Gob; and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim the
Beth-lehemite slew Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was
like a weaver's beam. <span id="an_sa2:21:20">20</span>  And there was
again war at Gath, where was a champion, that had on every hand six
fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he
also was born to the giant. <span id="an_sa2:21:21">21</span>  And when
he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother slew him.
<span id="an_sa2:21:22">22</span>  These four were born to the giant in
Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his
servants.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 22](sa2022)

</div>
