<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[II Samuel Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2007)  [Next](sa2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Tanach*, Jewish Publication Society tr. \[1917\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II SAMUEL CHAPTER 8

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

<span id="an_sa2:8:1">1</span>  And after this it came to pass, that
David smote the Philistines, and subdued them; and David took
Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.

<span id="an_sa2:8:2">2</span>  And he smote Moab, and measured them
with the line, making them to lie down on the ground; and he measured
two lines to put to death, and one full line to keep alive. And the
Moabites became servants to David, and brought presents.

<span id="an_sa2:8:3">3</span>  David smote also Hadadezer the son of
Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to establish his dominion at the river
Euphrates. <span id="an_sa2:8:4">4</span>  And David took from him a
thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and
David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred
chariots. <span id="an_sa2:8:5">5</span>  And when the Arameans of
Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David smote of the
Arameans two and twenty thousand men. <span id="an_sa2:8:6">6</span> 
Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus; and the Arameans became
servants to David, and brought presents. And the LORD gave victory to
David whithersoever he went. <span id="an_sa2:8:7">7</span>  And David
took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and
brought them to Jerusalem. <span id="an_sa2:8:8">8</span>  And from
Betah and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding
much brass.

<span id="an_sa2:8:9">9</span>  And when Toi king of Hamath heard that
David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer, <span
id="an_sa2:8:10">10</span>  then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David,
to salute him, and to bless him—because he had fought against Hadadezer
and smitten him; for Hadadezer had wars with Toi—and he brought with him
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass. <span
id="an_sa2:8:11">11</span>  These also did king David dedicate unto the
LORD, with the silver and gold that he dedicated of all the nations
which he subdued: <span id="an_sa2:8:12">12</span>  of Aram, and of
Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of
Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
<span id="an_sa2:8:13">13</span>  And David got him a name when he
returned from smiting the Arameans in the Valley of Salt, even eighteen
thousand men. <span id="an_sa2:8:14">14</span>  And he put garrisons in
Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all the Edomites became
servants to David. And the LORD gave victory to David whithersoever he
went.

<span id="an_sa2:8:15">15</span>  And David reigned over all Israel; and
David executed justice and righteousness unto all his people. <span
id="an_sa2:8:16">16</span>  And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the
host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder; <span
id="an_sa2:8:17">17</span>  and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech
the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Seraiah was scribe; <span
id="an_sa2:8:18">18</span>  and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief ministers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II Samuel Chapter 9](sa2009)

</div>
