[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index.md) 
[Buddhism](../../bud/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](npj26.md) 
[Next](npj28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

### NOTE ON KANTAN.

A YOUNG man, going into the world to make his fortune, stops at an inn
on the road and there meets with a sage, who lends him a pillow. While
the inn-servant is heating up the millet, the young man dozes on the
pillow and dreams that he enters public life, is promoted, degraded,
recalled to office, endures the hardship of distant campaigns, is
accused of treason, condemned to death, saved at the last moment and
finally dies at a great old age. Awaking from his dream, the young man
discovers that the millet is not yet cooked. In a moment's sleep he has
lived through the vicissitudes of a long public career. Convinced that
in the great world "honour is soon followed by disgrace, and promotion
by calumny," he turns back again towards the village from which he came.

Such, in outline, is the most usual version of the story of Rosei's
dream at Kantan. The earliest form in which we know it is the "Pillow
Tale" of the Chinese writer Li Pi, who lived from 722 to 789 A. D.

It is interesting to see how Seami deals with a subject which seems at
first sight so impossible to shape into a Nō play. The "sage" is
eliminated, and in the dream Rosei immediately becomes Emperor of
Central China. This affords an excuse for the Court dances which form
the central "ballet" of the piece. In the second half, as in *Hagoromo*
and other plays, the words are merely an accompaniment to the dancing.

Chamberlain's version loses by the fact that it is made from the
ordinary printed text which omits the prologue and all the speeches of
the hostess.

The play is usually attributed to Seami, but it is not mentioned in his
Works, nor in the list of plays by him drawn up by his great-grandson in
1524.

It is discussed at considerable length in the *Later Kwadensho*, which
was printed c. 1600. The writer of that book must therefore have
regarded the play as a work of Seami's period. It should be mentioned
that the geography of the play is absurd. Though both his starting-point
and goal lie in the south-western province of Ssechuan, he passes
through Hantan, <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_145.md) which lay in the
northern province of Chih-li.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[155:1](npj27.htm#fr_147.md) In Japanese, Kantan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kantan](npj28.md)
