[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index) 
[Buddhism](../../bud/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](npj55) 
[Next](npj57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

# APPENDIX I

### MODERN NŌ LETTERS FROM JAPAN

THE fact that Nō did not disappear with the overthrow of the Shōgun in
1868 was almost solely due to the efforts of Umewaka Minoru (1828-1909),
whose ancestors had for generations played *tsure* parts in the Kwanze
theatre. When the Mikado was restored in 1868 Kiyotaka, head of the
Kwanze line, was convinced that an art so intimately connected with the
Shōgunate must perish with it, and fled to Shizuoka where the fallen
Shōgun was living in retreat.

Minoru alone remained behind, built himself a theatre <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_217) (1869-70) and "manned his lonely
rampart." When confidence was re-established the other "troupes" soon
returned, so that henceforward five theatres existed, the four of
earlier days and that of Umewaka as a fifth. Minoru was succeeded by his
brilliant sons, Mansaburō and Rokurō, who in 1919 opened a new Umewaka
theatre. As a compliment to the Umewaka family and a tribute to its
services, actors of the three other "schools" took part in the opening
ceremony, but the Kwanzes refused to do so. The dispute turns on the
right to grant certificates of efficiency (*menjō*) which, according to
the Kwanzes, claim, belongs only to Motoshige, the head of their school.
Such certificates have, in fact, been issued successively by Minoru, his
sons and the "renegade" Kwanze Tetsunojō, who sides with the Umewaka.
The validity of Minoru's certificates was, I believe, never disputed
during his lifetime.

To complete this note on modern Nō I include the following extracts from
letters written in 1916 by Mr. Oswald Sickert to Mr. Charles Ricketts.
The sender and recipient of the letters both authorized me to use them,
and for this permission I am deeply grateful. But I wish that Mr.
Sickert, whose memories of Nō must already be a little dimmed, had had
the leisure to write a book of his own on the two dramatic arts that so
deeply interested him in Japan, the Nō and the Kabuki.

 

"It's odd if people describe the Nō performance as a thing that is
simple or unsophisticated or unelaborated. The poem, to begin with,
<span id="page_263">p. 263</span> is not simple, but it has a lyrical
slenderness which wouldn't one would say, lead anybody to think of going
Inch lengths as to distribute its recitation among a chorus and actors,
thus requiring perhaps eleven men to say the words, with two or three
drums and a flute added, and masks and costumes fit for a museum and
angelic properties, and special stages, and attendants to wipe, in this
hot weather, the sweat from immovable hands and from under chins. The
volume of what goes to a performance is large, but it's all cut down
outwardly and bent inwards. As for the recitation, the first necessity
is to eliminate direct expressiveness in the saying of the words. This
seems obvious in the saying of any good poetry. The chorus chants (it's
rather like a Gregorian chant), the actors intone. Both may come to
singing, only not with any tune that might carry you off by itself. Yet,
within the limitations of intoning, with some turns, the actor taking
the women's parts will achieve a pitch of pathetic intensity beyond the
reach of one who sings words to an air that has an existence of its own,
or who recites with meaning. The Nō actor is not directly expressive,
it's always the poem he is doing and throwing you back on.

"I suppose the mask may have originated in a priest's needing to
impersonate an angel or a beautiful girl, or an evil spirit; but its
justification, as against make-up, is absolute for the No purpose. I saw
in the same week *Funa Benkei*, adapted for the theatre, at the Imperial
and on a Nō stage. At the theatre, the part of Shizuka, the mistress
whom Yoshitsune the pursued young lord is persuaded to send away, was
taken by Baikō. It was one of his nights, and all the evening, as three
different women and a ghost, he was so that I shall not again ever so
much care about a beautiful woman taken by a beautiful woman. But in the
theatre version of *Funa Benkei*, Shizuka wore no mask, and when she
pleaded, Baikō, of course, acted; it was charming; but Heaven knows what
*words* he was saying--certainly he was not turning the mind of his
audience in upon any masterpiece of words, rhythm and poetical fancy. He
was acting the situation. The Nō performer, on the other hand, is
intensifying the poet's fancy. From sight of the masks hung up alone, I
had not imagined how well their mixture of vacancy and realism would do
the trick. The masks are not wayward, not extravagant (even the devil's
masks are realistic); but they are undoubtedly masks tied on with a
band, and they effect the purpose of achieving an impassive countenance
of a cast suited to the character--impassive save that, with a good
actor and a mask of a beautiful woman that just hits off the balance
between too much and too little physiognomy, I'd <span id="page_264">p.
264</span> swear that at the right moments the mask is affected, its
expression intensifies, it lives.

"The costumes are tremendous, elaborate, often priceless heirlooms; but
again they are not extravagant, 'on their own,' being all distinctly
hieratic (as indeed is the whole performance, a feature historically
deriving, maybe, from its original source among priests, but just what
one would desiderate if one were creating a Nō performance out of the
blue), because the hieratic helps to create and maintain a host of
restrictions and conventions which good taste alone, even in Japan,
could scarcely have preserved against the fatal erosion of reason.

"The masked actors of beautiful women are stuffed out and by some device
increase the appearance of height, though all go in socks and apparently
with bent knees. The great masked figure, gliding without lifting the
heels, but with all the more appearance of swiftness, to the front of
the stage, is the most ecstatic thing to sit under, and the most that a
man can do to act what people mean by 'poetical' something removed from
reality but not remote, fascinating so that you fall in love with it,
but more than you would care to trifle with. This movement occurs in the
dances which come in some plays--I think always as dances by characters
invited to dance--and which are the best moments for the stranger, since
then alone does the rhythm of the drums become regular enough for him to
recognize it. For that is really. I am sure, the bottom essential of the
Nō representation--the rhythm marked by two drums. For quite long
intervals nothing else occurs. No actor is on the stage, no word is
uttered, but the sharp rap sounds with the thimbled finger as on a box
and the stumpy little thud of the bare hands follows, or coincides, from
the second drum and both players give a crooning whoop. In some way,
which I can't catch, that rhythm surely plays into the measure of the
recitation when it comes and into the movements of the actors when they
come. You know how people everywhere will persist in justifying the
admirable in an art on the ground of the beautiful ideas it presents. So
my friends tell me the drum beats suggest the travelling of the pilgrim
who is often the hinge of the episode. I feel like a Japanese who wants
to know whether a sonnet has any particular number of lines, and any
order for its rhymes and repeats, and gets disquisitions on
Shakespeare's fancy which might also apply to a speech in blank verse.
Anyway, it is ever so evident that the musicians do something extremely
difficult and tricky. The same musicians don't seem to play on through
the three pieces which make <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> a
programme. As they have no book (and don't even look at each other),
they must know the performance by heart, and the stranger's attention is
often called by a friend to one or the other who is specially famous for
his skill. Some one tried to explain the relation between the musicians
and the actors by saying that a perpetual sort of contest went on
between them. Certainly there seems to be in a Nō performance some
common goal which has to be strained for every time, immensely practised
though the performers are. During the dance this drum rhythm speeds up
to a felt time, and at moments of great stress, as when an avenging
ghost swims on with a spear, a third drum, played with sticks, comes in
with rapid regular beats, louder and softer. Sometimes when the beats
are not so followable, but anyway quicker in succession, I seem to make
out that they must be involving themselves in some business of
syncopation, or the catching up and outstripping of a slow beat by a
quicker one. But the ordinary beats are too far apart for me to feel any
rhythm yet.

"The best single moment I have seen was the dance of thanks to the
fisherman who returns to the divine lady the Hagoromo, the robe without
which even an angel cannot fly. It seemed to me an example of the
excellent rule in art that, if a right thing is perhaps rather dull or
monotonous lasting five minutes, you will not cure the defect by cutting
the performance to two and a half minutes; rather give it ten minutes.
If it's still perhaps rather dull, try twenty minutes or an hour. This
presupposes that your limitations are right and that you *are*
exploiting them. The thing may seem dull at first because at first it is
the limitations the spectator feels; but the more these are exploited
the less they are felt to he limitations, and the more they become a
medium. The divine lady returned on her steps at great length and fully
six times after I had thought I could not bear it another moment. She
went on for twenty minutes, perhaps, or an hour or a night; I lost count
of time; but I shall not recover from the longing she left when at last
she floated backwards and under the fatal uplifted curtain. The
movements, even in the dance, are very restricted if one tries to
describe or relate them, but it may be true, as they say, that the Nō
actor works at an intense and concentrated pitch of all his thoughts and
energies, and this tells through his impassive face or mask and all his
clothes and his slow movements. Certainly the longer I looked at the
divine lady, the more she seemed to me to be in action, though sometimes
the action, if indeed there, was so slight that it could be that she had
worked us up to the fine edge of noticing her breathing. There was only
one memorable <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> quick motion in the
dance, the throwing of the stiff deep gauze sleeve over the head, over
the crown with its lotus and bell tassels. My wife has no inclination to
deceive herself with the fascination of what she can't explain, and she
agreed that this was the most beautiful thing that had ever been seen.

"You will see the two drum players in many of the cards. With them sits
the player on the fue, a transverse flute, who joins in at moments with
what often is, if you take it down, the same phrase, though it sounds
varied as the player is not often exactly on any note that you *can*
take down. The dropping of the flute's note at the end of the phrase,
which before always went up, is the nearest approach to the 'curtain' of
the theatre. It is very touching. The poem has come to an end. The
figures turn and walk off. . . .

 

"I have been to more Nō performances, always with increasing recognition
of the importance attaching to the beat, a subject on which I have got
some assurance from an expert kindly directed to me by a friend. From
beginning to end, all the words of every Nō play fit into an 8-beat
measure, and a performer who sat in the dark, tapping the measure while
skilfully weaving in the words, would give a Nō audience the essential
ground of its pleasure. If they are not actually being followed on
books, in which they are printed as ticks alongside the text, the beats
are going on inside (often to the finger tips of) all the people whom I
notice to be regular attendants at Nō performances. I saw a play (not a
good one) at the Kabukiza in which a Nō master refuses a pupil a secret
in his art. For some reason the pupil attaches importance to being shown
the way in this difficult point. The master's daughter takes poison and,
in fulfilment of her dying request, the master consents to show the
pupil. It was no subtlety of gesture, no matter of voice or mask, that
brought things to such straits. The master knelt at his desk, and,
beating with his fan, began reciting a passage, showing how the words
were distributed in the beat.

"It is very seldom that every beat in the eight is marked by a drum. I
don't think this happens save in those plays where the taiko (the real
drum played with sticks) takes part, generally in an important or
agitated dance. In the ordinary course, only certain of the eight beats
are marked by the two players on the tsuzumi (one held on the knee, the
other over the shoulder). The Japanese get much more out of subtleties
of rhythm (or, rather, out of playing hide-and-seek with one simple
rhythm) than we do and are correspondingly <span id="page_267">p.
267</span> lax about the interval between one note and another. I don't
believe a European would have thought of dividing the drum beats between
two instruments. It must be horribly tricky to do. This division gives
variety, for the big tsuzumi yields a clack and the small yields
something between a whop and a thud.

"As for masks, one would have to see very many performances, I fancy,
and think a lot, before one got on to any philosophy of their
fascination and effectiveness. I am always impressed by the realism, the
naturalness of the Nō mask. It is not fanciful in any obvious sense.
After a few performances, I found I knew when a mask was a particularly
good one. My preferences turned out to be precious heirlooms two hundred
years old. In one instance when, for a reason I don't yet understand,
Rokurō changed his mask after death for another of the same cast, I
could not say why the first was better than the second--certainly not
for a pleasanter surface, for it was shining like lacquer; I noticed the
features were more pronounced. We were allowed the thrill of being let
into the room of the mirror, immediately behind the curtain, and saw
Rokurō have his mask fitted and make his entry after a last touch by his
brother Mansaburō. These brothers are Umewaka, belong to the Kwanze
School, and have a stage of their own. I am told that my preference for
them is natural to a beginner and that later one likes as much, or
better, the more masculine style of the Hōshō. At present Nagashi
(Matsumoto), the chief performer of this school (which has a lovely
stage and a very aristocratic clientèle), seems to me like an upright
gentleman who has learned his lesson, while Rokurō and Mansaburō are
actors. Both brothers have beautiful voices. The Hōshō people speak with
a thickness in the throat. But I know it is absurd for me to feel
critical about anything. Moreover, Rokurō and Nagashi would not take the
same parts.

"MIIDERA. A mother, crazed by the straying away of her little boy, is
advised by a neighbour any way to go to Ōtsu, for there stands the
temple of Mii which she had seen in a dream.

"The priests of Miidera, with the little boy among them, are out in the
temple yard viewing the full autumn moon. The attendant tolls the great
bell, whose lovely note wavers long over the lake below. The mad mother
appears on the scene, and, drawn to the bell, makes to toll it. The head
priest forbids her. There follows an argument full of bell lore, and its
effect on troubled hearts. She tolls the bell, and mother and son
recognize each other.

"One of the cards I sent shows the mother tolling the bell. She <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> comes on first in a red flowered robe, is
advised by the neighbour and goes off. The priests come on. The sounding
of the bell is the hinge of everything, a thing of great sentiment. As
it is, in reality, one of the most touching things in the world, it
seemed to me clever that there was no attempt to represent it. On the
contrary, the action centred in the toller, a cheery old gossiper used
to the job, who more or less spat on his hands and said Heave ho as he
swung the imaginary horizontal beam. Only when he had done so, he
continued his Heave ho in a kind of long echoing hum. Then he danced.
The mad mother came on in another dress, very strange, light mauve gauze
over white, no pattern, and the bough in her hand. Why, when the old man
had already tolled, for one's imagination, a non-existent bell in the
real way with a heavy beam, the mother should actually pull a coloured
ribbon tied to an elaborate toy, it is hard to say. But it is right.

"I saw this taken by Mansaburō, who, like his brother Rokurō, has a
beautiful voice. The singing is so unlike ours, that at first one feels
nothing about it. But after three or four performances one notices, and
I recognized the beauty of both these brothers' voices before I knew
they were brothers, or, indeed, that they were noted in any way. In fact
I was still in the state when I had not yet realized that one might come
to discussing the merits of these players hidden in robes and masks as
hotly as one discusses the qualities of the favourites on the ordinary
theatre.

"I don't know if you know about the curtain. Every subsidiary detail of
the performance possesses, I don't know how to say, but a solidity. It's
there. God knows how it came there; but there it is, and it's not a
contrivance, not an 'idea.' The entry to the stage, as you know, is by a
narrow gallery, beside which three little pine-trees rise like
mile-stones. This gallery ends with a single heavy curtain, which does
not rise as ours do, or draw aside or fall as in the Japanese theatre.
It sweeps back, only bellying a little. It is, in fact, as I saw when I
was allowed behind, lifted by poles fixed to the bottom corners.

The poles are raised rapidly by two men kneeling a good way behind.
Suddenly the curtain blows back as by a wind, and the expected figure,
whom you know must be coming or something, i.e. suspense is prepared by
what has already happened, is framed in the opening, and there pauses an
instant. I am speaking, not of the first entry, but of the second one,
when the person who aroused the pilgrim-visitor's curiosity as a
temple-sweeper or a water-carrier, and vanished, reappears as the great
General or princely Prime <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> Minister he
once was. The stage-wait necessitated by the change of costume and mask
is filled in by an interminable sayer of short lines, with the same
number of feet, each line detached from the next as if the speaker were
going from one afterthought to another. He is a bystander--perhaps a
shepherd in one play and a fisherman in another--who knows something,
and dilates on it to fill in time. The musicians lay aside their drums.
Everybody just waits. Up sweeps the curtain, and with the re-entry of
the revealed personage comes the intenser and quicker second part for
which the slow first part was a preparation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[262:1](npj56.htm#fr_219) Or, according to
Fenollosa, bought a stage belonging to an ex-daimyō.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II](npj57)
