[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index) 
[Buddhism](../../bud/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](npj50) 
[Next](npj52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MARI

(THE FOOTBALL)

A FOOTBALLER died at the Capital. When the news was brought to his wife,
she became demented and performed a sort of football-mass for his soul.
"The eight players in a game of football," she declared, "represent the
eight chapters in the Hokke Scripture. If the four goal-posts are added
the number obtained is twelve, which is the number of the Causes and
Effects which govern life. Do not think of football as a secular game."

The play ends with a "[football](errata.htm#6) ballet."

The *Journal* of the great twelfth century footballer, Fujiwara no
Narimichi, contains the following story: "I had brought together the
best players of the time to assist me in celebrating the completion of
my thousandth game. We set up two altars, and upon the one we placed our
footballs, while on the other we arranged all kinds of offerings. Then,
holding on to prayer-ribbons which we had tied to them, we worshipped
the footballs.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

That night I was sitting at home near the lamp, grinding my ink with the
intention of recording the day's proceedings in my journal, when
suddenly the football which I had dedicated came bouncing into the room
followed by three children of about four years old. Their faces were
human, but otherwise they looked like monkeys. "What horrid creatures,"
I thought, and asked them roughly who they were.

"We are the Football Sprites," they said. "And if you want to know our
names--" So saying they lifted their hanging locks, and I saw that each
of them had his name written on his forehead, as follows: Spring Willow
Flower, Quiet Summer Wood, and Autumn Garden. Then they said, "Pray
remember our names and deign to become our *Mi-mori*, 'Honourable
Guardian.' Your success at *Mi-mari*, 'Honourable Football,' will then
continually increase."

And so saying they disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tōru](npj52)
