[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ibr06)  [Next](ibr08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

## CHAPTER VI.

### THE LAWS OF THE LEAGUE.

It is the custom of the officiating orator, while the chant is going on,
to walk to and fro in the council-house. When the hymn is finished, he
breaks out into a passionate invocation to their forefathers, and a
lament over the degeneracy of the times. This, as the French
missionaries inform us, was a favorite topic of Indian speakers. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) Among the Iroquois, who could look back to
an era of genuine statesmen and heroes, the authors of their
constitution, this complaint must have had a peculiar force and
Sincerity. After this appeal to the founders of their state, there
naturally followed an address to the Council and the people, reciting
"all the rules they decided on, which they thought would strengthen the
house." By "the house" was meant, of course, the house of many hearths,
to which they likened their confederacy. The "rules" or laws which
follow require some explanation, that their full value may be
understood.

The first law prescribes that when a chief dies his office shall not
perish with him. This is expressed, in their metaphorical style, by an
injunction that the "horns," or insignia of office, shall not be buried
with the deceased chief, but shall be taken off at his death, to be
transferred to his successor. This rule is laid down in the most urgent
and impressive terms. "We should perhaps all perish if his office is
buried with him in his grave." This systematic transmission of official
rank was, in fact, the vital principle of their government. It was in
this system that their federal union differed

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

from the frequent and transitory confederacies common among the Indian
tribes. In general, among nearly all the tribes, the rank of a chief was
personal. It was gained by the character and achievements of the
individual, and it died with him. Hence their government and policy, so
far as they can be said to have had any, were always uncertain and
fluctuating. No person understood the Indian usages better than
Zeisberger. His biographer has well described the difference which
existed in this respect between the Iroquois and their neighbors. "The
Algonkins," he writes, "knew nothing of regular government. They had no
system of polity; there was no unity of action among them. The affairs
even of a single tribe were managed in the loosest manner." After
briefly, but accurately, delineating the Iroquois system of councils, he
adds: "Thus they became both a political and a military power among the
aborigines; the influence of their league was felt everywhere, and their
conquests extended in every direction." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) The principle that "the chief dies but the
office survives,"--the regular transmission of rank, title and
authority, by a method partly hereditary and partly elective,---was the
principle on which the life and strength of the Iroquois constitution
depended.

Next followed a provision of hardly less importance. The wars among the
Indian tribes arise almost always from individual murders. The killing
of a tribesman by the members of another community concerns his whole
people. If satisfaction is not promptly made, war follows, as a matter
of course. <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) The founders of the
Iroquois commonwealth decreed that wars for this cause should not be
allowed to rise between any of their cantons. On this point a special
charge was given to

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the members of the Great Council. They were enjoined (in the figurative
language employed throughout the Book) not to allow the murder to be
discussed in a national assembly, where the exasperation of the young
men might lead to mischief, but to reserve it for their own
consideration; and they were required as soon as possible to bury all
animosities that might arise from it. The figure employed is impressive.
They were to uproot a huge pine-tree--the well-known emblem of their
League--disclosing a deep cavity, below which an underground stream
would be swiftly flowing. Into this current they were to cast the cause
of trouble, and then, replacing the tree, hide the mischief forever from
their people.

How strictly in spirit these injunctions were followed, and with what
good effect, their whole history shows. A notable instance of the
readiness and ingenuity of their statesmen in finding the means of
public reconciliation in such cases is given in the Jesuit narrative. On
the 24th of July, 1657, a great council was held at Onondaga to consider
three matters, all of special import. First in order was the necessity
of appeasing a threatened quarrel between two of the leading nations,
the Senecas and the Caniengas, caused by a misadventure in which a
Seneca "captain" had been killed by some warriors of the eastern nation.
Next in importance was the reception of a large party of Frenchmen,
headed by Father Francis le Mercier, the Superior of the Jesuit
missionaries in Canada, who had come to form a settlement among the
Iroquois. And, finally, they had to prepare the plan and the means for
an expedition against some hostile tribes. Before the meeting of the
Council the Frenchmen had paid a formal visit to the Seneca delegates,
whom they found "filling the air with songs of mourning" for their
slaughtered chief, and had manifested their sympathy by a present, "to
alleviate the grief" of the mourners. This incident seems to have
suggested to the assembled councillors a method of effecting

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

--or at least of announcing--the desired accommodation, and of paying at
the same time a happy compliment to their reverend visitors. By common
consent the affair was referred to the arbitrament of the Father
Superior, by whom the difference was promptly settled. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) It was not necessary for the politic
senators to inform their gratified visitors that the performance in
which they thus took part was merely a formality which ratified, or
rather proclaimed, a foregone conclusion. The reconciliation which was
prescribed by their constitution had undoubtedly been arranged by
previous conferences, after their custom in such matters, before the
meeting of the Council. <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37) So effective
was this provision of their constitution that for more than three
centuries this main cause of Indian wars was rendered innocuous, and the
"Great Peace" remained undisturbed. This proud averment of their
annalists, confirmed as it is for more than half the period by the
evidence of their white neighbors, cannot reasonably be questioned. What
nation or confederacy of civilized Europe can show an exemption from
domestic strife for so long a term?

The third rule or ordinance which the founders enacted "to strengthen
the house" is of a remarkable character. It relates to the mortuary
usages of the people; and when these are understood, the great
importance of this law becomes apparent. Among the Indians of the
Huron-Iroquois family the ordinary mourning for the dead became
exaggerated into

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

customs of the most extravagant character, exhausting the time and
strength of the warriors, and devouring their substance. The French
missionaries have left us an account of these singular usages among the
Hurons, some of which excited their respect, and others their
astonishment. "Our savages," they wrote, "are in no way savage as
regards the duties which nature herself requires us to render to the
dead. You would say that their efforts, their toils and their commerce
had no other end than to amass the means of honoring the departed. They
have nothing too precious for this object. To this they devote their
robes of skins, their hatchets and wampum, in such profusion that you
would fancy they made nothing of them; and yet these are the riches of
their country. Often in midwinter you will see them going almost naked,
while they have at home, laid up in store, good and handsome robes,
which they keep in reverence for the dead. This is their point of honor.
In this, above all, they seek to show themselves magnificent." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

During the three days that preceded the burial of the dead, or the
removal of his remains to the scaffold, the wails, groans and
lamentations of the relatives and neighbors resounded in the cabin where
he lay. All the stored riches were brought forth and lavished in gifts
"to comfort the mourners." The mourning did not end with the burial; in
fact, it may be said to have then only begun. The "great mourning," as
the missionaries term it, lasted for six days longer, during which the
mourners lay, face downward, upon their mats, and enveloped in their
robes, speechless, or replying only by an ejaculation to those who
addressed them. During this period they had no fire in the house, even
in winter; they ate their food cold, and left the cabin only at night,
and as secretly as possible. The "lesser mourning" lasted for a year,
during which they refrained from oiling their hair, attended public
festivals rarely, and only (in the case of women) when their mothers
ordered, and were forbidden to marry again.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

This, however, was not all. Once in twelve years was held a great
ceremony of reinterment,---a solemn "feast of the dead," as it was
called. Until the day of this feast arrived, funeral rites in honor of
the departed were repeated from time to time, and feasts were held, at
which, as the expression was, their names were revived, while presents
were distributed, as at the time of their death. The great Feast of the
Dead, however, was the most important of all their ceremonies. The
bodies of all who had died in the nation during the preceding twelve
years were then exhumed, or removed from the scaffolds on which they had
been laid, and the festering corpses or cleansed bones were all interred
together in a vast pit lined with robes of beaver skins, the most
precious of all their furs. Wampum, copper implements, earthenware, the
most valued of their possessions, were cast into the pit, which was then
solemnly closed with earth. While the ceremony was going on, rich
presents of all descriptions, the accumulations of the past twelve
years, were distributed by the relatives of the deceased among the
people. In this distribution, strange to say, valuable fur robes were
frequently cut and torn to pieces, so as to be rendered worthless. A
lavish display and reckless destruction of wealth were deemed honors due
to the shades of the departed. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

The Attiwandaronks, or Neutrals, who were the nearest neighbors of the
Iroquois, were still more extravagant in their demonstrations of
affection for their lost friends. They, too, had their feasts of the
dead, at regular intervals. In the meantime the bodies were kept in
their houses as long as possible--"until the stench became intolerable."
Then, when this proximity could no longer be borne, the remains were
left for a period to decay on a scaffold in the open air. After a time
the remaining flesh was removed from the bones,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

which were arranged on the sides of their cabins, in full view of the
inmates, until the great day of general interment. With these mournful
objects before their eyes, renewing constantly the sense of their loss,
the women of the household were excited to frequent outbursts of grief,
expressed in wailing chants. <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

That the Iroquois in ancient times had funeral customs similar to those
of their sister nations, and not less revolting, cannot be doubted. How
these shocking and pernicious usages were abolished at one swoop is
shown by the brief passage in the Book of Rites now under discussion.
The injunctions are laconic, but full of meaning. When a death occurs,
the people are told, "this shall be done." A delegation of persons,
officially appointed for the purpose, shall repair to the dwelling of
the deceased, bearing in a pouch some strands of mourning wampum. The
leader, holding these strands, and standing by the hearth, shall
address, in the name of the whole people, a few words of comfort to the
mourners. And then "they shall be comforted," and shall go on with their
usual duties. To this simple ceremony--supplemented, in the case of a
high chief, by the rites of the "Condoling Council,"--the preposterous
funeral usages, which pervaded the lives and wasted the wealth of the
other nations of this stock, were reduced, by the wisdom of the Iroquois
legislators.

In considering these remarkable laws, it becomes evident that the work
which Hiawatha and Dekanawidah accomplished was really a Great
Reformation, not merely political, but also social and religious. They
desired not only to establish peace among the nations, but also to
abolish or modify such usages and beliefs as in their opinion were
injurious to their

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

people. It is deserving of notice that a divinity unknown, at least in
name, to the Hurons, received special reverence among the Iroquois. The
chief characters of the Huron pantheon were a female deity, Ataensic, a
sort of Hecate, whom they sometimes identified with the moon, and her
grandson, Juskeha, who was sometimes regarded as the sun, and as a
benevolent spirit, but most commonly in their stories appears as a
fantastic and capricious goblin, with no moral attributes whatever. In
the Iroquois mythology these deities are replaced by a personage of a
much higher character. Taronhiawagon, the Holder of the Heavens, was
with them the Master of Life. He declared his will to them in dreams,
and in like manner disclosed future events, particularly such as were
important to the public welfare. He was, in fact, the national god of
the Iroquois. It was he who guided their fathers in their early
wanderings, when they were seeking for a place of abode. He visited them
from time to time, in person, to protect them from their enemies and to
instruct them in useful arts.

It is possible that the Iroquois Taronhiawagon may have been originally
the same as the Huron Juskeha. Some eminent authorities on Indian
mythology are inclined to this opinion. On the other hand, the earlier
Jesuit missionaries give no hint of such identity, and the Tuscarora
historian, Cusick, seems to distinguish between these divine personages.
But whether we accept this view or seek for any other origin, there
seems reason to suppose that the more exalted conception of this deity,
who is certainly, in character and attributes, one of the noblest
creations of the North American mythologies, dates from the era of the
confederacy, when he became more especially the chief divinity and
protector of the Kanonsionni. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[67:1](ibr07.htm#fr_33) See the Relation of
1639, p. 57: "C'est la plainte ordinaire des Capitaines \[of the
Hurons\] que tout se va perdant, à faute de garder les formes et
coustoumes de leurs ancestres."

<span id="fn_34"></span>[68:1](ibr07.htm#fr_34) De Schweinitz: *Life of
Zeisberger*, p. 39.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[68:2](ibr07.htm#fr_35) Relation, of 1636, p.
119. "C'est de la que naissent les guerres, et c'est un sujet plus que
suffisant deprendre les armes contre quelque Village quand il refuse de
satisfaire par les presents ordonnez, pour celuy qui vous aurait tué
quelq'un des vostres."--*Brebeuf, on the Hurons*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[70:1](ibr07.htm#fr_36) "On tint ce grand
conseil le 24 du mois de Juillet, où toutes les Nations remisent entre
les mains d'Achiendase (qui est nostre Père Superieur) le differend
d'entre les Sonnontoüeronnons et les Agnieronnons, qui fut bientot
terminé."--*Relation* of 1657, p. 16.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[70:2](ibr07.htm#fr_37) For a curious instance
of the manner in which questions to be apparently decided by a Council
were previously settled between the parties, see the Life of Zeisberger,
p. 190: "Gietterowane was the speaker on one side, Zeisberger on the
other. These two consulted together privately,---Zeisberger unfolding
the import of the strings \[of wampum which he had brought as
ambassador\] and Gietterowane committing to memory what he said."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[71:1](ibr07.htm#fr_38) Brebeuf, *Relation of*
1636, p. 128.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[72:1](ibr07.htm#fr_39) See the *Relation* for
1636, p. 131. A most vivid and graphic. description of these
extraordinary ceremonies is given in Parkman's admirable work, *The
Jesuits in North America*, Chapter 7.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[73:1](ibr07.htm#fr_40) "Cet object qu'ils ont
devant les yeux, leur renouvellant continuellement le resentiment de
leurs pertes, leur fait ordinairement ietter des cris, et faire des
lamentations tout à fait lugubres, le tout en chanson. Mais cela ne se
fait que par les femmes."--Relation of 1641, p. 73.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[74:1](ibr07.htm#fr_41) See for Taronhiawagon
the Jesuit *Relations* for 1670, pp. 47, 66, and for 1671, p. 17: also
Cusick, pp. 20, 22, 24, 34. For Juskeha, see the *Relation* for 1635, p.
34; 1636, pp. 101-103; 1640, p. 92. Lafitau in one place makes
Tharonhiawagon a deified man, and in another the grandson of
Ataensic.--*Mœurs des Sauvages Ameriquains*, Vol. I, p. 146 and p. 244.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Historical Traditions](ibr08)
