[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ibr14)  [Next](ibr16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

## NOTES ON THE ONONDAGA BOOK.

1 a. *Yo o-nen o-nen wen ni sr te*, "oh now--now this day." It will be
noticed that this address of the "younger brothers" commences in nearly
the same words which begin the speeches of the Canienga book. This
similarity of language exists in other parts of the two books, though
disguised by the difference of dialect, and also by the very irregular
and corrupt spelling of the Onondaga book. To give some idea of this
irregularity, and of the manner in which the words of this book are to
be pronounced, several of these words are sub joined, with the
pronunciation of the interpreter, represented in the orthography of the
Canienga book:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="7" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP">Words as written.
<p>wen ni sr te<br />
ho gar a nyat<br />
son tar yen<br />
na ya ne<br />
o shon ta gon gonar<br />
gar weear har tye<br />
on gwr non sen shen tar qua<br />
ga nen ar ta (or, ga nen ar ti)<br />
kon hon wi sats<br />
o wen gr ge<br />
nar ya he yr genh</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>As pronounced by La Fori.</p>
<p>wennisaate<br />
hogaenyat<br />
sontahien<br />
nayeneh<br />
osontagongona<br />
gawehehatie<br />
ongwanonsenshentakwa<br />
ganenhate<br />
konthonwitsas<br />
ohwengage<br />
nayehiyaken.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

The letter *r*, it will be seen, is not a consonant. In fact, it is
never heard as such in the modern Onondaga dialect. As used by La Fort,
its office is either to give to the preceding vowel *a* the sound which
it has in *father*, or by itself to represent that sound. The *a*, when
not followed by *r*, is usually sounded like *a* in *fate*, but
sometimes keeps the sound of *a* in *far*. The *e* usually represents
the English *e* in *be*, or, when followed by *n*, the *e* in *pen*. The
*i* and *y* are commonly sounded as in the word *city*. The *g* is
always hard, and is interchangeable with *k*. The *t* and *d* are also
interchangeable.

While the syllables in the original are written separately, the words
are not always distinguished; and it is doubtful if,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

in printing, they have in all cases been properly divided. The
translation of the interpreter, though tolerably exact, was not always
literal; and in the brief time at our command the precise meaning of
some of the words was not ascertained. No attempt, therefore, has been
made to form a glossary of this portion of the text.

(Transcribers' Note: In the original printed text there were gaps of one
and two spaces between syllables. In this transcription the gaps of one
space have been replaced with a hyphen and gaps of two spaces by one
space.*--jbh*.}

In the original the addresses of the "younger brothers" are divided into
sections, which are numbered from one to seven, and each of which, in
the ceremony, is called to mind by its special wampum-string, which is
produced when the section is recited. As the first of these sections is
of much greater length than the others, it has been divided in this
work, for the purpose of ready reference, into sub-sections, which are
numbered 1 *a*, 1 *b*, and so on.

1\. *b*. *Nenthaotagenhetak*, "by the ashes," or "near the hearth." The
root-word is here *agenhe*, the Onondaga form of the Canienga word
*akenra*, ashes, which is comprised in the compound form,
*jiudakenrokde*, in Section 27 of the Canienga book. It will be seen
that the spokesman of the younger nations is here complying strictly
with the law laid down in that section. He "stands by the hearth and
speaks a few words to comfort those who are mourning."

1\. *c*. "*It was valued at twenty.*" The interpreters explained that by
"twenty" was understood the whole of their wampum, which constituted all
their treasure. A human life was worth the whole of this, and they
freely gave it, merely to recall the memory of the chief who was gone.
Among the Hurons, when a man had been killed, and his kindred were
willing to renounce their claim to vengeance on receiving due
satisfaction, the number of presents of wampum and other valuables which
were to be given was rigidly prescribed by their customary law. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) From this custom would easily follow the
usage of making similar gifts, in token of sympathy, to all persons who
were mourning the loss of a near relative.

1\. *d*. "Because with her the line is lost." The same sentiment
prevailed among the Hurons. "For a Huron killed by a Huron," writes
Father Ragueneau in the letter just quoted, "thirty gifts are commonly
deemed a sufficient satisfaction. For a woman forty are required,
because, as they say, the women are less able to defend themselves; and,
moreover, they being the source whence the land is peopled, their

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

lives should be deemed of more value to the commonwealth, and their
weakness should have a stronger support in public justice." Such was the
reasoning of these heathen barbarians. Enlightened Christendom has
hardly yet advanced to the mark of these opinions.

1\. *e*. "*Where the grave has been made*," &c. The recital of Father
Ragueneau also illustrates this passage." Then followed," he writes,
"nine other presents, for the purpose, as it were, of erecting a
sepulchre for the deceased. Four of them were for the four pillars which
should support this sepulchre, and four others for the four cross-pieces
on which the bier of the dead was to rest. The ninth was to serve as his
pillow."

2\. "*I will make the sky clear to you.*" In this paragraph the speaker
reminds the mourners, in the style of bold imagery which the Iroquois
orators affected, that continued grief for the dead would not be
consonant with the course of nature. Though all might seem dark to them
now, the sky would be as clear, and the sun would shine as brightly for
them, as if their friend had not died. Their loss had been inevitable,
and equally sure would be the return of the "pleasant days." This
reminder, which may seem to us needless, was evidently designed as a
reproof, at once gentle and forcible, of those customs of excessive and
protracted mourning which were anciently common among the Huron Iroquois
tribes.

3\. "*You must converse with your nephews,*" &c. The "nephews" are, of
course, the chiefs of the younger nations, who are here the condolers.
The mourners are urged to seek for comfort in the sympathy of their
friends, and not to reject the consolations offered by their visitors
and by their own people.

4\. "*And now you can go out before the people, and go on with your
duties,*" &c. This, it will be seen, corresponds with the injunctions of
the Canienga book. (See Section 27, *ante*, [p.
127](ibr12.htm#page_127)): "And then they will be comforted, and will
conform to the great law."

6\. "*Then the horns shall be left on the grave,*" &c. The same figure
is here used as in the Canienga book, Section 23 (ante, [p.
125](ibr12.htm#page_125)). It is evident that the importance of keeping
up the succession of their councillors was constantly impressed on the
minds of the Iroquois people by the founders of their League.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

7\. "*And the next death will receive the pouch.*" The "mourning
wampum," in modern days, is left, or supposed to be left, with the
kindred of the late chief until another death shall occur among the
members of the Council, when it is to be passed on to the family of the
deceased. This economy is made necessary by the fact that only one store
of such wampum now exists, as the article is no longer made. It is
probable that in ancient times the wampum was left permanently with the
family of the deceased, as a memorial of the departed chief.

"*Where the fire is made and the smoke is rising,*" *i.e.*, when you
receive notice that a Condoling Council is to be held in a certain
place. The kindled fire and the rising smoke were the well-understood
images which represented the convocation of their councils. In the
Onondaga book before referred to (ante, [p. 152](ibr14.htm#page_152)) a
few pages were occupied by what might be styled a pagan sermon, composed
of exhortations addressed to the chiefs, urging them to do their duty to
the community. The following is the commencement of this curious
composition, which may serve to illustrate both the words now under
consideration and the character of the people. The orthography is much
better than that of La Fort's book, the vowels generally having the
Italian sound, and the spelling being tolerably uniform. The translation
was made by Albert Cusick, and is for the most part closely literal. The
discourse commences with a "text," after the fashion which the pagan
exhorter had probably learned from the missionaries:--

Naye ne iwaton ne gayanencher:

Onen wahagwatatjistagenhas ne Thatontarho. Onen wagayengwaeten, naye ne
watkaenya, esta netho tina enyontkawaonk. Ne enagenyon nwatkaonwenjage
shanonwe nwakayengwaeten netho titentyetongenta shanonwe
nwakayengwaeten, ne tokat gishens enyagoiwayentaha ne oyatonwetti.

Netho hiya nigawennonten ne ongwanencher ne Ayakt Niyongyonwenjage ne
Tyongwehonwe.

Otti nawahoten ne oyengwaetakwit? Nayehiya, ne agwegeh
enhonatiwagwaisyonk ne hatigowanes,--tenhontatnonongwak gagweki,--oni
enshagotino-ongwak ne honityogwa; engenk ne hotisgenrhergeta, oni ne
genthonwisash, oni ne hongwagsata, oni ne ashonsthateyetigaher ne
ongwagsata; netho niyoh tehatinya agweke sne sgennon enyonnontonnyonhet,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

ne hegentyogwagwegi. Naye ne hatigowanens neye gagwegi honatiiwayenni
sha oni nenyotik honityogwa shanya yagonigonheten. Ne tokat gishen naye
enyagotiwatentyeti, negaewane akwashen ne honiyatwa shanityawenih.

Translation.

"The law says this:"

"Now the council-fire was lighted by Atotarho. Now the smoke rises and
ascends to the sky, that everybody may see it. The tribes of the
different nations where the smoke appeared shall come directly where the
smoke arises, if, perhaps, they have any business for the council to
consider.

"These are the words of our law,--of the Six Nations of Indians.

"What is the purpose of the smoke? It is this--that the chiefs must all
be honest; that they must all love one another; and that they must have
regard for their people,--including the women, and also our children,
and also those children whom we have not yet seen; so much they must
care for, that all may be in peace, even the whole nation. It is the
duty of the chiefs to do this, and they have the power to govern their
people. If there is anything to be done for the good of the people, it
is their duty to do it."

7 *b*. "*Now I have finished! Now show him to me!*" With this laconic
exclamation, which calls upon the nation of the late chief to bring
forward his successor, the formal portion of the ceremony--the
condolence which precedes the installation--is abruptly closed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[167:1](ibr15.htm#fr_71) *Relation* of 1648, p.
80.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note A: The Names of the Iroquois Nations](ibr16)
