[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ibr20)  [Next](ibr22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### NOTE F.

#### THE PRE-ARYAN RACE IN EUROPE AND AMERICA.

\[The following is the concluding portion of an essay on "Indian
Migrations, as evidenced by Language," which was read at the Montreal
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in
August, 1882, and published in the "American Antiquarian" for January
and April, 1883. As the views set forth in this extract have a bearing
on the subjects discussed in the present work, the author takes the
opportunity of reproducing them here for the consideration of its
readers.\]

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

It will be noticed that the evidence of language, and to some extent
that of tradition, leads to the conclusion that the course of migration
of the Indian tribes has been from the Atlantic coast westward and
southward. The Huron-Iroquois tribes had their pristine seat on the
lower St. Lawrence. The traditions of the Algonkins seem to point to
Hudson's Bay and the coast of Labrador. The Dakota stock had its oldest
branch east of the Alleghenies, and possibly (if the Catawba nation
shall be proved to be of that stock), on the Carolina coast.
Philologists are well aware that there is nothing in the language of the
American Indians to favor the conjecture (for it is nothing else) which
derives the race from eastern Asia. But in western Europe one community
is known to exist, speaking a language which in its general structure
manifests a near likeness to the Indian tongues. Alone of all the races
of the old continent the Basques or Euskarians of northern Spain and
southwestern France have a speech of that highly complex and
polysynthetic character which distinguishes the American languages.
There is not, indeed, any such positive similarity, in words or grammar,
as would prove a direct affiliation. The likeness is merely in the
general cast and mould of speech; but this likeness is so marked as to
have awakened much attention. If the scholars who have noticed it had
been aware of the facts now adduced with regard to the course of
migration on this continent, they would probably have been led to the
conclusion that this similarity in the type of speech was an evidence of
the unity of race. There seems reason to believe that Europe--at least
in its southern and western portions--was occupied in early times by a
race having many of the characteristics, physical and mental, of the
American aborigines. The evidences which lead to this conclusion are
well set forth in Dr. Dawson's recent work on "Fossil Man." Of this
early European people, by some called the Iberian race, who were
ultimately overwhelmed by the Aryan emigrants from central Asia, the
Basques are the only survivors that have retained their original
language; but all the nations of southern Europe, commencing with the
Greeks, show in their physical and mental traits a large intermixture of
this aboriginal race. As we advance westward, the evidence of this
infusion becomes stronger, until in the Celts of France and of the
British

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

Islands it gives the predominant cast to the character of the
people. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84)

If the early population of Europe were really similar to that of
America, then we may infer that it was composed of many tribes,
scattered in loose bands over the country, and speaking languages widely
and sometimes radically different, but all of a polysynthetic structure.
They were a bold, proud, adventurous people, good hunters and good
sailors. In the latter respect they were wholly unlike the primitive
Aryans, who, as was natural in a pastoral people of inland origin, have
always had in the east a terror of the ocean, and in Europe were, within
historic times, the clumsiest and least venturous of navigators. If
communities resembling the Iroquois and the Caribs once inhabited the
British islands and the western coasts of the adjacent continent, we may
be sure that their fleets of large canoes, such as have been exhumed
from the peat-deposits and ancient river-beds of Ireland, Scotland, and
France, swarmed along all the shores and estuaries of that region.
Accident or adventure may easily have carried some of them across the
Atlantic, not merely once, but in many successive emigrations from
different parts of western Europe. The distance is less than that which
the canoes of the Polynesians were accustomed to traverse. The
derivation of the American population from this source presents no
serious improbability whatever. <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85)

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

On the theory which seems thus rendered probable, that the early
Europeans were of the same race as the Indians of America, we are able
to account for certain characteristics of the modern nations of Europe,
which would otherwise present to the student of anthropology a
perplexing problem. The Aryans of Asia, ancient and modern, as we know
them in the Hindoos, the Persians, and the Armenians, with the evidence
afforded by their history, their literature and their present condition,
have always been utterly devoid of the sentiment of political rights.
The love of freedom is a feeling of which they seem incapable. To humble
themselves before some superior power--deity, king, or brahmin--seems to
be with them a natural and overpowering inclination. Next to this
feeling is the love of contemplation and of abstract reasoning. A dreamy
life of worship and thought is the highest felicity of the Asiatic
Aryan. On the other hand, if the ancient Europeans were what the Basques
and the American Indians are now, they were a people imbued with the
strongest possible sense of personal independence, and, resulting from
that, a passion for political freedom. They were also a shrewd,
practical, observant people, with little taste for abstract reasoning.

It is easy to see that from a mingling of two races of such opposite
dispositions, a people of mixed character would be formed, very similar
to that which has existed in Europe since the advent of the Aryan
emigrants. In eastern Europe, among the Greeks and Sclavonians, where
the Iberian element would be weakest, the Aryan characteristics of
reverence and contemplation would be most apparent. As we advance
westward, among the Latin and Teutonic populations, the sense of
political rights, the taste for adventure, and the observing, practical
tendency, would--be more and more manifest; until at length, among the
western Celts, as among the American Indians, the love of freedom would
become exalted to an almost morbid distrust of all governing authority.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

If this theory is correct, the nations of modern Europe have derived
those traits of character and those institutions which have given them
their present headship of power and civilization among the peoples of
the globe, not from their Aryan forefathers, but mainly from this other
portion of their ancestry, belonging to the earlier population which the
Aryans overcame and absorbed. That this primitive population was
tolerably numerous is evident from the fact that the Aryans,
particularly of the Latin, Teutonic, and Celtic nations, lost in
absorbing it many vocal elements and many grammatical inflections of
their speech. They gained, at the same time, the self-respect, the love
of liberty, and the capacity for self-government, which were unknown to
them in their Asiatic home. Knowing that these characteristics have
always marked the American race, we need not be surprised when modern
researches demonstrate the fact that many of our Indian communities have
had political systems embodying some of the most valuable principles of
popular government. We shall no longer feel inclined to question the
truth of the conclusion which has been announced by Carli, Draper, and
other philosophic investigators, who affirm that the Spaniards, in their
conquest of Mexico, Yucatan, and Peru, destroyed a better form of
society than that which they established in its place. The intellectual
but servile Aryans will cease to attract the undue admiration which they
have received for qualities not their own; and we shall look with a new
interest on the remnant of the Indian race, as possibly representing
this nobler type of man, whose inextinguishable love of freedom has
evoked the idea of political rights, and has created those institutions
of regulated self-government by which genuine civilization and progress
are assured to the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[188:1](ibr21.htm#fr_84) "The Basque may then be
the sole surviving relic and witness of an aboriginal western European
population, dispossessed by the intrusive Indo-European tribes. It
stands entirely alone, no kindred having yet been found for it in any
part of the world. It is of an exaggeratedly agglutinative type,
incorporating into its verb a variety of relations which are almost
everywhere else expressed by an independent word."--The Basque forms a
suitable stepping-stone from which to enter the peculiar linguistic
domain of the New World, since there is no other dialect of the Old
World which so much resembles in structure the American languages."
Professor Whitney, in "The Life and Growth of Language," p. 258.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[188:2](ibr21.htm#fr_85) The distance from
Ireland to Newfoundland is only sixteen hundred miles. The distance from
the Sandwich Islands to Tahiti (whence the natives of the former group
affirm that their ancestors came) is twenty-two hundred miles. The
distance from the former islands to the Marquesas group, the nearest
inhabited land, is seventeen hundred miles. The canoes of the Sandwich
Islands (as we are assured by Ellis, in his <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> "*Polynesian Researches*,") "seldom exceed fifty feet in
length." In the river-beds of France, ancient canoes have been found
exceeding forty feet in length. One was more than forty-five feet long,
and nearly four feet deep. Seethe particulars in Figuier's "*Primitive
Man*," Appleton's edit., p. 177. See also Prof. D. Wilson's
"*Prehistoric Man*," 2d edit., p. 102, for a full discussion of this
question, with instances of long canoe voyages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caniega Glossary](ibr22)
