[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa05)  [Next](awa07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Laws of Marriage

One of the most interesting of their laws is that of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

marriage, which is founded on the fact that they are divided into
certain great families, all the members of which bear the family name as
a second one in addition to their own. According to Sir George Grey the
principal families are the following:--Ballaroke, Idondarup, Ngatak,
Nagarnook, Nogonyuk, Mongalung, and Narrangur.

Then in different districts the members of these families give a local
name to the one to which they belong, which is understood in that
district to indicate some particular branch of the principal family.

The common local names are:--Didaroke, Gwerinjoke, Maleoke, Waddaroke,
Djekoke, Kotejumino, Namyungo, and Rgungaree.

Strangely enough these family names are common all over the continent.
They are perpetuated and spread throughout the country by two remarkable
laws.

1st.--That children of either sex always take their mother's family
name.

2nd.--That a man may not marry a woman of his own family name.

These singular laws exist among North American Indians, and a well-known
writer reminds me that a similar law of consanguinity was probably
inferred in Abraham's reply to Abimelech (Genesis, chapter xx, verse
12), "And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father,
but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife."

Each Australian native family has its Kobang, or crest. Some animal or
vegetable is taken as the sign,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

and in recognition of this the owner of the Kobang will never kill the
animal to which it refers, should he find it asleep while his family
vegetable can only be gathered under certain condition, and at special
seasons of the year.

Again the North American Indians have a similar custom of taking
animals, at all events, for their coats of arms. Thus the Iroquois have
the turtle, and the Hurons the bear. Among civilized people in Europe,
this custom, as we know, only exists among the upper classes. It is
strange, indeed, to reflect that while the despised blackboy proudly
owns and knows all about the cognizance of his ancestors, in shape
perchance of Squirrel, Bandicoot, Iguana, or Kangaroo, the white
settler's knowledge of heraldry is probably limited to a hazy idea that
the lion, and the unicorn, are somehow connected with Her Majesty, the
Queen.

Another very curious law is that which obliges families connected by
blood, upon the female side, to unite for the common purpose of defence
and avenging crimes. The family name, as I have said, is that of the
mother; and as the father may probably have several wives, all of
different families, so his children are liable to be divided against
each other by deadly feuds. This law would itself prove a hindrance to
any people emerging from a savage state. Thus it will be seen that the
ties of blood-relationship are as nothing, compared with the bond of
family; and one of the effects of a father bearing a different name from
his children, is that a district of country seldom remains; for two
generations successively

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

in the same family. It is not easy to successfully pursue an enquiry
into matters of this kind, because another aboriginal law forbids them
ever to mention the name of a deceased person, male or female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Land Ownership](awa07)
