[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa01)  [Next](awa03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE ABORIGINES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.

REGARDING the aborigines of Western Australia the materials at our
disposal are somewhat scanty.

There exists a theory that all savages are the degraded descendants of
civilized ancestors, If this be true it seems to me that the Australian
Blackboys' period of enlightenment must have existed very far back in
the dim twilight of ancient history.

Theories are, as is well known, apt to outrun facts, so I will not try
my reader's patience by venturing to discuss the question of "rise or
fall," but content myself with the observation that through unnumbered
ages there have been wanderers in the desert, side by side with dwellers
in cities; and our black Australian brother seems to have descended from
the former class. I am likewise led to remark in passing, that our first
parents before the fall did not live in a state of civilization, but of
ignorance--an ignorance which was undoubtedly bliss,--for ever to be
dispelled by the knowledge of good and evil. It was after the fall when
they had to work, and became ashamed of their nude condition, that they

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

bethought them of the most primitive modes of dress. Thus did
civilization and sin enter the world hand in hand, soon after the
creation; and the fig leaf was ancestor to the petticoat.

Among the rudest tribes of men, inhabitants of the wild forests and
deserts, dependent for their food and clothing on the accidental produce
of the earth or spoils of the chase, a form of skull is prevalent, which
is termed prognathous, indicating an extension forward of the jaws. The
facial angle peculiar to this formation is low, and is strongly
developed among the Alfurian or Australian races. They probably spring
from a common source; and the Rev. William Ridley draws attention to the
interesting fact that the blacks themselves always have in idea that
their ancestors came from the north. Then the current of migration has
been ever towards the south and west, and the natives of the
north-eastern corner call it "Kai Dowdai" or Little Country. This seems
strange when New Guinea is known to them as "Muggi Dowdai" or Great
Country. The anomaly is accounted for by their ignorance of the extent
of country they inhabit. To those living near Cape York, and passing to
and fro across the strait dividing New Holland from New Guinea, the low
narrow promontory would seem insignificant compared with the great
mountain ranges of the latter. Then again there is a tradition among
some tribes that their first parents landed on the North West Corner
from Java. All this, however, is at the best but wild conjecture. The
real source from which the Aborigines of Australia

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

originally came is one of those mysteries buried in the impenetrable
depths of an unwritten past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Languages](awa03)
