[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa02)  [Next](awa04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Languages

Although marked differences exist between the various Australian
languages, and also considerable differences in frame and physiognomy
between the various tribes; still the fundamental unity of the
population from Swan River to Botany Bay, and from the Gulf of
Carpentaria to Bass's Straits is generally admitted.

The natives have no written language and our alphabet is totally
inadequate to give expression to some of the sounds which are so volubly
emitted. Then of course there are very many different dialects of which
the following may be said to be the most important:--

Kamilaroi.--This is spoken from the Castlereagh to the Darling and also
on the Namai.

Kailwun.--Spoken on the Barwan, below the junction with the Namai.

Kogai.--This is the dialect in use by all the nations roaming to the
Westward of the Baloune all along the Maronoa and the Congoon.

Rukumbul.--Around Calandoon in Queensland; also on the Weir and
Macintyre.

Dippil.--About Durundrum on the north side of Moreton Bay and thence
towards Wide Bay and the Burnett district in Queensland.

Turrabul.--On the Brisbane River.

Turruwal.--Once spoken by the tribe of Port Jackson, now extinct.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Wodi-Wodi.--In Illawarra, from Wollongong to the Shoalhaven.

Waradgeri.--On the Murrumbidgee and Lauchlan.

Within the boundaries of Western Australia itself there are numerous
dialects spoken. I will only trouble my readers with one illustration.
From King George's Sound to Champion Bay a baby is known as "Good-ja" or
"Nuba"; in the New Norcian District about 80 miles north from Perth, the
word is "Chiengallon"; in the Eastern District it would be called
"Coo-long", and in the neighbourhood of Albany, "Culong". Again at
Banbury, Busselton, and along the coast, the infant becomes "Duaing"; at
Blackwood, "Noba"; at Champion Bay, Victoria District, "Nurellee"; while
at Nickol Bay and in the Roeburn District it rejoices in the cheerful
name of "Yandeeyarrah."

Of the three principal languages used near the settled districts, it may
be said, in common, that they are rendered extremely difficult to
Europeans, by the--to our way of thinking--utter want of method in
arrangement of words in sentences.

An illustration of my meaning may, perhaps, best be given, by submitting
the following exercise, written by the late J. F. Armstrong, Government
Interpreter to the Western Australian tribes.

In English the exercise runs thus:--

"When we first landed here we wanted to be friendly with you natives.
Why were you so angry, why did you spear the white people? We did not
want to kill you or hurt you in any way. Why would you

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

not be friends and let us learn your language? We could shew you how to
use a gun, make nets, boats, and many other things; but you set
yourselves against us for years, until you found that we were the
strongest, otherwise you should have killed us all, as you killed the
other white people."

To put that speech into a possible form, for comprehension for the
blacks, the words would have to be re-arranged and altered thus:--

"We at first here came reside we angry not, and so on; heart good you
to; you why us hate? Why you us with no cause speared? We you in anger
thought not beat, and so on. You why heart bad? We then your language
soon understand correctly. We then you gun good use shew or tell; net
and such like shew tell; boat and such like and numerous nameless things
good and common. But you us angry strong, winter summer many. Then we
really fought. You then said 'Ah! the whites strong.' If we weak you
long ago us kill all others like."

To give the reader an idea of how the words of a native language look
when printed the above may be literally translated thus:--

"Nganneel ingar-ungar nhalla bart nginnaga, nganneel gurrangbroo
na-broo; goordoo gwabba nurang-uk; nurang nyte-juk gnalleekuk dellut-a
bart Nyte-juk nurang nganneel in yaga yaga daanugga? Nganneel nureel en
gurrang Katteege-broo booma-broo na-broo. Nurang nyte-juk Goordoo
wendang? Nganneel garoo nureeluk mya gete kateega met in Nganneel garoo

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

nureel in gun gwabbyne wurrung-un net, na may wurrungun boat ware na
ware nyteby nyteby na gwabbyne ware warra. Garoo nureel nganneeluk
gurrang moordooit. Muggore, Beroke, boola, garoo ngallutta boondojil,
bukadge; mureel garoo wangga-Nah! Djanga moordoit jil. Minning ngullara
babba, nurang goord nganneel in booma, moondang-um-um waame-ma mogin."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Early Accounts](awa04)
