[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa11)  [Next](awa13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Childhood

The childhood of the little black, who has escaped his parents
occasional infanticidal proclivities, is probably the "jolliest"--to use
a word well understood by English school-boys--which can be well
imagined. Do what he will the young hopeful of the wilds is never
chastised. Solomon's injunction about the rod has no place in the code
of the Australian Aboriginal. The boy, who is rather brother than father
to the man, (for the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

men are practically children all their lives) does literally seems right
in his own eyes. The crime of ill-treatment of children is quite unknown
among these poor uncivilized folk, who fortunately for us do not read
English police news, or they might occasionally wonder how their white
brothers and sisters could bc such savages as to maltreat helpless
infants, as is but too common. In wife beating, however, they certainly
manage to hold their own, and thus possibly manage to relieve their
ruffled feelings. Yet am I assured that even this almost universal rule
of marital brutality is not without its exception. White men, who have
lived among the blacks, have assured me that there are henpecked
husbands even in the Australian desert, and they further allege that the
energetic spouses of the victims, instead of exciting disgust among
their neighbours, are looked upon with more than ordinary respect;
being, indeed, in some cases, run away with by men, envious of the
possession of such strong-minded ladies. This is very encouraging.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Music](awa13)
