[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa13)  [Next](awa15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Religion and Mythology

Regarding the religion of the aborigines, the evidence is somewhat
conflicting. Certain it is that their legends are full of evil spirits
and malignant demons which destroy men, women, and children. I think it
is very doubtful if they have any knowledge of a beneficient God or
righteous Creator. "Mullion" is a wicked being who lives in a high tree
and seizes black fellows to devour in a higher abode, for he lives in
the Milky Way.

Then there are some female demons who are much more cruel and
implacable; one particularly who impales the poor black with her spear
and carries him off wriggling and writhing to her den, where she roasts
and eats him.

Then there is a famous creature called the *Bunyip*, a terrific monster,
somewhat like our sea serpent. It is some fifty feet long, with a
snake-like head and inhabits lagoons, rivers and swamps.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

The *Bunnyar* is another variety of the *Bunyip*--,which, as an American
might say,--is a good deal like its horrible brother-demon, only
considerably more so.

From the peculiarities of this evil beast, it is probable that the
stories of the alligators in the North of Australia and in Queensland
have penetrated to other parts of the Continent, and these formed the
model upon which this terrible water demon has been constructed.

Piama, is in some districts a word which signifies the common ancestor
of the black folk, and may bc taken to indicate a beneficient deity, and
there are periodical celebrations and ceremonies which seem to contain
the idea of a supposed conflict between good and evil influences.

It is, of course, unknown whether such religious observances have
crossed over from Asia, or were invented on Australian soil.

Be that as it may, Christianity, the most potent engine of civilization,
has undoubtedly proved its efficacy once more on the history of man in
raising some of these wild natives so that they abhor their old
degrading superstitions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Funerals](awa15)
