[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks17)  [Next](lks19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECOND CONJURATION.

I DO invocate, conjure, and command thee, O thou Spirit N., to appear
and to show thyself visibly unto me before this Circle in fair and
comely shape, without any deformity or tortuosity; by the name and in
the name IAH and VAU, which Adam heard and spake; and by the name Of
GOD, AGLA, which Lot heard and was saved with his family; and by the
name IOTH, which Jacob heard from the angel wrestling with him, and was
delivered from the hand of Esau his brother; and by the name ANAPHAXETON
which Aaron heard and spake and was

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

made wise; and by the name ZABAOTH, which Moses named and all the rivers
were turned into blood; and by the name ASHER EHYEH ORISTON, which Moses
named, and all the rivers brought forth frogs, and they ascended into
the houses, destroying all things; and by the name ELION, which Moses
named, and there was great hail such as had not been since the beginning
of the world; and by the name ADONAI, which Moses named, and there came
up locusts, which appeared upon the whole land, and devoured all which
the hail had left; and by the name SCHEMA AMATHIA which Ioshua called
upon, and the sun stayed his course; and by the name ALPHA and OMEGA,
which Daniel named, and destroyed Bel, and slew the Dragon; and in the
name EMMANUEL, which the three children, Shadrach, Meshach and
Abed-nego, sang in the midst of the fiery furnace, and were delivered;
and by the name HAGIOS; and by the SEAL <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) OF ADONI; and by ISCHYROS, ATHANATOS,
PARACLETOS; and by O THEOS, ICTROS, ATHANATOS; and by these three secret
names, AGLA, ON, TETRAGRAMMATON, do I adjure and constrain thee. And by
these names, and by all the other names of the LIVING and TRUE GOD, the
LORD ALMIGHTY, I do exorcise and command thee, O Spirit N., even by Him
Who spake the Word and it was done, and to Whom all creatures are
obedient; and by the dreadful judgments of GOD; and by the uncertain Sea
of Glass, which is before the DIVINE MAJESTY, mighty and powerful; by
the four beasts before the throne, having eyes before and behind; by the
fire round about the throne; by the holy angels of Heaven; and by the
mighty wisdom of GOD; I do potently exorcise thee, that thou appearest
here before this Circle, to fulfil my will in all things which shall

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

seem good unto me; by the Seal of BASDATHEA BALDACHIA; and by this name
PRIMEUMATON, which Moses named, and the earth opened, and did swallow up
Kora, Dathan, and Abiram. Wherefore thou shalt make faithful answers
unto all my demands, O Spirit N., and shalt perform all my desires so
far as in thine office thou art capable hereof. Wherefore, come thou,
visibly, peaceably, and affably, now without delay, to manifest that
which I desire, speaking with a clear and perfect voice, intelligibly,
and to mine understanding.

IF HE come not yet at the rehearsal of these two first conjurations (but
without doubt he will), say on as followeth; it being a constraint:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[58:1](lks18.htm#fr_33) In some "By the Seat of
Adonai" or "By the Throne of Adonai." In these conjurations and
elsewhere in the body of the text I have given the divine names
correctly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Constraint](lks19)
