[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks22)  [Next](lks24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GREATER CURSE. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

Now, O thou Spirit N., since thou art still pernicious and disobedient,
and wilt not appear unto me to answer unto such things as I would have
desired of thee, or would have been satisfied in; I do in the name, and
by the power and dignity of the Omnipresent and Immortal Lord God of
Hosts IEHOVAH TETRAGRAMMATON, the only creator of Heaven, and Earth, and
Hell, and all that is therein, who is the marvellous Disposer of all
things both visible and invisible, curse thee, and deprive thee of all
thine office, joy, and place; and I do bind thee in the depths of the
Bottomless Abyss there to remain until the Day of Judgment, I say into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

which is prepared for all rebellious, disobedient, obstinate, and
pernicious spirits. Let all the company of Heaven curse thee! Let the
sun, moon, and all the stars curse thee! Let the LIGHT and all the hosts
of Heaven curse thee into the fire unquenchable, and into the torments
unspeakable. And as thy name and seal contained in this box chained and
bound up, shall be choken in sulphurous stinking substances, and burned
in this material fire; so in the name IEHOVAH and by the power and
dignity of these three names, TETRAGRAMMATON, ANAPHAXETON, and
PRIMEUMATON, I do cast thee, O thou wicked and disobedient Spirit N.,
into the Lake of Fire which is prepared for the damnéd and accurséd
spirits, and there to remain unto the day of doom, and never more to be
remembered before the face of GOD, who shall come to judge the quick,
and the dead, and the world, by fire.

THEN the exorcist must put the box into the fire, and by-and-by the
Spirit will come, but as soon as he is come, quench the fire that the
box is in, and make a sweet perfume, and give him welcome and a kind
entertainment, showing unto him the Pentacle that is at tile bottom of
your vesture covered with a linen cloth, saying:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[63:1](lks23.htm#fr_36) In some codices this is
called "the Curse" only; but in one or two the "Spirits' Chain" is
called "the Lesser Curse," and this the "Greater Curse."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Address Unto The Spirit Upon His Coming](lks24)
