[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks34)  [Next](lks36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YE CONSTRAYNTE.

I stir thee up, O spirit N. in all things that are the names of glory
and power of God the Great One who is greater than understanding, Adni
Ihvh Tzabaoth, come forth in the 24th of a moment, let Thy
dwelling-place be empty; apply thyself unto the secret truth and obey my
power: appear unto my eyes, visit us in peace, speaking the secrets of
truth in voice and understanding. I stir thee up and move thee, O spirit
N., in all the names that I have said, and I add these one and six names
wherein Solomon, the lord of the secret wisdom, placed yourselves,
spirits of wrath, in a vessel, Adonai,. Preyai Tetragrammaton,
Anaphaxeton Inessenfatoal, Pathtomon and Itemon: appear before this
circle; obey in all things my power. And as thou art he that obeys not
and comes not I shall be in thy power, O God Most High that liveth for
ever, who is the creator of all things in six days Eie, Saraye, and in
my power in the name Prieumaton that ruleth over the palaces of heaven,
Curse Thee, and destroy thy seat, joy, and power; and I bind thee in the
depth of Abaddon, to

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

remain until the day of judgment whose end cannot be. And I bind thee in
the fire of sulphur mingled with poison and the seas of fire and
sulphur: come, forth, therefore, obey my power and appear before, this
circle. Therefore come forth in the name of the Holy Ones Zabaoth,
Adonai, Amioran. Come! for I am Adonai who stir thee up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ye Potent Invocatioun Of Hys Kynge](lks36)
