[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc03)  [Next](pcc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### III.

### THE SYMBOLISM OF THE ZODIAC

THE Vernal Equinox has all over the ancient world, and from the earliest
times, been a period of rejoicing and of festivals in honor of the
Sungod. It is needless to labor a point which is so well known. Everyone
understands and appreciates the joy of finding that the long darkness is
giving way, that the Sun is growing in strength, and that the days are
winning a victory over the nights. The birds and flowers reappear, and
the promise of Spring is in the air. But it may be worth while to give
an elementary explanation of the *astronomical* meaning of this period,
because this is not always understood, and yet it is very important in
its bearing on the rites and creeds of the early religions. The priests
who were, as I have said, the early students and inquirers, had worked
out this astronomical side, and in that way were able to fix dates and
to frame for the benefit of the populace myths and legends, which were
in a certain sense explanations of the order of Nature, and a kind of
"popular science."

The Equator, as everyone knows, is an imaginary line or circle girdling
the Earth half-way between the North and South poles. If you imagine a
transparent Earth with a light at its very centre, and also imagine the
*shadow* of this equatorial line to be thrown on the vast concave of the
Sky, this shadow would in astronomical parlance

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

 

<span id="img_03700"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="img/03700.jpg" alt="In the above illustration the signs of the Zodiac are represented by a belt which must be imagined at a practically infinite distance among the stars. The Sun is in the centre, and the dotted circle indicates the Earth&#39;s orbit--the numerals 1,2,3, etc., standing for the places of the Earth in the corresponding months of the year. Thus in January, to the observer at (1) the sun would appear to be in &lt;I&gt;Aquarius&lt;/I&gt;; in February he would appear in &lt;I&gt;Pisces&lt;/I&gt;; in March in &lt;I&gt;Aries&lt;/I&gt;; and so forth. The diagram shows these relative positions fairly accurately as they were 3,000 years ago. &lt;I&gt;Now&lt;/I&gt;, owing to " />
<br />
In the above illustration the signs of the Zodiac are represented by a belt which must be imagined at a practically infinite distance among the stars. The Sun is in the centre, and the dotted circle indicates the Earth's orbit--the numerals 1,2,3, etc., standing for the places of the Earth in the corresponding months of the year. Thus in January, to the observer at (1) the sun would appear to be in <em>Aquarius</em>; in February he would appear in <em>Pisces</em>; in March in <em>Aries</em>; and so forth. The diagram shows these relative positions fairly accurately as they were 3,000 years ago. <em>Now</em>, owing to</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

coincide with the Equator of the Sky--forming an imaginary circle
half-way between the North and South celestial poles.

The Equator, then, may be pictured as cutting across the sky either by
day or by night, and always at the same elevation--that is, as seen from
any one place. But the Ecliptic (the other important great circle of the
heavens) can only be thought of as a line traversing the constellations
as they are seen at *night*. It is in fact the Sun's path among the
fixed stars. For (really owing to the Earth's motion in its orbit) the
Sun appears to move round the heavens once a year--travelling, always to
the left, from constellation to constellation. The exact path of the sun
is called the Ecliptic; and the band of sky on either side of the
Ecliptic which may be supposed to include the said constellations is
called the *Zodiac*. How then--it will of course be asked--seeing that
the Sun and the Stars can never be seen together--were the Priests
*able* to map out the path of the former among the latter? Into that
question we need not go. Sufficient to say that they succeeded; and
their success--even with the very primitive instruments they had--shows
that their astronomical knowledge and acuteness of reasoning were of no
mean order.

To return to our Vernal Equinox. Let us suppose that the Equator and
Ecliptic of the sky, at the Spring season, are represented by two lines
*Eq*. and *Ecl*. crossing each other at the point *P*. The Sun,
represented by the small circle, is moving slowly and in its annual
course along the Ecliptic to the left. When it reaches the point *P*
(the dotted circle) it stands on the Equator of the sky, and then for a
day or two, being neither North nor South, it shines on the two
terrestrial hemispheres alike, and day and night are equal. *Before*
that time, when the sun is low down in the heavens, night has the
advantage, and the days are short; *afterwards*, when the Sun has
travelled more to the left, the days triumph over the nights. It will be
seen

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

then that this point *P* where the Sun's path crosses the Equator is a
very critical point. It is the astronomical location of the triumph of
the Sungod and of the arrival of Spring.

How was this location defined? Among what stars was the Sun moving at
that critical moment? (For of course it was understood, or supposed,
that the Sun was deeply influenced by the constellation through which it
was, or appeared to be, moving.) It seems then that at the period when
these questions were occupying men's minds--say about three thousand
years ago--the point where the Ecliptic crossed the Equator was, as a
matter of fact, in the region of the constellation *Aries* or the

<span id="img_03900"></span> ![](img/03900.jpg)

he-Lamb. The triumph of the Sungod was therefore, and quite naturally,
ascribed to the influence of *Aries*. *The lamb became the symbol of the
risen savior, and of his passage from the underworld into the height of
heaven*. At first such an explanation sounds hazardous; but a thousand
texts and references confirm it; and it is only by the accumulation of
evidence in these cases that the student becomes convinced of a theory's
correctness. It must also be remembered (what I have mentioned before)
that these myths and legends were com only adopted not only for one
strict reason but because they represented in a general way the
convergence of various symbols and inferences.

Let me enumerate a few points with regard to the Vernal Equinox. In the
Bible the festival is called the Passover,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

and its supposed institution by Moses is related in Exodus, ch. xii. In
every house a he-lamb was to be slain, and its blood to be sprinkled on
the doorposts of the house. Then the Lord would pass over and not smite
that house. The Hebrew word is *pasach*, to pass. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) The lamb slain was called the Paschal
Lamb. But what was that lamb? Evidently not an earthly lamb--(though
certainly the earthly lambs on the hillsides *were* just then ready to
be killed and eaten)--but the heavenly Lamb, which was slain or
sacrificed when the Lord "passed over" the equator and obliterated the
constellation *Aries*. This was the Lamb of God which was slain each
year, and "Slain since the foundation of the world." This period of the
Passover (about the 25th March) was to be <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) the beginning of a new year. The sacrifice
of the Lamb, and its blood, were to be the promise of redemption. The
door-frames of the houses--symbols of the entrance into a new life--were
to be sprinkled with blood. <span id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30) Later,
the imagery of the saving power of the blood of the Lamb became more
popular, more highly colored. (See St. Paul's epistles, and the early
Fathers.) And we have the expression "washed in the blood of the Lamb"
adopted into the Christian Church.

In order fully to understand this extraordinary expression and its
origin we must turn for a moment to the worship

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

both of Mithra, the Persian Sungod, and of Attis the Syrian god, as
throwing great light on the Christian cult and ceremonies. It must be
remembered that in the early centuries of our era the Mithra-cult was
spread over the whole Western world. It has left many monuments of
itself here in Britain. At Rome the worship was extremely popular, and
it may almost be said to have been a matter of chance whether Mithraism
should overwhelm Christianity, or whether the younger religion by
adopting many of the rites of the older one should establish itself (as
it did) in the face of the latter.

Now we have already mentioned that in the Mithra cult the slaying of a
Bull by the Sungod occupies the same sort of place as the slaving of the
Lamb in the Christian cult. It took place at the Vernal Equinox and the
blood of the Bull acquired in men's minds a magic virtue. Mithraism was
a greatly older religion than Christianity; but its genesis was similar.
In fact, owing to the Precession of the Equinoxes, the crossing-place of
the Ecliptic and Equator was different at the time of the establishment
of Mithra-worship from what it was in the Christian period; and the Sun
instead of standing in the He-lamb, or *Aries*, at the Vernal Equinox
stood, about two thousand years earlier (as indicated by the dotted line
in the diagram), in this very constellation of the Bull. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) The bull therefore became the symbol of
the triumphant God, and the sacrifice of the bull a holy mystery. (Nor
must we

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

overlook here the agricultural appropriateness of the bull as the emblem
of Spring-plowings and of service to man.)

The sacrifice of the Bull became the image of redemption. In a certain
well-known Mithra-sculpture or group, the Sungod is represented as
plunging his dagger into a bull, while a scorpion, a serpent, and other
animals are sucking the latter's blood. From one point of view this may
be taken as symbolic of the Sun fertilizing the gross Earth by plunging
his rays into it and so drawing forth its blood for the sustenance of
all creatures; while from another more astronomical aspect it symbolizes
the conquest of the Sun over winter in the moment of "passing over" the
sign of the Bull, and the depletion of the generative power of the Bull
by the *Scorpion*--which of course is the autumnal sign of the Zodiac
and herald of winter. One such Mithraic group was found at Ostia, where
there was a large subterranean Temple "to the invincible god Mithras."

In the worship of Attis there were (as I have already indicated) many
points of resemblance to the Christian cult. On the 22nd March (the
Vernal Equinox) a pine-tree was cut in the woods and brought into the
Temple of Cybele. It was treated almost as a divinity, was decked with
violets, and the effigy of a young man tied to the stem (cf. the
Crucifixion). The 24th was called the "Day of Blood"; the High Priest
first drew blood from his own arms; and then the others gashed and
slashed themselves, and spattered the altar and the sacred tree with
blood; while novices made themselves eunuchs "for the kingdom of
heaven's sake." The effigy was afterwards laid in a tomb. But when night
fell, says Dr. Frazer, <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) sorrow was
turned to joy. A light was brought, and the tomb was found to be empty.
The next day, the 25th, was the festival of the Resurrection; and ended
in carnival and license (the *Hilaria*). Further, says Dr. Frazer, these
mysteries "seem

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

to have included a sacramental meal and a baptism of blood."

"In the baptism the devotee, crowned with gold and wreathed with
fillets, descended into a pit, the mouth of which was covered with a
wooden grating. A bull, adorned with garlands of flowers, its forehead
glittering with gold leaf, was then driven on to the grating and there
stabbed to death with a consecrated spear. Its hot reeking blood poured
in torrents through the apertures, and was received with devout
eagerness by the worshiper on every part of his person and garments,
till he emerged from the pit, drenched, dripping, and scarlet from head
to foot, to receive the homage, nay the adoration, of his fellows--as
one who had been born again to eternal life and had washed away his sins
in the blood of the bull." <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) And
Frazer continuing says: "That the bath of blood derived from slaughter
of the bull (*tauro-bolium*) was believed to regenerate the devotee for
eternity is proved by an inscription found at Rome, which records that a
certain Sextilius Agesilaus Aedesius, who dedicated an altar to Attis
and the mother of the gods (Cybele) was *taurobolio criobolio que in
aeternum renatus*." <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) "In the
procedure of the Taurobolia and Criobolia," says Mr. J. M.
Robertson, <span id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35) "which grew very popular
in the Roman world, we have the literal and original meaning of the
phrase 'washed in the blood of the lamb'; the doctrine being that
resurrection and eternal life were secured by drenching or sprinkling
with the actual blood of a sacrificial bull or ram." For the
*popularity* of the rite we may quote Franz Cumont, who says <span
id="fr_36"></span>[4](#fn_36):--"Cette douche sacrée (*taurobolium*)
paraît avoir été administrée en Cappadoce dans un grand nombre de
sanctuaires,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

et en particulier dans ceux de Mâ la grande divinité indigène, et dans
ceux de Anahita."

Whether Mr. Robertson is right in ascribing to the priests (as he
appears to do) so materialistic a view of the potency of the actual
blood is, I should say, doubtful. I do not myself see that there is any
reason for supposing that the priests of Mithra or Attis regarded
baptism by blood very differently from the way in which the Christian
Church has generally regarded baptism by water--namely, as a *symbol* of
some inner regeneration. There may certainly have been a little more of
the *magical* view and a little less of the symbolic, in the older
religions; but the difference was probably on the whole more one of
degree than of essential disparity. But however that may be, we cannot
but be struck by the extraordinary analogy between the tombstone
inscriptions of that period "born again into eternity by the blood of
the Bull or the Ram," and the corresponding texts in our graveyards
to-day. F. Cumont in his elaborate work, *Textes et Monuments relatifs
aux Mystères de Mithra* (2 vols., Brussels, 1899) gives a great number
of texts and epitaphs of the same character as that above-quoted, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) and they are well worth studying by those
interested in the subject. Cumont, it may be noted (vol. i, p. 305),
thinks that the story of Mithra and the slaying of the Bull must have
originated among some pastoral people to whom the bull was the source of
all life. The Bull in heaven--the symbol of the triumphant Sungod--and
the earthly bull, sacrificed for the good of humanity were one and the
same; the god, in fact, *sacrificed himself or his representative*. And
Mithra was the hero who first won this conception of divinity for
mankind--though of course it is in essence quite similar to the
conception put forward by the Christian Church.

As illustrating the belief that the Baptism by Blood was accompanied by
a real regeneration of the devotee, Frazer

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

quotes an ancient writer <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) who says
that for some time after the ceremony the fiction of a new birth was
kept up by dieting the devotee on *milk*, like a new-born babe. And it
is interesting in that connection to find that even in the present day a
diet of *absolutely nothing but milk* for six or eight weeks is by many
doctors recommended as the only means of getting rid of deep-seated
illnesses and enabling a patient's organism to make a completely new
start in life.

"At Rome," he further says (p. 230), "the new birth and the remission of
sins by the shedding of bull's blood appear to have been carried out
above all at the sanctuary of the Phrygian Goddess (Cybele) on the
Vatican Hill, at or near the spot where the great basilica of St.
Peter's now stands; for many inscriptions relating to the rites were
found when the church was being enlarged in 1608 or 1609. From the
Vatican as a centre," he continues, "this barbarous system of
superstition seems to have spread to other parts of the Roman empire.
Inscriptions found in Gaul and Germany prove that provincial sanctuaries
modelled their ritual on that of the Vatican."

It would appear then that at Rome in the quiet early days of the
Christian Church, the rites and ceremonials of Mithra and Cybele,
probably much intermingled and blended, were exceedingly popular. Both
religions had been recognized by the Roman State, and the Christians,
persecuted and despised as they were, found it hard to make any headway
against them--the more so perhaps because the Christian doctrines
appeared in many respects to be merely faint *replicas* and copies of
the older creeds. Robertson maintains <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) that a he-lamb was sacrificed in the
Mithraic mysteries, and he quotes Porphyry as saying <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) that "a place near the equinoctial circle
was assigned to Mithra as an appropriate seat; and on this account he

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

bears the sword of the Ram \[Aries\] which is a sign of Mars \[Ares\]."
Similarly among the early Christians, it is said, a ram or lamb was
sacrificed in the Paschal mystery.

Many people think that the association of the Lamb-god with the Cross
arose from the fact that the constellation *Aries* at that time *was* on
the heavenly cross (the crossways of the Ecliptic and Equator--see
diagram, ch. iii, [p. 39](#page_39) *supra*), and in the very place
through which the Sungod had to pass just before his final triumph. And
it is curious to find that Justin Martyr in his *Dialogue with
Trypho* <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) (a Jew) alludes to an old
Jewish practice of roasting a Lamb on spits arranged in the form of a
Cross. "The lamb," he says, meaning apparently the Paschal lamb, "is
roasted and dressed up in the form of a cross. For one spit is
transfixed right through the lower parts up to the head, and one across
the back, to which are attached the legs \[forelegs\] of the lamb."

To-day in Morocco at the festival of Eid-el-Kebir, corresponding to the
Christian Easter, the Mohammedans sacrifice a young ram and hurry it
still bleeding to the precincts of the Mosque, while at the same time
every household slays a lamb, as in the Biblical institution, for its
family feast.

 

But it will perhaps be said, "You are going too fast and proving too
much. In the anxiety to show that the Lamb-god and the sacrifice of the
Lamb were honored by the devotees of Mithra and Cybele in the Rome of
the Christian era, you are forgetting that the sacrifice of the Bull and
the baptism in bull's blood were the salient features of the Persian and
Phrygian ceremonials, some centuries earlier. How can you reconcile the
existence side by side of divinities belonging to such different
periods, or ascribe them both to an astronomical origin?" The answer is
simple enough. As I have explained before, the Precession

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of the Equinoxes caused the Sun, at its moment of triumph over the
powers of darkness, to stand at one period in the constellation of the
Bull, and at a period some two thousand years later in the constellation
of the Ram. It was perfectly natural therefore that a change in the
sacred symbols should, in the course of time, take place; yet perfectly
natural also that these symbols, having once be n consecrated and
adopted, should continue to be honored and clung to long after the time
of their astronomical appropriateness had passed, and so to be found
side by side in later centuries. The devotee of Mithra or Attis on the
Vatican Hill at Rome in the year 200 A.D. probably had as little notion
or comprehension of the real origin of the sacred Bull or Ram which he
adored, as the Christian in St. Peter's to-day has of the origin of the
Lamb-god whose vicegerent on earth is the Pope.

It is indeed easy to imagine that the change from the worship of the
Bull to the worship of the Lamb which undoubtedly took place among
various peoples as time went on, was only a ritual change initiated by
the priests in order to put on record and harmonize with the
astronomical alteration. Anyhow it is curious that while Mithra in the
early times was specially associated with the bull, his association with
the lamb belonged more to the Roman period. Somewhat the same happened
in the case of Attis. In the Bible we read of the indignation of Moses
at the setting up by the Israelites of a Golden Calf, *after* the
sacrifice of the ram-lamb had been instituted--as if indeed the
rebellious people were returning to the earlier cult of Apis which they
ought to have left behind them in Egypt. In Egypt itself, too, we find
the worship of Apis, as time went on, yielding place to that of the
Ram-headed god Amun, or Jupiter Ammon. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) So that both

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

from the Bible and from Egyptian history we may conclude that the
worship of the Lamb or Ram succeeded to the worship of the Bull.

Finally it has been pointed out, and there may be some real connection
in the coincidence, that in the quite early years of Christianity the
*fish* came in as an accepted symbol of Jesus Christ. Considering that
after the domination of *Taurus* and *Aries*, the Fish (*Pisces*) comes
next in succession as the Zodiacal sign for the Vernal Equinox, and is
now the constellation in which the Sun stands at that period, it seems
not impossible that the astronomical change has been the cause of the
adoption of this new symbol.

Anyhow, and allowing for possible errors or exaggerations, it becomes
clear that the travels of the Sun through the belt of constellations
which forms the Zodiac must have had, from earliest times, a profound
influence on the generation of religious myths and legends. To say that
it was the only influence would certainly be a mistake. Other causes
undoubtedly contributed. But it was a main and important influence. The
origins of the Zodiac are obscure; we do not know with any certainty the
reasons why the various names were given to its component sections, nor
can we measure the exact antiquity of these names; but--pre-supposing
the names of the signs as once given--it is not difficult to imagine the
growth of legends connected with the Sun's course among them.

Of all the ancient divinities perhaps Hercules is the one whose rôle as
a Sungod is most generally admitted. The helper of gods and men, a
mighty Traveller, and invoked everywhere as the *Saviour*, his labors
for the good of the world became ultimately defined and systematized as
twelve and corresponding in number to the signs of the Zodiac. It is
true that this systematization only took place at a late period,
probably in Alexandria; also that the identification of some of the
Labors with the actual signs as we have them at present is not always
clear. But

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

considering the wide prevalence of the Hercules myth over the ancient
world and the very various astronomical systems it must have been
connected with in its origin, this lack of exact correspondence is
hardly to be wondered at.

The Labors of Hercules which chiefly interest us are: (1) The capture of
the Bull, (2) the slaughter of the Lion, (3) the destruction of the
Hydra, (4) of the Boar, (5) the cleansing of the stables of Augeas, (6)
the descent into Hades and the taming of Cerberus. The first of these is
in line with the Mithraic conquest of the Bull; the Lion is of course
one of the most prominent constellations of the Zodiac, and its conquest
is obviously the work of a Saviour of mankind; while the last four
labors connect themselves very naturally with the Solar conflict in
winter against the powers of darkness. The Boar (4) we have seen already
as the image of Typhon, the prince of darkness; the Hydra (3) was said
to be the offspring of Typhon; the descent into Hades (6)--generally
associated with Hercules' struggle with and victory over Death--links on
to the descent of the Sun into the underworld, and its long and doubtful
strife with the forces of winter; and the cleansing of the stables of
Augeas (5) has the same signification. It appears in fact that the
*stables of Augeas* was another name for the sign of *Capricorn* through
which the Sun passes at the Winter solstice <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)--the stable of course being an underground
chamber--and the myth was that there, in this lowest tract and backwater
of the Ecliptic all the malarious and evil influences of the sky were
collected, and the Sungod came to wash them away (December was the
height of the rainy season in Judæa) and cleanse the year towards its
rebirth.

It should not be forgotten too that even as a child in the cradle
Hercules slew two serpents sent for his destruction--the serpent and the
scorpion as autumnal constellations figuring always as enemies of the
Sungod--to which

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

may be compared the power given to his disciples by Jesus <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) "to tread on serpents and scorpions."
Hercules also as a Sungod compares curiously with Samson (mentioned
above, ii), but we need not dwell on all the elaborate analogies that
have been traced <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) between these two
heroes.

 

The Jesus-story, it will now be seen, has a great number of
correspondences with the stories of former Sungods and with the actual
career of the Sun through the heavens--so many indeed that they cannot
well be attributed to mere coincidence or even to the blasphemous wiles
of the Devil! Let us enumerate some of these. There are (1) the birth
from a Virgin mother; (2) the birth in a stable (cave or underground
chamber); and (3) on the 25th December (just after the winter solstice).
There is (4) the Star in the East (Sirius) and (5) the arrival of the
Magi (the "Three Kings"); there is (6) the threatened Massacre of the
Innocents, and the consequent flight into a distant country (told also
of Krishna and other Sungods). There are the Church festivals of (7)
Candlemas (2nd February), with processions of candles to symbolize the
growing light; of (8) Lent, or the arrival of Spring; of (9) Easter Day
(normally on the 25th March) to celebrate the crossing of the Equator by
the Sun; and (10) simultaneously the outburst of lights at the Holy
Sepulchre at Jerusalem. There is (11) the Crucifixion and death of the
Lamb-God, on Good Friday, three days before Easter; there are (12) the
nailing to a tree, (13) the empty grave, (14) the glad Resurrection (as
in the cases of Osiris, Attis and others); there are (15) the twelve
disciples (the Zodiacal signs); and (16) the betrayal by one of the
twelve. Then later there is (17) Midsummer Day, the 24th June, dedicated
to the Nativity of John the Baptist, and corresponding

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

to Christmas Day; there are the festivals of (18) the Assumption of the
Virgin (15th August) and of (19) the Nativity of the Virgin (8th
September), corresponding to the movement of the god through *Virgo*;
there is the conflict of Christ and his disciples with the autumnal
asterisms, (20) the *Serpent* and the *Scorpion*; and finally there is
the curious fact that the Church (21) dedicates the very day of the
winter solstice (when any one may very naturally doubt the rebirth of
the Sun) to St. Thomas, who doubted the truth of the Resurrection!

These are some of, and by no means all, the coincidences in question.
But they are sufficient, I think, to prove--even allowing for possible
margins of error--the truth of our general contention. To go into the
parallelism of the careers of Krishna, the Indian Sungod, and Jesus
would take too long; because indeed the correspondence is so
extraordinarily close and elaborate. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)
I propose, however, at the close of this chapter, to dwell now for a
moment on the Christian festival of the Eucharist, partly on account of
its connection with the derivation from the astronomical rites and
Nature-celebrations already alluded to, and partly on account of the
light which the festival generally, whether Christian or Pagan, throws
on the origins of Religious Magic--a subject I shall have to deal with
in the next chapter.

I have already (Ch. II, [p. 25](pcc03.htm#page_25)) mentioned the
Eucharistic rite held in commemoration of Mithra, and the indignant
ascription of this by Justin Martyr to the wiles of the Devil. Justin
Martyr clearly had no doubt about the resemblance of the Mithraic to the
Christian ceremony. A Sacramental meal, as mentioned a few pages back,
seems to have been held by the worshipers of Attis <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) in commemoration of their god; and the
'mysteries' of the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pagan cults generally appear to have included
rites--sometimes half-savage, sometimes more aesthetic--in which a
dismembered animal was eaten, or bread and wine (the spirits of the Corn
and the Vine) were consumed, as representing the body of the god whom
his devotees desired to honor. But the best example of this practice is
afforded by the rites of Dionysus, to which I will devote a few lines.
Dionysus, like other Sun or Nature deities, was born of a Virgin (Semele
or Demeter) untainted by any earthly husband; and born on the 25th.
December. He was nurtured in a Cave, and even at that early age was
identified with the Ram or Lamb, into whose form he was for the time
being changed. At times also he was worshiped in the form of a
Bull. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) He travelled far and wide; and
brought the great gift of wine to mankind. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49) He was called Liberator, and Saviour. His
grave "was shown at Delphi in the inmost shrine of the temple of Apollo.
Secret offerings were brought thither, while the women who were
celebrating the feast woke up the new-born god. . . . Festivals of this
kind in celebration of the extinction and resurrection of the deity were
held (by women and girls only) amid the mountains at night, every third
year, about the time of the shortest day. The rites, intended to express
the excess of grief and joy at the death and reappearance of the god,
were wild even to savagery, and the women who performed them were hence
known by the expressive names of *Bacchae*, *Maenads*, and *Thyiades*.
They wandered through woods and mountains, their flying locks crowned
with ivy or snakes, brandishing wands and torches, to the hollow sounds
of the drum, or the shrill notes of the flute, with wild dances and
insane cries and jubilation. The victims of the sacrifice,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

oxen, goats, even fawns and roes from the forest were killed, torn to
pieces, and eaten raw. This in imitation of the treatment of Dionysus by
the Titans" <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)--who it was supposed had
torn the god in pieces when a child.

Dupuis, one of the earliest writers (at the beginning of last century)
on this subject, says, describing the mystic rites of Dionysus: <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) "The sacred doors of the Temple in which
the initiation took place were opened only once a year, and no stranger
might ever enter. Night lent to these august mysteries a veil which was
forbidden to be drawn aside--for whoever it might be. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52) It was the sole occasion for the
representation of the passion of Bacchus \[Dionysus\] dead, descended
into hell, and rearisen--in imitation of the representation of the
sufferings of Osiris which, according to Herodotus, were commemorated at
Sais in Egypt. It was in that place that the partition took place of
*the body of the god*, <span id="fr_53"></span>[4](#fn_53) which was
then eaten--the ceremony, in fact, of which our Eucharist is only a
reflection; whereas in the mysteries of Bacchus actual raw flesh was
distributed, which each of those present had to consume in commemoration
of the death of Bacchus dismembered by the Titans, and whose passion, in
Chios and Tenedos, was renewed each year by the sacrifice of a man who
represented the god. <span id="fr_54"></span>[5](#fn_54) Possibly it is
this last fact which made people believe that the Christians (whose hoc
est corpus meum and sharing of an Eucharistic meal were no more than a
shadow of a more ancient rite) did really sacrifice a child and devour
its limbs."

 

That Eucharistic rites were very very ancient is plain from the
Totem-sacraments of savages; and to this subject we shall now turn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[40:1](pcc04.htm#fr_28) It is said that *pasach*
sometimes means not so much to pass over, as to hover over and so
protect. Possibly both meanings enter in here. See Isaiah xxxi. 5.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[40:2](pcc04.htm#fr_29) See Exodus xii. 1.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[40:3](pcc04.htm#fr_30) It is even said (see
*The Golden Bough*, vol. iii, 185) that the doorways of houses and
temples in Peru were at the Spring festival daubed with blood of the
first-born children--commuted afterwards to the blood of the sacred
animal, the Llama. And as to Mexico, Sahagun, the great Spanish
missionary, tells us that it was a custom of the people there to "smear
the outside of their houses and doors with blood drawn from their own
ears and ankles, in order to propitiate the god of Harvest"
(Kingsborough's *Mexican Antiquities*, vol. vi, p. 235).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[41:1](pcc04.htm#fr_31) With regard to this
point, see an article in the *Nineteenth Century* for September 1900, by
E. W. Maunder of the Greenwich Observatory on "The Oldest Picture Book"
(the Zodiac). Mr. Maunder calculates that the Vernal Equinox was in the
centre of the Sign of the Bull 5,000 years ago. \[It would therefore be
in the centre of Aries 2,845 years ago--allowing 2,155 years for the
time occupied in passing from one Sign to another.\] At the earlier
period the Summer solstice was in the centre of Leo, the Autumnal
equinox in the centre of Scorpio, and the Winter solstice in the centre
of Aquarius--corresponding roughly, Mr. Maunder points out, to the
positions of the four "Royal Stars," Aldebaran, Regulus, Antares and
Fomalhaut.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[42:1](pcc04.htm#fr_32) See *Adonis, Attis and
Osiris*, Part IV of *The Golden Bough*, by J. G. Frazer, p. 229.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[43:1](pcc04.htm#fr_33) Adonis, *Attis and
Osiris*, p. 229. References to Prudentius, and to Firmicus Maternus, *De
errore* 28. 8.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[43:2](pcc04.htm#fr_34) That is, "*By the
slaughter of the bull and the slaughter of the ram born again into
eternity*."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[43:3](pcc04.htm#fr_35) *Pagan Christs*, p. 315.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[43:4](pcc04.htm#fr_36) *Mystères de Mithra,
Bruxelles*, 1902, p. 153.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[44:1](pcc04.htm#fr_37) See vol. i, pp. 334 ff.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[45:1](pcc04.htm#fr_38) Sallustius philosophus.
See *Adonis, Attis and Osiris*, note, p. 229.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[45:2](pcc04.htm#fr_39) *Pagan Christs*, p. 336.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[45:3](pcc04.htm#fr_40) *De Antro*, xxiv.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[46:1](pcc04.htm#fr_41) Ch. xl.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[47:1](pcc04.htm#fr_42) Tacitus (*Hist*. v. 4)
speaks of ram-sacrifice by the Jews in honor of Jupiter Ammon. See also
Herodotus (ii. 42) on the same in Egypt.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[49:1](pcc04.htm#fr_43) See diagram of Zodiac,
*supra*, [p. 37](#page_37).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[50:1](pcc04.htm#fr_44) Luke x. 19.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[50:2](pcc04.htm#fr_45) See Doane's *Bible
Myths*, ch. viii, (New York, 1882.)

<span id="fn_46"></span>[51:1](pcc04.htm#fr_46) See Robertson's
*Christianity and Mythology*, Part II, pp. 129-302; also Doane's *Bible
Myths*, ch. xxviii, p. 278.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[51:2](pcc04.htm#fr_47) See Frazer's *Golden
Bough*, Part IV, p. 229.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[52:1](pcc04.htm#fr_48) *The Golden Bough*, Part
II, Book II, p. 164.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[52:2](pcc04.htm#fr_49) "I am the *true* Vine,"
says the Jesus of the fourth gospel, perhaps with an implicit and
hostile reference to the cult of Dionysus--in which Robertson suggests
(*Christianity and Mythology*, p. 357) there was a ritual miracle of
turning water into wine.)

<span id="fn_50"></span>[53:1](pcc04.htm#fr_50) See art. Dionysus.
*Dictionary of Classical Antiquities*, Nettleship and Sandys 3rd edn.,
London, 1898).

<span id="fn_51"></span>[53:2](pcc04.htm#fr_51) See Charles F. Dupuis,
"Traité des Mystères," ch. i.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53:3](pcc04.htm#fr_52) Pausan, *Corinth*, ch.
37.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53:4](pcc04.htm#fr_53) Clem, Prot. *Eur.
Bacch*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[53:5](pcc04.htm#fr_54) See Porphyry, *De
Abstinentia*, lii, § 56.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Totem-sacraments And Eucharists](pcc05)
