[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc08)  [Next](pcc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### VIII.

### PAGAN INITIATIONS AND THE SECOND BIRTH

We have suggested in the last chapter how the conceptions of Sin and
Sacrifice coming down to us from an extremely remote past, and embodied
among the various peoples of the world sometimes in crude and
bloodthirsty rites, sometimes in symbols and rituals of a gentler and
more gracious character, descended at last into Christianity and became
a part of its creed and of the creed of the modern world. On the whole
perhaps we may trace a slow amelioration in this process and may flatter
ourselves that the Christian centuries exhibit a more philosophical
understanding of what Sin is, and a more humane conception of what
Sacrifice *should* be, than the centuries preceding. But I fear that any
very decided statement or sweeping generalization to that effect would
be--to say the least--rash. Perhaps there *is* a very slow amelioration;
but the briefest glance at the history of the Christian churches--the
horrible rancours and revenges of the clergy and the sects against each
other in the fourth and fifth centuries A.D. the heresy-hunting crusades
at Beziers and other places and the massacres of the Albigenses in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the witch-findings and burnings of the
sixteenth and seventeenth, the hideous science-urged and bishop-blessed
warfare of the twentieth--horrors fully as great as any we can charge to
the account

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of the Aztecs or the Babylonians--must give us pause. Nor must we forget
that if there is by chance a substantial amelioration in our modern
outlook with regard to these matters the same had begun already before
the advent of Christianity and can by no means be ascribed to any
miraculous influence of that religion. Abraham was prompted to slay a
ram as a substitute for his son, long before the Christians were thought
of; the rather savage Artemis of the old Greek rites was (according to
Pausanias) <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) honored by the yearly
sacrifice of a perfect boy and girl, but later it was deemed sufficient
to draw a knife across their throats as a symbol, with the result of
spilling only a few drops f their blood, or to flog the boys (with the
same result) upon her altar. Among the Khonds in old days many victims
(*meriahs*) were sacrificed to the gods, "but in time the man was
replaced by a horse, the horse by a bull, the bull by a ram, the ram by
a kid, the kid by fowls, and the fowls by many flowers." <span
id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131) At one time, according to the
Yajur-Veda, there was a festival at which one hundred and twenty-five
victims, men and women, boys and girls, were sacrificed; "but reform
supervened, and now the victims were bound as before to the stake, but
afterwards amid litanies to the immolated (god) Narayana, the
sacrificing priest brandished a knife and--severed the bonds of the
captives." <span id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_132) At the Athenian
festival of the Thargelia, to which I referred in the last chapter, it
appears that the victims, in later times, instead of being slain, were
tossed from a height into the sea, and after being rescued were then
simply banished; while at Leucatas a similar festival the fall of the
victim was graciously broken by tying feathers and even living birds to
his body. <span id="fr_133"></span>[4](#fn_133)

With the lapse of time and the general progress of mankind,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

we may, I think, perceive some such slow ameliorations in the matter of
the brutality and superstition of the old religions. How far any later
ameliorations were due to the direct influence of Christianity might be
a difficult question; but what I think we can clearly see--and what
especially interests us here--is that in respect to its main religious
ideas, and the matter underlying them (exclusive of the *manner* of
their treatment, which necessarily has varied among different peoples)
Christianity is of one piece with the earlier pagan creeds and is for
the most part a re-statement and renewed expression of world-wide
doctrines whose first genesis is lost in the haze of the past, beyond
all recorded history.

I have illustrated this view with regard to the doctrine of Sin and
Sacrifice. Let us take two or three other illustrations. Let us take the
doctrine of Re-birth or Regeneration. The first few verses of St. John's
Gospel are occupied with the subject of salvation through rebirth or
regeneration. "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God." . . . "Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God." Our Baptismal Service begins by saying
that "forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin; and that our
Saviour Christ saith, None can enter into the kingdom of God except he
be regenerate and born anew of water and the Holy Ghost"; therefore it
is desirable that this child should be baptized, "received into Christ's
Holy Church, and be made a lively member of the same." That, is to say,
there is one birth, after the flesh, but a second birth is necessary, a
birth after the Spirit and into the Church of Christ. Our Confirmation
Service is simply a service repeating and confirming these views, at an
age (fourteen to sixteen or so) when the boy or girl is capable of
understanding what is being done.

But our Baptismal and Confirmation ceremonies combined are clearly the
exact correspondence and parallel

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of the old pagan ceremonies of Initiation, which are or have been
observed in almost every primitive tribe over the world. "The rite of
the second birth," says Jane Harrison, <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) "is widespread, universal, over half the
savage world. With the savage to be twice-born is the rule. By his first
birth he comes into the world; by his second he is born into his tribe.
At his first birth he belongs to his mother and the women-folk; at his
second he becomes a full-fledged man and passes into the society of the
warriors of his tribe." . . . "These rites are very various, but they
all point to one moral, that the former things are passed away and that
the new-born man has entered upon a new life. Simplest of all, and most
instructive, is the rite practised by the Kikuyu tribe of British East
Africa, who require that every boy, just before circumcision, must be
born again. The mother stands up with the boy crouching at her feet; she
pretends to go through all the labour pains, and the boy on being reborn
cries like a babe and is washed." <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135)

Let us pause for a moment. An Initiate is of course one who "enters in."
He enters into the Tribe; he enters into the revelation of certain
Mysteries; he becomes an associate of a certain Totem, a certain God; a
member of a new Society, or Church--a church of Mithra, or Dionysus or
Christ. To do any of these things he must be born again; be must die to
the old life; he must pass through ceremonials which symbolize the
change. One of these ceremonials is washing. As the new-born babe is
washed, so must the new-born initiate be washed; and as by primitive man
(and not without reason) *blood* was considered the most vital and
regenerative of fluids, the very elixir of life, so in earliest times it
was common to wash the initiate with blood. If the initiate had to be
born anew, it would seem reasonable to suppose that he must first

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

die. So, not unfrequently, he was wounded, or scourged, and baptized
with his own blood, or, in cases, one of the candidates was really
killed and his blood used as a substitute for the blood of the others.
No doubt *human* sacrifice attended the earliest initiations. But later
it was sufficient to be half-drowned in the blood of a Bull as in the
Mithra cult, <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) or 'washed in the
blood of the Lamb' as in the Christian phraseology. Finally, with a
growing sense of decency and aesthetic perception among the various
peoples, washing with pure water came in the initiation-ceremonies to
take the place of blood; and our baptismal service has reduced the
ceremony to a mere sprinkling with water. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137)

To continue the quotation from Miss Harrison: "More often the new birth
is stimulated, or imagined, as a death and a resurrection, either of the
boys themselves or of some one else in their presence. Thus at
initiation among some tribes of South-east Australia, when the boys are
assembled an old man dressed in stringy bark-fibre lies down in a grave.
He is covered up lightly with sticks and earth, and the grave is
smoothed over. The buried man holds in his hand a small bush which seems
to be growing from the ground, and other bushes are stuck in the ground
round about. The novices are then brought to the edge of the grave and a
song is sung. Gradually, as the song goes on, the bush held by the
buried man begins to quiver. It moves more and more, and bit by bit the
man himself starts up from the grave."

Strange in our own Baptismal Service and just before the actual
christening we read these words, "*Then shall the Priest say*: O
merciful God, grant that old Adam in this child may be so *buried* that
the new man may be raised up in him: grant that all carnal affections
may

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

die in him, and that all things belonging to the Spirit may live and
grow in him!" Can we doubt that the Australian medicine-man, standing at
the graveside of the re-arisen old black-fellow, pointed the same moral
to the young initiates as the priest does to-day to those assembled
before him in church--for indeed we know that among savage tribes
initiations have always been before all things the occasions of moral
and social teaching? Can we doubt that he said, in substance if not in
actual words: "As this man has arisen from the grave, so you must also
arise from your old childish life of amusement and self-gratification
and, *enter into* the life of the tribe, the life of the Spirit of the
tribe." "In totemistic societies," to quote Miss Harrison again, "and in
the animal secret societies that seem to grow out of them, the novice is
born again as *the sacred animal*. Thus among the Carrier Indians <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) when a man wants to become a *Lulem* or
'Bear,' however cold the season he tears off his clothes, puts on a
bear-skin and dashes into the woods, where he will stay for three or
four days. Every night his fellow-villagers will go out in search
parties to find him. They cry out *Yi! Kelulem* (come on, Bear), and he
answers with angry growls. Usually they fail to find him, but he comes
back at last himself. He is met, and conducted to the ceremonial lodge,
and there in company with the rest of the Bears dances solemnly his
first appearance. Disappearance and reappearance is as common a rite in
initiation as stimulated killing and resurrection, and has the same
object. Both are rites of transition, of passing from one to another."
In the Christian ceremonies the boy or girl puts away childish things
and puts on the new man, but instead of putting on a bear-skin he puts
on Christ. There is not so much difference as may appear on the surface.
To be identified with your Totem is to be identified with the

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

sacred being who watches over your tribe, who has given his life for
your tribe; it is to be born again, to be washed not only with water but
with the Holy Spirit of all your fellows. To be baptized into Christ
ought to mean to be regenerated in the Holy Spirit of all humanity; and
no doubt in cases it does mean this, but too often unfortunately it has
only amounted to a pretence of religious sanction given to the meanest
and bitterest quarrels of the Churches and the States.

This idea of a New Birth at initiation explains the prevalent pagan
custom of subjecting the initiates to serious ordeals, often painful and
even dangerous. If one is to be born again, obviously one must be ready
to face death; the one thing cannot be without the other. One must be
able to endure pain, like the Red Indian braves; to go long periods
fasting and without food or drink, like the *choupan* among the Western
Inoits--who, wanders for whole nights over the ice-fields under the
moon, scantily clothed and braving the intense cold; to overcome the
very fear of death and danger, like the Australian novices who, at first
terrified by the sound of the bull-roarer and threats of fire and the
knife, learn finally to cast their fears away. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) By so doing one puts off the old
childish things, and qualifies oneself by firmness and courage to become
a worthy member of the society

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

into which one is called. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) The
rules of social life are taught--the duty to one's tribe, and to
oneself, truth-speaking, defence of women and children, the care of
cattle, the meaning of sex and marriage, and even the mysteries of such
religious ideas and rudimentary science as the tribe possesses. And by
so doing one really enters into a new life. Things of the spiritual
world begin to dawn. Julius Firmicus, in describing the mysteries of the
resurrection of Osiris, <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) says that
when the worshipers had satiated themselves with lamentations over the
death of the god then the priest would go round anointing them with oil
and whispering, "Be of good cheer, O Neophytes of the new-arisen God,
for to us too from our pains shall come salvation." <span
id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142)

It would seem that at some very early time in the history of tribal and
priestly initiations an attempt was made to impress upon the neophytes
the existence and over-shadowing presence of spiritual and ghostly
beings. Perhaps the pains endured in the various ordeals, the long
fastings, the silences in the depth of the forests or on the mountains
or among the ice-floes, helped to rouse the visionary faculty. The
developments of this faculty among the black and colored
peoples--East-Indian, Burmese, African, American-Indian, etc.--are well
known. Miss Alice Fletcher, who lived among the Omaha Indians for thirty
years, gives a most interesting account <span
id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143) of the general philosophy of that people
and their rites of initiation. "The Omahas regard all animate and
inanimate forms, all phenomena, as pervaded by a common life, which was
continuous with and similar to the will-power they were conscious of in

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

themselves. This mysterious power in all things they called *Wakonda*,
and through it all things were related to man and to each other. In the
idea of the continuity of life a relation was maintained between the
seen and the unseen, the dead and the living, and also between the
fragment of anything and its entirety." <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) Thus an Omaha novice might at any time
seek to obtain Wakonda by what was called *the rite of the vision*. He
would go out alone, fast, chant incantations, and finally fall into a
trance (much resembling what in modern times has been called *cosmic
consciousness*) in which he would perceive the inner relations of all
things and the solidarity of the least object with the rest of the
universe.

Another rite in connection with initiation, and common all over the
pagan world--in Greece, America, Africa, Australia, New Mexico,
etc.--was the daubing of the novice all over with clay or chalk or even
dung, and then after a while removing the same. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145) The novice must have looked a
sufficiently ugly and uncomfortable object in this state; but later,
when he was thoroughly *washed*, the ceremony must have afforded a
thrilling illustration of the idea of a new birth, and one which would
dwell in the minds of the spectators. When the daubing was done as not
infrequently happened with white clay or gypsum, and the ritual took
place at night, it can easily be imagined that the figures of young men
and boys moving about in the darkness would lend support to the idea
that they were spirits belonging to some intermediate world--who had
already passed through death and were now waiting for their second birth
on earth (or into the tribe) which would be signalized by their thorough
and ceremonial washing. It will be remembered that Herodotus (viii)
gives a circumstantial account of how the Phocians in

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

a battle with the Thessalians smeared six hundred of their bravest
warriors with white clay so that, looking like supernatural beings, and
falling upon the Thessalians by night, they terrified the latter and put
them to instant flight.

Such then--though only very scantily described--were some of the rites
of Initiation and Second Birth celebrated in the old Pagan world. The
subject is far too large for adequate treatment within the present
limits; but even so we cannot but be struck by the appropriateness in
many cases of the teaching thus given to the young, the concreteness of
the illustrations, the effectiveness of the symbols used, the dramatic
character of the rites, the strong enforcement of lessons on the nature
and duties of the life into which the candidates were about to enter.
Christianity followed on, and inherited these traditions, but one feels
that in its ceremonies of Baptism and Confirmation, which of course
correspond to the Pagan Initiations, it falls short of the latter. Its
ceremonies (certainly as we have them to-day in Protestant countries)
are of a very milk-and-watery character; all allusion to and teaching on
the immensely important subject of Sex is omitted, the details of social
and industrial morality are pass d by, and instruction is limited to a
few rather commonplace lessons in general morality and religion.

 

It may be appropriate here, before leaving the subject of the Second
Birth, to inquire how it has come about that this doctrine--so remote
and metaphysical as it might appear--has been taken up and embodied in
their creeds and rituals by quite *primitive* people all over the world,
to such a degree indeed that it has ultimately been adopted and built
into the foundations of the latter and more intellectual religions, like
Hinduism, Mithraism, and the Egyptian and Christian cults. I think the
answer to this question must be found in the now-familiar fact that

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the earliest peoples felt themselves so much a part of Nature and the
animal and vegetable world around them that (whenever they thought about
these matters at all) they never for a moment doubted that the things
which were happening all round them in the external world were also
happening within themselves. They saw the Sun, overclouded and nigh to
death in winter, come to its birth again each year; they saw the
Vegetation shoot forth anew in spring--the revival of the spirit of the
Earth; the endless breeding of the Animals, the strange transformations
of Worms and Insects; the obviously new life taken on by boys and girls
at puberty; the same at a later age when the novice was transformed into
the medicine-man--the *choupan* into the *angakok* among the Esquimaux,
the Dacotah youth into the *wakan* among the Red Indians; and they felt
in their sub-conscious way the same everlasting forces of rebirth and
transformation working within themselves. In some of the Greek Mysteries
the newly admitted Initiates were fed for some time after on milk only
"as though we were being born again." (See Sallustius, quoted by Gilbert
Murray.) When sub-conscious knowledge began to glimmer into direct
consciousness one of the first aspects (and no doubt one of the truest)
under which people saw life was just thus: as a series of rebirths and
transformations. <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) The most modern
science, I need hardly say, in biology as well as in chemistry and the
field of inorganic Nature, supports t at view. The savage in earliest
times *felt* the truth of some things which we to-day are only beginning
intellectually to perceive and analyze.

Christianity adopted and absorbed--as it was bound to do--this
world-wide doctrine of the second birth. Passing over its physiological
and biological applications, it gave to it a fine spiritual
significance--or rather it insisted

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

especially on its spiritual significance, which (as we have seen) had
been widely recognized before. Only--as I suppose must happen with all
local religions--it narrowed the application and outlook of the doctrine
down to a special case--"As in Adam all die, so in *Christ* shall all be
made alive." The Universal Spirit which can give rebirth and salvation
to *every* child of man to whom it comes, was offered only under a very
special form--that of Jesus Christ. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) In this respect it was no better than
the religions which preceded it. In some respects--that is, where it was
especially fanatical, blinkered, and hostile to other sects--it was
*worse*. But to those who perceive that the Great Spirit may bring new
birth and salvation to some under the form of Osiris, equally well as to
others under the form of Jesus, or again to some under the form of a
Siberian totem-Bear equally as to others under the form of Osiris, these
questionings and narrowings fall away as of no importance. We in this
latter day can see the main thing, namely that Christianity was and is
just one phase of a world-old religion, slowly perhaps expanding its
scope, but whose chief attitudes and orientations have been the same
through the centuries.

Many other illustrations might be taken of the truth of this view, but I
will confine myself to two or three more. There is the instance of the
*Eucharist* and its exceedingly widespread celebration (under very
various forms) among the pagans all over the world--as well as among
Christians. I have already said enough on this subject, and need not
delay over it. By partaking of the sacramental meal, even in its wildest
and crudest shapes, as in the mysteries of Dionysus, one was identified
with and united to the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

god; in its milder and more spiritual aspects as in the Mithraic,
Egyptian, Hindu and Christian cults, one passed behind the veil of
*maya* and this ever-changing world, and entered into the region of
divine peace and power. <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148)

Or again the doctrine of the *Saviour*. That also is one on which I need
not add much to what has been said already. The number of pagan deities
(mostly virgin-born and done to death in some way or other in their
efforts to save mankind) is so great <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149) as to be difficult to keep account of.
The god *Krishna* in India, the god *Indra* in Nepaul and Thibet, spilt
their blood for the salvation of men; *Buddha* said, according to Max
Müller, <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_150) "Let all the sins that
were in the world fall on me, that the world may be delivered"; the
Chinese *Tien*, the Holy One--"one with God and existing with him from
all eternity"--died to save the world; the Egyptian *Osiris* was called
Saviour, so was *Horus*; so was the Persian *Mithras*; so was the Greek
*Hercules* who overcame Death though his body was consumed in the
burning garment of mortality, out of which he rose into heaven. So also
was the Phrygian *Attis* called Saviour, and the Syrian *Tammuz* or
*Adonis* likewise--both of whom, as we have seen, were nailed or tied to
a tree, and afterward rose again from their biers, or coffins.
*Prometheus*, the greatest and earliest benefactor of the human race,
was *nailed by the hands* and feet, and with arms extended, to the rocks
of Mount Caucasus. *Bacchus* or *Dionysus*, born of the virgin Semele

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

to be the Liberator of mankind (Dionysus Eleutherios as he was called),
was torn to pieces, not unlike Osiris. Even in far Mexico
*Quetzalcoatl*, the Saviour, was born of a virgin, was tempted, and
fasted forty days, was done to death, and his second coming looked for
so eagerly that (as is well known) when Cortes appeared, the Mexicans,
poor things, greeted *him* as the returning god! <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) In Peru and among the American Indians,
North and South of the Equator, similar legends are, or were, to be
found.

Briefly sketched as all this is, it is enough to prove quite abundantly
that the doctrine of the Saviour is world-wide and world-old, and that
Christianity merely appropriated the same and (as the other cults did)
gave it a special color. Probably the wide range of this doctrine would
have been far better and more generally known, had not the Christian
Church, all through, made the greatest of efforts and taken the greatest
precautions to extinguish and snuff out all evidence of pagan claims on
the subject. There is much to show that the early Church took this line
with regard to pre-Christian saviours; <span
id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152) and in later times the same policy is
remarkably illustrated by the treatment in the sixteenth century of the
writings of Sahagun the Spanish missionary--to whose work I have already
referred. Sahagun was a wonderfully broad-minded and fine man who, while
he did not conceal the barbarities of the Aztec religion, was truthful
enough to point out redeeming traits in the manners and customs of the
people and some resemblances to Christian doctrine and practice. This
infuriated the bigoted Catholics of the newly formed Mexican Church.
They purloined the manuscripts of Sahagun's *Historia* and scattered and
hid them about the country, and it was only after infinite labor and an
appeal to the Spanish Court that he got them together again. Finally, at
the age of eighty, having translated

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

them into Spanish (from the original Mexican) he sent them in two big
volumes home to Spain for safety; but there almost immediately *they
disappeared*, and could not be found! It was only after *two centuries*
that they ultimately turned up (1790) in a Convent at Tolosa in Navarre.
Lord Kingsborough published them in England in 1830.

 

I have thus dwelt upon several of the main doctrines of
Christianity--namely, those of Sin and Sacrifice, the Eucharist, the
Saviour, the Second Birth, and Transfiguration--as showing that they are
by no means unique in our religion, but were common to nearly all the
religions of the ancient world. The list might be much further extended,
but there is no need to delay over a subject which is now very generally
understood. I will, however, devote a page or two to one instance, which
I think is very remarkable, and full of deep suggestion.

There is no doctrine in Christianity which is more reverenced by the
adherents of that religion, or held in higher estimation, than that God
sacrificed his only Son for the salvation of the world; also that since
the Son was not only of like nature but of the *same* nature with the
Father, and equal to him as being the second Person of the Divine
Trinity, the sacrifice amounted to an immolation of Himself for the good
of mankind. The doctrine is so mystical, so remote, and in a sense so
absurd and impossible, that it has been a favorite mark through the
centuries for the ridicule of the scoffers and enemies of the Church;
and here, it might easily be thought, is a belief which--whether it be
considered glorious or whether contemptible--is at any rate unique, and
peculiar to that Church.

And yet the extraordinary fact is that a similar belief ranges all
through the ancient religions, and can be traced back to the earliest
times. The word *host* which is used

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

in the Catholic Mass for the bread and wine on the Altar, supposed to be
the transubstantiated body and blood of Christ, is from the Latin
*Hostia* which the dictionary interprets as "an animal slain in
sacrifice, a sin-offering." It takes us far far back to the Totem stage
of folk-life, when the tribe, as I have already explained, crowned a
victim-bull or bear or other animal with flowers, and honoring it with
every offering of food and worship, sacrificed the victim to the Totem
spirit of the tribe, and consumed it in an Eucharistic feast--the
medicine-man or priest who conducted the ritual wearing a skin of the
same beast as a sign that he represented the Totem- divinity, taking
part in the sacrifice of 'himself to himself.' It reminds us of the
Khonds of Bengal sacrificing their meriahs crowned and decorated as gods
and goddesses; of the Aztecs doing the same; of Quetzalcoatl pricking
his elbows and fingers so as to draw blood, which he offered on his own
altar; or of Odin hanging by his own desire upon a tree. "I know I was
hanged upon a tree shaken by the winds for nine long nights. I was
transfixed by a spear; I was moved to Odin, myself to myself." And so
on. The instances are endless. "I am the oblation," says the Lord
Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita, <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) "I
am the sacrifice, I the ancestral offering." "In the truly orthodox
conception of sacrifice," says Elie Reclus, <span
id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154) "the consecrated offering, be it man,
woman or virgin, lamb or heifer, cock or dove, represents *the deity
himself*. . . . Brahma is the 'imperishable sacrifice'; Indra, Soma,
Hari and the other gods, became incarnate in animals to the sole end
that they might be immolated. Perusha, the Universal Being, caused
himself to be slain by the Immortals, and from his substance were born
the birds of the air, wild and domestic animals, the offerings of butter
and curds. The world, declared the Rishis, is a series of sacrifices
disclosing other sacrifices. To stop them

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

would be to suspend the life of Nature. The god Siva, to whom the
Tipperahs of Bengal are supposed to have sacrificed as many as a
thousand human victims a year, said to the Brahamins: 'It is I that am
the actual offering; it is I that you butcher upon my altars.'"

It was in allusion to this doctrine that R. W. Emerson, paraphrasing the
Katha-Upanishad, wrote that immortal verse of his:--

If the red slayer thinks he slays,  
  Or the slain thinks he is slain,  
They know not well the subtle ways  
  I take, and pass, and turn again.

I say it is an astonishing thing to think and realize that this profound
and mystic doctrine of the eternal sacrifice of Himself, ordained by the
Great Spirit for the creation and salvation of the world--a doctrine
which has attracted and fascinated many of the great thinkers and nobler
minds of Europe, which has also inspired the religious teachings of the
Indian sages and to a less philosophical degree the writings of the
Christian Saints--should have been seized in its general outline and
essence by rude and primitive people before the dawn of history, and
embodied in their rites and ceremonials. What is the explanation of this
fact?

It is very puzzling. The whole subject is puzzling. The world-wide
adoption of similar creeds and rituals (and, we may add, legends and
fairy tales) among early peoples, and in far-sundered places and times
is so remarkable that it has given the students of these subjects
'furiously to think' <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155)--yet for the
most part without great success in the way of finding a solution. The
supposition that (1) the creed, rite or legend in question has sprung
up, so to speak, accidentally, in one place, and

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

then has travelled (owing to some inherent plausibility) over the rest
of the world, is of course one that commends itself readily at first;
but on closer examination the practical difficulties it presents are
certainly very great. These include the migrations of customs and myths
in quite early ages of the earth across trackless oceans and continents,
and between races and peoples absolutely incapable of understanding each
other. And if to avoid these difficulties it is assumed that the present
human race all proceeds from one original stock which radiating from one
centre--say in South-Eastern Asia <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156)--overspread the world, carrying its
rites and customs with it, why, then we are compelled to face the
difficulty of supposing this radiation to have taken place at an
enormous time ago (the continents being then all more or less conjoined)
and at a period when it is doubtful if any religious rites and customs
at all existed; not to mention the further difficulty of supposing all
the four or five hundred languages now existing to be descended from one
common source. The far tradition of the Island of Atlantis seems to
afford a possible explanation of the community of rites and customs
between the Old and New World, and this without assuming in any way that
Atlantis (if it existed) was the original and *sole* cradle of the human
race. <span id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_157) Anyhow it is clear that
these origins of human culture must be of extreme antiquity, and that it
would not be wise to be put off the track of the investigation of a
possible common source merely by that fact of antiquity.

A second supposition, however, is (2) that the natural psychological
evolution of the human mind has in the various

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

times and climes led folk of the most diverse surroundings and
heredity--and perhaps even sprung from separate anthropoid stocks--to
develop their social and religious ideas along the same general
lines--and that even to the extent of exhibiting at times a remarkable
similarity in minute details. This is a theory which commends itself
greatly to a deeper and more philosophical consideration; but it brings
us up point-blank against another most difficult question (which we have
already raised), namely, how to account for extremely rude and primitive
peoples in the far past, and on the very borderland of the animal life,
having been *susceptible* to the germs of great religious ideas (such as
we have mentioned) and having been instinctively--though not of course
by any process of conscious reasoning--moved to express them in symbols
and rites and ceremonials, and (later no doubt) in myths and legends,
which satisfied their *feelings* and sense of fitness--though they may
not have known *why*--and afterwards were capable of being taken up and
embodied in the great philosophical religions.

This difficulty almost compels us to a view of human knowledge which has
found supporters among some able thinkers--the view, namely, that a vast
store of knowledge is already contained in the subconscious mind of man
(and the animals) and only needs the provocation of outer experience to
bring it to the surface; and that in the second stage of human
psychology this process of crude and piecemeal externalization is taking
place, in preparation for the final or third stage in which the
knowledge will be re-absorbed and become direct and intuitional on a
high and harmonious plane--something like the present intuition of the
animals as we perceive it on the animal plane. However this general
subject is one on which I shall touch again, and I do not propose to
dwell on it at any length now.

There is a third alternative theory (3)--a combination

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of (1) and (2)--namely, that if one accepts (2) and the idea that at any
given stage of human development there is a *predisposition* to certain
symbols and rites belonging to that stage, then it is much more easy to
accept theory (1) as an important factor in the spread of such symbols
and rites; for clearly, then, the smallest germ of a custom or practice,
transported from one country or people to another at the right time,
would be sufficient to wake the development or growth in question and
stimulate it into activity. It will be seen, therefore, that the
important point towards the solution of this whole puzzling question is
the discussion, of theory (2)--and to this theory, as illustrated by the
world-wide myth of the Golden Age, I will now turn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[118:1](pcc09.htm#fr_130) vii. 19, and iii. 8,
16.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[118:2](pcc09.htm#fr_131) *Primitive Folk*, by
Elie Reclus (Contemp. Science Series), p. 330.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[118:3](pcc09.htm#fr_132) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[118:4](pcc09.htm#fr_133) Muller's *Dorians*
Book II, ch. ii, par. 10.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[120:1](pcc09.htm#fr_134) *Ancient Art and
Ritual*, p. 104.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[120:2](pcc09.htm#fr_135) See also *Themis*, p.
21.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[121:1](pcc09.htm#fr_136) See *supra*, ch. iii.
[p. 43](pcc04.htm#page_43).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[121:2](pcc09.htm#fr_137) For the virtue
supposed to reside in blood see Westermarck's *Moral Ideas*, Ch. 46.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[122:1](pcc09.htm#fr_138) *Golden
Bough*<sup>2</sup>, III, p. 438.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[123:1](pcc09.htm#fr_139) According to accounts
of the Wiradthuri tribe of Western Australia, in their initiations, the
lads were frightened by a large fire being lighted near them, and
hearing the awful sound of the bull-roarers, while they were told that
Dhuramoolan was about to burn them; the legend being that Dhuramoolan, a
powerful being, whose voice sounded like thunder, would take the boys
into the bush and instruct them in all the laws, traditions and customs
of the community. So he pretended that he always killed the boys, cut
them up, and burnt them to ashes, after which he moulded the ashes into
human shape, and restored them to life as new beings. (See R. H.
Matthews, "The Wiradthuri tribes," *Journal Anthrop. Inst*., vol. xxv,
1896, pp. 297 *sq*.)

<span id="fn_140"></span>[124:1](pcc09.htm#fr_140) See Catlin's
*North-American Indians*, vol. i, for initiations and ordeals among the
Mandans.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[124:2](pcc09.htm#fr_141) *De Errore*, c. 22.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[124:3](pcc09.htm#fr_142)

Θαρρεῖτε, μυσται το̃ν θεο̃υ σεσωσμένου,  
Εσται γὰρ ἡμῖν εκ πονῶν σωτηρία.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[124:4](pcc09.htm#fr_143) Summarized in
*Themis*, pp. 68-71.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[125:1](pcc09.htm#fr_144) A. C. Fletcher, *The
Significance of the Scalp-lock*, Journal of Anthropological Studies,
xxvii (1897-8), p. 436.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[125:2](pcc09.htm#fr_145) See A. Lang's *Myth,
Ritual and Religion*, i, 274 *sq*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[127:1](pcc09.htm#fr_146) The fervent and
widespread belief in animal metamorphoses among early peoples is well
known.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[128:1](pcc09.htm#fr_147) The same happened
with regard to another great Pagan doctrine (to which I have just
alluded), the doctrine of transformations and metamorphoses; and whereas
the pagans believed in these things, as the common and possible heritage
of *every* man, the Christians only allowed themselves to entertain the
idea in the special and unique instance of the Transfiguration of
Christ.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[129:1](pcc09.htm#fr_148) Baring Gould in his
*Orig. Relig. Belief*, I. 401, says:--"Among the ancient Hindus Soma was
a chief deity; he is called the Giver of Life and Health. . . . He
became incarnate among men, was taken by them and slain, and brayed in a
mortar \[a god of corn and wine apparently\]. But he rose in flame to
heaven to be \`the Benefactor of the World' and the 'Mediator between
God and Man.' Through communion with him in his sacrifice, man (who
partook of this god) has an assurance of immortality, for by that
sacrament he obtains union with his divinity."

<span id="fn_149"></span>[129:2](pcc09.htm#fr_149) See for a
considerable list Doane's *Bible Myths*, ch. xx.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[129:3](pcc09.htm#fr_150) *Hist. Sanskrit
Literature*, p. 80.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[130:1](pcc09.htm#fr_151) See Kingsborough,
*Mexican Antiquities*, vol. vi.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[130:2](pcc09.htm#fr_152) See Tertullian's
*Apologia*, c. 16; Ad Nationes, c. xii.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[132:1](pcc09.htm#fr_153) Ch. ix, v. 16.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[132:2](pcc09.htm#fr_154) *Primitive Folk*, ch.
vi.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[133:1](pcc09.htm#fr_155) See A. Lang's *Myth,
Ritual and Religion*, vol. ii.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[134:1](pcc09.htm#fr_156) See Hastings,
*Encycl. Religion and Ethics*, art. "Ethnology."

<span id="fn_157"></span>[134:2](pcc09.htm#fr_157) E. J. Payne, *History
of the New World called America* (vol. i, p. 93) says: "It is certain
that Europe and America once formed a single continent," but inroads of
the sea "left a vast island or peninsula stretching from Iceland to the
Azores--which gradually disappeared." Also he speaks (i. 93) of the
"Miocene Bridge'" between Siberia and the New World.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Myth Of The Golden Age](pcc10)
