[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc05)  [Next](pcc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### V.

### FOOD AND VEGETATION MAGIC

I have wandered, in pursuit of Totems and the Eucharist, some way from
the astronomical thread of Chapters II and III, and now it would appear
that in order to understand religious origins we must wander still
farther. The chapters mentioned were largely occupied with Sungods and
astronomical phenomena, but now we have to consider an earlier period
when there were no definite forms of gods, and when none but the vaguest
astronomical knowledge existed. Sometimes in historical matters it is
best and safest to move thus *backwards* in Time, from the things recent
and fairly well known to things more ancient and less known. In this way
we approach more securely to some understanding of the dim and remote
past.

It is clear that before any definite speculations on heaven-dwelling
gods or divine beings had arisen in the human mind--or any clear
theories of how the sun and moon and stars might be connected with the
changes of the seasons on the earth--there were still certain obvious
things which appealed to everybody, learned or unlearned alike. One of
these was the return of Vegetation, bringing with it the fruits or the
promise of the fruits of the earth, for human food, and also bringing
with it increase of animal life, for food in another form; and the other
was the return of Light and Warmth, making life easier in all ways. Food

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

delivering from the fear of starvation; Light and Warmth delivering from
the fear of danger and of cold. These were three glorious things which
returned together and brought salvation and renewed life to man. The
period of their return was 'Spring,' and though Spring and its benefits
might fade away in time, still there was always the *hope* of its
return--though even so it may have been long time in human evolution
before man discovered that it really did always return, and (with
certain allowances) at equal intervals of time.

Long then before any Sun or Star gods could be called in, the return of
the Vegetation must have enthralled man's attention, and filled him with
hope and joy. Yet since its return was somewhat variable and uncertain
the question, What could man do to assist that return?, naturally became
a pressing one. It is now generally held that the use of
Magic--sympathetic magic--arose in this way. Sympathetic magic seems to
have been generated by a belief that your own actions cause a similar
response in things and persons around you. Yet this belief did not rest
on any philosophy or argument, but was purely instinctive and sometimes
of the nature of a mere corporeal reaction. Every schoolboy knows how in
watching a comrade's high jump at the Sports he often finds himself
lifting a knee at the moment 'to help him over'; at football matches
quarrels sometimes arise among the spectators by reason of an ill-placed
kick coming from a too enthusiastic on-looker, behind one;
undergraduates running on the tow-path beside their College boat in the
races will hurry even faster than the boat in order to increase its
speed; there is in each case an automatic bodily response increased by
one's own desire. A person *acts* the part which he desires to be
successful. He thinks to transfer his energy in that way. Again, if by
chance one witnesses a painful accident, a crushed foot or what-not, it
commonly happens that one feels a pain in the same

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

part oneself--a sympathetic pain. What more natural than to suppose that
the pain really is transferred from the one person to the other? and how
easy the inference that by tormenting a wretched scape-goat or
crucifying a human victim in some cases the sufferings of people may be
relieved or their sins atoned for?

Simaetha, it will be remembered, in the second Idyll of Theocritus,
curses her faithless lover Delphis, and as she melts his waxen image she
prays that *he too may melt*. All this is of the nature of Magic, and is
independent of and generally more primitive than Theology or Philosophy.
Yet it interests us because it points to a firm instinct in early
man--to which I have already alluded--the instinct of his unity and
continuity with the rest of creation, and of a common life so close that
his lightest actions may cause a far-reaching reaction in the world
outside.

Man, then, independently of any belief in gods, may assist the arrival
of Spring by magic ceremonies. If you want the Vegetation to appear you
must have rain; and the rain-maker in almost all primitive tribes has
been a *most* important personage. Generally he based his rites on quite
fanciful associations, as when the rain-maker among the Mandans wore a
raven's skin on his head (bird of the storm) or painted his shield with
red zigzags of lightning; <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) but
partly, no doubt, he had observed actual facts, or had had the knowledge
of them transmitted to him--as, for instance that when rain is impending
loud noises will bring about its speedy downfall, a fact we moderns have
had occasion to notice on battlefields. He had observed perhaps that in
a storm a specially loud clap of thunder is generally followed by a
greatly increased downpour of rain. He had even noticed (a thing which I
have often verified in the vicinity of Sheffield) that the copious smoke
of fires will generate rain-clouds--and so quite naturally h concluded
that it was his smoking

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

sacrifices which had that desirable effect. So far he was on the track
of elementary Science. And so he made "bull-roarers" to imitate the
sound of wind and the blessed rain-bringing thunder, or clashed great
bronze cymbals together with the same object. Bull-voices and
thunder-drums and the clashing of cymbals were used in this connection
by the Greeks, and are mentioned by Aeschylus; <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) but the bull-roarer, in the form of a
rhombus of wood whirled at the end of a string, seems to be known, or to
have been known, all over the world. It is described with some care by
Mr. Andrew Lang in his *Custom and Myth* (pp. 29-44), where he says "it
is found always as a sacred instrument employed in religious mysteries,
in New Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, ancient Greece, and Africa."

Sometimes, of course, the rain-maker was successful; but of the inner
causes of rain he knew next to nothing; he was more ignorant even than
we are! His main idea was a more specially 'magical' one--namely, that
the sound itself would appeal to the *spirits* of rain and thunder and
cause them to give a response. For of course the thunder (in Hebrew
*Bath-Kol*, "the daughter of the Voice") was everywhere regarded as the
manifestation of a spirit. <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) To make
sounds like thunder would therefore naturally call the attention of such
a spirit; or he, the rain-maker, might make sounds like rain. He made
gourd-rattles (known in ever so many parts of the world) in which he
rattled dried seeds or small pebbles with a most beguiling and rain-like
insistence; or sometimes, like the priests of Baal in the Bible, <span
id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) he would cut himself with knives

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

till the blood fell upon the ground in great drops suggestive of an
oncoming thunder-shower. "In Mexico the raingod was propitiated with
sacrifices of children. If the children wept and shed abundant tears,
they who carried them rejoiced, being convinced that rain would also be
abundant." <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) Sometimes he, the
rain-maker, would *whistle* for the wind, or, like the Omaha Indians,
flap his blankets for the same purpose.

 

In the ancient myth of Demeter and Persephone--which has been adopted by
so many peoples under so many forms--Demeter the Earth-mother loses her
daughter Persephone (who represents of course the Vegetation), carried
down into the underworld by the evil powers of Darkness and Winter. And
in Greece there was a yearly ceremonial and ritual of magic for the
purpose of restoring the lost one and bringing her back to the world
again. Women carried certain charms, "fir-cones and snakes and unnamable
objects made of paste, to ensure fertility; there was a sacrifice of
pigs, who were thrown into a deep cleft of the earth, and their remains
afterwards collected and scattered as a charm over the fields." <span
id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85) Fir-cones and snakes from their very forms
were emblems of male fertility; snakes, too, from their habit of gliding
out of their own skins with renewed brightness and color were suggestive
of resurrection and re-vivification; pigs and sows by their exceeding
fruitfulness would in their hour of sacrifice remind old mother Earth of
what was expected from her! Moreover, no doubt it had been observed that
the scattering of dead flesh over the ground or mixed with the seed, did
bless the ground to a greater fertility; and so by a strange mixture of
primitive observation with a certain child-like belief that by means of
symbols and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

suggestions Nature could be appealed to and induced to answer to the
desires and needs for her children this sort of ceremonial Magic arose.
It was not exactly Science, and it was not exactly Religion; but it was
a naive, and perhaps not altogether mistaken, sense of the bond between
Nature and Man.

For we can perceive that earliest man was not yet consciously
differentiated from Nature. Not only do we see that the tribal life was
so strong that the individual seldom regarded himself as different or
separate or opposed to the rest of the tribe; but that something of the
same kind was true with regard to his relation to the Animals and to
Nature at large. This outer world was part of himself, was also himself.
His sub-conscious sense of unity was so great that it largely dominated
his life. That brain-cleverness and brain-activity which causes modern
man to perceive such a gulf between him and the animals, or between
himself and Nature, did not exist in the early man. Hence it was no
difficulty to him to believe that he was a Bear or an Emu.
Sub-consciously he was wiser than we are. He knew that he *was* a bear
or an emu, or any other such animal as his totem-creed led him to fix
his mind upon. Hence we find that a familiarity and common consent
existed between primitive man and many of his companion animals such as
has been lost or much attenuated in modern times. Elisée Reclus in his
very interesting paper *La Grande Famille* <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) gives support to the idea that the
so-called domestication of animals did not originally arise from any
forcible subjugation of them by man, but from a natural amity with them
which grew up in the beginning from common interests, pursuits and
affections. Thus the chetah of India (and probably the puma of Brazil)
from far-back times took to hunting in the company of his two-legged and
bow-and-arrow-armed

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

friend, with whom he divided the spoil. W. H. Hudson <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) declares that the Puma, wild and fierce
though it is, and capable of killing the largest game, will never even
to-day attack man, but when maltreated by the latter submits to the
outrage, unresisting, with mournful cries and every sign of grief. The
Llama, though domesticated in a sense, has never allowed the domination
of the whip or the bit, but may still be seen walking by the side of the
Brazilian peasant and carrying his burdens in a kind of proud
companionship. The mutual relations of Women and the Cow, or of Man and
the Horse <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) (also the Elephant) reach
so far into the past that their origin cannot be traced. The Swallow
still loves to make its home under the cottage eaves and still is
welcomed by the inmates as the bringer of good fortune. Elisée Reclus
assures us that the Dinka man on the Nile calls to certain snakes by
name and shares with them the milk of his cows.

And so with Nature. The communal sense, or subconscious perception,
which made primitive men feel their unity with other members of their
tribe, and their obvious kinship with the animals around them, brought
them also so close to general Nature that they looked upon the trees,
the vegetation, the rain, the warmth of the sun, as part of their
bodies, part of themselves. Conscious differentiation had not yet set
in. To cause rain or thunder you had to make rain- or thunder-like
noises; to encourage Vegetation and the crops to leap out of the ground,
you had to leap and dance. "In Swabia and among the Transylvanian Saxons
it is a common custom (says Dr. Frazer) for a man who has some hemp to
leap high in the field in the belief that this will make the hemp grow
tall." <span id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Native May-pole dances and Jacks in the Green
have hardly yet died out--even in this most civilized England. The bower
of green boughs, the music of pipes, the leaping and the twirling, were
all an encouragement to the arrival of Spring, and an expression of
Sympathetic Magic. When you felt full of life and energy and virility in
yourself you naturally leapt and danced, so why should you not
sympathetically do this for the energizing of the crops? In every
country of the world the vernal season and the resurrection of the Sun
has been greeted with dances and the sound of music. But if you wanted
success in hunting or in warfare then you danced before-hand mimic
dances suggesting the successful hunt or battle. It was no more than our
children do to-day, and it all was, and is, part of a natural-magic
tendency in human thought.

 

Let me pause here for a moment. It is difficult for us with our
academical and somewhat school-boardy minds to enter into all this, and
to understand the sense of (unconscious or sub-conscious) identification
with the world around which characterized the primitive man--or to look
upon Nature with his eyes. A Tree, a Snake, a Bull, an Ear of Corn. *We*
know so well from our botany and natural history books what these things
are. Why should our minds dwell on them any longer or harbor a doubt as
to our perfect comprehension of them?

And yet (one cannot help asking the question): Has any one of us really
ever *seen* a Tree? I certainly do not think that I have--except most
superficially. That very penetrating observer and naturalist, Henry D.
Thoreau, tells us that he would often make an appointment to visit a
certain tree, miles away--but what or whom he saw when he got there, he
does not say. Walt Whitman, also a keen observer, speaks of a tulip-tree
near which he sometimes sat--"the Apollo of the woods--tall and
graceful, yet robust and sinewy, inimitable in hang of foliage and

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

throwing-out of limb; as if the beauteous, vital, leafy creature could
walk, if it only would"; and mentions that in a dream-trance he actually
once saw his "favorite trees step out and promenade up, down and around
*very curiously*." <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) Once the present
writer seemed to have a partial vision of a tree. It was a beech,
standing somewhat isolated, and still leafless in quite early Spring.
Suddenly I was aware of its skyward-reaching arms and up-turned
finger-tips, as if some vivid life (or electricity) was streaming
through them far into the spaces of heaven, and of its roots plunged in
the earth and drawing the same energies from below. The day was quite
still and there was no movement in the branches, but in that moment the
tree was no longer a separate or separable organism, but a vast being
ramifying far into space, sharing and uniting the life of Earth and Sky,
and full of a most amazing activity.

The reader of this will probably have had some similar experiences.
Perhaps he will have seen a full-foliaged Lombardy poplar swaying in
half a gale in June--the wind and the sun streaming over every little
twig and leaf, the tree throwing out its branches in a kind of ecstasy
and bathing them in the passionately boisterous caresses of its two
visitants; or he will have heard the deep glad murmur of some huge
sycamore with ripening seed clusters when after weeks of drought the
steady warm rain brings relief to its thirst; and he will have known
that these creatures are but likenesses of himself, intimately and
deeply-related to him in their love and hunger longing, and, like
himself too, unfathomed and unfathomable.

It would be absurd to credit early man with conscious speculations like
these, belonging more properly to the twentieth century; yet it is
incontrovertible, I think, that in *some* ways the primitive peoples,
with their swift subconscious intuitions and their minds unclouded by
mere

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

book knowledge, perceived truths to which we moderns are blind. Like the
animals they arrived at their perceptions without (individual) brain
effort; they knew things without thinking. When they did *think* of
course they went wrong. Their budding science easily went astray.
Religion with them had as yet taken no definite shape; science was
equally protoplasmic; and all they had was a queer jumble of the two in
the form of Magic. When at a later time Science gradually defined its
outlook and its observations, and Religion, from being a vague
subconscious feeling, took clear shape in the form of gods and creeds,
then mankind gradually emerged into the stage of evolution *in which we
now are*. *Our* scientific laws and doctrines are of course only
temporary formulae, and so also are the gods and the creeds of our own
and other religions; but these things, with their set and angular
outlines, have served in the past and will serve in the future as
stepping-stones towards another kind of knowledge of which at present we
only dream, and will lead us on to a renewed power of perception which
again will not be the laborious product of thought but a direct and
instantaneous intuition like that of the animals--and the angels.

 

To return to our Tree. Though primitive man did not speculate in modern
style on these things, I yet have no reasonable doubt that he felt (and
*feels*, in those cases where we can still trace the workings of his
mind) his essential relationship to the creatures of the forest more
intimately, if less analytically, than we do to-day. If the animals with
all their wonderful gifts are (as we readily admit) a veritable part of
Nature--so that they live and move and have their being more or less
submerged in the spirit of the great world around them--then Man, when
he first began to differentiate himself from them, must for a long time
have remained in this *sub*conscious

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

unity, becoming only distinctly *conscious* of it when he was already
beginning to lose it. That early dawn of distinct consciousness
corresponded to the period of belief in Magic. In that first mystic
illumination almost every object was invested with a halo of mystery or
terror or adoration. Things were either *tabu*, in which case they were
dangerous and often not to be touched or even looked upon--or they were
overflowing with magic grace and influence, in which case they were
holy, and any rite which released their influence was also holy. William
Blake, that modern prophetic child, beheld a Tree full of angels; the
Central Australian native believes bushes to be the abode of spirits
which leap into the bodies of passing women and are the cause of the
conception of children; Moses saw in the desert a bush (perhaps the
*mimosa*) like a flame of fire, with Jehovah dwelling in the midst of
it, and he put off his shoes for he felt that the place was holy; Osiris
was at times regarded as a Tree-spirit; <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) and in inscriptions is referred to as "the
solitary one in the acacia"--which reminds us curiously of the "burning
bush." The same is true of others of the gods; in the old Norse
mythology Ygdrasil was the great branching World-Ash, abode of the soul
of the universe; the Peepul or Bo-tree in India is very sacred and must
on no account be cut down, seeing that gods and spirits dwell among its
branches. It is of the nature of an Aspen, and of little or no practical
use, <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) but so holy that the poorest
peasant will not disturb it. The Burmese believe the things of nature,
but especially the trees, to be the abode of spirits. "To the Burman of
to-day, not less than to the Greek of long ago, all nature is alive. The
forest and the river and the mountains are full of spirits, whom the
Burmans call Nats. There are all kinds of Nats, good and bad, great and
little, male and female, now living round about us. Some of them live

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

in the trees, especially in the huge figtree that shades half-an-acre
without the village; or among the fern-like fronds of the
tamarind." <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

There are also in India and elsewhere popular rites of *marriage* of
women (and men) to Trees; which suggest that trees were regarded as very
near akin to human beings! *The Golden Bough* <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94) mentions many of these, including the idea
that some trees are male and others female. The well-known Assyrian
emblem of a Pine cone being presented by a priest to a Palm-tree is
supposed by E. B. Tylor to symbolize fertilization--the Pine cone being
masculine and the Palm feminine. The ceremony of the god Krishna's
marriage to a Basil plant is still celebrated in India down to the
present day; and certain trees are clasped and hugged by pregnant
women--the idea no doubt being that they bestow fertility on those who
embrace them. In other cases apparently it is the trees which are
benefited, since it is said that men sometimes go naked into the Clove
plantations at night in order by a sort of sexual intercourse to
fertilize them. <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95)

One might go on multiplying examples in this direction quite
indefinitely. There is no end to them. They all indicate--what was
instinctively felt by early man, and is perfectly obvious to all to-day
who are not blinded by "civilization" (and Herbert Spencer!) that the
world outside us *is* really most deeply akin to ourselves, that it is
not dead and senseless but intensely alive and instinct with feeling and
intelligence resembling our own. It is this perception, this conviction
of our essential unity with the whole of creation, which lay from the
first at the base of all Religion; yet at first, as I have said, was
hardly a conscious perception. Only later, when it gradually became

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

more conscious, did it evolve itself into the definite forms of the gods
and the creeds--but of that process I will speak more in detail
presently.

The Tree therefore was a most intimate presence to the Man. It grew in
the very midst of his Garden of Eden. It had a magical virtue, which his
tentative science could only explain by chance analogies and
assimilations. Attractive and beloved and worshipped by reason of its
many gifts to mankind--its grateful shelter, its abounding fruits, its
timber, and other invaluable products--why should it not become the
natural emblem of the female, to whom through sex man's worship is ever
drawn? If the Snake has an unmistakable resemblance to the male organ in
its active state, the foliage of the tree or bush is equally remindful
of the female. What more clear than that the conjunction of Tree and
Serpent is the fulfilment in nature of that sex-mystery which is so
potent in the life of man and the animals? and that the magic ritual
most obviously fitted to induce fertility in the tribe or the herds (or
even the crops) is to set up an image of the Tree and the Serpent
combined, and for all the tribe-folk in common to worship and pay it
reverence. In the Bible with more or less veiled sexual significance we
have this combination in the Eden-garden, and again in the brazen
Serpent and Pole which Moses set up in the wilderness (as a cure for the
fiery serpents of lust); illustrations of the same are said to be found
in the temples of Egypt and of South India, and even in the ancient
temples of Central America. <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) In the
myth of Hercules the golden apples of the Hesperides garden are guarded
by a dragon. The Etruscans, the Persians and the Babylonians had also
legends of the Fall of man through a serpent tempting him to taste of
the fruit of a holy Tree. And De Gubernatis, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97)

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

pointing out the phallic meaning of these stories, says "the legends
concerning the tree of golden apples or figs which yields honey or
ambrosia, guarded by dragons, in which the life, the fortune, the glory,
the strength and the riches of the hero have their beginning, are
numerous among every people of Aryan origin: in India, Persia, Russia,
Poland, Swede, Germany, Greece and Italy."

Thus we see the natural-magic tendency of the human mind asserting
itself. To some of us indeed this tendency is even greater in the case
of the Snake than in that of the Tree. W. H. Hudson, in *Far Away and
Long Ago*, speaks of "that sense of something supernatural in the
serpent, which appears to have been universal among peoples in a
primitive state of culture, and still survives in some barbarous or
semi-barbarous countries." The fascination of the Snake--the fascination
of its mysteriously gliding movement, of its vivid energy, its
glittering eye, its intensity of life, combined with its fatal dart of
Death--is a thing felt even more by women than by men--and for a reason
(from what we have already said) not far to seek. It was the Woman who
in the story of the Fall was the first to listen to its suggestions. No
wonder that, as Professor Murray says, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) the Greeks worshiped a gigantic snake
(Meilichios) the lord of Death and Life, with ceremonies of appeasement,
and sacrifices, long before they arrived at the worship of Zeus and the
Olympian gods.

 

Or let us take the example of an Ear of Corn. Some people
wonder--hearing nowadays that the folk of old used to worship a
Corn-spirit or Corn-god--wonder that any human beings could have been so
foolish. But probably the good people who wonder thus have never *really
looked* (with their town-dazed eyes) at a growing spike of wheat. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99)

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Of all the wonderful things in Nature I hardly
know any that thrills one more with a sense of wizardry than just this
very thing--to observe, each year, this disclosure of the Ear within the
Blade--first a swelling of the sheath, then a transparency and a
whitey-green face within a hooded shroud, and then the perfect spike of
grain disengaging itself and spiring upward towards the sky--"the
resurrection of the wheat with pale visage appearing out of the ground."

If this spectacle amazes one to-day, what emotions must it not have
aroused in the breasts of the earlier folk, whose outlook on the world
was so much more direct than ours--more 'animistic' if you like! What
wonderment, what gratitude, what deliverance from fear (of starvation),
what certainty that this being who had been ruthlessly cut down and
sacrificed last year for human food had indeed arisen again as a savior
of men, what readiness to make some human sacrifice in return, both as
an acknowledgment of the debt, and as a gift of something which would no
doubt be graciously accepted!--(for was it not well known that where
blood had been spilt on the ground the future crop was so much more
generous?)--what readiness to adopt some magic ritual likely to
propitiate the unseen power--even though the outline and form of the
latter were vague and uncertain in the extreme! Dr. Frazer, speaking of
the Egyptian Osiris as one out of many corn-gods of the above character,
says: <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) "The primitive conception of
him as he corn-god comes clearly out in the festival of his death and
resurrection, which was celebrated the month of Athyr. That festival
appears to have been essentially a festival of sowing, which properly
fell at the time when the husbandman actually committed the seed

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

to the earth. On that occasion an effigy of the corn-god, moulded of
earth and corn, was buried with funeral rites in the ground in order
that, dying there, he might come to life again with the new crops. The
ceremony was in fact a charm to ensure the growth of the corn by
sympathetic magic, and we may conjecture that as such it was practised
in a simple form by every Egyptian farmer on his fields long before it
was adopted and transfigured by the priests in the stately ritual of the
temple." <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

The magic in this case was of a gentle description; the clay image of
Osiris sprouting all over with the young green blade was pathetically
poetic; but, as has been suggested, bloodthirsty ceremonies were also
common enough. Human sacrifices, it is said, had at one time been
offered at the grave of Osiris. We bear that the Indians in Ecuador used
to sacrifice men's hearts and pour out human blood on their fields when
they sowed them; the Pawnee Indians used a human victim the same,
allowing his blood to drop on the seed-corn. It is said that in Mexico
girls were sacrificed, and that the Mexicans would sometimes *grind*
their (male) victim, like corn, between two stones. ("I'll grind his
bones to make me bread.") Among the Khonds of East India--who were
particularly given to this kind of ritual--the very *tears* of the
sufferer were an incitement to more cruelties, for tears of course were
magic for Rain. <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

And so on. We have referred to the Bull many times, both in his
astronomical aspect as pioneer of the Spring-Sun, and in his more direct
rôle as plougher of the fields, and provider of food from his own body.
"The tremendous *mana* of the wild bull," says Gilbert Murray, "occupies
almost half the stage of pre-Olympic ritual." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) Even to us there is something mesmeric
and overwhelming in the sense of

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

this animal's glory of strength and fury and sexual power. No wonder the
primitives worshiped him, or that they devised rituals which should
convey his power and vitality by mere contact, or that in sacramental
feasts they ate his flesh and drank his blood as a magic symbol and
means of salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[71:1](pcc06.htm#fr_80) See Catlin's *North
American Indians*, Letter 19.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[72:1](pcc06.htm#fr_81) *Themis*, p. 61.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[72:2](pcc06.htm#fr_82) See A. Lang, *op. cit.*:
"The muttering of the thunder is said to be his voice calling to the
rain to fall and make the grass grow up green." Such are the very words
of Umbara, the minstrel of the Tribe (Australian).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[72:3](pcc06.htm#fr_83) 1 Kings xviii.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[73:1](pcc06.htm#fr_84) Quoted from Sahagun II,
2, 3 by A. Lang in *Myth, Ritual and Religion*, vol. ii, p. 102.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[73:2](pcc06.htm#fr_85) See Gilbert Murray's
*Four Stages of Greek Religion*, p. 29.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[74:1](pcc06.htm#fr_86) Published originally in
*Le Magazine International*, January 1896.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[75:1](pcc06.htm#fr_87) See *The Naturalist in
La Plata*, ch. ii.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[75:2](pcc06.htm#fr_88) "It is certain that the
primitive Indo-European reared droves of tame or half-tame horses for
generations, if not centuries, before it ever occurred to him to ride or
drive them" (F. B. Jevons, *Introd. to Hist. Religion*, p. 119).

<span id="fn_89"></span>[75:3](pcc06.htm#fr_89) See *The Golden Bough*,
i, 139 *seq*. Also *Art and Ritual*, p. 31.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[77:1](pcc06.htm#fr_90) *Specimen Days*, 1882-3
Edition, p. iii.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[79:1](pcc06.htm#fr_91) *The Golden Bough*, iv,
339.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[79:2](pcc06.htm#fr_92) Though the sap is said
to contain caoutchouc.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[80:1](pcc06.htm#fr_93) *The Soul of a People*,
by H. Fielding (1902), p. 250.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[80:2](pcc06.htm#fr_94) Vol. i, p. 40, Vol. iii,
pp. 24 sq.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[80:3](pcc06.htm#fr_95) *Ibid*., vol. ii, p. 98.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[81:1](pcc06.htm#fr_96) See *Ancient Pagan and
Modern Christian Symbolism*, by Thomas Inman (Trübner, 1874), p. 55.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[81:2](pcc06.htm#fr_97) *Zoological Mythology*,
vol. ii, pp. 410 *sq*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[82:1](pcc06.htm#fr_98) *Four Stages of Greek
Religion*, p. 29.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[82:2](pcc06.htm#fr_99) Even the thrice-learned
Dr. Farnell quotes apparently with approval the scornful words of
Hippolytus, who (he says) "speaks of the Athenians imitating people at
the Eleusinian mysteries and showing to the epoptæ (initiates) that
great and marvelous mystery of perfect revelation--in solemn silence--a
*cut cornstalk* (τεθερισμένον στάχον)."--*Cults of the Greek States*,
vol. iii, p. 182.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[83:1](pcc06.htm#fr_100) *The Golden Bough*,
iv, p. 330.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[84:1](pcc06.htm#fr_101) See ch. xv *infra*, p.
5.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[84:2](pcc06.htm#fr_102) *The Golden Bough*,
vol. vii, "*The Corn-Spirit*," pp. 236 *sq*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[84:3](pcc06.htm#fr_103) *Four Stages*, p. 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vi. Magicians, Kings And Gods](pcc07)
