[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc13)  [Next](pcc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

### XIII.

### THE GENESIS OF CHRISTIANITY

Referring back to the existence of something resembling a great
World-religion which has come down the centuries, continually expanding
and branching in the process, we have now to consider the genesis of
that special brand or branch of it which we call Christianity. Each
religion or cult, pagan or Christian, has had, as we have seen, a vast
amount in common with the general World-religion; yet each has had its
own special characteristics. What have been the main characteristics of
the Christian branch, as differentiating it from the other branches?

We saw in the last chapter that a certain ascetic attitude towards Sex
was one of the most salient marks of the Christian Church; and that
whereas most of the pagan cults (though occasionally favoring frightful
austerities and cruel sacrifices) did on the whole rejoice in pleasure
and the world of the senses, Christianity--following largely on
Judaism--displayed a tendency towards renunciation of the world and the
flesh, and a withdrawal into the inner and more spiritual regions of the
mind. The same tendency may be traced in the Egyptian and Phrygian cults
of that period. It will be remembered how Juvenal (Sat. VI, 510-40)
chaffs the priests of Cybele at Rome for making themselves "eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven's sake," or the rich Roman lady for plunging in
the wintry Tiber

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

for a propitiation to Isis. No doubt among the later pagans "the long
intolerable tyranny of the senses over the soul" had become a very
serious matter. But Christianity represented perhaps the most powerful
reaction against this; and this reaction had, as indicated in the last
chapter, the enormously valuable result that (for the time) it
disentangled love from sex and established Love, pure and undefiled, as
ruler of the world. "God is Love." But, as also indicated, the divorce
between the two elements of human nature, carried to an extreme, led in
time to a crippling of both elements and the development of a certain
morbidity and self-consciousness which, it cannot be denied, is
painfully marked among some sections of Christians--especially those of
the altruistic and 'philanthropic' type.

Another characteristic of Christianity which is also very fine in its
way but has its limits of utility, has been its insistence on
"morality." Some modern writers indeed have gone so far--forgetting, I
suppose, the Stoics--as to claim that Christianity's chief mark is its
high morality, and that the pagans generally were quite wanting in the
moral sense! This, of course, is a profound mistake. I should say that,
in the true sense of the word, the early and tribal peoples have been
much more 'moral' as a rule--that is, ready as individuals to pay
respect to the needs of the community--than the later and more civilized
societies. But the mistake arises from the different interpretations of
the word; for whereas all the pagan religions insisted very strongly on
the just-mentioned kind of morality, which we should call *civic duty to
one's neighbor*, the Christian made morality to consist more especially
in a mans *duty to God*. It became with them a private affair between a
mans self and-God, rather than a public affair; and thus led in the end
to a very obnoxious and quite pharisaic kind of morality, whose chief
inspiration was not the helping of one's fellow-man but the saving of
one's own soul.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

There may perhaps be other salient points of differentiation between
Christianity and the preceding pagan religions; but for the present we
may recognize these two--(*a*) the tendency towards a renunciation of
the world, and the consequent cultivation of a purely spiritual love and
(*b*) the insistence on a morality whose inspiration was a private sense
of duty to God rather than a public sense of duty to one's neighbor and
to society generally. It may be interesting to trace the causes which
led to this differentiation.

Three centuries before our era the conquests of Alexander had had the
effect of spreading the Greek thought and culture over most of the known
world. A vast number of small bodies of worshipers of local deities,
with their various rituals and religious customs, had thus been broken
up, or at least brought into contact with each other and partially
modified and hellenized. The orbit of a more general conception of life
and religion was already being traced. By the time of the founding of
the first Christian Church the immense conquests of Rome had greatly
extended and established the process. The Mediterranean had become a
great Roman lake. Merchant ships and routes of traffic crossed it in all
directions; tourists visited its shores. The known world had become one.
The numberless peoples, tribes, nations, societies within the girdle of
the Empire, with their various languages, creeds, customs, religions,
philosophies, were profoundly influencing each other. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211) A great fusion was taking place; and it
was becoming inevitable that the next great religious movement would
have a world-wide character.

It was probable that this new religion would combine many elements from
the preceding rituals in one cult. In

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

connection with the fine temples and elaborate services of Isis and
Cybele and Mithra there was growing up a powerful priesthood; Franz
Cumont <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) speaks of "the learned
priests of the Asiatic cults" as building up, on the foundations of old
fetichism and superstition, a complete religious philosophy--just as the
Brahmins had built the monism of the Vedanta on the "monstrous
idolatries of Hinduism." And it was likely that a similar process would
evolve the new religion expected. Toutain again calls attention to the
patronage accorded to all these cults by the Roman Emperors, as favoring
a new combination and synthesis:--"Hadrien, Commode, Septime Severe,
Julia Domna, Elagabal, Alexandre Sévère, en particulier ont contribué
personnellement à la popularité et au succès des cultes qui se
celebraient en l'honneur de Serapis et d'Isis, des divinités syriennes
et de Mithra." <span id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_213)

It was also probable that this new Religion would show (as indicated in
the last chapter) a reaction against mere sex-indulgence; and, as
regards its standard of Morality generally, that, among so many
conflicting peoples with their various civic and local customs, it could
not well identify itself with any *one* of these but would evolve an
inner inspiration of its own which in its best form would be love of the
neighbor, regardless of the race, creed or customs of the neighbor, and
whose sanction would not reside in any of the external authorities thus
conflicting with each other, but in the sense of the soul's direct
responsibility to God.

So much for what we might expect *a priori* as to the influence of the
surroundings on the general form of the new Religion. And what about the
kind of creed or creeds which that religion would favor? Here again we
must see that the influence of the surroundings compelled a

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

certain result. Those doctrines which we have described in the preceding
chapters--doctrines of Sin and Sacrifice, a Savior, the Eucharist, the
Trinity, the Virgin-birth, and so forth--were in their various forms
seething, so to speak, all around. It was impossible for any new
religious synthesis to escape them; all it could do would be to
appropriate them, and to give them perhaps a color of its own. Thus it
is into the midst of this germinating mass that we must imagine the
various pagan cults, like fertilizing streams, descending. To trace all
these streams would of course be an impossible task; but it may be of
use, as an example of the process, to take the case of some particular
belief. Let us take the belief in the coming of a Savior-god; and this
will be the more suitable as it is a belief which has in the past been
commonly held to be distinctive of Christianity. Of course we know now
that it is not in any sense distinctive, but that the long tradition of
the Savior comes down from the remotest times, and perhaps from every
country of the world. <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_214) The
Messianic prophecies of the Jews and the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah
emptied themselves into the Christian teachings, and infected them to
some degree with a Judaic tinge. The "Messiah" means of course the
Anointed One. The Hebrew word occurs some 40 times in the Old Testament;
and each time in the Septuagint or Greek translation (made mainly in the
third century *before* our era) the word is translated Χριστός, or
Christos, which again means Anointed. Thus we see that the idea or the
word "The Christ" was in vogue in Alexandria as far back certainly as
280 B.C., or nearly three centuries before Jesus. And what the word "The
Anointed" strictly speaking means, and from what the expression is
probably derived, will appear later. In *The Book of Enoch*, written not
later than B.C. 170, <span id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_215) the Christ is
spoken of as already existing in heaven,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

and about to come as judge of all men, and is definitely called "the Son
of Man." The Book of Revelations is *full* of passages from *Enoch*; so
are the Epistles of Paul; so too the Gospels. The Book of Enoch believes
in a Golden Age that is to come; it has Dantesque visions of Heaven and
Hell, and of Angels good and evil, and it speaks of a "garden of
Righteousness" with the "Tree of Wisdom" in its midst. Everywhere, says
Prof. Drews, in the first century B.C., there was the longing for a
coming Savior.

But the Savior-god, as we also know, was a familiar figure in Egypt. The
great Osiris was the Savior of the world, both in his life and death: in
his life through the noble works he wrought for the benefit of mankind,
and in his death through his betrayal by the powers of darkness and his
resurrection from the tomb and ascent into heaven. <span
id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_216) The Egyptian doctrines descended through
Alexandria into Christianity--and though they did not influence the
latter deeply until about 300 A.D., yet they then succeeded in reaching
the Christian Churches, giving a color to their teachings with regard to
the Savior, and persuading them to accept and honor the Egyptian worship
of Isis in the Christian form of the Virgin Mary.

Again, another great stream of influence descended from Persia in the
form of the cult of Mithra. Mithra, as we have seen, <span
id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_217) stood as a great Mediator between God
and man. With his baptisms and eucharists, and his twelve disciples, and
his birth in a cave, and so forth, he seemed to the early Fathers an
invention of the devil and a most dangerous mockery on Christianity--and
all the more so because his worship was becoming so exceedingly popular.
The cult seems to have reached Rome about B.C. 70. It spread far and
wide through the Empire. It extended to Great Britain, and numerous
remains of Mithraic monuments and sculptures in this country--at York,
Chester and other places--testify to its wide acceptance even here. At

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Rome the vogue of Mithraism became so great that
in the third century A. D., it was quite doubtful <span
id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218) whether it *or* Christianity would
triumph; the Emperor Aurelian in 273 founded a cult of the Invincible
Sun in connection with Mithraism; <span id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219)
and as St. Jerome tells us in his letters, <span
id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220) the latter cult had at a later time to
be suppressed in Rome and Alexandria by *physical force*, so powerful
was it.

Nor was force the only method employed. *Imitation* is not only the
sincerest flattery, but it is often the most subtle and effective way of
defeating a rival. The priests of the rising Christian Church were, like
the priests of *all* religions, not wanting in craft; and at this moment
when the question of a World-religion was in the balance, it was an
obvious policy for them to throw into their own scale as many elements
as possible of the popular Pagan cults. Mithraism had been flourishing
for 600 years; and it is, to say the least, *curious* that the Mithraic
doctrines and legends which I have just mentioned should all have been
adopted (quite unintentionally of course!) into Christianity; and still
more so that some others from the same source, like the legend of the
Shepherds at the Nativity and the doctrine of the Resurrection and
Ascension, which are *not* mentioned at all in the original draft of the
earliest Gospel (St. Mark), should have made their appearance, in the
Christian writings at a later time, when Mithraism was making great
forward strides. History shows that as a Church progresses and expands
it generally feels

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

compelled to enlarge and fortify its own foundations by inserting
material which was not there at first. I shall shortly give another
illustration of this; at present I will merely point out that the
Christian writers, as time went on, not only introduced new doctrines,
legends, miracles and so forth--most of which we can trace to antecedent
pagan sources--but that they took especial pains to destroy the pagan
records and so obliterate the evidence of their own dishonesty. We learn
from Porphyry <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) that there were
several elaborate treatises setting forth the religion of Mithra; and J.
M. Robertson adds (*Pagan Christs*, p. 325): "everyone of these has been
destroyed by the care of the Church, and it is remarkable that even the
treatise of Firmicus is mutilated at a passage (v.) where he seems to be
accusing Christians of following Mithraic usages." While again Professor
Murray says, "The polemic literature of Christianity is loud and
triumphant; the books of the Pagans have been *destroyed*." <span
id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222)

Returning to the doctrine of the Savior, I have already in preceding
chapters given so many instances of belief in such a deity among the
pagans--whether he be called Krishna or Mithra or Osiris or Horus or
Apollo or Hercules--that it is not necessary to dwell on the subject any
further in order to persuade the reader that the doctrine was 'in the
air' at the time of the advent of Christianity. Even Dionysus, then a
prominent figure in the 'Mysteries,' was called Eleutherios, *The
Deliverer*. But it may be of interest to trace the same doctrine among
the *pre-Christian* sects of Gnostics. The Gnostics, says Professor
Murray, <span id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_223) "are still commonly
thought of as a body of *Christian* heretics. In reality there were
Gnostic sects scattered over

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the Hellenistic world *before* Christianity as well as after. They must
have been established in Antioch and probably in Tarsus well before the
days of Paul or Apollos. Their Savior, like the Jewish Messiah, was
established in men's minds before the Savior of the Christians. 'If e
look close,' says Professor Bousset, 'the result emerges with great
clearness that the figure of the Redeemer as such did not wait for
Christianity to force its way into the religion of Gnosis, but was
already present there under various forms.'"

This Gnostic Redeemer, continues Professor Murray, "is descended by a
fairly clear genealogy from the 'Tritos Sôtêr' ('third Savior') <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) of early Greece, contaminated with
similar figures, like Attis and Adonis from Asia Minor, Osiris from
Egypt, and the special Jewish conception of the Messiah of the Chosen
people. He has various names, which the name of Jesus or 'Christos,'
'the Anointed,' tends gradually to supersede. Above all, he is in some
sense Man, or 'the second Man' or 'the Son of Man' . . . He is the real,
the ultimate, the perfect and eternal Man, of whom all bodily men are
feeble copies." <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_225)

This passage brings vividly before the mind the process of which I have
spoken, namely, the fusion and mutual interchange of ideas on the
subject of the Savior during the period anterior to our era. Also it
exemplifies to us through what an abstract sphere of Gnostic religious
speculation the doctrine had to travel before reaching its expression in
Christianity. <span id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_226) This exalted and
high philosophical

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

conception passed on and came out again to some degree in the Fourth
Gospel and the Pauline Epistles (especially 1 Cor. xv); but I need
hardly say it was not maintained. The enthusiasm of the little scattered
Christian bodies--with their communism of practice with regard to *this*
world and their intensity of faith with regard to the next--began to
wane in the second and third centuries A.D. As the Church (with capital
initial) grew, so was it less and less occupied with real religious
feeling, and more and more with its battles against persecution from
outside, and its quarrels and dissensions concerning heresies w thin its
own borders. And when at the Council of Nicæa (325 A.D.) it endeavored
to establish an official creed, the strife and bitterness only
increased. "There is no wild beast," said the Emperor Julian, "like an
angry theologian." Where the fourth Evangelist had preached the gospel
of Love, and Paul had announced redemption by an inner and spiritual
identification with Christ, "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
be made alive"; and whereas some at any rate of the Pagan cults had
taught a glorious salvation by the new birth of a divine being within
each man: "*Be of good cheer, O initiates in the mystery of the
liberated god; For to you too out of all your labors and sorrows shall
come Liberation*"--the Nicene creed had nothing to propound except some
extremely futile speculations about the relation to each other of the
Father and the Son, and the relation of *both* to the Holy Ghost, and of
all *three* to the Virgin Mary--speculations which only served for the
renewal of shameful strife and animosities--riots and bloodshed and
murder--within the Church, and the mockery of the heathen without. And
as far as it dealt with the crucifixion, death and resurrection of the
Lord it did not differ from the score of preceding pagan creeds, except
in the thorough materialism and lack of poetry in statement which it
exhibits. After the Council of Nicæa, in fact, the Judaic tinge in the
doctrines of the Church becomes

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

more apparent, and more and more its Scheme of Salvation through Christ
takes the character of a rather sordid and huckstering bargain by which
Man gets the better of God by persuading the latter to sacrifice his own
Son for the redemption of the world! With the exception of a few
episodes like the formation during the Middle Ages of the noble
brotherhoods and sisterhoods of [Friars](errata.htm#2) and Nuns,
dedicated to the help and healing of suffering humanity, and the
appearance of a few real lovers of mankind (and the animals) like St.
Francis--(and these manifestations can hardly be claimed by the Church,
which pretty consistently opposed them)--it may be said that after about
the fourth century the real spirit and light of early Christian
enthusiasm died away. The incursions of barbarian tribes from the North
and East, and later of Moors and Arabs from the South, familiarized the
European peoples with the ideas of bloodshed and violence; gross and
material conceptions of life were in the ascendant; and a romantic and
aspiring Christianity gave place to a worldly and vulgar Churchianity.

 

I have in these two or three pages dealt only--and that very
briefly--with the entry of the pagan doctrine of the Savior into the
Christian field, showing its transformation there and how Christianity
could not well escape having a doctrine of a Savior, or avoid giving a
color of its own to that doctrine. To follow out the same course with
other doctrines, like those which I have mentioned above, would
obviously be an endless task--which must be left to each student or
reader to pursue according to his opportunity and capacity. It is clear
anyhow, that all these elements of the pagan religions--pouring down
into the vast reservoir, or rather whirlpool, of the Roman Empire, and
mixing among all these numerous brotherhoods, societies, *collegia*,
mystery-clubs, and groups which were at that time looking out intently
for some new revelation or inspiration--did more or less automatically
act and react upon

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

each other, and by the general conditions prevailing were modified, till
they ultimately combined and took united shape in the movement which we
call Christianity, but which only--as I have said--narrowly escaped
being called Mithraism--so nearly related and closely allied were these
cults with each other.

 

At this point it will naturally be asked: "And where in this scheme of
the Genesis of Christianity is the chief figure and accredited leader of
the movement--namely Jesus Christ himself--for to all appearance in the
account here given of the matter he is practically non-existent or a
negligible quantity?" And the question is a very pertinent one, and very
difficult to answer. "Where is the founder of the Religion?"--or to put
it in another form: "Is it necessary to suppose a human and visible
Founder at all?" A few years ago such a mere question would have been
accounted rank blasphemy, and would only--if passed over--have been
ignored on account of its supposed absurdity. To-day, however, owing to
the enormous amount of work which has been done of late on the subject
of Christian origins, the question takes on quite a different
complexion. And from Strauss onwards a growingly influential and learned
body of critics is inclined to regard the whole story of the Gospels as
*legendary*. Arthur Drews, for instance, a professor at Karlsruhe, in
his celebrated book *The Christ-Myth*, <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227) places David F. Strauss as first in the
myth field--though he allows that Dupuis in *L'origine de tous les
cultes* (1795) had given the clue to the whole idea. He then mentions
Bruno Bauer (1877) as contending that Jesus was a pure invention of
Mark's, and John M. Robertson as having in his *Christianity and
Mythology* (1900) given the first thoroughly reasoned exposition of the
legendary theory; also Emilio Bossi in Italy, who

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

wrote Jesu Christo non e mai esistito, and similar authors in Holland,
Poland, and other countries, including W. Benjamin Smith, the American
author of *The Pre-christian Jesus* (1906), and P. Jensen in *Das
Gilgamesch Epos in den Welt-literatur* (1906), who makes the Jesus-story
a variant of the Babylonian epic, 2000 B.C. A pretty strong list! <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228) "But," continues Drews, "ordinary
historians still ignore all this." Finally, he dismisses Jesus as "a
figure swimming obscurely in the mists of tradition." Nevertheless I
need hardly remark that, large and learned as the body of opinion here
represented is, a still larger (but less learned) body fights
desperately for the actual *historicity* of Jesus, and some even still
for the old view of him as a quite unique and miraculous revelation of
Godhood on earth.

At first, no doubt, the *legendary* theory seems a little *too*
far-fetched. There is a fashion in all these things, and it *may* be
that there is a fashion even here. But when you reflect how rapidly
legends grow up even in these days of exact Science and an omniscient
Press; how the figure of Shakespeare, dead only 300 years, is almost
completely lost in the mist of Time, and even the authenticity of his
works has become a subject of controversy; when you find that William
Tell, supposed to have lived some 300 years again before Shakespeare,
and whose deeds in minutest detail have been recited and honored all
over Europe, is almost certainly a pure invention, and never existed;
when you remember--as mentioned earlier in this book <span
id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229)--that it was more than five hundred
years after the supposed birth of Jesus before any serious effort was
made to establish the date of that birth--and that then a purely
mythical date was chosen: the 25th December, the day of the *Sun's* new
birth after the winter solstice, and the time of the supposed birth of
Apollo, Bacchus, and the other Sungods;

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

when, moreover, you think for a moment what the state of historical
criticism must have been, and the general standard of credibility, 1,900
years ago, in a country like Syria, and among an ignorant population,
where any story circulating from lip to lip was assured of credence if
sufficiently marvelous or imaginative;--why, then the legendary theory
does not seem so improbable. There is no doubt that after the
destruction of Jerusalem (in A.D. 70), little groups of believers in a
redeeming 'Christ' were formed there and in other places, just as there
had certainly existed, in the first century B.C., groups of Gnostics,
Therapeutæ, Essenes and others whose teachings were very *similar* to
the Christian, and there was now a demand from many of these groups for
'writings' and 'histories' which should hearten and confirm the young
and growing Churches. The Gospels and Epistles, of which there are still
extant a great abundance, both apocryphal and canonical, met this
demand; but how far their records of the person of Jesus of Nazareth are
reliable history, or how far they are merely imaginative pictures of the
kind of man the Saviour might be expected to be, <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230) is a question which, as I have already
said, is a difficult one for skilled critics to answer, and one on which
I certainly have no intention of giving a positive verdict. Personally I
must say I think the 'legendary' solution quite likely, and in some ways
more satisfactory than the opposite one--for the simple reason that it
seems much more encouraging to suppose that the story of Jesus,
(gracious and beautiful as it is) is a myth which gradually formed
itself in the conscience of mankind, and thus points the way of
humanity's future evolution, than to suppose it to be the mere record of
an unique and miraculous interposition of Providence, which depended
entirely on the powers above, and could hardly be expected to occur
again.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

However, the question is not what we desire, but what we can prove to be
the actual fact. And certainly the difficulties in the way of regarding
the Gospel story (or stories, for there is not one consistent story) as
*true* are enormous. If anyone will read, for instance, in the four
Gospels, the events of the night preceding the crucifixion and reckon
the time which they would necessarily have taken to enact--the Last
Supper, the agony in the Garden, the betrayal by Judas, the haling
before Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin, and then before Pilate in the Hall of
judgment (though courts for the trial of malefactors do not *generally*
sit in the middle of the night); then--in Luke--the interposed visit to
Herod, and the *return* to Pilate; Pilate's speeches and washing of
hands before the crowd; then the scourging and the mocking and the
arraying of Jesus in purple robe as a king; then the preparation of a
Cross and the long and painful journey to Golgotha; and finally the
Crucifixion at sunrise;--he will see--as has often been pointed
out--that the whole story is physically impossible. As a record of
actual events the story is impossible; but as a record or series of
notes derived from the witnessing of a "mystery-play"--and such plays
with *very similar* incidents were common enough in antiquity in
connection with cults of a dying Savior, it very likely *is* true (one
can see the very dramatic character of the incidents: the washing of
hands, the threefold denial by Peter, the purple robe and crown of
thorns, and so forth); and as such it is now accepted by many
well-qualified authorities. <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231)

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

There are many other difficulties. The raising of Lazarus, already dead
three days, the turning of water into wine (a miracle attributed to
Bacchus, of old), the feeding of the five thousand, and others of the
marvels are, to say the least, not easy of digestion. The "Sermon on the
Mount" which, with the "Lord's Prayer" embedded in it, forms the great
and accepted repository of 'Christian' teaching and piety, is well known
to be a collection of sayings from pre-christian writings, including the
Psalms, Isaiah, Ecclesiasticus, the *Secrets of Enoch*, the
*Shemonehesreh* (a book of Hebrew prayers), and others; and the fact
that this collection was really made *after* the time of Jesus, and
could not have originated from him, is clear from the stress which it
lays on "persecutions" and "false prophets"--things which were certainly
not a source of trouble at the time Jesus is supposed to be speaking,
though they were at a later time--as well as from the occurrence of the
word "Gentiles," which being here used apparently in contra-distinction
to "Christians" could not well be appropriate at a time when no
recognized Christian bodies as yet existed.

But the most remarkable point in this connection is the absolute silence
of the Gospel of Mark on the subject of the Resurrection and
Ascension--that is, of the *original* Gospel, for it is now allowed on
all hands that the twelve verses Mark xvi. 9 to the end, are a later
insertion. Considering the nature of this event, astounding indeed, if
physically true, and unique in the history of the world, it is strange
that this Gospel--the earliest written of the four Gospels, and nearest
in time to the actual evidence--

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

makes no mention of it. The next Gospel in point of time--that of
Matthew--mentions the matter rather briefly and timidly, and reports the
story that the body had been *stolen* from the sepulchre. Luke enlarges
considerably and gives a whole long chapter to the resurrection and
ascension; while the Fourth Gospel, written fully twenty years later
still--say about A. D. 120--gives two chapters and a *great variety of
details*!

This increase of detail, however, as one gets farther and farther from
the actual event is just what one always finds, as I have said before,
in legendary traditions. A very interesting example of this has lately
come to light in the case of the traditions concerning the life and
death of the Persian Bâb. The Bâb, as most of my readers will know, was
the Founder of a great religious movement which now numbers (or numbered
before the Great War) some millions of adherents, chiefly Mahommedans,
Christians, Jews and Parsees. The period of his missionary activity was
from 1845 to 1850. His Gospel was singularly like that of Jesus--a
gospel of love to mankind--only (as might be expected from the
difference of date) with an even wider and more deliberate inclusion of
*all* classes, creeds and races, sinners and saints; and the incidents
and *entourage* of his ministry were also singularly similar. He was
born at Shiraz in 1820, and growing up a promising boy and youth, fell
at the age of 21 under the influence of a certain Seyyid Kazim, leader
of a heterodox sect, and a kind of fore-runner or John the Baptist to
the Bâb. The result was a period of mental trouble (like the "temptation
in the wilderness"), after which the youth returned to Shiraz and at the
age of twenty-five began his own mission. His real name was Mirza Ali
Muhammad, but he called himself thenceforth *The Bâb*, i.e. the Gate ("I
am the Way"); and gradually there gathered round him disciples, drawn by
the fascination of his personality and the devotion of his character.
But with the rapid increase of his

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

following great jealousy and hatred were excited among the Mullahs, the
upholders of a fanatical and narrow-minded Mahommedanism and quite
corresponding to the Scribes and Pharisees of the New Testament. By them
he was denounced to the Turkish Government. He was arrested on a charge
of causing political disturbance, and was condemned to death. Among his
disciples was one favorite, <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232) who
was absolutely devoted to his Master and refused to leave him at the
last. So together they were suspended over the city wall (at Tabriz) and
simultaneously shot. This was on the 8th July, 1850.

In November 1850--or between that date and October 1851, a book
appeared, written by one of the Bâb's earliest and most enthusiastic
disciples--a merchant of Kashan--and giving in quite simple and
unpretending form a record of the above events. There is in it no
account of miracles or of great pretensions to godhood and the like. It
is just a plain history of the life and death of a beloved teacher. It
was cordially received and circulated far and wide; and we have no
reason for doubting its essential veracity. And even if proved now to be
inaccurate in one or two details, this would not invalidate the moral of
the rest of the story--which is as follows:

After the death of the Bâb a great persecution took place (in 1852);
there were many Bâbi martyrs, and for some years the general followers
were scattered. But in time they gathered themselves together again;
successors to the original prophet were appointed--though not without
dissensions--and a Bâbi church, chiefly at Acca or Acre in Syria, began
to be formed. It was during this period that a great number of legends
grew up--legends of miraculous babyhood and boyhood, legends of miracles
performed by the mature Bâb, and so forth; and when the newly-forming
Church came to look into the matter it concluded

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (quite naturally!) that such a simple history as
I have outlined above would never do for the foundation of its plans,
now grown somewhat ambitious. So a new Gospel was framed, called the
*Tarikh-i-Jadid* ("The new History" or "The new Way"), embodying and
including a lot of legendary matter, and issued with the authority of
"the Church." This was in 1881-2; and comparing this with the original
record (called *The point of Kaf*) we get a luminous view of the growth
of fable in those thirty brief years which had elapsed since the Bâb's
death. Meanwhile it became very necessary of course to withdraw from
circulation as far as possible all copies of the original record, lest
they should give the lie to the later 'Gospel'; and this apparently was
done very effectively--so effectively indeed that Professor Edward
Browne (to whom the world owes so much on account of his labors in
connection with Bâbism), after arduous search, came at one time to the
conclusion that the original was no longer extant. Most fortunately,
however, the well-known Comte de Gobineau had in the course of his
studies on Eastern Religions acquired a copy of *The point of Kaf*; and
this, after his death, was found among his literary treasures and
identified (as was most fitting) by Professor Browne himself.

Such in brief is the history of the early Bâbi Church <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)--a Church which has grown up and
expanded greatly within the memory of many yet living. Much might be
written about it, but the chief point at present is for us to note the
well-verified and interesting example it gives of the rapid growth in
Syria of a religious legend and the reasons which contributed to this
growth--and to be warned how much more rapidly similar legends probably
grew up in the same land in the middle of the First Century, A.D.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The story of the Bâb is also interesting to us
because, while this mass of legend was formed around it, there is no
possible doubt about the actual existence of a historical nucleus in the
person of Mirza Ali Muhammad.

On the whole, one is sometimes inclined to doubt whether any great
movement ever makes itself felt in the world, without dating first from
some powerful personality or group of personalities, *round* which the
idealizing and myth-making genius of mankind tends to crystallize. But
one must not even here be too certain. Something of the Apostle Paul we
know, and something of 'John' the Evangelist and writer of the Epistle 1
John; and that the 'Christian' doctrines dated largely from the
preaching and teaching of these two we cannot doubt; but Paul never saw
Jesus (except "in the Spirit"), nor does he ever mention the man
personally, or any incident of his actual life (the "crucified Christ"
being always an ideal figure); and 'John' who wrote the Gospel was
certainly not the same as the disciple who "lay in Jesus' bosom"--though
an intercalated verse, the last but one in the Gospel, asserts the
identity. <span id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_234)

There may have been a historic Jesus--and if so, to get a reliable
outline of his life would indeed be a treasure; but at present it would
seem there is no sign of that. If the historicity of Jesus, in any
degree, could be proved, it would give us reason for supposing--what I
have personally always been inclined to believe--that there was also a
historical nucleus for such personages as Osiris, Mithra, Krishna,
Hercules, Apollo and the rest. The question, in fact, narrows itself
down to this, Have there been in the course of human evolution certain,
so to speak, *nodal* points or periods at which the psychologic currents
ran together and condensed themselves for a new start; and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

has each such node or point of condensation been marked by the
appearance of an actual and heroic man (or woman) who supplied a
necessary impetus for the new departure, and gave his name to the
resulting movement? *or* is it sufficient to suppose the automatic
formation of such nodes or starting-points without the intervention of
any special hero or genius, and to imagine that in each case the
myth-making tendency of mankind *created* a legendary and inspiring
figure and worshiped the same for a long period afterwards as a god?

As I have said before, this is a question which, interesting as it is,
is not really very important. The main thing being that the prophetic
and creative spirit of mankind *has* from time to time evolved those
figures as idealizations of its "heart's desire" and placed a halo round
their heads. The long procession of them becomes a *real* piece of
History--the history of the evolution of the human heart, and of human
consciousness. But with the psychology of the whole subject I shall deal
in the next chapter.

 

I may here, however, dwell for a moment on two other points which belong
properly to this chapter. I have already mentioned the great reliance
placed by the advocates of a unique 'revelation' on the high morality
taught in the Gospels and the New Testament generally. There is no need
of course to challenge that morality or to depreciate it unduly; but the
argument assumes that it is so greatly superior to anything of the kind
that had been taught before that we are compelled to suppose something
like a revelation to explain its appearance--whereas of course anyone
familiar with the writings of antiquity, among the Greeks or Romans or
Egyptians or Hindus or later Jews, knows perfectly well that the
reported sayings of Jesus and the Apostles may be paralleled abundantly
from these sources. I have illustrated this already from the Sermon on
the Mount. If anyone will glance at the *Testament of* 

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the Twelve Patriarchs--a Jewish book composed about 120 B. C.--he will
see that it is full of moral precepts, and especially precepts of love
and forgiveness, so ardent and so noble that it hardly suffers in any
way when compared with the New Testament teaching, and that consequently
no special miracle is required to explain the appearance of the latter.

The twelve Patriarchs in question are the twelve sons of Jacob, and the
book consists of their supposed deathbed scenes, in which each patriarch
in turn recites his own (more or less imaginary) life and deeds and
gives pious counsel to his children and successors. It is composed in a
fine and poetic style, and is full of lofty thought, remindful in scores
of passages of the Gospels--words and all--the coincidences being too
striking to be accidental. It evidently had a deep influence on the
authors of the Gospels, as well as on St. Paul. It affirms a belief in
the coming of a Messiah, and in salvation for the Gentiles. The
following are some quotations from it: <span
id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_235) Testament of Zebulun (p. 116): "My
children, I bid you keep the commands of the Lord, and show mercy to
your neighbours, and have compassion towards all, not towards men only,
but also towards beasts." Dan (p. 127): "Love the Lord through all your
life, and one another with a true heart." Joseph (p. 173): "I was sick,
and the Lord visited me; in prison, and my God showed favor unto me."
Benjamin (p. 209): "For as the sun is not defiled by shining on dung and
mire, but rather drieth up both and driveth away the evil smell, so also
the pure mind, encompassed by the defilements of earth, rather cleanseth
them and is not itself defiled."

I think these quotations are sufficient to prove the high standard of
this book, which was written in the Second Century B. C., and *from*
which the New Testament authors copiously borrowed.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The other point has to do with my statement at the beginning of this
chapter that two of the main 'characteristics' of Christianity were its
insistence on (*a*) a tendency towards renunciation of the world, and a
consequent cultivation of a purely spiritual love, and (*b*) on a
morality whose inspiration was a private sense of duty to God rather
than a public sense of duty to one's neighbor and to society generally.
I think, however, that the last-mentioned characteristic ought to be
viewed in relation to a third, namely, (*c*) the extraordinarily
*democratic* tendency of the new Religion. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) Celsus (A.D. 200) jeered at the early
Christians for their extreme democracy: "It is only the simpletons, the
ignoble, the senseless--slaves and womenfolk and children--whom they
wish to persuade \[to join their churches\] or *can*
persuade"--"wool-dressers and cobblers and fullers, the most uneducated
and vulgar persons," and "whosoever is a sinner, or unintelligent or a
fool, in a word, whoever is god-forsaken (κακοδαίμων), him the Kingdom
of God will receive." <span id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237) Thus Celsus,
the accomplished, clever, philosophic and withal humorous critic,
laughed at the new religionists, and prophesied their speedy extinction.
Nevertheless he was mistaken. There is little doubt that just the
inclusion of women and weaklings and outcasts did contribute *largely*
to the spread of Christianity (and Mithraism). It brought hope and a
sense of human dignity to the despised and rejected of the earth. Of the
immense numbers of lesser officials who carried on the vast organization
of the Roman Empire, most perhaps, were taken from the ranks of the
freedmen and *quondam* slaves, drawn from a great variety of races and
already

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

familiar with pagan cults of all kinds--Egyptian, Syrian, Chaldean,
Iranian, and so forth. <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) This fact
helped to give to Christianity--under the fine tolerance of the
Empire--its democratic character and also its willingness to accept all.
The rude and menial masses, who had hitherto been almost beneath the
notice of Greek and Roman culture, flocked in; and though this was
doubtless, as time went on, a source of weakness to the Church, and a
cause of dissension and superstition, yet it was in the inevitable line
of human evolution, and had a psychological basis which I must now
endeavor to explain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_211"></span>[200:1](pcc14.htm#fr_211) For an enlargement on
this theme see Glover's *Conflict of Religions in the early Roman
Empire*; also S. J. Case, *Evolution of Early Christianity* (University
of Chicago, 1914). The Adonis worship, for instance (a
resurrection-cult), "was still thriving in Syria and Cyprus when Paul
preached there," and the worship of Isis and Serapis had already reached
Athens, Rome and Naples.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[201:1](pcc14.htm#fr_212) See Cumont,
*Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain* (Paris, 1906), p. 253.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[201:2](pcc14.htm#fr_213) *Cultes païens dans
l'Empire Romain* (2 vols., 1911), vol. ii, p. 263.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[202:1](pcc14.htm#fr_214) Even to-day, the
Arabian lands are always vibrating with prophecies of a coming Mahdi.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[202:2](pcc14.htm#fr_215) See Edition by R. H.
Charles (1893).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[203:1](pcc14.htm#fr_216) See ch. ii, *supra*.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[203:2](pcc14.htm#fr_217) *Supra*, ch. ii.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[204:1](pcc14.htm#fr_218) See Cumont, *op.
cit*., who says, p. 171:--"Jamais, pas même à l'époque des invasions
mussulmanes, l'Europe ne sembla plus près de devenir asiatique qu'au
moment où Dioclétien reconnaissait officiellement en Mithra, le
protecteur de l'empire reconstitué." See also Cumont's *Mystères de
Mithra*, preface. The Roman Army, in fact, stuck to Mithra throughout,
as against Christianity; and so did the Roman nobility. (See S.
Augustine's *Confessions*, Book VIII, ch. 2.)

<span id="fn_219"></span>[204:2](pcc14.htm#fr_219) Cumont indeed says
that the identification of Mithra with the Sun (the emblem of imperial
power) formed one reason why Mithraism was *not* persecuted at that
time.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[204:3](pcc14.htm#fr_220) Epist. cvii, *ad
Laetam*. See Robertson's *Pagan Christs*, p. 350.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[205:1](pcc14.htm#fr_221) *De Abstinentia*, ii.
56; iv. 16.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[205:2](pcc14.htm#fr_222) *Four Stages*, p.
180. We have probably an instance of this destruction in the total
disappearance of Celsus' lively attack on Christianity (180 A.D.), of
which, however, portions have been fortunately preserved in Origen's
rather prolix refutation of the same.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[205:3](pcc14.htm#fr_223) *Four Stages*, p.
143.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[206:1](pcc14.htm#fr_224) There seems to be
some doubt about the exact meaning of this expression. Even Zeus himself
was sometimes called 'Soter,' and at feasts, it is said, the *third*
goblet was always drunk in his honor.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[206:2](pcc14.htm#fr_225) See also *The Gnostic
Story of Jesus Christ*, by Gilbert T. Sadler (C. W. Daniel, 1919).

<span id="fn_226"></span>[206:3](pcc14.htm#fr_226) When travelling in
India I found that the Gñanis or Wise Men there quite commonly
maintained that Jesus (judging from his teaching) must have been
initiated at some time in the esoteric doctrines of the Vedanta.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[209:1](pcc14.htm#fr_227) *Die Christus-mythe*:
verbesserte und erweitezte Ausgabe, Jena, 1910.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[210:1](pcc14.htm#fr_228) To which we may also
add Schweitzer's *Quest of the historical Jesus* (1910).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[210:2](pcc14.htm#fr_229) Ch. II, *supra*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[211:1](pcc14.htm#fr_230) One of Celsus'
accusations against the Christians was that their Gospels had been
written "several times over" (see Origen, *Contra Celsum*, ii. 26, 27).

<span id="fn_231"></span>[212:1](pcc14.htm#fr_231) Dr. Frazer in *The
Golden Bough* (vol. ix, "The Scapegoat," p. 400) speaks of the frequency
in antiquity of a Mystery-play relating to a God-man who gives his life
and blood for the people; and he puts forward tentatively and by no
means dogmatically the following note:--"Such a drama, if we are right,
was the original story of Esther and Mordecai, or (to give their older
names) Ishtar and Marduk. It was played in Babylonia, and from Babylonia
the returning Captives brought it to Judæa, where it was acted, rather
as an historical than a mythical piece, by players who, having to die in
grim earnest on a cross or gallows, were naturally drawn from the gaol
<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> rather than the green-room. A chain of
causes, which because we cannot follow them might--in the loose language
of common life--be called an accident, determined that the part of the
dying god in this annual play should be thrust upon Jesus of Nazareth,
whom the enemies he had made in high places by his outspoken strictures
were resolved to put out of the way." See also vol. iv, "The Dying God,"
in the same book.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[215:1](pcc14.htm#fr_232) Mirza Muhammad Ali;
and one should note the similarity of the two names.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[216:1](pcc14.htm#fr_233) For literature, see
Edward G. Browne's *Traveller's Narrative on the Episode of the Bâb*
(1891), and his *New History of the Bâb* translated from the Persian of
the *Tarikh-i-Jadid* (*Cambridge*, 1893). Also *Sermons and Essays* by
Herbert Rix (Williams and Norgate, 1907), pp. 295-325, "The Persian
Bâb."

<span id="fn_234"></span>[217:1](pcc14.htm#fr_234) It is obvious, in
fact, that the *whole* of the last chapter of St. John is a later
insertion, and again that the two last verses of that chapter are later
than the chapter itself!

<span id="fn_235"></span>[219:1](pcc14.htm#fr_235) The references being
to the Edition by R. H. Charles (1907).

<span id="fn_236"></span>[220:1](pcc14.htm#fr_236) It is important to
note, however, that this same democratic tendency was very marked in
Mithraism. "Il est certain," says Cumont, "qu'il a fait ses premières
conquêtes dans les classes inférieures de la société et c'est l'a un
fait considérable; le mithracisme est resté longtemps la réligion des
humbles." *Mystères de Mithra*, p. 68.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[220:2](pcc14.htm#fr_237) See Glover's
*Conflict of Religions in the early Roman Empire*, ch. viii.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[221:1](pcc14.htm#fr_238) See Toutain, *Cultes
païens*, vol. ii, conclusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The Meaning of it All](pcc15)
