[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc17)  [Next](pcc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### XVII.

### CONCLUSION

In conclusion there does not seem much to say, except to accentuate
certain points which may still appear doubtful or capable of being
understood.

The fact that the main argument of this volume is along the lines of
psychological evolution will no doubt commend it to some, while on the
other hand it will discredit the book to others whose eyes, being fixed
on purely *material* causes, can see no impetus in History except
through these. But it must be remembered that there is not the least
reason for *separating* the two factors. The fact that psychologically
man has evolved from simple consciousness to self-consciousness, and is
now in process of evolution towards another and more extended kind of
consciousness, does not in the least bar the simultaneous appearance and
influence of material evolution. It is clear indeed that the two must
largely go together, acting and reacting on each other. Whatever the
physical conditions of the animal brain may be which connect themselves
with simple (unreflected and unreflecting) consciousness, it is evident
that these conditions--in animals and primitive man--lasted for an
enormous period, before the distinct consciousness of the individual and
separate *self* arose. This second order of consciousness seems to have
germinated at or about the same period as the discovery of the use

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

of Tools (tools of stone, copper, bronze, &c.), the adoption of
picture-writing and the use of reflective words (like "I" and "Thou");
and it led on to the appreciation of gold and of iron with their
ornamental and practical values, the accumulation of Property, the
establishment of slavery of various kinds, the subjection of Women, the
encouragement of luxury and self-indulgence, the growth of crowded
cities and the endless conflicts and wars so resulting. We can see
plainly that the incoming of the self-motive exercised a direct stimulus
on the pursuit of these material objects and adaptations; and that the
material adaptations in their turn did largely accentuate the
self-motive; but to insist that the real explanation of the whole
process is only to be found along one channel--the material OR the
psychical--is clearly quite unnecessary. Tho e who understand that all
matter is conscious in some degree, and that all consciousness has a
material form of some kind, will be the first to admit this.

The same remarks apply to the Third Stage. We can see that in modern
times the huge and unlimited powers of production by machinery, united
with a growing tendency towards intelligent Birth-control, are preparing
the way for an age of Communism and communal Plenty which will
inevitably be associated (partly as cause and partly as effect) with a
new general phase of consciousness, involving the mitigation of the
struggle for existence, the growth of intuitional and psychical
perception, the spread of amity and solidarity, the disappearance of
War, and the realization (in degree) of the Cosmic life.

Perhaps the greatest difficulty or stumbling-block to the general
acceptance of the belief in a third (or 'Golden- Age') phase of human
evolution is the obstinate and obdurate pre-judgment that the passing of
Humanity out of the Second stage can only mean the entire *abandonment
of self-consciousness*; and this people say--and quite rightly --is both
impossible and undesirable. Throughout the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

preceding chapters I have striven, wherever feasible, to counter this
misunderstanding--but I have little hope of success. The *determination*
of the world to misunderstand or misinterpret anything a little new or
unfamiliar is a thing which perhaps only an author can duly appreciate.
But while it is clear that self-consciousness originally came into being
through a process of alienation and exile and fear which marked it with
the Cain-like brand of loneliness and apartness, it is equally clear
that to think of that apartness as an absolute and permanent separation
is an illusion, since no being can really continue to live divorced from
the source of its life. For a period in evolution the *self* took on
this illusive form in consciousness, as of an *ignis fatuus*--the form
of a being sundered from all other beings, atomic, lonely, without
refuge, surrounded by dangers and struggling, for itself alone and for
its own salvation in the midst of a hostile environment. Perhaps some
such terrible imagination was necessary at first, as it were to start
Humanity on its new path. But it had its compensation, for the
sufferings and tortures, mental and bodily, the privations,
persecutions, accusations, hatreds, the wars and conflicts--so endured
by millions of individuals and whole races--have at length stamped upon
the human mind a sense of individual responsibility which otherwise
perhaps would never have emerged, and whose mark can now be effaced;
ultimately, too, these things have searched our inner nature to its very
depths and exposed its bed-rock foundation. They have convinced us that
this idea of ultimate separation is an illusion, and that in truth we
are all indefeasible and indestructible parts of one great Unity in
which "we live and move and have our being." That being so, it is clear
that there remains in the end a self-consciousness which need by no
means be abandoned, which indeed only comes to its true fruition and
understanding when it recognizes its affiliation with the Whole, and
glories in an individuality which is an

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

expression both of itself *and* of the whole. The human child at its
mother's knee probably comes first to know it *has* a 'self' on some
fateful day when having wandered afar it goes lost among alien houses
and streets or in the trackless fields. That appalling experience--the
sense of danger, of fear, of loneliness--is never forgotten; it stamps
some new sense of Being upon the childish mind, but that sense, instead
of being destroyed, becomes all the prouder and more radiant in the hour
of return to the mother's arms. The return, the salvation, for which
humanity looks, is the return of the little individual self to harmony
and union with the great Self of the universe, but by no means its
extinction or abandonment--rather the finding of its own true nature as
never before.

 

There is another thing which may be said here: namely, that the
disentanglement, as above, of three main stages of psychological
evolution as great formative influences in the history of mankind, does
not by any means preclude the establishment of lesser stages within the
boundaries of these. In all probability subdivisions of all the three
will come in time to be recognized and allowed for. To take the Second
stage only, it *may* appear that Self-consciousness in its first
development is characterized by an accentuation of Timidity; in its
second development by a more deliberate pursuit of sensual Pleasure
(lust, food, drink, &c.); in its third by the pursuit of mental
gratifications (vanities, ambitions, enslavement of others); in its
fourth by the pursuit of Property, as a means of attaining these
objects; in its fifth by the access of enmities, jealousies, wars and so
forth, consequent on all these things; and so on. I have no intention at
present of following out this line of thought, but only wish to suggest
its feasibility and the degree to which it may throw light on the social
evolutions of the Past. <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289)

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

As a kind of rude general philosophy we may say that there are only two
main factors in life, namely, *Love* and *Ignorance*. And of these we
may also say that the two are not in the same plane: one is positive and
substantial, the other is negative and merely illusory. It may be
thought at first that Fear and Hatred and Cruelty, and the like, are
very positive things, but in the end we see that they are due merely to
*absence* of perception, to dulness of understanding. Or we may put the
statement in a rather less crude form, and say that there are only two
factors in life: (1) the sense of Unity with others (and with
Nature)--which covers Love, Faith, Courage, Truth, and so forth, and (2)
Non-perception of the same--which covers Enmity, Fear, Hatred,
Self-pity, Cruelty, Jealousy, Meanness and an endless similar list. The
present world which we see around us, with its idiotic wars, its
senseless jealousies of nations and classes, its fears and greeds and
vanities and its futile endeavors--as of people struggling in a
swamp--to find one's own salvation by treading others underfoot, is a
negative phenomenon. Ignorance, *non-perception*, are at the root of it.
But it is the blessed virtue of Ignorance and of non-perception that
they inevitably--if only slowly and painfully--*destroy themselves*. All
experience serves to dissipate them. The world, as it is, carries' the
doom of its own transformation in its bosom; and in proportion as that
which is negative disappears the positive element must establish itself
more and more.

So we come back to that with which we began, <span
id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_290) to Fear bred by Ignorance. From that
source has sprung the long catalogue of follies, cruelties and
sufferings which mark the records of the human race since the dawn of
history; and to the overcoming of this Fear we perforce must look

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

for our future deliverance, and for the discovery, even in the midst of
this world, of our true Home. The time is coming when the positive
constructive element must dominate. It is inevitable that Man must ever
build a state of society around him after the pattern and image of his
own interior state. The whole futile and idiotic structure of commerce
and industry in which we are now imprisoned springs from that falsehood
of individualistic self-seeking which marks the second stage of human
evolution. That stage is already tottering to its fall, destroyed by the
very flood of egotistic passions and interests, of vanities, greeds, and
cruelties, all warring with each other, which are the sure outcome and
culmination of its operation. With the restoration of the sentiment of
the Common Life, and the gradual growth of a mental attitude
corresponding, there will emerge from the flood something like a solid
earth--something on which it will be possible to build with good hope
for the future. Schemes of reconstruction are well enough in their way,
but if there is no ground of *real human solidarity* beneath, of what
avail are they?

An industrial system which is no real industrial order, but only (on the
part of the employers) a devil's device for securing private profit
under the guise of public utility, and (on the part of the employed) a
dismal and poor-spirited renunciation--for the sake of a bare living--of
all real interest in life and work: such a 'system' must infallibly pass
away. It cannot in the nature of things be permanent. The first
condition of social happiness and prosperity must be the sense of the
Common Life. This sense, which instinctively underlay the whole Tribal
order of the far past-- which first came to consciousness in the worship
of a thousand pagan divinities, and in the rituals of countless
sacrifices, initiations, redemptions, love-feasts and communions, which
inspired the dreams of the Golden Age, and flashed out for a time in the
Communism of the early Christians and in their adorations of the risen
Savior--must in the end be

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

the creative condition of a new order: it must provide the material of
which the Golden City waits to be built. The long travail of the
World-religion will not have been in vain, which assures this
consummation. What the signs and conditions of any general advance into
this new order of life and consciousness will be, we know not. It may be
that as to individuals the revelation of a new vision often comes quite
suddenly, and *generally* perhaps after a period of great suffering, so
to society at large a similar revelation will arrive--like "the
lightning which cometh out of the East and shineth even unto the
West"--with unexpected swiftness. On the other hand it would perhaps be
wise not to count too much on any such sudden transformation. When we
look abroad (and at home) in this year of grace and hoped-for peace,
1919, and see the spirits of rancour and revenge, the fears, the selfish
blindness and the ignorance, which still hold in their paralyzing grasp
huge classes and coteries in every country in the world, we see that the
second stage of human development is by no means yet at its full term,
and that, as in some vast chrysalis, for the liberation of the creature
within still more and more terrible struggles *may* be necessary. We can
only pray that such may not be the case. Anyhow, if we have followed the
argument of this book we can hardly doubt that the destruction (which is
going on everywhere) of the outer form of the present society marks the
first stage of man's final liberation; and that, sooner or later, and in
its own good time, that further 'divine event' will surely be realized.

 

Nor need we fear that Humanity, when it has once entered into the great
Deliverance, will be again overpowered by evil. From Knowledge back to
Ignorance there is no complete return. The nations that have come to
enlightenment need entertain no dread of those others (however hostile
they appear) who are still plunging darkly

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

in the troubled waters of self-greed. The dastardly Fears which inspire
all brutishness and cruelty of warfare--whether of White against White
or it may be of White against Yellow or Black--may be dismissed for good
and all by that blest race which once shall have gained the shore--since
from the very nature of the case those who are on dry land can fear
nothing and need fear nothing from the unfortunates who are yet tossing
in the welter and turmoil of the waves.

Dr. Frazer, in the conclusion of his great work *The Golden
Bough*, <span id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_291) bids farewell to his
readers with the following words: "The laws of Nature are merely
hypotheses devised to explain that ever-shifting phantasmagoria of
thought which we dignify with the high-sounding names of the World and
the Universe. In the last analysis magic, religion and science are
nothing but theories \[of thought\]; and as Science has supplanted its
predecessors so it may hereafter itself be superseded by some more
perfect hypothesis, perhaps by some perfectly different way of looking
at phenomena--of registering the shadows on the screen--of which we in
this generation can form no idea." I imagine Dr. Frazer is right in
thinking that "a way of looking at phenomena" different from the way of
Science, may some day prevail. But I think this change will come, not so
much by the growth of Science itself or the extension of its
'hypotheses,' as by a growth and expansion of the human *heart* and a
change in its psychology and powers of perception. Perhaps some of the
preceding chapters will help to show how much the outlook of humanity on
the world has been guided through the centuries by the slow evolution of
its inner consciousness. Gradually, out of an infinite mass of folly and
delusion, the human soul has in this way disentangled itself, and will
in the future disentangle itself, to emerge at length in the light of
true *Freedom*. All the taboos, the insane terrors, the fatuous

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

forbiddals of this and that (with their consequent heart-searchings and
distress) may perhaps have been in their way necessary, in order to
rivet and define the meaning and the understanding of that word. To-day
these taboos and terrors still linger, many of them, in the form of
conventions of morality, uneasy strivings of conscience, doubts and
desperations of religion; but ultimately Man will emerge from all these
things, *free*--familiar, that is, with them all, making use of all,
allowing generously for the values of all, but hampered and bound by
*none*. He will realize the inner meaning of the creeds and rituals of
the ancient religions, and will hail with joy the fulfilment of their
far prophecy down the ages--finding after all the long-expected Saviour
of the world within his own breast, and Paradise in the disclosure there
of the everlasting peace of the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_289"></span>[274:1](pcc18.htm#fr_289) For an analysis of
the nature of Self-consciousness see vol. iii, p. 375 *sq*. of the three
ponderous tomes by Wilhelm Wundt--<span id="page_275">p.
275</span>*Grundzüge der Physiologischen Psychologie*--in which amid an
enormous mass of verbiage occasional gleams of useful suggestion are to
be found.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[275:1](pcc18.htm#fr_290) See Introduction, Ch.
I, *supra*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[278:1](pcc18.htm#fr_291) See "Balder," vol.
ii, pp. 306, 307. ("Farewell to Nemi.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](pcc19)
