[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc11)  [Next](pcc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### XI.

### RITUAL DANCING

It is unnecessary to labor the conclusion of the last two or three
chapters, namely that Christianity grew out of the former Pagan Creeds
and is in its general outlook and origins continuous and of one piece
with them. I have not attempted to bring together *all* the evidence in
favor of this contention, as such work would be too vast, but more
illustrations of its truth will doubtless occur to readers, or will
emerge as we proceed.

I think we may take it as proved (1) that from the earliest ages, and
before History, a great body of religious belief and ritual--first
appearing among very primitive and unformed folk, whom we should call
'savages'--has come slowly down, broadening and differentiating itself
on the way into a great variety of forms, but embodying always certain
main ideas which became in time the accepted doctrines of the later
Churches--the Indian, the Egyptian, the Mithraic, the Christian, and so
forth. What these ideas in their general outline have been we can
perhaps best judge from our "Apostles' Creed," as it is recited every
Sunday in our churches.

"I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and buried. He descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the
communion of Saints; the Forgiveness of sins; the Resurrection of the
body, and the life everlasting. Amen."

Here we have the All-Father and Creator, descending from the Sky in the
form of a spirit to impregnate the earthly Virgin-mother, who thus gives
birth to a Saviour-hero. The latter is slain by the powers of Evil, is
buried and descends into the lower world, but arises again as God into
heaven and becomes the leader and judge of mankind. We have the
confirmation of the Church (or, in earlier times, of the Tribe) by means
of a Eucharist or Communion which binds together all the members, living
or dead, and restores errant individuals through the Sacrifice of the
hero and the Forgiveness of their sins; and we have the belief in a
bodily Resurrection and continued life of the members within the fold of
the Church (or Tribe), itself regarded as eternal.

One has only, instead of the word 'Jesus,' to read Dionysus or Krishna
or Hercules or Osiris or Attis, and instead of 'Mary' to insert Semele
or Devaki or Alcmene or Neith or Nana, and for Pontius Pilate to use the
name of any terrestrial tyrant who comes into the corresponding story,
and lo! the creed fits in all particulars into the rites and worship of
a pagan god. I need not enlarge upon a thesis which is self-evident from
all that has gone before. I do not say, of course, that *all* the
religious beliefs of Paganism are included and summarized in our
Apostles' Creed, for--as I shall have occasion to note in the next
chapter--I think some very important religious elements are there
*omitted*; but I do think that all the beliefs which *are* summarized in
the said creed had already been fully

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

represented and elaborately expressed in the non-Christian religions and
rituals of Paganism.

Further (2) I think we may safely say that there is no certain proof
that the body of beliefs just mentioned sprang from any one particular
centre far back and radiated thence by dissemination and mental
contagion over the rest of the world; but the evidence rather shows that
these beliefs were, for the most part, the *spontaneous* outgrowths (in
various localities) of the human mind at certain stages of its
evolution; that they appeared, in the different races and peoples, at
different periods according to the degree of evolution, and were largely
independent of intercourse and contagion, though of course, in cases,
considerably influenced by it; and that one great and all-important
occasion and provocative of these beliefs was actually the *rise of
self-consciousness*--that is, the coming of the mind to a more or less
distinct awareness of itself and of its own operation, and the
consequent development and growth of Individualism, and of the
Self-centred attitude in human thought and action.

In the third place (3) I think we may see--and this is the special
subject of the present chapter--that at a very early period, when
humanity was hardly capable of systematic expression in what we call
Philosophy or Science, it could not well rise to an ordered and literary
expression of its beliefs, such as we find in the later religions and
the 'Churches' (Babylonian, Jewish, East Indian, Christian, or
what-not), and yet that it *felt* these beliefs very intensely and was
urged, almost compelled, to their utterance in some form or other. And
so it came about that people expressed themselves in a vast mass of
ritual and myth--customs, ceremonies, legends, stories--which on account
of their popular and concrete form were handed down for generations, and
some of which linger on still in the midst of our modern civilization.
These rituals and legends were, many of them, absurd enough, rambling
and childish

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

in character, and preposterous in conception, yet they gave the
expression needed; and some of them of course, as we have seen, were
full of meaning and suggestion.

A critical and commercial Civilization, such as ours, in which
(notwithstanding much *talk* about Art) the artistic sense is greatly
lacking, or at any rate but little diffused, does not as a rule
understand that poetic *rites*, in the evolution of peoples, came
naturally before anything like ordered poems or philosophy or
systematized *views* about life and religion--such as *we* love to
wallow in! Things were *felt* before they were spoken. The loading of
diseases into disease-boats, of sins onto scape-goats, the propitiation
of the forces of nature by victims, human or animal, sacrifices,
ceremonies of re-birth, eucharistic feasts, sexual communions, orgiastic
celebrations of the common life, and a host of other things--all *said*
plainly enough what was meant, but not in *words*. Partly no doubt it
was that at some early time words were more difficult of command and
less flexible in use than actions (and at all times are they not less
expressive?). Partly it was that mankind was in the child-stage. The
Child delights in ritual, in symbol, in expression through material
objects and actions:

See, at his feet some little plan or chart,  
Some fragment from his dream of human life,  
Shaped by himself with newly learned art;  
      A wedding or a festival,  
      A mourning or a funeral;  
            And this hath now his heart.

And primitive man in the child-stage felt a positive joy in ritual
celebrations, and indulged in expressions which we but little
understand; for these had then his heart.

One of the most pregnant of these expressions was *dancing*. Children
dance instinctively. They dance with rage; they dance with joy, with
sheer vitality; they dance

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

with pain, or sometimes with savage glee at the suffering of others;
they delight in mimic combats, or in animal plays and disguises. There
are such things as Courting-dances, when the mature male and female go
through a ritual together--not only in civilized ball-rooms and the
back-parlors of inns, but in the farmyards where the rooster pays his
addresses to the hen, or the yearling bull to the cow--with quite
recognized formalities; there are elaborate ceremonials performed by the
Australian bower-birds and many other animals. All these things--at any
rate in children and animals--come before speech; and anyhow we may say
that *love-rites*, even in mature and civilized man, hardly *admit* of
speech. Words only vulgarize love and blunt its edge.

So Dance to the savage and the early man was not merely an amusement or
a gymnastic exercise (as the books often try to make out), but it was
also a serious and intimate part of life, an expression of religion and
the relation of man to non-human Powers. Imagine a young dancer--and the
admitted age for ritual dancing was commonly from about eighteen to
thirty--coming forward on the dancing-ground or platform for the
*invocation of Rain*. We have unfortunately no kinematic records, but it
is not impossible or very difficult to imagine the various gestures and
movements which might be considered appropriate to such a rite in
different localities or among different peoples. A modern student of
Dalcroze Eurhythmics would find the problem easy. After a time a certain
ritual dance (for rain) would become stereotyped and generally adopted.
Or imagine a young Greek leading an invocation to Apollo to *stay some
plague* which was ravaging the country. He might as well be accompanied
by a small body of co-dancers; but he would be the leader and chief
representative. Or it might be a *war-dance*--as a more or less magical
preparation for the raid or foray. We are familiar enough with accounts
of war-dances

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

among American Indians. C. O. Müller in his *History and Antiquities of
the Doric Race* <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) gives the
following account of the Pyrrhic dance among the Greeks, which was
danced in full armor:--"Plato says that it imitated all the attitudes of
defence, by avoiding a thrust or a cast, retreating, springing up, and
crouching-as also the opposite movements of attack with arrows and
lances, and also of every kind of thrust. So strong was the attachment
to this dance at Sparta that, long after it had in the other Greek
states degenerated into a Bacchanalian revel, it was still danced by the
Spartans as a warlike exercise, and boys of fifteen were instructed in
it." Of the *Hunting-dance* I have already given instances. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183) It always had the character of Magic
about it, by which the game or quarry might presumably be influenced;
and it can easily be understood that if the Hunt was not successful the
blame might well be attributed to some neglect of the usual ritual mimes
or movements--no laughing matter for the leader of the dance.

Or there were dances belonging to the ceremonies of *Initiation*--dances
both by the initiators and the initiated. Jane E. Harrison in *Themis*
(p. 24) says, "Instruction among savage peoples is always imparted in
more or less mimetic dances. At initiation you learn certain dances
which confer on you definite social status. When a man is too old to
dance, he hands over his dance to another and a younger, and he then
among some tribes ceases to exist socially. . . . The dances taught to
boys at initiation are frequently if not always *armed* dances. These
are not necessarily warlike. The accoutrement of spear and shield was in
part decorative, in part a provision for making the necessary hubbub."
(Here Miss Harrison

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

reproduces a photograph of an Initiation dance among the Akikúyu of
British East Africa.) The Initiation-dances blend insensibly and
naturally with the *Mystery and Religion dances*, for indeed initiation
was for the most part an instruction in the mysteries and social rites
of the Tribe. They were the expression of things which would be hard
even for us, and which for rude folk would be impossible, to put into
definite words. Hence arose the expression--whose meaning has been much
discussed by the learned--"to dance out (ὲξορχε̑ισθαι) a mystery." <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184) Lucian, in a much-quoted passage, <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_185) observes: "You cannot find a single
ancient mystery in which there is not dancing . . . and this much all
men know, that most people say of the revealers of the mysteries that
they 'dance them out.'" Andrew Lang, commenting on this passage, <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_186) continues: "Clement of Alexandria uses
the same term when speaking of his own 'appalling revelations.' So
closely connected are mysteries with dancing among savages that when Mr.
Orpen asked Qing, the Bushman hunter, about some doctrines in which Qing
was not initiated, he said: 'Only the initiated men of that dance know
these things.' To 'dance' this or that means to be acquainted with this
or that myth, which is represented in a dance or *ballet d'action*. So
widely distributed is the practice that Acosta in an interesting passage
mentions it as familiar to the people of Peru before and after the
Spanish conquest." \[And we may say that when the 'mysteries' are of a
sexual nature it can easily be understood that to 'dance them out' is
the only way of explaining them!\]

Thus we begin to appreciate the serious nature and the importance of the
dance among primitive folk. To dub a youth "a good dancer" is to pay him
a great compliment.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Among the well-known inscriptions on the rocks
in the island of Thera in the Ægean sea there are many which record in
deeply graven letters the friendship and devotion to each other of
Spartan warrior-comrades; it seems strange at first to find how often
such an epithet of praise occurs as Bathycles *dances well*, Eumelos is
a *perfect dancer* (ἀριστος ὀρχεστας). One hardly in general expects one
warrior to praise another for his dancing! But when one realizes what is
really meant--namely the fitness of the loved comrade to lead in
religious and magical rituals--then indeed the compliment takes on a new
complexion. Religious dances, in dedication to a god, have of course
been honored in every country. Müller, in the work just cited, <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187) describes a lively dance called the
*hyporchema* which, accompanied by songs, was used in the worship of
Apollo. "In this, besides the chorus of singers who usually danced
around *the blazing altar*, several persons were appointed to accompany
the action of the poem with an appropriate pantomimic display." It was
probably some similar dance which is recorded in Exodus, ch. xxxii, when
Aaron made the Israelites a golden Calf (image of the Egyptian Apis).
There was an altar and a fire and burnt offerings for sacrifice, and the
people dancing around. Whether in the Apollo ritual the dancers were
naked I cannot say, but in the affair of the golden Calf they evidently
were, for it will be remembered that it was just this which upset Moses'
equanimity so badly--"when he *saw that the people were naked*"--and led
to the breaking of the two tables of stone and the slaughter of some
thousands of folk. It will be remembered also that David on a
sacrificial occasion danced naked before the Lord. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188)

It may seem strange that dances in honor of a god should be held naked;
but there is abundant evidence that this

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

was frequently the case, and it leads to an interesting speculation.
Many of these rituals undoubtedly owed their sanctity and solemnity to
their extreme antiquity. They came down in fact from very far back times
when the average man or woman--as in some of the Central African tribes
to-day--wore simply nothing at all; and like all religious ceremonies
they tended to preserve their forms long after surrounding customs and
conditions had altered. Consequently nakedness lingered on in
sacrificial and other rites into periods when in ordinary life it had
come to be abandoned or thought indecent and shameful. This comes out
very clearly in both instances above--quoted from the Bible. For in
Exodus xxxii. 25 it is said that "Aaron had made them (the dancers)
naked *unto their shame* among their enemies (*read* opponents)," and in
2 Sam. vi. 20 we are told that Michal came out and sarcastically rebuked
the "glorious king of Israel" for "shamelessly uncovering himself, like
a vain fellow" (for which rebuke, I am sorry to say, David took a mean
revenge on Michal). In both cases evidently custom had so far changed
that to a considerable section of the population these naked exhibitions
had become indecent, though as parts of an acknowledged ritual they were
still retained and supported by others. The same conclusion may be
derived from the commands recorded in Exodus xx. 26 and xxviii. 42, that
the priests be not "uncovered" before the altar--commands which would
hardly have been needed had not the practice been in vogue.

Then there were dances (partly magical or religious) performed at rustic
and agricultural festivals, like the *Epilenios*, celebrated in Greece
at the gathering of the grapes. <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189) Of
such a dance we get a glimpse in the Bible (Judges xxi. 20) when the
elders advised the children of Benjamin to go out and lie in wait in the
vineyards, at the time of the yearly feast; and "when the daughters of
Shiloh come out

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

to dance in the dances, then come ye out of the vineyards and catch you
every man a wife from the daughters of Shiloh"--a touching example
apparently of early so-called 'marriage by capture'! Or there were
dances, also partly or originally religious, of a quite orgiastic and
Bacchanalian character, like the *Bryallicha* performed in Sparta by men
and women in hideous masks, or the *Deimalea* by Sileni and Satyrs
waltzing in a circle; or the *Bibasis* carried out by both men and
women--a quite gymnastic exercise in which the performers took a special
pride in striking their own buttocks with their heels! or others wilder
still, which it would perhaps not be convenient to describe.

 

We must see how important a part Dancing played in that great panorama
of Ritual and Religion (spoken of in the last chapter) which, having
originally been led up to by the 'Fall of Man,' has ever since the dawn
of history gradually overspread the world with its strange procession of
demons and deities, and its symbolic representations of human destiny.
When it is remembered that ritual dancing was the matrix out of which
the *Drama* sprang, and further that the drama in its inception (as
still to-day in India) was an affair of religion and was acted in, or in
connection with, the Temples, it becomes easier to understand how all
this mass of ceremonial sacrifices, expiations, initiations, Sun and
Nature festivals, eucharistic and orgiastic communions and celebrations,
mystery-plays, dramatic representations, myths and legends, etc., which
I have touched upon in the preceding chapters--together with all the
emotions, the desires, the fears, the yearnings and the wonderment which
they represented--have practically sprung from the same root: a root
deep and necessary in the psychology of Man. Presently I hope to show
that they will all practically converge again in the end to one meaning,
and prepare the way for one great Synthesis to

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

come--an evolution also necessary and inevitable in human psychology.

In that truly inspired Ode from which I quoted a few pages back, occur
those well-known words whose repetition now will, on account of their
beauty, I am sure be excused:--

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:  
The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star,  
    Hath had elsewhere its setting,  
        And cometh from afar;  
    Not in entire forgetfulness,  
    And not in utter nakedness,  
But trailing clouds of glory do we come  
    From God, who is our home:  
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!  
Shades of the prison-house begin to close  
    Upon the growing Boy,  
But He beholds the light and whence it flows  
    He sees it in his joy;  
The youth who daily farther from the east  
    Must travel, still is Nature's Priest,  
    And by the vision splendid  
    Is on his way attended;  
At length the man perceives it die away  
And fade into the light of common day.

Wordsworth--though he had not the inestimable advantage of a
nineteenth-century education and the inheritance of the Darwinian
philosophy--does nevertheless put the matter of the Genius of the Child
in a way which (with the alteration of a few conventional terms) we
scientific moderns are quite inclined to accept. We all admit now that
the Child does not come into the world with a mental *tabula rasa* of
entire forgetfulness but on the contrary as the possessor of vast stores
of sub-conscious memory, derived from its ancestral inheritances; we all
admit that a certain grace and intuitive insight and even prophetic
quality, in the child-nature, are due to the harmonization of these
racial inheritances in the infant, even before it is born; and

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

that after birth the impact of the outer world serves rather to break up
and disintegrate this harmony than to confirm and strengthen it. Some
psychologists indeed nowadays go so far as to maintain that the child is
not only 'Father of the man,' but superior to the man, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190) and that Boyhood and Youth and Maturity
are attained to not by any addition but by a process of loss and
subtraction. It will be seen that the last ten lines of the above
quotation rather favor this view.

But my object in making the quotation was not to insist on the truth of
its application to the individual Child, but rather to point out the
remarkable way in which it illustrates what I have said about the
*Childhood of the Race*. In fact, if the quotation be read over again
with this interpretation (which I do not say Wordsworth intended) that
the 'birth' spoken of is the birth or evolution of the distinctively
self-conscious Man from the Animals and the animal-natured,
unself-conscious human beings of a preceding age, then the parable
unfolds itself perfectly naturally and convincingly. *That* birth
certainly was sleep and a forgetting; the grace and intuition and
instinctive perfection of the animals was lost. But the forgetfulness
was not entire; the memory lingered long of an age of harmony, of an
Eden-garden left behind. And trailing clouds of this remembrance the
first tribal men, on the edge of but not yet *within* the
civilization-period, appear in the dawn of History.

As I have said before, the period of the dawn of Self-consciousness was
also the period of the dawn of the practical and inquiring Intellect; it
was the period of the babyhood of both; and so we perceive among these
early people (as we also do among children) that while in the main the
heart and the intuitions were right, the intellect was for

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

a long period futile and rambling to a degree. As soon as the mind left
the ancient bases of instinct and sub-conscious racial experience it
fell into a hopeless bog, out of which it only slowly climbed by means
of the painfully-gathered stepping-stones of logic and what we call
Science. "Heaven lies about us in our infancy." Wordsworth perceived
that wonderful world of inner experience and glory out of which the
child emerges; and some even of us may perceive that similar world in
which the untampered animals *still* dwell, and *out* of which
self-regarding Man in the history of the race was long ago driven. But a
curse went with the exile. As the Brain grew, the Heart withered. The
inherited instincts and racially accumulated wisdom, on which the first
men thrived and by means of which they achieved a kind of temporary
Paradise, were broken up; delusions and disease and dissension set in.
Cain turned upon his brother and slew him; and the shades of the
prison-house began to close. The growing Boy, however, (by whom we may
understand the early tribes of Mankind) had yet a radiance of Light and
joy in his life; and the Youth--though travelling daily farther from the
East--still remained Nature's priest, and by the vision splendid was on
his way attended: but

At length the Man perceived it die away.  
And fade into the light of common day.

\[paragraph continues\] What a strangely apt picture in a few words (if
we like to take it so) of the long pilgrimage of the Human Race, its
early and pathetic clinging to the tradition of the Eden-garden, its
careless and vigorous boyhood, its meditative youth, with consciousness
of sin and endless expiatory ritual in Nature's bosom, its fleeting
visions of salvation, and finally its complete disillusionment and
despair in the world-slaughter and unbelief of the twentieth century!

Leaving Wordsworth, however, and coming back to our

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

main line of thought, we may point out that while early peoples were
intellectually mere babies--with their endless yarns about heroes on
horseback leaping over wide rivers or clouds of monks flying for
hundreds of miles through the air, and their utter failure to understand
the general concatenations of cause and effect--yet practically and in
their instinct of life and destiny they were, as I have already said, by
no means fools; certainly not such fools as many of the arm-chair
students of these things delight to represent them. For just as, a few
years ago, we modern civilizees studying outlying nations, the Chinese
for instance, rejoiced (in our vanity) to pick out every quaint
peculiarity and absurdity and monstrosity of a supposed topsyturvydom,
and failed entirely to see the real picture of a great and eminently
sensible people; so in the case of primitive men we have been, and even
still are, far too prone to catalogue their cruelties and obscenities
and idiotic superstitions, and to miss the sane and balanced setting of
their actual lives.

Mr. R. R. Marett, who has a good practical acquaintance with his
subject, had in the *Hibbert Journal* for October 1918 an article on
"The Primitive Medicine Man" in which he shows that the latter is as a
rule anything but a fool and a knave--although like 'medicals' in all
ages he *hocuspocuses* his patients occasionally! He instances the
medicine-man's excellent management, in most cases, of childbirth, or of
wounds and fractures, or his primeval skill in trepanning or
trephining--all of which operations, he admits, may be accompanied with
grotesque and superstitious ceremonies, yet show real perception and
ability. We all know--though I think the article does not mention the
matter--what a considerable list there is of drugs and herbs which the
modern art of healing owes to the ancient medicine-man, and it may be
again mentioned that one of the most up-to-date treatments--the use of a
prolonged and exclusive diet of *milk* as a means of giving the organism
a new start in severe

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

cases--has really come down to u through the ages from this early
source. <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191) The real medicine-man, Mr.
Marett says, is largely a 'faith-healer' and 'soul-doctor'; he believes
in his vocation, and undergoes much for the sake of it: "The main point
is to grasp that by his special initiation and the rigid taboos which he
practises--not to speak of occasional remarkable gifts, say of trance
and ecstasy, which he may inherit by nature and have improved by art--he
*has* access to a wonder-working power. . . . And the great need of
primitive folk is for this healer of souls." Our author further insists
on the enormous play and influence of Fear in the savage mind--a point
we have touched on already--and gives instances of *Thanatomania*, or
cases where, after a quite slight and superficial wound, the patient
becomes so depressed that he, quite needlessly, persists in dying! Such
cases, obviously, can only be countered by Faith, or something (whatever
it may be) which restores courage, hope and energy to the mind. Nor need
I point out that the situation is exactly the same among a vast number
of 'patients' to-day. As to the value, in his degree, of the
medicine-man many modern observers and students quite agree with the
above. <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_192) Also as the present chapter
is on *Ritual Dancing* it may not be out of place to call attention to
the supposed healing of sick people in Ceylon and other places by
*Devil-dancing*--the enormous output of energy and noise in the ritual
possibly having the effect of reanimating the patient (if it does not
kill him), or of expelling the disease from his organism.

With regard to the practical intelligence of primitive peoples, derived
from their close contact with life and

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

nature, Bishop Colenso's experiences among the Zulus may appropriately
be remembered. When expounding the Bible to these supposedly backward
'niggers' he was met at all points by practical interrogations and
arguments which he was perfectly unable to answer--especially over the
recorded passage of the Red Sea by the Israelites in a single night.
From the statistics given in the Sacred Book these naughty savages
proved to him absolutely conclusively that the numbers of fugitives were
such that even supposing them to have marched--men, women and
children--*five abreast* and in close order, they would have formed a
column 100 miles long, and this not including the baggage, sheep and
cattle! Of course the feat was absolutely impossible. They could not
have passed the Red Sea in a night or a week of nights.

But the sequel is still more amusing and instructive. Colenso, in his
innocent sincerity, took the side of the Zulus, and feeling sure the
Church at home would be quite glad to have its views with regard to the
accuracy of Bible statistics corrected, wrote a book embodying the
amendments needed. Modest as his criticisms were, they raised a *storm*
of protest and angry denunciation, which even led to his deposition for
the time being from his bishopric! While at the same time an avalanche
of books to oppose his heresy poured forth from the press. Lately I had
the curiosity to look through the British Museum catalogue and found
that in refutation of Colenso's *Pentateuch Examined* some 140 (a
hundred and forty) volumes were at that time published! To-day, I need
hardly say, all these arm-chair critics and their works have sunk into
utter obscurity, but the arguments of the Zulus and their Bishop still
stand unmoved and immovable.

This is a case of searching intelligence shown by 'savages,' an
intelligence founded on intimate knowledge of the needs of actual life.
I think we may say that a, similarly instinctive intelligence
(sub-conscious if you like) has guided the tribes

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

of men on the whole in their long passage through the Red Sea of the
centuries, from those first days of which I speak even down to the
present age, and has in some strange, even if fitful, way kept them
along the path of that final emancipation towards which Humanity is
inevitably moving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[168:1](pcc12.htm#fr_182) Book IV, ch. 6, § 7.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[168:2](pcc12.htm#fr_183) See also Winwood
Reade's *Savage Africa*, ch. xviii, in which he speaks of the "gorilla
dance," before hunting gorillas, as a "religious festival."

<span id="fn_184"></span>[169:1](pcc12.htm#fr_184) Meaning apparently
either simply to represent, or, sometimes to *divulge*, a mystery.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[169:2](pcc12.htm#fr_185) περὶ Ὀρχήσεως, ch.
xv. 277.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[169:3](pcc12.htm#fr_186) *Myth, Ritual and
Religion*, i, 272.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[170:1](pcc12.htm#fr_187) Book II, ch. viii, §
14.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[170:2](pcc12.htm#fr_188) 2 Sam. vi.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[171:1](pcc12.htm#fr_189) Επιλήνιοι ὕμνοι:
hymns sung over the winepress (Dictionary).

<span id="fn_190"></span>[174:1](pcc12.htm#fr_190) Man in the course of
his life falls away more and more from the specifically *human* type of
his early years, but the Ape in the course of his short life goes very
much farther along the road of degradation and premature senility."
(*Man and Woman*, by Havelock Ellis, p. 24).

<span id="fn_191"></span>[177:1](pcc12.htm#fr_191) Milk ("fast-milk" or
*vrata*) was, says Mr. Hewitt, the only diet in the Soma-sacrifice. See
*Ruling Races of Prehistoric Times* (preface). The Soma itself was a
fermented drink prepared with ceremony from the milky and semen-like sap
of certain plants, and much used in sacrificial offerings. (See
Monier-Williams. *Sanskrit Dictionary*.)

<span id="fn_192"></span>[177:2](pcc12.htm#fr_192) See Winwood Reade
(*Savage Africa*), Salamon Reinach (*Cults, Myths and Religions*), and
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Sex-taboo](pcc13)
