[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg05)  [Next](btg07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE TIES OF LIFE

WHEN Siddhattha had grown to youth, his father desired to see him
married, and he sent to all his kinsfolk, commanding them to bring their
princesses that the prince might select one of them as his wife.

But the kinsfolk replied and said: "The prince is young and delicate;
nor has he learned any of the sciences. He would not be able to maintain
our daughter, and should there be war he would be unable to cope with
the enemy."

The prince was not boisterous, but pensive in his nature. He loved to
stay under the great jambu-tree in the garden of his father, and,
observing the ways of the world, gave himself up to meditation. And the
prince said to his father: "Invite our kinsfolk that they may see me and
put my strength to the test." And his father did as his son bade him.

When the kinsfolk came, and the people of the city Kapilavatthu had
assembled to test the prowess and scholarship of the prince, he proved
himself manly in all the exercises both of the body and of the mind, and
there was no rival among the youths and men of India who could surpass
him in any test, bodily or mental. He replied to all the questions of
the sages; but when he questioned them, even the wisest among them were
silenced.

Then Siddhattha chose himself a wife. He selected his cousin Yasodhara,
the gentle daughter of the king of Koli. In their wedlock was born a son
whom they named Rahula which means "fetter" or "tie," and King
Suddhodana, glad that an heir was born to his son, said: "The prince
having begotten a son, will love him as I love the prince. This will be
a strong tie to bind Siddhattha's heart to the interests of the world,
and the kingdom of the Sakyas will remain under the scepter of my
descendants."

With no selfish aim, but regarding his child and the people at large,
Siddhattha, the prince, attended to his religious duties, bathing his
body in the holy Ganges and cleansing his heart in the waters of the
law. Even as men desire to give happiness to their children, so did he
long to give peace to the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Three Woes](btg07)
