[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg32)  [Next](btg34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# WOMEN IN THE SANGHA

YASODHARA had three times requested of the Buddha that she might be
admitted to the Sangha, but her wish had not been granted. Now Pajapati,
the foster-mother of the Blessed One, in the company of Yasodhara, and
many other women, went to the Tathagata entreating him earnestly to let
them take the vows and be ordained as disciples.

The Blessed One, foreseeing the danger that lurked in admitting women to
the Sangha, protested that while the good religion ought surely to last
a thousand years it would, when women joined it, likely decay after five
hundred years; but observing the zeal of Pajapati and Yasodhara for
leading a religious life he could no longer resist and assented to have
them admitted as his disciples.

Then the venerable Ananda addressed the Blessed One thus: "Are women
competent, venerable Lord, if they retire from household life to the
homeless state, under the doctrine and discipline announced by the
Tathagata, to attain to the fruit of conversion, to attain to a release
from a wearisome repetition of rebirths, to attain to saintship?" The
Blessed One declared: "Women are competent, Ananda, if they retire from
household life to the homeless state, under the doctrine and discipline
announced by the Tathagata, to attain to the fruit of conversion, to
attain to a release from a wearisome repetition of rebirths, to attain
to saintship.

"Consider, Ananda, how great a benefactress Pajapati has been. She is
the sister of the mother of the Blessed One, and as foster-mother and
nurse, reared the Blessed One after the death of his mother. So, Ananda,
women may retire from household life to the homeless state, under the
doctrine and discipline announced by the Tathagata."

Pajapati was the first woman to become a disciple of the Buddha and to
receive the ordination as a bhikkhuni.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Conduct Toward Women](btg34)
