[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg57)  [Next](btg59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SERMON ON ABUSE

THE Blessed One observed the ways of society and noticed how much misery
came from malignity and foolish offenses done only to gratify vanity and
self-seeking pride. And the Buddha said: "If a man foolishly does me
wrong, I will return to him the protection of my ungrudging love; the
more evil comes from him, the more good shall go from me; the fragrance
of goodness always comes to me, and the harmful air of evil goes to
him."

A foolish man learning that the Buddha observed the principle of great
love which commends the return of good for evil, came and abused him.
The Buddha was silent, pitying his folly. When the man had finished his
abuse, the Buddha asked him, saying: "Son, if a man declined to accept a
present made to him, to whom would it belong?" And he answered: "In that
case it would belong to the man who offered it."

"My son," said the Buddha thou hast railed at me, but I decline to
accept thy abuse, and request thee to keep it thyself. Will it not be a
source of misery to thee? As the echo belongs to the sound, and the
shadow to the substance, so misery will overtake the evil-doer without
fail."

The abuser made no reply, and Buddha continued: "A wicked man who
reproaches a virtuous one is like one who looks up and spits at heaven;
the spittle soils not the heaven, but comes back and defiles his own
person. The slanderer is like one who flings dust at another when the
wind is contrary; the dust does but return on him who threw it. The
virtuous man cannot be hurt and the misery that the other would inflict
comes back on himself." The abuser went away ashamed, but he came again
and took refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Buddha Replies To The Deva](btg59)
