[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg81)  [Next](btg83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MARRIAGE-FEAST IN JAMBUNADA

THERE was a man in Jambunada who was to be married the next day, and he
thought, "Would that the Buddha, the Blessed One, might be present at
the wedding." And the Blessed One passed by his house and met him, and
when he read the silent wish in the heart of the bridegroom, he
consented to enter. When the When the Holy One appeared with the retinue
of his many bhikkhus, the host, whose means were limited, received them
as best he could, saying: "Eat, my Lord, and all thy congregation,
according to your desire."

While the holy men ate, the meats and drinks remained undiminished, and
the host thought to himself: "How wondrous is this! I should have had
plenty for all my relatives and friends. Would that I had invited them
all. all." When this thought was in the host's mind, all his relatives
and friends entered the house; and although the hall in the house was
small there was room in it for all of them. They sat down at the table
and ate, and there was more than enough for all of them. The Blessed One
was pleased to see so many guests full of good cheer and he quickened
them and gladdened them with words of truth, proclaiming the bliss of
righteousness:

"The greatest happiness which a mortal man can imagine is the bond of
marriage that ties together two loving hearts. But there is a greater
happiness still: it is the embrace of truth. Death will separate husband
and wife, but death will never affect him who has espoused the truth.
Therefore be married unto the truth and live with the truth in holy
wedlock. The husband who loves his wife and desires for a union that
shall be everlasting must be faithful to her so as to be like truth
itself, and she will rely upon him and revere him and minister unto him.
And the wife who loves her husband and desires a union that shall be
everlasting must be faithful to him so as to be like truth itself; and
he will place his trust in her, he will provide for her. Verily, I say
unto you, their children will become like their parents and will bear
witness to their happiness. Let no man be single, let every one be
wedded in holy love to the truth. And when Mara, the destroyer, comes to
separate the visible forms of your being, you will continue to live in
the truth, and will partake of the life everlasting, for the truth is
immortal."

There was no one among the guests but was strengthened in his, spiritual
life, and recognized the sweetness of a life of righteousness; and they
took refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Search Of A Thief](btg83)
