[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp08)  [Next](ajp10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### OCCUPATIONS

<span class="smallcaps">§ 1. Work</span>

156\. <span class="smallcaps">Who</span> hath not worked shall not eat
(Gen. R. ch. xiv. § 10; D<sup>s</sup>. 97).

The identical words are to be found in 2 Thess. iii. 10. The Rabbis were
fond of quoting "When thou eatest the labour of thine hands, happy shalt
thou be, and it shall be well with thee" (Ps. cxxviii. 2), with the
comment that the man who eats the fruit of his labour stands higher than
the God-fearing man (Ber. 8<sup>a</sup>). That work is a blessing is
finely taught in the Talmudical legend which relates how Adam burst into
tears when he was told that as a consequence of his disobedience the
earth would henceforth produce thorns and thistles. "Shall I and the ass
eat out of the same manger?" he cried. When, however, he was informed
that by the sweat of his brow he could grow corn and eat bread, he was
comforted (Pes. 118<sup>a</sup>).

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

157\. Hadst got up early, thou needest not have stayed up late (Lev. R.
ch. xxv. § 5; D<sup>a</sup>. 6).

If you had worked while young, there would be no necessity for you to
work in your old age (Jastrow). Cf. "Leisure is the reward of labour."
Dukes renders the proverb quite differently: "Hast seen the dawn, thou
hast not yet seen the dusk." Man is ignorant of what the next step he
has to take will bring him. Cf. "Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for
thou knowest not what a day may bring forth" (Prov. xxvii. 1), and "Let
not him that girdeth on his armour boast himself as he that putteth it
off" (1 Kings xx. 11).

158\. Flay a carcass in the street and earn a living, and say not, I am
a great man and the work is below my dignity (Pes. 113<sup>a</sup>; B.
B. 110<sup>a</sup>; D. 579).

Other similar sayings are: "Great is work, for it honours the workman"
(Ned. 49<sup>b</sup>; D. 188), and "Make thy Sabbath \[-table like that
of\] a weekday, but be not dependent upon others" (Shab.
118<sup>a</sup>; D. 568). The Rabbis certainly practised what they
preached, for there were no professional scholars in their day. We hear
of great Rabbis being at the same time shoemakers, carpenters, smiths,
builders, bakers, etc. The eminent Rabban Gamliel had as his favourite
maxim: "An

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

excellent thing is the study of the Law combined with some worldly
occupation, for the labour demanded by them both makes sin to be
forgotten. All study of the Law without work must in the end be futile
and become the cause of sin" (Aboth. ii. 2).

159\. Seven years lasted the famine, but it came not to the artisan's
door (Sanh. 29<sup>a</sup>; D. 622).

Cf. also "It is a father's duty to teach his son a trade" (Kid.
29<sup>a</sup>), and "He who does not teach his son a trade teaches him
to steal" (*ibid.*). A man without a regular occupation was not
permitted to act as judge or even give testimony (Sanh. 24<sup>b</sup>).

160\. If a swordsman he is no book-worm; if a book-worm he is no
swordsman (Ab. Zar. 17<sup>b</sup>; D. 46).

The occupations of the student and warrior clash with each other.
Another reading of the proverb is: "If the sword the Book is not, if the
Book the sword is not."The Book is the Bible, and its teachings make for
peace and good-will.

161\. A physician afar off is a blind eye (B. K. 85<sup>a</sup>; D.
111).

*I.e.* he is of no use. Jastrow translates, "If the surgeon is far off,
the eye will be blind" (before he arrives).

\*182. There is no faith in slaves (B. M. 86<sup>b</sup>; D. 437).

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

Palestinian proverb. Elsewhere it is said: "Of the ten measures of sleep
that came down into the world, slaves received nine and the rest of the
world only one" (Kid. 49<sup>b</sup>); "Slaves have no sense of shame"
(Sanh. 86<sup>a</sup>); "Their testimony is not accepted" (Mish. R. H.
i. 8); "It is forbidden to teach a slave the Law" (Keth.
28<sup>a</sup>). Harsh though these *dicta* sound, they were no doubt
justified by experience. On the other hand, there cannot be any doubt
that servants \[there is only one word in Hebrew and Aramaic for "slave"
and "servant"\] were well looked after and protected by law. It is thus
recommended, "Do not eat fine bread and give coarse bread to your
servant, do not drink old wine and give him new wine, do not sleep on
soft cushions and allow him only straw; hence people say, Whoever
acquires a Hebrew slave, acquires a master over himself" (Kid.
20<sup>a</sup>).

<span class="smallcaps">§ 2. Trade</span>

163\. Does a man buy and sell just to be called a merchant? (B. M.
40<sup>b</sup>; B. B. 90<sup>a</sup>).

The chief aim in trade is to make a profit. Cf. "A merchant that gains
not, loseth."

\*164. Hast bought, thou hast gained; sell, and thou wilt lose (B. M.
51<sup>a</sup>).

The art of trading consists in skilful purchasing.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Cf. "Buying and selling is but winning and losing."

165\. Loosen thy purse-strings, \[then\] open thy sack (Pes.
113<sup>a</sup>; D. 643).

Receive payment before parting with your goods. Cf. a Scotch proverb
"Ell and tell \[ = ready money\] is good merchandise."

\*166. Behold the sack, the money, and the corn; arise and measure (j.
Sanh. x. 1; D. 230).

Deal for cash only.

167\. Vines purchase date-palms, date-palms do not purchase vines (B. K.
92<sup>a</sup>).

The fruit of the vine is more valuable than that of the palm. Therefore
devote your energies to the former, for it will prove more profitable.

168\. A *Kab* from the ground and not a *Kor* from the roof (Pes.
113<sup>a</sup>; D. 586).

Better is a small profit derived from the place where you dwell than a
larger profit from afar off. You are saved worry, and there is no need
to mount the roof of your house to look out anxiously for the arrival of
your agents. Cf. "Buy at market but sell at home." On the *Kab* see no.
21. The *Kor* was a larger dry measure.

\*169. If on opening the door \[in the morning\] there is rain, set down
thy sack, O ass-driver, and lie on it (Ber. 59<sup>a</sup>; Taan
6<sup>b</sup>; D. 163).

Morning rain is the sign of a fruitful season.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Provisions will be cheap, so do not carry thy produce to market, for the
profits will be small. On the other hand, the *Talmud* bitterly
denounces the men who inflate the price of food-stuff by withholding it
from the market in the time of scarcity (B. B. 90<sup>b</sup>).

\*170. The beam sells for a *Zuz* in the town and for a *Zuz* in the
forest (B. K. 11<sup>a</sup>; D. p. 15).

The cost of transporting the timber does not materially affect the
price.

\*171. Ten parasangs for one *Zuz*, eleven parasangs for two (Ḥag.
9<sup>b</sup>).

Cry of ass-drivers.

\*172. Four \[*Zuz*\] for a large skin and four for a small skin (B. B.
5<sup>a</sup>; D. 117).

The cost of tanning a skin, whether large or small, is practically the
same. Make use of this fact to get the most possible for your money. In
the context, the application is that the cost of guarding two contiguous
fields is the same as that for one field. (This seems the most probable
of the various translations and explanations of the proverb.)

173\. A hundred *Zuz* \[invested\] in business, and every day meat and
wine; a hundred *Zuz* \[invested\] in land, and salt and vegetables
(Jeb. 63<sup>a</sup>; D. 463).

The Jews seem at one time to have had a disinclination to acquire much
land, possibly on account of the uncertainty of tenure in

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the time of persecution. Cf. the wording of proverb no. 130. The
opinions on the question of landed property differ very widely. Ben Sira
says: "Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry, which the Most High
hath ordained" (Ecclus. vii. 15). The fact that "husbandry" is specially
mentioned is in keeping with Ben Sira's general view, shared by the
Greeks, that occupation with the soil led to boorishness. A Rabbi of the
second century AḌ. gives it as his opinion that there could be no worse
occupation than agriculture, and on seeing a field ploughed across its
breadth he exclaimed sarcastically, "Plough it also long-wise, and still
you will find that to engage in commerce is more profitable" (Jeb.
63<sup>a</sup>). Rab, who lived in the third century, noticed the ears
of corn being fanned by the breeze, and declared "However much you may
fan, it is better to devote oneself to commerce" (*ibid.*). On the other
hand, it is also said, "A man who does not possess a piece of land is
not fit to be called a man" (*ibid.*); and another Rabbi adopts a middle
course by advising "Let every man divide his money into three parts, and
invest a third in land, a third in business, and a third let him keep by
him in reserve" (B. M. 42<sup>a</sup>).

174\. A hundred bleedings for a *Zuz*, a hundred

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

heads (hair-cuttings) for a *Zuz*, a hundred lips (moustache-trimmings)
for nothing (Shab. 129<sup>b</sup>; D. 464).

There are some occupations which are absolutely barren of profit.
Although, as we have seen, work was considered a blessing, a distinction
was naturally drawn between the different trades. "No trade," says a
Rabbi, "will ever pass away from the world; but happy is he who sees his
parents engaged in a superior trade, and woe to him who sees his parents
engaged in an ungainly occupation. The world cannot exist without a
perfumer and a tanner; but happy is he whose occupation is that of a
perfumer, and woe to him who is a tanner" (Kid. 82<sup>b)</sup>. Here
the emphasis is laid on clean and pleasant work; but another Rabbinic
passage regards the matter from a different point of view. "Let not a
man teach his son to be an ass-driver, nor a camel-driver, nor a barber,
nor a sailor, nor a shepherd, nor a shop-keeper, for their trades are
those of thieves. Ass-drivers are mostly wicked, camel-drivers mostly
honest, sailors mostly pious, the best of physicians is destined for
Gehenna, and the most honourable of butchers is a partner of Amalek"
(Mish. Kid. iv. 14). Also the professions which brought men into
frequent contact with women were discouraged, such as the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

goldsmith, wool-carder, maker of hand-mills, perfumer, weaver,
hairdresser, fuller, cupper, and bath-heater. None engaged in these
trades could be elected to the office of king or high priest (Kid.
82<sup>a</sup>).

\*175. Fifty \[*Zuz*\] which produce \[increase\] are better than a
hundred which do not (j. Peah viii. 8; D. 296).

A little which is used is of greater value than double which is lying
unused.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Rules of Conduct](ajp10)
