[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp10)  [Next](ajp12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### VAGARIES OF FORTUNE

226\. <span class="smallcaps">This</span> world is like pump-wheels
whereby the full become empty that the empty shall become full (Lev. R.
ch. xxxiv. § 9; D. 246).

Cf. "It is a wheel that revolves in the world" (Shab. 151<sup>b</sup>;
D. 196), "The wheel has revolved" (Jalkut to Ruth § 601), and "The world
is a staircase; some are going up and some are coming down."

\*227. In the place where the master of the house once hung up his
weapons, there the shepherd hangs up his scrip (B. M. 84<sup>b</sup>;
Sanh. 103<sup>a</sup>; D. 141).

Palestinian proverb. The wheel of fortune revolves constantly, and
inferiors usurp the place of their betters.

228\. The sow pastures with ten \[young ones\] and the lamb not even
with one (Gen. R. ch. xliv. § 23; D. 288).

Fortune does not always smile on those who deserve it most.

229\. They eat and we say Grace (Ber. 44<sup>a</sup>; D. 81).

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

We have the work and they the enjoyment. Cf. "One beats the bush and
another catches the bird."

\*230. Shechem married \[Dinah\] and Mabgai was circumcised (Mac.
11<sup>a</sup>; D. 631).

Palestinian proverb based on the incident narrated in Gen. xxxiv.
*Mabgai* is the name of a Samaritan town, and is used here generally of
the people living under the rule of Shechem. The thought of the proverb
is the same as that of the preceding.

\*231. Tobiah sinned and Sigud is beaten (Mac. 11<sup>a</sup>; cf. Pes.
113<sup>b</sup>; D. 306).

The Babylonian equivalent of no. 230.

\*232. Shilo sinned and Joḥanan is punished (Gen. R. ch. xxv. § 3; D.
630).

Same as preceding.

233\. If I had not removed the potsherd for thee, thou wouldst not have
discovered the pearl under it (B. M. 17<sup>b</sup>; Jeb.
92<sup>b</sup>; Mac. 21<sup>b</sup>; D. 45).

One is reminded of Samson's words: "If ye had not plowed with my heifer,
ye had not found out my riddle" (Judg. xiv. 18). Lewin quotes an English
proverb, "It's good to pluck flowers in your neighbour's garden." One
does the work, the other reaps the reward.

\*234. The wine \[belongs\] to the master, but the credit \[goes\] to
the butler (B. K. 92<sup>b</sup>; D. 295)."

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Credit is not always given where it is rightly due.

235\. The common soldiers do the fighting, and the officers claim the
victory (Ber. 53<sup>b</sup>; Nazir 66<sup>b</sup>; D. 190).

Same as preceding.

\*236. When the maker of stocks sits in his stocks, he is paid out of
his own work (Pes. 28<sup>a</sup>; D. 537, p. 218).

(This is the reading in the MSS., *saddāā besaddéh*, adopted by Jastrow.
The editions read saddānā bisedanéh: "When the smith sits at his anvil,
he is paid out of his own work," *i.e.* he often receives blows from the
instruments which he himself had fashioned.) The meaning of the proverb
is illustrated by the phrase "Hoist with his own petard."

\*237. If the arrow-maker is killed by his arrow, he is paid out of his
own work (Pes. 28<sup>a</sup>; D. 195).

Same as preceding.

\*238. In the same ladle which the carpenter fashioned will the mustard
burn \[his mouth\] (Pes. 28<sup>a</sup>; D. 405).

Same as preceding.

\*239. Together with the shrub the cabbage is beaten (B. K.
92<sup>a</sup>; D. 143).

The good suffer together with the bad when a calamity overtakes a
community, just as when in pulling up shrubs a cabbage is also sometimes
uprooted. On the other hand, it

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

is pointed out that rain benefits the wicked as well as the righteous
(Taan. 7<sup>a</sup>).

\*240. To the fox in his time one has to bow (Meg. 16<sup>b</sup>; D.
660).

"Every dog has his day."

241\. Not the mouse but the hole is the thief (Git 45<sup>a</sup>; Kid.
56<sup>b</sup>; Erach. 30<sup>a</sup>; D. 425).

Circumstances often determine a man's actions. Similarly: "The breach
\[in the wall\] invites the thief" (Suc. 26<sup>a</sup>; D. 578). Cf.
"Opportunity makes the thief." "An open door may tempt a saint."

242\. Should \[opportunity\] fail the thief, he conducts himself like an
honest man (Sanh. 22<sup>a</sup>; D. 297).

A contrast to the preceding proverb.

\*243. A woman accustomed to miscarriages is no longer troubled by them
(Keth. 62<sup>a</sup>; D. 219).

Everything, even troubles and misfortunes, is lightened by frequent
occurrence. Cf. "Familiarity breeds contempt" and proverb no. 13.

\*244. The thief is not put to death after two or three \[offences\]
(Sanh. 7<sup>a</sup>; D. 135).

Because punishment does not overtake the culprit in the early stage of
his career of crime, let him not imagine that he will escape altogether.
Cf. "God stays long, but strikes at last."

245\. Are the maid's acts of stubbornness many,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

they will \[all be dealt with\] by one chastisement (Shab.
32<sup>a</sup>; D. 662).

Similar to preceding. Cf. "Punishment is lame, but it comes."

\*246. Through Kamtsa and Bar Kamtsa was the Temple destroyed (Lam. R.
to iv. 2; Git. 55<sup>b</sup>; D. 158).

Small causes lead to great consequences. The story is told that a man of
Jerusalem was arranging a banquet and sent an invitation to Kamtsa, one
of his friends. Unfortunately it was delivered in error to Bar Kamtsa,
his enemy, who accepted it. On discovering the mistake, the host wished
to drive him out of the house, and refused the latter's offer to pay for
whatever he ate. Thereupon Bar Kamtsa went to the Roman Emperor, and, to
revenge the insult, denounced the Jews as traitors. This act ultimately
led to the destruction of the Temple. Cf. "Little chips light great
fires," "Little strokes fell great oaks."

\*247. The ox ran and fell, so they place a horse in its crib (Sanh.
98<sup>b</sup>; D. 611).

Although in the East horses are highly prized and not used for
agricultural work, still in the time of need they too have to be trained
to that kind of labour. In the context the proverb is used for a special
case. It is applied to Israel, who, having stumbled,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

was displaced from his crib (Palestine) and other nations permitted to
take possession of it.

\*248. Hast hired thyself to him, comb his wool (Jom. 20<sup>b</sup>; D.
133).

If one has undertaken a duty, he must fulfil even the unpleasant parts
which are involved. Wool-combing was usually done by women, and
therefore despised by men. See no. 23. Cf. "Money taken, freedom
forsaken."

\*249. Seven years lasted the pestilence, but not a man died before his
year (Jeb. 114<sup>b</sup>; Sanh. 29<sup>a</sup>; D. 623).

Everything is predestined and nothing hastens the decree of Providence.
The ancient Jews, like all Orientals, were fatalists and firm believers
in Predestination. It is, *e.g.*, said "Forty days before the creation
of a child a supernatural voice \[*Bath Kōl*\] proclaims, "The daughter
of so-and-so for so-and-so, the house of so-and-so for so-and-so, the
field of so-and-so for so-and-so" (Sot. 2<sup>a</sup>; cf. Moed K.
18<sup>b</sup>); "Even the appointment of the overseers of wells \[an
insignificant office\] is ordained from heaven" (B. B. 91<sup>b</sup>);
"No man pricks his finger below, unless it has been decreed above, for
it is said (Psalm xxxvii. 23) "A man's goings are established of the
Lord" (Ḥul. 7<sup>b</sup>). Such beliefs were due

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

mainly to the cultivation of astrology. Thus we read: "Existence,
offspring, and sustenance depend not upon personal merit but upon the
*Mazzāl*, *i.e.* horoscope." (Moed K. 28<sup>a</sup>); "The *Mazzāl*
makes wise and rich" (Shab. 156<sup>a</sup>); although some maintained
that Israel was not affected by astrological influences (*ibid.*). But
several of the mediæval Rabbis, *e.g.* Maimonides, repudiated all such
notions. Cf. the English proverb, "The fated will happen." On "seven"
see no. 57.

250\. If the stone falls on the pot, woe to the pot; if the pot falls on
the stone, woe to the pot; in either case, woe to the pot (Esth. R. ch.
vii. § 10; D. 530.)

The weak always suffers. A proverb in the identical terms is current in
Spain, borrowed in all probability from the Jews. Cf. the following
Hindu saying: "Whether the knife fall on the melon, or the melon on the
knife, the melon suffers."

251\. Any piece of coal which does not burn at the \[required\] time
will never burn (j. Maas. Sh. v. 3; j. Bets. ii. 4; j. Ḥag. ii. 3; D.
365).

What does not occur at the moment when it can be of service is useless.

\*252. In the place of beauty disfigurement (Shab. 62<sup>b</sup>; D.
290).

Based on Isaiah iii. 24.

\*253. From the camel the ear (Shebu. 11<sup>b</sup>).

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

The camel has small ears in comparison with its bulk. For all that, be
satisfied if you can get even the ears as your share of the camel.

254\. A young pumpkin \[now\] is better than a full-grown one \[later
on\] (Suc. 56<sup>b</sup>); Keth. 83<sup>b</sup>; Temur. 9<sup>a</sup>;
D. 147).

Cf. "Better an egg to-day than a hen to-morrow."

\*255. Better one bird tied up than a hundred flying (Eccles. R. to iv.
6; D. 301).

Cf. "A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush."

\*256. A scorpion met a camel \[and stung her\], and she pushed it aside
with her heel. Whereupon \[the scorpion\] exclaimed, By thy life, I
\[hope next time\] to reach thine head! (Jalkut to Psalms § 764; D.
565).

The camel should have killed the scorpion and saved herself from the
possibility of revenge. The disdainful neglect of something deemed at
the time insignificant may later on have serious consequences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Social Life](ajp12)
