[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat16)  [Next](sat18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="small">OF THE ENMITY <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232)
OF THE SPIRIT AND OF THE BODY, AND OF THEIR CURE AND REMEDY</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Everything</span> is in itself a senseless,
and as a dead thing or being; it is only a manifestation of the spirit,
which is in the body: The spirit is signed with the body; <span
id="fr_233"></span>[2](#fn_233) whatever the spirit is in itself in an
incomprehensible \[imperceptible\] operation, the same is the body in
the comprehensible and visible working. There is one form of the seven
forms of nature superior and chief; the other hang to it, and give their
signs also, according as each of them is strong in the essence; and as
the forms stand in their order in each thing, so they sign the body of
every thing and creature in its generation \[or kind\]: This is the
manifestation of the divine wisdom in the expressed word of love and
anger.

2\. There is not anything but it has its soul in it according to its
property, and the soul is a kernel to another body: Whatever lives and
grows has its seed in it; God has comprehended all things in his word,
and spoken them forth into a form, as the will had formed <span
id="fr_234"></span>[3](#fn_234) itself in the desire, the expressed word
is a platform of the speaking, and has again the speaking in it; this
same speaking is a seed to another image according to the first, for
both work, viz. the speaking, and the spoken \[word\].

3\. The speaking works in itself, viz. in the eternity, and the spoken
also in itself, viz. in the time; the speaking is the master, and the
spoken is the instrument; the speaking makes the nature of eternity, and
the spoken makes the nature of time; each makes in its comprehension two
properties, viz. light and darkness, wherein the element of all beings
consists, which in the expressed word operates itself into four
elements, but in the speaking word there is but one: The element in
itself is neither hot nor cold, also neither dry nor moist; but it is a
lubet, viz. a desiring will, wherein the divine wisdom makes the
different <span id="fr_235"></span>[4](#fn_235)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

and various colours; all according to the desire's property, in
which <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) there is neither number nor
end: But in the four elements there is number and end; for with the
expressing (in that they are become self-full) they have taken a
beginning, and have formed themselves into a model or platform of a
time, which runneth as a watch-work; it forms, frames, and destroys.

4\. This watch-work consists of seven forms, or properties (as is before
mentioned), which make in themselves a threefold spirit, viz. a
vegetative, sensitive, and rational: The vegetative consists in the four
elements; the sensitive in the seven forms of nature, and the reasoning
power in the constellation; but the understanding proceeds only from
God, for it rises out of the eternal nature; all life whatever, which
has its limit in the expressed word, consists in Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury; for therein consist the seven properties of every life of this
world; and also the spirit of vegetation, sensation, and reason.

5\. Sulphur is the mother of all spirituality and corporality; Mercury
manages the dominion therein; and Sal is the house of its habitation,
which Mercury itself makes in Sulphur: Reason arises in the oil of the
Sulphur, whereinto the constellation gives its desire, viz. the essence
of its property, from whence immediately the senses and thoughts arise;
but the understanding proceeds from the oil of the element, viz. in the
free lubet in the speaking Mercury.

6\. Now then, seeing it is very necessary for us poor children of Eve to
know from whence the disease and enmity of our life arise, and what that
is in us which makes us our own enemies,. and vex, perplex, and plague
us in ourselves; much more necessary it is to know the cure, whereby we
may cure ourselves in our self-hood, and bring ourselves into the limit
of rest. <span id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237)

7\. This we will delineate and declare, if there be any one that has a
mind to enter upon it, and truly prove and try it; and we will set forth
from whence evil and good arise originally, and how they arise, and give
occasion to the understanding searcher to seek: And we will shew how the
will to evil and good arises, and how the evil is the death of the good,
and on the contrary the good the death of the evil.

8\. When we consider what the mercurial life is, then we find that it
consists in Sulphur; for Sulphur is a dry hunger after matter, which
makes an austere impression, and in its austere impression it has the
fire, and also in its impression the oil, from whence the life burns.
Now the impression makes coldness, and

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

its compunction or attraction makes heat, so that <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) now there is a cold fire and an hot fire
in one thing; the cold makes in itself hardness and darkness, and the
heat makes in itself the light, and yet there could be no light, if the
oil in the Sulphur did not die in hot anguish, as the candle in the
fire.

9\. Now there is a twofold dying in Sulphur, from whence also a twofold
life is generated; First, the impression or desire does draw in,
contract, enclose, make hard, cold, thick; and the hardness, viz. the
enclosed, causes a death in the enclosed being, and yet in that spirit
there is no death, but a pricking, raging, and anxious cold fire-life,
which is generated with the impression, and is the life of the darkness.

10\. Secondly, in the same anguish, in the austere desire, the hot fire
is generated, which consumes the substance, which the coldness, viz. the
impression of the desire to nature makes: Thus there remains in the fire
the contention betwixt the cold and heat; the cold will have its life
according to its property, and in that it strives for life, it enkindles
the heat in its impression, and immediately the heat deprives the cold
of its might, and consumes the cold substance, and then also the
fire-spirit cannot subsist; for unless it has substance it goes out,
therefore it must continually, and without intermission, die in itself
in the fiery anxious desire: So long as it has the cold's substance to
live upon, its life arises, and yet it is nothing but a constant dying
and consuming, and in its devouring is the greatest hunger after
substance; this same \[hunger\] passes forth through and with the
devouring out of the dying of the fire, and dwells in the nothing, yet
it may not be a nothing, and also it cannot be a nothing, therefore it
draws the fire again into itself; for its own desire is bent towards its
mother: But seeing it is once dead to the fire-source, it cannot die any
more in the fire of the heat or cold, but it continually proceeds forth
from the fire, and the fire draws it again continually into itself, and
so it is the life of the fire; and this is the air, which in the fire is
rightly called wind, by reason of the strength and force; and in that
which is proceeded forth <span id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239) it is
properly called air, by reason of its life of meekness.

11\. And in the dying of the fire we are to understand the oil, whence
the fire receives its shining light, in which the true life is
understood; for that which proceeds forth in the fire-death with the
desire to be delivered and freed from the fire-source, that is

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

a desire of meekness, and takes its original in the first will to
nature, in which the eternal nothing brings itself with its lubet into a
desire.

12\. This lubet brings forth itself through the cold and hot death
(through both the dyings) again into the liberty, viz. into the <span
class="smallcaps">Nothing</span>; and so it is manifested in the austere
impression through the fire, and brought into a principle, and yet it is
not either of the fire or of the cold, but so is its manifestation.

13\. But seeing the eternal lubet to nature introduces itself with
nature into a desire; thereupon this desire cannot die either in the
cold or heat, for it takes its origin neither in the heat or cold, but
in the nothing; and so it is, after it proceeds from the dying in the
fire, again desiring, namely of its own property, and impresses itself,
for in the fire it has taken the impression.

14\. Now it cannot conceive anything in its impression but an essence
according to its desire, which is now water; understand according to the
dark impression's property it is water, and according to the fire it is
oil; and that which in the cold impression is wholly enclosed in the
hardness, as a conception according to the wrath's property, is earth.

15\. Thus the wrathful fiery desire draws continually the same air,
water, and oil into itself, and devours it, and so the fire-wrath is
changed in the air, and oil, and water, into a shining light; for the
nothing desires nothing else but power and lustre, and so it makes
itself manifest, and brings itself into essence: And the spirit which
proceeds forth out of the fire burning in the oil, viz. in the light
from the fire and light, gives reason and understanding; for it has
originally taken its rise in the nothing, and was the desire to nature;
and has brought itself through all the properties of nature, through
heat and cold, through the dying in the fire through the light, and
dwells again in the nothing.

16\. It is a prover and knower of all the properties, for it is
generated through all, and proceeded forth from all; it is as a <span
class="smallcaps">Nothing</span>, and yet has all things, and passes
through heat and cold, and yet none of them apprehend it; as we see that
the life of the creature dwells in heat and cold, and yet the right life
is neither hot nor cold.

17\. Now therefore understand us right: This birth in the eternity is
spiritual, but in the time it is material; for I cannot say of God that
he is darkness and fire, much less air, water, or earth; but in his
eternal desire he has so formed himself with

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the time in the place of this world into such an essence, which he
formed in the speaking <span class="smallcaps">Mercury</span> according
to the properties of the will, and brought with the expressed word into
such a formation according to the properties of the desire in the
eternal nature, viz. in the verbum fiat.

18\. Now the expressed word, viz. the eternal nature's property is
understood in Sulphur, for therein is the sevenfold wheel of the birth,
which in the spirit, viz. in the first conception to nature, is a
constellation, and divides itself out of the constellation in its own
peculiar birth into seven properties, and out of the seven properties
into four elements.

19\. This constellation is a chaos, wherein all things lie, but hidden;
and it is the first body, but spiritual; and the sevenfold wheel is the
first explication \[or working forth\] of the chaos, and makes the
second body, viz. the reason; the second manifests the first, and it is
also a spiritual body; the third body is elementary, a cabinet of both
the first, and is a visible tangible body.

20\. The first body, viz. the chaos, or the first constellation, seeing
it is spiritual, is the word expressed out of the eternal conception;
the same has again its speaking in itself, which is the mercurial wheel
in the Sulphur with the seven forms, which speaks forth again from
itself the four elements.

21\. Thus the one proceeds forth from the other; the first before the
chaos is the lubet of eternity in the abyss, which takes in itself a
will to its own manifestation; this is all God; and the will conceives
in itself a desire in the lubet; this is the chaos, or first
astrum, <span id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240) wherein consists the
eternal nature, which with the desire to nature introduces itself into
seven forms, as is before mentioned, and so manifests the chaos, viz.
the eternal hidden wisdom of God; and with the desire in the mercurial
wheel the element is formed, being a spiritual body of the mercurial
life.

22\. Now all this is twofold, viz. the desire makes in itself in its
impression the darkness, wherein is the strong might of the enkindling
of nature, and it is painful; and the free lubet to the desire makes in
itself through the enkindling of the desire light and pleasing motion;
the light is the power and lustre, and the element is its body, or
essence; whereas yet it is only spiritual: Thus the fire-desire is a
joyfulness in the free lubet, and in the darkness it is an aching
painful source.

23\. Out of this whole essence man was created to the image

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

of God, and understand us right, he stood after and in the creation in
the dominion of the element; the mercurial wheel <span
id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241) in Sulphur stood in the light, and in
the free lubet of eternity; but he departed further with his desire into
the four elements, viz. into the centre of darkness, from whence heat
and cold arise.

24\. His desire in the beginning was bent \[inclined\] into the liberty
of God, viz. into the element, where he was resigned in God; and then
God's love-will ruled him with the free lubet's property, but he
departed out of the free lubet of God, out of the resignation into a
self-will, which he forged in the centre to nature, from whence the pain
and torture arise, viz. heat and cold, so also astringency, sour
bitterness, and all the properties of the dark impression.

25\. Even there he fell into the eternal death, viz. into the dying
source, in which the mercurial life in the Sulphur rules in the poison,
where one form in the mercurial sphere does envy, hate, annoy, and
destroy the other, where there is meer anguish, aching, tormenting, and
enmity; for the free lubet was quenched in him, wherein the holy
element, viz. the divine body consists, and there arose in the same pure
element the four elements of the outward source; there the image of God
was cursed, which is nothing else but that God's love-will, which ruled
in the image of his likeness, withdrew from man, and so man fell into
the dominion of nature: And seeing the four elements have a temporal
beginning and end, and must again enter into the end, therefore also the
human body, which is now become wholly earthly in the four elements,
must fall again into the four elements, and be destroyed therein: And
therefore now we are to consider of his cure and restoration, how he may
again be delivered from death, and be again introduced with the body
into the pure element, and with the spirit into the dominion of God's
will.

26\. Now there is no other remedy but that he with the spirit which
arises in the chaos, and was inspired by God's will-spirit into the
created image, does again depart out of his self-hood, viz. out of his
natural will, and resign himself up fully and freely into the first
will, which in the beginning formed him into an image: He must wholly
die to his self-hood in himself in the death of the dark impression (as
far as he lives therein to his own will in the self-desire of the
outward life of the four elements) and cast himself with total
resignation into God's will, viz. into God's mercy, that he may no
longer live and will to himself, but

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

to God, viz. to the first will of God, which created him in its image,
whereby God manifested himself in an image; and so he is with the first
astrum, viz. with the chaos of the soul, again in the same comprehension
wherein God created him to his image.

27\. But seeing the self-hood, viz. the self-will, strives against this,
and will in no wise die to its self-hood (understand the will of the
outward world, which is from the outward stars and four elements),
therefore God's food must be given to the inward will of the spirit to
eat of, that it may live without need and hunger as to the outward
being, that it may continually mortify and break the will of the earthly
self-hood, till the earthliness, viz. the earthly body, does freely
unloose or dissolve itself in death, and also enter again into the
mother, from whence it was created, and forsake its self-hood, that the
pure body of the element (in which the true life in God's will-spirit
does again enkindle the soul in the resigned will <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242)) and the disappeared body from the pure
element may become a mansion of the soul, viz. a paradisical budding
\[or bloomy renovation in the eternal spring-time of paradise\].

28\. And that the own will of the soul might be able to do this, viz.
that it might break itself off from its self-hood, and willingly enter
into the death of its self-hood, and become a nothing in its self-hood,
the free will of God, viz. the eternal lubet to the chaos of the soul,
which is the eternal Mercury in the power of the majesty, is again
entered into the disappeared image of God proceeded from the pure
element, viz. into the virgin-like life, and draws the will of the soul
to itself, and gives it again out of love and grace the heavenly
corporality of the pure element for food, and the water in that element
in the tincture of the fire and light, viz. of the eternal life, for
drink: And it has incorporated itself in the humanity, and freely
tenders itself to all souls with full desire: That soul which dies to
its self-hood, and brings its hunger again into God's mercy, may enjoy
this food, whereby it again becomes the first creature in God's
love. <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_243)

29\. Now we are to consider how the poor soul captivated in God's anger,
being void of the heavenly food, lives in mere anguish, and distress,
and restless pain; as the outward earthly body in its properties lives
in its hunger in mere anguish, distress, and oppressing pain, unless the
soul with the pure element does so overpower and keep it under, that it
does not fully domineer

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

in its own dominion of the outward astrum and four elements in the
poisonful mercurial wheel, according to the dark impression, by reason
of the influence of the element: If the universal does withstand it,
then it may stand in quiet rest, but yet no longer than the inward
penetrates the outward \[body\], and tinctures it: There is in the four
elements no perfection, till the body is changed again into the pure
element; therefore it must enter again into that from whence the four
elements arise.

30\. Now in this time of the four elements there is mere pain and
vexation; <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244) the soul amuses itself
on the outward astrum, which forces into it, from whence its false
imagination arises, and the body stirs up the poisonful mercurial wheel,
from whence sickness and pains befall it; therefore the soul must be
cured with the inward perfection, viz. by the speaking word, wherein it
stands in God's hand, which alone is able to tincture the soul, and
bring it into rest: The outward body must be tinctured and healed with
the expressed Mercury; and if the outward Mercury does also stand in the
curse as a poison-wheel, then he must be tinctured with his own light in
his mother in the body \[or womb\] of Sulphur: Mercury's own will and
hunger must be broken, that the envious odious hunger may become a love
desire.

31\. And now to know how this may be brought to pass, we must consider
the generation in Sulphur, from whence joy and sorrow do arise; for the
poisonful Mercury may not otherwise be resisted, and also nothing can
resist it, but its own mother which brings it forth, in whose womb it is
couched: As nothing can resist the cold but the heat only, and yet the
heat is the cold's son; so also the poisonful Mercury must be resisted
with its own child, which he himself generates in his mother's womb out
of heat and cold out of himself.

32\. As the love proceeding from the heart of the Father, which is his
Son, withstands the anger of the Father, whereby the Father is merciful;
so likewise it is in the expressed word or Mercury.

33\. Now understand it thus: I do not mean that the cold poison of
Mercury should be, or could be resisted with the enkindled heat; no, but
if the cold poison be enkindled, then the remedy must be from the same
likeness; but it must be first freed from the coldness, viz. from the
enflamed cold wrath, and brought into meekness, and then it does also
still and appease the hunger of the cold's desire in the disease of the
body: For if enkindled heat be administered to the enkindled

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

cold, then the cold is dismayed at the heat, and falls into a swound,
viz. into death's property; and so the heat becomes in this death's
property a poison-life, viz. an anxious sting; and the mercurial wheel
runs into sadness, viz. into sickness, or a crazy dotage, wherein all
joy is forgotten.

34\. For if the life shall subsist in its own right, then the heat and
cold must stand in equality, <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245) that
so they may accord one with another, and no enmity or disaffection <span
id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246) be at all in any of them; the one must
not exceed or over-top the other, but they must stand in one will; for
the enkindled cold desires no heat, but only likeness: Every hunger
desires only likeness for its food, but if the hunger be too strongly
enkindled in the cold, such a cure is not to be given it which is so
enkindled; indeed it must be in as high a degree in the cold; but the
violent force must be first taken away from it; so that it may be only
as the mother which generates it, not according to the enkindled
poison-source, but according to the mother's joy; and so the sickness,
viz. the poison in the anguish, will be likewise changed into such a
joy, and so the life receives again its first property.

35\. The raw opposite body does not belong to the cure, but its oil,
which must be mollified with its own love, understand with a meek
essence, which also belongs to the same property; for the seven forms of
nature are only one in the centre: Therefore that oil must be brought so
far in the wheel, till it enters into its highest love-desire, and then
it is rightly fit for cure; for there is nothing so evil but it has a
good in it, and that very good resists its evil \[or poisonful
malignity\].

36\. Thus also in the same sickness it may withstand the enkindled wrath
in the body; for if the cold poison be enkindled in the body, then its
good falls into faintness; <span id="fr_247"></span>[3](#fn_247) and if
it cannot obtain the likeness of its essence for its help, it remains in
faintness; and then the enkindled wrath also does immediately consume
itself, and falls also into faintness; and so the natural death is in
both, and the moving life in the body ceases; but if it attains the
likeness, <span id="fr_248"></span>[4](#fn_248) then it gathers strength
again, and the enkindled hunger of the disease must cease.

37\. In like manner also we are to consider of the heat, which needs no
cold property, but the likeness; yet it must be first freed from the
wrath of the same likeness, and brought into its own highest joy and
good, so that this likeness does not effectually <span
id="fr_249"></span>[5](#fn_249) operate either in heat or cold, but in
its own love-desire,

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

viz. in its best relish, and so it will bring the heat in the body into
such a desire: All corruptions in the body proceed from the cold; if the
brimstone be too vehemently enkindled by the heat, then the right and
property of the cold dies, and enters into sorrow.

38\. Mercury is the moving <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250) life in
all, and his mother is Sulphur; now the life and death lie in Sulphur,
viz. in the wrestling mercurial wheel. In the Sulphur there is fire,
light, and darkness; the impression causes darkness, coldness, and
hardness, and also great anguish: and from the impression of the
attraction Mercury takes his rise, and he is the sting of the
attraction, viz. the motion or disquietude, and arises in the great
anguish of the impression, where coldness, viz. a dark cold fire, by
reason of the hardness, arises in the impression; and in the sting of
anguish, viz. in the disquietude, an hot fire arises.

39\. Now Mercury is the wheel of motion, and a stirring up of the cold
and heat; and in this placeit is only a painful aching source in heat
and cold, viz. a cold and hot fiery poison-anguish, and forces forward
as a wheel, and yet it is a cause of joy, and all life and motion; but
if it shall be freed from the anguish, and introduced into the joy, then
it must be brought forth through death.

40\. Now every sickness and malady is a death's property; for Mercury
has too much enkindled and enflamed himself either in heat or cold,
whereby the essence or flesh, which he has attracted to himself in his
desire, viz. in his mother in the Sulphur, is burnt, whereby the
earthliness arises both in the water and flesh: Even as the matter of
the earth and stones, viz. the grossness of the same, is nothing else
but a burnt Sulphur, and water in Mercury is his property, where the
salniter in the flagrat of the mercurial wheel, from whence the manifold
salts arise, is burnt \[or too vehemently enflamed\], from whence come
the stink and evil taste.

41\. Otherwise if the Mercury did so effectually operate therein in the
oil of Sulphur, that he might be brought through the death of the
impression from the heat and cold, then the earth would be again in
paradise, and the joy-desire would again spring \[or bloom afresh\]
through the anguish of the cold's impression: And this is the cause that
God laid the curse upon the earth; for the mercurial wheel was deprived
of its good (viz. the love-desire, which arises in the eternal liberty,
and manifests itself with this mercurial wheel through cold and heat,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

and proceeds forth through the fire, and makes a shining of the light)
and the curse was brought thereinto, which is a withdrawing of the
love-desire.

42\. Now this Mercury, being a life in the Sulphur of its mother, stands
in the curse, viz. in the anguish of heat and cold, and makes in his
flagrat, or salnitral walm, continually salts, according to such
property as he is in each place, and as he is enkindled in each body;
these salts are only the taste in the seven properties.

43\. Now if the Mercury be too vehemently enkindled in the cold, then he
makes in the salnitral flagrat in his mother in the Sulphur a cold hard
impressive salt, from whence melancholy, darkness, and sadness arise in
the life of Sulphur; for observe what salt is in each thing, such a
lustre of the fire, and such a vital shining from the fire is also
therein; but if Mercury be enkindled in immoderate heat, he then burns
up the cold essence, and makes raging pains and achings according to the
impression, and according to the sting's property, from whence arises in
the Sulphur great heat and inflammation; he dries up and consumes the
water, so that the desire's hunger or sting has then no food to satisfy
its wrathful hunger, upon which he rages and tears in the salt, as it is
the poison's property \[so to do\], from whence the painful distemper in
the flesh arises.

44\. But if he obtains the likeness again in the property as he stands
in the centre of his mother, viz. in the Sulphur, understand as she has
generated him in the beginning, viz. as he at first came forth to the
natural life in both tinctures of man and woman, understand in the child
where his life did enkindle, then he is freed from all anguish, and
enters again into the likeness of the heat and cold; and though the
strife arises in many even from the very womb, yet the combat is first
raised up after the beginning of the life: In the life's beginning the
life enters into its highest joy; for the gates of the three principles
are opened in equal accord; but the strife soon begins about the
conquest between the darkness and light.

45\. But now we are to consider what is to be done to Mercury, if he be
enkindled <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_251) either in heat or cold,
whereby he raises up sickness and pains: Now it were very good that men
had the right cure; but alas! it will remain hidden and covered by
reason of the curse of the earth, and the abominations and sins of men,
because they awaken this poison in Mercury with their immoderate
bestiality. <span id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_252)

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

46\. Yet the poor captive has need of deliverance; and though men have
not the high universal, which reaches the centre, and brings the wheel
of life into its first property, yet men must take from the mercurial
walm <span id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253) of the earth its fruits
thereunto, seeing the body is also become earthly: A man must accord (or
assimulate) one likeness with another, one salt with another, according
as the inflammation is in the salt of the body: For observe, in what
property the brimstone is enkindled, either in heat or cold, in
melancholy or falling sickness (whether the brimstone be burnt too in
the body and putrified, or whether it be yet fresh and burning), even
such an herb, such a brimstone belongs to the cure, lest the heat or
cold be terrified in the salniter, where the salt arises, by a strange
might which comes into it, and generates a mort <span
id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_254) salt, and sets open more and more the
house of sadness: But it is not sufficient and powerful enough in its
wild nature and property as it grows out of the walm <span
id="fr_255"></span>[3](#fn_255) of the earth; it is not able to master
the root of the enkindled Mercury in the brimstone, but it does more
vehemently enkindle it in such a source and property.

47\. That which thou desirest should happen to the body, the same must
first happen to that which shall cure the body: To the cure of a foul
sickness there belongs a foul brimstone, and so to a cold or hot
sickness the like is to be understood; for look in what degree of the
fire or cold Mercury is enkindled, and in what form among the seven
properties of nature; that is, what salt soever among the seven salts is
enkindled, such a salt belongs to the cure: For sickness is nothing else
but an hunger; now the hunger desires nothing else but its likeness; but
now the property of that life, which in its beginning of its rise stood
in joy, is the root; and the sickness is its immoderate enkindling,
whereby the order \[or temperature\] is broken and divided: Thus the
root desires in its hunger the likeness, but the inflammation has taken
it away; now the inflammation is stronger than the root, therefore the
hunger of the inflammation must be appeased, and that which itself is
must be administered to it.

48\. But as God cured us with his love, and restored to us the salvation
of the soul, when we had enkindled the same in the poisonful Mercury of
his anger; in like manner also this likeness must be first cured and
circulated in the mercurial wheel, and freed from the heat and cold;
indeed not taken away from them (this cannot be, and it were also
unprofitable), but it must be brought into his highest joy, and then it
will make such a

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

property in the body in the Mercury of the brimstone and salt; for the
root of life does again quicken itself therein, and lifts up the first
desire, so that now the hunger vanishes in the fall of the inflammation.

49\. Now it behoves the physician to know how he may deal with the
medicaments in the likeness, so that he does not enrage them, and bring
them into another property; for in their property they are even as a
man's life is: He must take care that they remain in their degree, as
they are originally brought forth in their mother; for nothing can come
higher than it is in the centre of its original according to the
hiddenness; but if it shall come higher, then it must assume another
property to itself; and so it is not in its own degree, and has not its
proper virtue, but an improper one; which indeed may very well be, but
it has lost its nature-right, wherein it stands in joy, and is not able
to effect any proper operation in the assimulate of its own nature.

50\. Therefore there is nothing better than to let everything remain in
its innate genuine virtue; only its wrath must be changed into its own
joy, that so its own virtue according to the good part may be advanced
into its dominion, and then in the likeness it is powerful enough in all
sicknesses without any other mixture: For the original in the life
desires no other multiplicity, but only its likeness, that it may stand,
live, and burn in its own power and property.

51\. The power of the Most High has given to all things (to every one
according to its property) a fixed perfection; for "all was very good,"
as Moses says, but with the curse the turba is introduced, so that the
properties stand in the strife of Mercury; yet in each property, in
every herb, or whatever is, in whatever grows or arises out of the
walm <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_256) of the four elements, there
is a fixity hidden; for all things which are in the four elements are
originally sprung forth out of the eternal element, in which there is no
strife, neither heat nor cold, but all things were in equal weight of
all the properties in a love-play, as it is so now in paradise; and the
same \[paradise\] sprung forth in the beginning of this world before the
curse through the earth: Thus it is also yet hidden in all things, and
may be opened by understanding and art, so that the first virtue may
overcome the enflamed malignity.

52\. Though we men have not full power to do it in self-might, yet it
may be done in God's permission, who has again turned

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

his mercy towards us, <span id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_257) and again
opened paradise and its comprehension in man: Hath God given us power to
become his children, and to rule over the world? Why then not over the
curse of the earth? Let none hold it for impossible; there is required
only a divine understanding and knowledge thereunto, which shall blossom
in the time of the lily, and not in Babel, for whom we also have not
written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[162:1](sat17.htm#fr_232) Contrary will,
contrariety.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[162:2](sat17.htm#fr_233) Or signs and marks
itself in the body.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[162:3](sat17.htm#fr_234) Or comprehended, or
conceived.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[162:4](sat17.htm#fr_235) Colours of
distinction.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[163:1](sat17.htm#fr_236) Element.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[163:2](sat17.htm#fr_237) Into the desired end
or perfection of rest.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[164:1](sat17.htm#fr_238) Thus now.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[164:2](sat17.htm#fr_239) In the outward
principle in the expressed formed word.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[166:1](sat17.htm#fr_240) Constellation.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[167:1](sat17.htm#fr_241) Sphere.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[168:1](sat17.htm#fr_242) Or in which the soul
in the resigned will does again enkindle by its desire the true life in
God's will-spirit, viz. in the eternal light or liberty.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[168:2](sat17.htm#fr_243) Such a creature as it
was at first, before it fell.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[169:1](sat17.htm#fr_244) Source.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[170:1](sat17.htm#fr_245) Equal essence.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[170:2](sat17.htm#fr_246) Or departure.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[170:3](sat17.htm#fr_247) Into a swoon, or
impotency.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[170:4](sat17.htm#fr_248) Or assimulate.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[170:5](sat17.htm#fr_249) Or vehemently, by
force.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[171:1](sat17.htm#fr_250) Stirring, active.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[172:1](sat17.htm#fr_251) Enraged.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[172:2](sat17.htm#fr_252) With their bestial
lustful excess or disorder.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[173:1](sat17.htm#fr_253) Seething.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[173:2](sat17.htm#fr_254) Mortifying.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[173:3](sat17.htm#fr_255) Seething.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[174:1](sat17.htm#fr_256) Seething.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[175:1](sat17.htm#fr_257) Or put his mercy into
us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](sat18)
