[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat22)  [Next](sat24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

### DIALOGUE II

#### ARGUMENT

<span class="smallcaps">Herein</span> is described and set forth the
manner of passing the gulf which divides betwixt the two principles or
states of heaven and hell: And it is particularly shewn how this
transaction is carried on in the soul; what the partition wall therein
is, which separates from God.

What the breaking down of this partition wall, and how effected; what
the centre of light is, and the pressing into that centre is; what the
light of God and the light of nature are; how they are operative in
their several spheres, and how to be kept from interfering with each
other; with some account of the two wills and their contraposition in
the fallen state; of the magical wheel of the will, and how the motion
thereof may be regulated; of the eye in the midst thereof, what the
right eye is to the soul, and what the left is, but especially what the
*single eye* is, and in what manner it is to be obtained; of
purification from the contagion of matter; of the destruction of evil,
and of the very annihilation of it, by the subsidence of the will from
its own something into nothing; of the naked and magical faith, and the
attraction thereby of a certain divine substantiality and vestment; how
all consists in the will, and proceeds but from *one point;* where that
point is placed, and how it may be found out; and which is both the
safest and nearest way to attain to the high supersensual state, and the
internal kingdom of Christ, according to the true heavenly magia or
wisdom.

<span class="small">DISCIPLE.    MASTER.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> disciple being very earnest to be
more fully instructed how he might arrive at the supersensual life; and
how, having found all things, he might come to be a king over all God's
works; came again to his master the next morning, having watched the
night in prayer, that he might be disposed to receive and apprehend the
instructions that should be given him by a divine irradiation upon his
mind. And the disciple after a little space of silence, bowed himself,
and thus brake forth:

*Disciple*. O my master! my master! I have now endeavoured to recollect
my soul in the presence of God, and to cast myself into that deep where
no creature doth nor can dwell; that I might hear the voice of my Lord
speaking in me; and be initiated into that high life, whereof I heard
yesterday such great and amazing things pronounced. But, alas! I neither
hear nor see as I should: There is still such a partition wall in me
which beats back the heavenly sounds in their passage, and obstructs the
entrance of that light by which alone divine objects are discoverable,
as till this be broken down, I can have

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

but small hopes, yea, even none at all, of arriving at those glorious
attainments which you pressed me to, or of entering into that where no
creature dwells, and which you call nothing and all things. Wherefore be
so kind as to inform me what is required on my part, that this partition
which hinders may be broken or removed.

*Master*. This partition is the creaturely will in thee: And this can be
broken by nothing but by the grace of self-denial, which is the entrance
into the true following of Christ; and totally removed by nothing but a
perfect conformity with the divine will.

*Disciple*. But how shall I be able to break this creaturely will which
is in me, and is at enmity with the divine will? Or, what shall I do to
follow Christ in so difficult a path, and not to faint in a continual
course of self-denial and resignation to the will of God?

*Master*. This is not to be done by thyself; but by the light and grace
of God received into thy soul, which will, if thou gainsay not, break
the darkness that is in thee, and melt down thine own will, which
worketh in the darkness and corruption of nature, and bring it into the
obedience of Christ, whereby the partition of the creaturely self is
removed from betwixt God and thee.

*Disciple*. I know that I cannot do it of myself: But I would fain
learn, how I must receive this divine light and grace into me, which is
to do it for me, if I hinder it not my own self. What is then required
of me in order to admit this breaker of the partition, and to promote
the attainment of the ends of such admission?

*Master*. There is nothing more required of thee at first, than not to
resist this grace, which is manifested in thee; and nothing in the whole
process of thy work, but to be obedient and passive to the light of God
shining through the darkness of thy creaturely being, which
comprehendeth it not, as reaching no higher than the light of nature.

*Disciple*. But is it not for me to attain, if I can, both the light of
God, and the light of the outward nature too: And to make use of them
both for the ordering my life wisely and prudently?

*Master*. It is right, I confess, so to do. And it is indeed a treasure
above all earthly treasures, to be possessed of the light of God and
nature, operating in their spheres; and to have both the eye of time and
eternity at once open together, and yet not to interfere with each
other.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

*Disciple*. This is a great satisfaction to me to hear; having been very
uneasy about it for some time. But how this can be without interfering
with each other, there is the difficulty: Wherefore fain would I know,
if it were lawful, the boundaries of the one and the other; and how both
the divine and the natural light may in their several spheres
respectively act and operate, for the manifestation of the mysteries of
God and nature, and for the conduct of my outward and inward life?

*Master*. That each of these may be preserved distinct in their several
spheres, without confounding things heavenly and things earthly, or
breaking the golden chain of wisdom, it will be necessary, my child, in
the first place to wait for and attend the supernatural and divine
light, as that superiour light appointed to govern the day, rising in
the true east, which is the centre of paradise; and in great might
breaking forth as out of the darkness within thee, through a pillar of
fire and thunder-clouds, and thereby also reflecting upon the inferiour
light of nature a sort of image of itself, whereby only it can be kept
in its due subordination; that which is below being made subservient to
that which is above; and that which is without to that which is within.
Thus there will be no danger of interfering; but all will go right, and
everything abide in its proper sphere.

*Disciple*. Therefore without reason or the light of nature be
sanctified in my soul, and illuminated by this superiour light, as from
the central east of the holy light-world, by the eternal and
intellectual sun; I perceive there will be always some confusion, and I
shall never be able to manage aright either what concerneth time or
eternity: But I must always be at a loss, or break the links of wisdom's
chain.

*Master*. It is even so as thou hast said. All is confusion, if thou
hast no more but the dim light of nature, or unsanctified and
unregenerated reason to guide thee by; and if only the eye of time be
opened in thee, which cannot pierce beyond its own limit. Wherefore seek
the fountain of light, waiting in the deep ground of thy soul for the
rising there of the sun of righteousness, whereby the light of nature in
thee, with the properties thereof, will be made to shine seven times
brighter than ordinary. For it shall receive the stamp, image, and
impression of the super-sensual and supernatural; so that the sensual
and rational life will hence be brought into the most perfect order and
harmony.

*Disciple*. But how am I to wait for the rising of this glorious sun,
and how am I to seek in the centre, this fountain of light, which may
enlighten me throughout, and bring all my properties

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

into perfect harmony? I am in nature, as I said before; and which way
shall I pass through nature, and the light thereof, so that I may come
into that supernatural and supersensual ground, whence this true light,
which is the light of minds, doth arise; and this, without the
destruction of my nature, or quenching the light of it, which is
my—reason?

*Master*. Cease but from thine own activity, steadfastly fixing thine
eye upon one point, and with a strong purpose relying upon the promised
grace of God in Christ, to bring thee out of thy darkness into his
marvellous light. For this end gather in all thy thoughts, and by faith
press into the centre, laying hold upon the word of God, which is
infallible, and which hath called thee. Be thou then obedient to this
call; and be silent before the Lord, sitting alone with him in thy
inmost and most hidden cell, thy mind being centrally united in itself,
and attending his will in the patience of hope. So shall thy light break
forth as the morning; and after the redness thereof is passed, the sun
himself, which thou waitest for, shall arise unto thee, and under his
most healing wings thou shalt greatly rejoice; ascending and descending
in his bright and salutiferous beams. Behold this is the true
supersensual ground of life.

*Disciple*. I believe it indeed to be even so. But will not this destroy
nature? Will not the light of nature in me be extinguished by this
greater light? Or, must not the outward life hence perish, with the
earthly body which I carry?

*Master*. By no means at all. It is true, the evil nature will be
destroyed by it; but by the destruction thereof you can be no loser, but
very much a gainer. The eternal band of nature is the same afterward as
before; and the properties are the same. So that nature hereby is only
advanced and meliorated; and the light thereof, or human reason, by
being kept within its due bounds, and regulated by a superiour light, is
only made useful.

*Disciple*. Pray therefore let me know how this inferiour light ought to
be used by me; how it is to be kept within its due bounds; and after
what manner the superiour light doth regulate it and ennoble it.

*Master*. Know then, my beloved son, that if thou wilt keep the light of
nature within its own proper bounds, and make use thereof in just
subordination to the light of God; thou must consider that there are in
thy soul two wills, an inferiour will, which is for driving thee to
things without and below; and a superiour will, which is for drawing to
things within and above. These two wills are now set together, as it
were back to back,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

and in a direct contrariety to each other; but in the beginning it was
not so. For this contraposition of the soul in these two is no more than
the effect of the fallen state; since before that they were placed one
under the other, that is, the superiour will above, as the lord, and the
inferiour below, as the subject. And thus it ought to have continued.
Thou must also further consider, that answering to these two wills there
are likewise two eyes in the soul, whereby they are severally directed;
forasmuch as these eyes are not united in one single view, but look
quite contrary ways at once. They are in a like manner set one against
the other, without a common medium to join them. And hence, so long as
this double-sightedness doth remain, it is impossible there should be
any agreement in the determination of this or that will. This is very
plain: And it sheweth the necessity that this malady, arising from the
disunion of the rays of vision, be some way remedied and redressed, in
order to a true discernment in the mind. Both these eyes therefore must
be made to unite by a concentration of rays; there being nothing more
dangerous than for the mind to abide thus in the duplicity, and not to
seek to arrive at the unity. Thou perceivest, I know, that thou hast two
wills in thee, one set against the other, the superiour and the
inferiour; and that thou hast also two eyes within, one against another;
whereof the one eye may be called the right eye, and the other the left
eye. Thou perceivest, too, doubtless, that it is according to the right
eye that the wheel of the superiour will is moved; and that it is
according to the motion of the left eye that the contrary wheel in the
lower is turned about.

*Disciple*. I perceive this, sir, to be very true; and this it is which
causeth a continual combat in me, and createth to me greater anxiety
than I am able to express. Nor am I unacquainted with the disease of my
own soul, which you have so clearly declared. Alas! I perceive and
lament this malady, which so miserably disturbeth my sight; whence I
feel such irregular and convulsive motions drawing me on this side and
that side. The spirit seeth not as the flesh seeth; neither doth, or can
the flesh see, as the spirit seeth. Hence the spirit willeth against the
flesh; and the flesh willeth against the spirit in me. This hath been my
hard case. And how shall it be remedied? O how may I arrive at the unity
of will, and how come into the unity of vision!

*Master*. Mark now what I say: The right eye looketh forward in thee
into eternity. The left eye looketh backward in thee

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

into time. If now thou sufferest thyself to be always looking into
nature, and the things of time, and to be leading the will, and to be
seeking somewhat for itself in the desire, it will be impossible for
thee ever to arrive at the unity, which thou wishest for. Remember this;
and be upon thy watch. Give not thy mind leave to enter into, nor to
fill itself with, that which is without thee; neither look thou backward
upon thyself; but quit thyself, and look forward upon Christ. Let not
thy left eye deceive thee, by making continually one representation
after another, and stirring up thereby an earnest longing in the
self-propriety; but let thy right eye command back this left, and
attract it to thee, so that it may not gad abroad into the wonders and
delights of nature. Yea, it is better to pluck it quite out, and to cast
it from thee, than to suffer it to proceed forth without restraint into
nature, and to follow its own lusts: However, there is for this no
necessity, since both eyes may become very useful, if ordered aright;
and both the divine and natural light may in the soul subsist together,
and be of mutual service to each other. But never shalt thou arrive at
the unity of vision or uniformity of will, but by entering fully into
the will of our Saviour Christ, and therein bringing the eye of time
into the eye of eternity; and then descending by means of this united
through the light of God into the light of nature.

*Disciple*. So then if I can but enter into the will of my Lord, and
abide therein, I am safe, and may both attain to the light of God in the
spirit of my soul, and see with the eye of God, that is, the eye of
eternity in the eternal ground of my will; and may also at the same time
enjoy the light of this world nevertheless; not degrading, but adorning
the light of nature; and beholding as with the eye of eternity things
eternal, so with the eye of nature things natural, and both
contemplating therein the wonders of God, and sustaining also thereby
the life of my outward vehicle or body.

*Master*. It is very right. Thou hast well understood; and thou desirest
now to enter into the will of God, and to abide therein as in the
supersensual ground of light and life, where thou mayest in his light
behold both time and eternity, and bring all the wonders created of God
for the exteriour into the interiour life, and so eternally rejoice in
them to the glory of Christ; the partition of thy creaturely will being
broken down, and the eye of thy spirit simplified in and through the eye
of God manifesting itself in the centre of thy life. Let this be so now;
for it is God's will.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

*Disciple*. But it is very hard to be always looking forwards into
eternity; and consequently to attain to this single eye, and simplicity
of divine vision. The entrance of a soul naked into the will of God,
shutting out all imaginations and desires, and breaking down the strong
partition which you mention, is indeed somewhat very terrible and
shocking to human nature, as in its present state. O what shall I do,
that I may reach this which I so much long for?

*Master*. My son, let not the eye of nature with the will of the wonders
depart from that eye which is introverted into the divine liberty, and
into the eternal light of the holy majesty: But let it draw to thee
those wonders by union with that heavenly internal eye, which are
externally wrought out and manifested in visible nature. For while thou
art in the world, and hast an honest employment, thou art certainly by
the order of providence obliged to labour in it, and to finish the work
given thee, according to thy best ability, without repining in the
least; seeking out and manifesting for God's glory, the wonders of
nature and art. Since let the nature be what it will, it is all the work
and art of God: And let the art also be what it will, it is still God's
work; and his art, rather than any art or cunning of man. And all both
in art and nature serveth but abundantly to manifest the wonderful works
of God; that he for all, and in all, may be glorified. Yea, all serveth,
if thou knowest rightly how to use them, but to recollect thee more
inwards, and to draw thy spirit into that majestic light, wherein the
original patterns and forms of things visible are to be seen. Keep
therefore in the centre, and stir not out from the presence of God
revealed within thy soul; let the world and the devil make never so
great a noise and bustle to draw thee out, mind them not; they cannot
hurt thee. It is permitted to the eye of thy reason to seek food, and to
thy hands, by their labour, to get food for the terrestrial body: But
then this eye ought not with its desire to enter into the food prepared,
which would be covetousness; but must in resignation simply bring it
before the eye of God in thy spirit, and then thou must seek to place it
close to this very eye, without letting it go. Mark this lesson well.

Let the hands or the head be at labour, thy heart ought nevertheless to
rest in God. God is a Spirit; dwell in the Spirit, work in the Spirit,
pray in the Spirit, and do everything in the Spirit; for remember thou
also art a spirit, and thereby created in the image of God: Therefore
see thou attract not in thy desire

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

matter unto thee, but as much as possible abstract thyself from all
matter whatever; and so, standing in the centre, present thyself as a
naked spirit before God, in simplicity and purity; and be sure thy
spirit draw in nothing but spirit.

Thou wilt yet be greatly enticed to draw matter, and to gather that
which the world calls substance, thereby to have somewhat visible to
trust to: But by no means consent to the tempter, nor yield to the
lustings of thy flesh against the spirit. For in so doing thou wilt
infallibly obscure the divine light in thee; thy spirit will stick in
the dark covetous root, and from the fiery source of thy soul will it
blaze out in pride and anger; thy will shall be chained in earthliness,
and shall sink through the anguish into darkness and materiality; and
never shalt thou be able to reach the still liberty, or to stand before
the majesty of God. Since this is opening a door for him who reigneth in
the corruption of matter, possibly the devil may roar at thee for this
refusal; because nothing can vex him worse than such a silent
abstraction of the soul, and introversion thereof to the point of rest
from all that is worldly and circumferential: But regard him not;
neither admit the least dust of that matter into thee which he may
pretend any claim to. It will be all darkness to thee, as much matter as
is drawn in by the desire of thy will: It will darken God's majesty to
thee; and will close the seeing eye, by hiding from thee the light of
his beloved countenance. This the serpent longeth to do; but in vain,
except thou permittest thy imagination, upon his suggestion, to receive
in the alluring matter; else he can never get in. Behold then, if thou
desirest to see God's light in thy soul, and be divinely illuminated and
conducted, this is the short way that thou art to take; not to let the
eye of thy spirit enter into matter, or fill itself with anything
whatever, either in heaven or earth; but to let it enter by a naked
faith into the light of the majesty; and so receive by pure love the
light of God, and attract the divine power into itself, putting on the
divine body, and growing up in it to the full maturity of the humanity
of Christ.

*Disciple*. As I said before, so I say again, this is very hard. I
conceive indeed well enough that my spirit ought to be free from the
contagion of matter, and wholly empty, that it may admit into it the
Spirit of God. Also, that this Spirit will not enter, but where the will
entereth into nothing, and resigneth itself up in the nakedness of
faith, and in the purity of love, to its conduct; feeding magically upon
the word of God, and clothing itself thereby with a divine
substantiality. But, alas, how hard

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

is it for the will to sink into nothing, to attract nothing, to imagine
nothing!

*Master*. Let it be granted that it is so. Is it not surely worth thy
while, and all that thou canst ever do?

*Disciple*. It is so, I must needs confess.

*Master*. But perhaps it may not be so hard as at first it appeareth to
be; make but the trial, and be in earnest. What is there required of
thee but to stand still, and see the salvation of thy God? And couldst
thou desire anything less? Where is the hardship in this? Thou hast
nothing to care for, nothing to desire in this life, nothing to imagine
or attract: Thou needest only cast thy care upon God, who careth for
thee, and leave him to dispose of thee according to his good will and
pleasure, even as if thou hadst no will at all in thee. For he knoweth
what is best; and if thou canst but trust him, he will most certainly do
better for thee, than if thou wert left to thine own choice.

*Disciple*. This I most firmly believe.

*Master*. If thou believest, then go and do accordingly. All is in the
will, as I have shewn thee. When the will imagineth after somewhat, then
entereth it into that somewhat, and this somewhat taketh presently the
will into itself, and overcloudeth it, so as it can have no light, but
must dwell in darkness, unless it return back out of that somewhat into
nothing. But when the will imagineth or lusteth after nothing, then it
entereth into nothing, where it receiveth the will of God into itself,
and so dwelleth in light, and worketh all its works in it.

*Disciple*. I am now satisfied that the main cause of any one's
spiritual blindness, is his letting his will into somewhat, or into that
which he hath wrought, of what nature soever it be, good or evil, and
his setting his heart and affections upon the work of his own hands or
brain; and that when the earthly body perisheth, then the soul must be
imprisoned in that very thing which it shall have received and let in;
and if the light of God be not in it, being deprived of the light of
this world, it cannot but be found in a dark prison.

*Master*. This is a very precious gate of knowledge; I am glad thou
takest it into such consideration. The understanding of the whole
Scripture is contained in it; and all that hath been written from the
beginning of the world to this day, may be found herein, by him that
having entered with his will into nothing, hath there found all things,
by finding God; from whom, and to whom, and in whom are all things. By
this means

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

thou shalt come to hear and see God; and after this earthly life is
ended, to see with the eye of eternity all the wonders of God and of
nature, and more particularly those which shall be wrought by thee in
the flesh, or all that the Spirit of God shall have given thee to labour
out for thyself and thy neighbour, or all that the eye of reason
enlightened from above, may at any time have manifested to thee. Delay
not therefore to enter in by this gate, which if thou seest in the
spirit, as some highly favoured souls have seen it, thou seest in the
supersensual ground all that God is, and can do; thou seest also
therewith, as one hath said who was taken thereinto, through heaven,
hell, and earth; and through the essence of all essences. Whosoever
findeth it, hath found all that he can desire. Here is the virtue, and
power of the love of God displayed. Here is the height and depth; here
is the breadth and length thereof manifested, as fully as ever the
capacity of thy soul can contain. By this thou shalt come into that
ground out of which all things are originated, and in which they
subsist; and in it thou shalt reign over all God's works, as a prince of
God.

*Disciple*. Pray tell me, dear master, where dwelleth it in man?

*Master*. Where man dwelleth not; there hath it its seat in man.

*Disciple*. Where is that in a man, where man dwelleth not in himself?

*Master*. It is the resigned ground of a soul, to which nothing
cleaveth.

*Disciple*. Where is the ground in any soul, to which there will nothing
stick? Or, where is that which abideth and dwelleth not in something?

*Master*. It is the centre of rest and motion in the resigned will of a
truly contrite spirit, which is crucified to the world. This centre of
the will is impenetrable consequently to the world, the devil, and hell:
Nothing in all the world can enter into it, or adhere to it, though
never so many devils should be in the confederacy against it; because
the will is dead with Christ unto the world, but quickened with him in
the centre thereof, after his blessed image. Here it is where man
dwelleth not; and where no self abideth, or can abide.

*Disciple*. O where is this naked ground of the soul void of all self?
And how shall I come at the hidden centre where God dwelleth, and not
man? Tell me plainly, loving sir, where it is, and how it is to be found
of me, and entered into?

*Master*. There where the soul hath slain its own will, and

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

willeth no more anything as from itself, but only as God willeth, and as
his Spirit moveth upon the soul, shall this appear: Where the love of
self is banished, there dwelleth the love of God. For so much of the
soul's own will as is dead unto itself, even so much room hath the will
of God, which is his love, taken up in that soul. The reason whereof is
this: Where its own will did before sit, there is now nothing; and where
nothing is, there it is that the love of God worketh alone.

*Disciple*. But how shall I comprehend it?

*Master*. If thou goest about to comprehend it, then it will fly away
from thee; but if thou dost surrender thyself wholly up to it, then it
will abide with thee, and become the life of thy life, and be natural to
thee.

*Disciple*. And how can this be without dying, or the whole destruction
of my will?

*Master*. Upon this entire surrender and yielding up of thy will, the
love of God in thee becometh the life of thy nature; it killeth thee
not, but quickeneth thee, who art now dead to thyself in thine own will,
according to its proper life, even the life of God. And then thou
livest, yet not to thy own will; but thou livest to its will; forasmuch
as thy will is henceforth become its will. So then it is no longer thy
will, but the will of God; no longer the love of thyself, but the love
of God, which moveth and operateth in thee; and then, being thus
comprehended in it, thou art dead indeed as to thyself, but art alive
unto God. So being dead thou livest, or rather God liveth in thee by his
Spirit; and his love is made to thee life from the dead. Never couldst
thou, with all thy seeking, have comprehended it; but it hath
apprehended thee. Much less couldst thou have comprehended it: But now
it hath comprehended thee; and so the treasure of treasures is found.

*Disciple*. How is it that so few souls do find it, when yet all would
be glad enough to have it?

*Master*. They all seek it in somewhat, and so they find it not: For
where there is somewhat for the soul to adhere to, there the soul
findeth but that somewhat only, and taketh up its rest therein, until
she seeth that it is to be found in nothing, and goeth out of the
somewhat into nothing, even into that nothing out of which all things
may be made. The soul here saith, "I have nothing, for I am utterly
naked and stripped of everything: I can do nothing; for I have no manner
of power, but am as water poured out: I am nothing; for all that I am is
no more than an image of being, and only God is to me <span
class="smallcaps">I am</span>; and so

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

sitting down in my own nothingness, I give glory to the Eternal Being,
and will nothing of myself, that so God may will all in me, being unto
me my God and all things." Herein now it is that so very few find this
most precious treasure in the soul, though every one would so fain have
it; and might also have it, were it not for this somewhat in every one
which letteth.

*Disciple*. But if the love should proffer itself to a soul, could not
that soul find it, nor lay hold on it, without going for it into
nothing?

*Master*. No verily. Men seek and find not, because they seek it not in
the naked ground where it lieth; but in something or other where it
never will be, neither can be. They seek it in their own will, and they
find it not, They seek it in their self-desire, and they meet not with
it. They look for it in an image, or in an opinion, or in affection, or
a natural devotion and fervour, and they lose the substance by thus
hunting after a shadow. They search for it in something sensible or
imaginary, in somewhat which they may have a more peculiar natural
inclination for, and adhesion to; and so they miss of what they seek,
for want of diving into the supersensual and supernatural ground where
the treasure is hid. Now, should the love graciously condescend to
proffer itself to such as these, and even to present itself evidently
before the eye of their spirit, yet would it find no place in them at
all, neither could it be held by them, or remain with them.

*Disciple*. Why not, if the love should be willing and ready to offer
itself, and to stay with them.

*Master*. Because the imaginariness which is in their own will hath set
up itself in the place thereof: And so this imaginariness would have the
love in it; but the love fleeth away, for it is its prison. The love may
offer itself; but it cannot abide where the self-desire attracteth or
imagineth. That will which attracteth nothing, and to which nothing
adhereth, is only capable of receiving it; for it dwelleth only in
nothing, as I said, and therefore they find it not.

*Disciple*. If it dwell only in nothing, what is now the office of it in
nothing?

*Master*. The office of the love here is to penetrate incessantly into
something; and if it penetrate into, and find a place in something which
is standing still and at rest, then its business is to take possession
thereof. And when it hath there taken possession, then it rejoiceth
therein with its flaming love-fire, even as the sun doth in the visible
world. And then the office

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

of it is without intermission to enkindle a fire in this something,
which may burn it up; and then with the flames thereof exceedingly to
enflame itself, and raise the heat of the love-fire by it, even seven
degrees higher.

*Disciple*. O loving master, how shall I understand this?

*Master*. If it but once kindle a fire within thee, my son, thou shalt
then certainly feel how it consumeth all that which it toucheth; thou
shalt feel it in the burning up thyself, and swiftly devouring all
egoity, or that which thou callest I and Me, as standing in a separate
root, and divided from the Deity, the fountain of thy being. And when
this enkindling is made in thee, then the love doth so exceedingly
rejoice in thy fire, as thou wouldst not for all the world be out of it;
yea, wouldst rather suffer thyself to be killed, than to enter into thy
something again. This fire now must grow hotter and hotter, till it
shall have perfected its office with respect to thee, and therefore wilt
not give over, till it come to the seventh degree. Its flame hence also
will be so very great, that it will never leave thee, though it should
even cost thee thy temporal life; but it would go with thee in its sweet
loving fire into death; and if thou wentest also into hell, it would
break hell in pieces also for thy sake. Nothing is more certain than
this; for it is stronger than death and hell.

*Disciple*. Enough, my dearest master, I can no longer endure that
anything should divert me from it. But how shall I find the nearest way
to it?

*Master*. Where the way is hardest, there go thou; and what the world
casteth away, that take thou up. What the world doth, that do thou not;
but in all things walk thou contrary to the world. So thou comest the
nearest way to that which thou art seeking.

*Disciple*. If I should in all things walk contrary to other people, I
must needs be in a very unquiet and sad state; and the world would not
fail to account me for a madman.

*Master*. I bid thee not, child, to do harm to any one, thereby to
create to thyself any misery or unquietness. This is not what I mean by
walking contrary in everything to the world. But because the world, as
the world, loveth only deceit and vanity, and walketh in false and
treacherous ways; thence, if thou hast a mind to act a clean contrary
part to the ways thereof, without any exception or reserve whatsoever,
walk thou only in the right way, which is called the way of light, as
that of the world is properly the way of darkness. For the right

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

way, even the path of light, is contrary to all the ways of the world.

But whereas thou art afraid of creating to thyself hereby trouble and
inquietude, that indeed will be so according to the flesh. In the world
thou must have trouble; and thy flesh will not fail to be unquiet, and
to give thee occasion of continual repentance. Nevertheless in this very
anxiety of soul, arising either from the world or the flesh, the love
Both most willingly enkindle itself, and its cheering and conquering
fire is but made to blaze forth with greater strength for the
destruction of that evil. And whereas thou dost also say, that the world
will for this esteem thee mad; it is true the world will be apt enough
to censure thee for a madman in walking contrary to it: And thou art not
to be surprised if the children thereof laugh at thee, calling thee
silly fool. For the way to the love of God is folly to the world, but is
wisdom to the children of God. Hence, whenever the world perceiveth this
holy fire of love in God's children, it concludeth immediately that they
are turned fools, and are besides themselves. But to the children of
God, that which is despised of the world is the greatest treasure; yea,
so great a treasure it is, as no life can express, nor tongue so much as
name what this enflaming, all-conquering love of God is. it is brighter
than the sun; it is sweeter than anything that is called sweet; it is
stronger than all strength; it is more nutrimental than food; more
cheering to the heart than wine, and more pleasant than all the joy and
pleasantness of this world. Whosoever obtaineth it, is richer than any
monarch on earth; and he who getteth it, is nobler than any emperor can
be, and more potent and absolute than all power and authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Heaven and Hell](sat24)
