[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dun03)  [Next](dun05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV4ZS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Duncan's Masoic Ritual and Monitor*, by Malcom C. Duncan, \[1866\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span id="img_08700"></span> ![](img/08700.jpg)

# MASTER MASON, OR THIRD DEGREE. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

THE ceremony of opening and conducting the business of a Lodge of Master
Masons is nearly the same as in the Entered Apprentice and Fellow
Crafts' Degrees, already explained. All the business of a "Blue Lodge"
(a Lodge of three Degrees) is done in the Lodge while opened on this
Degree, except that of entering an Apprentice or passing a Fellow Craft,
when the Lodge is lowered from the Masters' Degree for that purpose.

The Third Degree is said to be the height of Ancient Free-masonry, and
the most sublime of all the Degrees in Masonry (Royal Arch not even
excepted); and when it is conferred, the Lodge is generally well filled
with the members of the Lodge and visiting brethren.

The traditional account of the death, several burials, and resurrections
of one of the craft, Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, as developed in
conferring this Degree, is very interesting.

We read in the Bible, that Hiram Abiff was one of the head workmen
employed at the building of King Solomon's Temple, and other ancient
writings inform us that he was an arbiter between King Solomon and
Hiram, king of Tyre; but his tragical death is nowhere recorded, except
in the archives of Freemasonry. Not even the Bible, the writings of
Josephus, nor any other writings, however ancient, of which we have any
knowledge, furnish any information respecting his death. It is very
singular, that

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

a man so celebrated as Hiram Abiff was, universally acknowledged as the
third most distinguished man then living, and, in many respects, the
greatest man in the world, should pass from off the stage of action, in
the presence of King Solomon, three thousand three hundred grand
overseers, and one hundred and fifty thousand workmen, with whom he had
spent a number of years, and with King Solomon, his bosom friend,
without any of his numerous *confrères* even recording his death, or any
thing <span id="img_08800"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/08800.jpg" alt="COMPASSES, PLACED IN A LODGE OF MASTER MASONS,&lt;br&gt; &#39;&#39;BOTH POINTS ELEVATED ABOVE THE SQUARE,&#39;&#39; (See Note B, Appendix.)" /><br />
COMPASSES, PLACED IN A LODGE OF MASTER MASONS,<br />
''BOTH POINTS ELEVATED ABOVE THE SQUARE,'' (See Note B, Appendix.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

about it.

A Master Masons' Lodge is styled by the Craft the "Sanctum Sanctorum, or
Holy of Holies, of King Solomon's Temple," and when the Lodge is opened
on this Degree, both points of the compasses are elevated above the
square. (See [engraving](#img_08800)..md)

A candidate for the sublime Degree of a Master Mason is generally (as in
the preceding Degrees) prepared by the Junior Deacon and the two
Stewards, or some other brethren acting as such.

### PREPARING THE CANDIDATE

The candidate is divested of all wearing apparel, except his shirt and
drawers, and if he has not the latter, he is furnished with a pair by
the brethren preparing him. The drawers are rolled up just above the
candidate's knees, and both arms are taken out of his shirt-sleeves,
leaving his legs and breast bare. A rope, technically called, by Masons,
a cable-tow, is wound around his body three times, and a bandage, or
hoodwink, is tied very closely over his eyes. (See
[engraving](#img_08900)..md)

When the candidate is prepared, the Deacon takes him by the left arm,
leads him up to the door of the Lodge, and gives three *loud, distinct
knocks*.

The Senior Deacon, who has stationed himself at the inner door, at the
right of the Senior Warden, on hearing these raps rises to his feet,
makes the sign of a Master Mason to the Master (see [Fig.
6](dun02.htm#img_01800), [p. 18](dun02.htm#page_18).md), and says:

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Worshipful Master, while engaged in the lawful pursuit of Masonry, there
is an alarm at the inner door of our Lodge.

W. M.--You will attend to the alarm, and ascertain the cause.

Senior Deacon gives three loud knocks (• • •), which are responded to by
one (•) from the parties outside. The Senior Deacon then answers with
one rap (•), and opens the door. <span id="img_08900"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/08900.jpg" alt="CANDIDATE DULY AND TRULY PREPARED." /><br />
CANDIDATE DULY AND TRULY PREPARED.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(See Note  [J](dun10.htm#xref_J), Appendix..md)

S. D.--Who comes here?

J. D.--Brother Gabe, who has been regularly initiated Entered
Apprentice, passed to the Degree of Fellow Craft, and now wishes to
receive further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime Degree
of a Master Mason.

S. D.--Brother Gabe, is it of your own free-will and accord?

Candidate--It is.

S. D.--Brother Junior Deacon, is he worthy and well qualified?

J. D.--He is.

S. D.--Duly and truly prepared?

J. D--He is.

S. D.--Has he made suitable proficiency in the preceding degrees?

J. D.--He has.

S. D.--And properly vouched for?

J. D.--He is.

S. D.--Who vouches for him?

J. D.--A brother.

S. D.--By what further right or benefit does he expect to gain
admission?

J. D.--By the benefit of the password.

S. D.--Has he the password?

J. D.--He has it not, but I have it for him.

S. D.--Advance, and give it me.

Junior Deacon here steps forward and whispers in the Senior Deacon's
ear, "Tubal Cain."

S. D.--The pass is right; you will wait with patience until the
Worshipful Master is informed of your request and his answer returned.

The Deacon then closes the door, repairs to the centre of the Lodge-room
before the altar, and sounds his rod on the floor three times (• • •),
which is responded to by the Master with three raps of the gavel, when
the Senior Deacon makes the sign of a Master Mason (see [Fig.
6](dun02.htm#img_01800), [p. 18](dun02.htm#page_18).md), and says:

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

S. D.--Brother Gabe, who has been regularly initiated Entered
Apprentice, passed to the Degree of Fellow Craft, and now wishes to
receive further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime Degree
of a Master Mason.

W. M.--Is it of his own free-will and accord?

S. D.--It is.

W, M.--Is he worthy and well qualified, duly and truly prepared?

S. D.--He is.

W. M.--Has he made suitable proficiency in the preceding degree?

S. D.--He has.

W. M.--And properly vouched for?

S. D.--He is.

W. M.--Who vouches for him?

S. D--A brother.

W. M.--By what further right or benefit does he expect to gain
admission?

S. D.--By the benefit of the password.

W. M.--Has he that pass?

S. D.--He has it not, but I have it for him.

W. M.--Advance, and give it me.

The Senior Deacon steps to the Master, and whispers in his ear, "Tubal
Cain."

W. M.--The password is right. Let him enter, and be received in due
form.

The Senior Deacon steps to the altar, takes the compasses, repairs to
the door, opens it, and says:

S. D.--Let him enter, and be received in due form.

The Junior Deacon advances, followed by the Stewards, with rods, when
the Senior Deacon stops them, by placing his hand against the candidate,
at the same time saying:

S. D.--Brother Gabe, on entering this Lodge the first time, you were
received on the point of the compasses, pressing your naked left breast,
the moral of which was explained to you. On entering the second time,
you were received on the angle of the square, which was also explained
to you. I now receive you on both points of the compasses, extending
from your naked left to your naked right breast (he here places both
points against candidate's breasts), which is to teach you, that as the
vital parts of man are contained within the breasts, so the most
excellent tenets of our institution are contained between the points of
the compasses--which are Friendship, Morality, and Brotherly Love.

The Junior Deacon now passes the candidate over to the Senior

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deacon, and he
(Junior Deacon) takes his seat near the door, at the right hand of the
Senior Warden in the west, while the Senior Deacon proceeds to conduct
the candidate, followed by the two Stewards, three times around the
Lodge, during which time the Worshipful Master reads the following
passage of Scripture:

"Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days
come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shalt say, I have no
pleasure in them: while the sun, or the moon, or the stars be not
darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; in the day when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few; and those that
look out of the windows be darkened, and the doors shall be shut in the
streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at
the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought
low. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears
shall be in the way, and the almond-tree shall flourish, and the
grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth
to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets; or ever the
silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken at the fountain, or
the wheel at the cistern. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it
was; and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it."

In some Lodges the following paraphrase of the above is sung; and if the
Lodge have an organ, or melodeon, the singers are generally accompanied
on the instrument:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Let us remember in our youth,  
  Before the evil days draw nigh,  
Our Great Creator, and his Truth,  
  Ere memory fail, and pleasures fly;  
Or sun, or moon, or planet's light  
  Grow dark, or clouds return in gloom;  
Ere vital spark no more incite;  
  When strength shall bow and years consume."

</div>

For balance of this paraphrase, see *Freemason's Monitor, or
Illustrations of Masonry*, by Thomas S. Webb, p. 61.

As the Senior Deacon and candidate pass the different stations of the
officers, they (the officers) sound their gavels as follows; when they
pass the Junior Warden in the south the first time, he gives one rap
(•), Senior Warden one rap, and Worshipful Master one rap; the second
time, .Junior Warden two raps, Senior Warden two raps, and Worshipful
Master two raps (• •); the third time round, Junior Warden three raps
(• • •), Senior

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Warden three raps,
and the Worshipful Master three raps. The Master so times his reading of
the passage of Scripture, as to finish just as the parties reach the
Junior Warden's station in the south, on the third round, when they
halt.

J. W.--Who comes here?

Conductor (S. D.)--Brother Gabe, who has been regularly initiated
Entered Apprentice, passed to the degree of Fellow Craft, and now wishes
to receive further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime
Degree of a Master Mason.

J. W.--Brother Gabe, is it of your own free-will and accord?

Candidate--It is.

J. W.--Brother Senior Deacon, is he worthy and well qualified, duly and
truly prepared?

S. D.--He is.

J. W.--Has he made suitable proficiency in the preceding Degrees?

S. D.--He has.

J. W.--And properly vouched for?

S. D.--He is.

J. W.--Who vouches for him?

S. D.--A brother.

J. W.--By what further right or benefit does he expect to gain
admission?

S. D.--By the benefit of the password.

J. W.--Has he the password?

S. D.--He has it not, but I have it for him.

J. W.--Advance and give the password.

Senior Deacon steps forward, and whispers in the Warden's ear, "Tubal
Cain."

J. W.--The password is right. I will suffer you to pass on to the Senior
Warden's station in the west, for his examination.

Senior Deacon passes on to the west, where the same questions are asked
and answered as before, and the Senior Warden suffers them to pass on to
the Worshipful Master in the east, where the same questions and answers
are repeated.

W. M.--From whence came you, and whither are you travelling?

S. D.--From the west, travelling toward the east.

W. M.--Why leave you the west, and travel toward the east!

S. D--In search of further light in Masonry.

W. M.--Since that is the object of your search, you will reconduct this
candidate to the Senior Warden in the west, with my orders that he be
taught to approach the east, the place of further light in Masonry, by
three upright, regular steps, his body erect at the altar before the
Worshipful Master in the east.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

The Senior Deacon then conducts the candidate to the Senior Warden in
the west, and reports:

S. D.--Brother Senior Warden, it is the orders of the Worshipful Master
that you teach this candidate to approach the east, the place of further
light in Masonry, by three upright, regular steps, his body erect at the
altar before the Worshipful Master in the east.

The Senior Warden approaches the candidate, faces him toward the east
(*i.e.* towards the Master), and says:

Brother, you will step off with your left foot one full step, and bring
the heel of your right in the hollow of your left foot; now step off
with your right foot, and bring the heel of your left in the hollow of
your right foot; now step off with your left foot, and bring both heels
together. (See [Fig. 14](#img_09300)..md)

<span id="img_09300"></span> ![FIG. 14. FIRST THREE STEPS IN
MASONRY.](img/09300.jpg.md)  
FIG. 14. FIRST THREE STEPS IN MASONRY.

S. W.--The candidate is in order, Worshipful, and awaits your further
will and pleasure.

W. M.--You will cause him to kneel on his naked knees, both hands
resting on the Holy Bible, square, and compasses.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, you are kneeling, for the third time, at the altar
of Masonry, to take upon yourself the solemn oath of a Master Mason; and
I, as Master of this Lodge, take pleasure, as on former occasions, in
informing you that there is nothing in it which will interfere with the
duty you owe to your God, your neighbor, your country, or self. Are you
willing to take the oath?

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span id="img_09400"></span> ![FIG. 15. CANDIDATE TAKING THE OATH OF A
MASTER MASON.](img/09400.jpg.md)  
FIG. 15. CANDIDATE TAKING THE OATH OF A MASTER MASON.

(left to right: Worshipful Master Altar, Candidate. Conductor.)

<span class="small">"Kneeling on both my naked knees, both hands resting
on the Holy Bible, square, and compasses."</span>

 

Candidate--I am.

W. M.--You will repeat your name, and say after me:

"I, Peter Gabe (Master gives three raps with his gavel, when all present
assemble round the altar), of my own free-will and accord, in the
presence of Almighty God, and this worshipful Lodge, erected to him and
dedicated to the holy Sts. John, do hereby and hereon most solemnly and
sincerely promise and swear, that I will always hail, ever conceal, and
never reveal any of the secrets, arts, parts, point or points, of the
Master Masons' Degree, to any person or persons whomsoever, except it be
to a true and lawful brother of this Degree, or in a regularly
constituted Lodge of Master Masons, nor unto him, or them, until by
strict trial, due examination, or lawful information, I shall have found
him, or them, as lawfully entitled to the same as I am myself.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"I furthermore promise and swear, that I will stand to and abide by all
laws, rules, and regulations of the Master Masons' Degree, and of the
Lodge of which I may hereafter become a member, as far as the same shall
come to my knowledge; and that I will ever maintain and support the
constitution, laws, and edicts of the Grand Lodge under which the same
shall be holden.

"Further, that I will acknowledge and obey all due signs and summonses
sent to me from a Master Masons' Lodge, or given me by a brother of that
Degree, if within the length of my cable-tow.

"Further, that I will always aid and assist all poor, distressed, worthy
Master Masons, their widows and orphans, knowing them to be such, as far
as their necessities may require, and my ability permit, without
material injury to myself and family.

"Further, that I will keep a worthy brother Master Mason's secrets
inviolable, when communicated to and received by me as such, murder and
treason excepted.

"Further, that I will not aid, nor be present at, the initiation,
passing, or raising of a woman, an old man in his dotage, a young man in
his nonage, an atheist, a madman, or fool, knowing them to be such.

"Further, that I will not sit in a Lodge of clandestine-made Masons, nor
converse on the subject of Masonry with a clandestine-made Mason, nor
one who has been expelled or suspended from a Lodge, while under that
sentence, knowing him or them to be such.

"Further, I will not cheat, wrong, nor defraud a Master Mason's Lodge,
nor a brother of this Degree, knowingly, nor supplant him in any of his
laudable undertakings, but will give him due and timely notice, that he
may ward off all danger.

"Further, that I will not knowingly strike a brother Master Mason, or
otherwise do him personal violence in anger, except in the necessary
defence of my family or property.

"Further, that I will not have illegal carnal intercourse with a Master
Mason's wife, his mother, sister, or daughter, nor suffer the same to be
done by others, if in my power to prevent.

"Further, that I will not give the Grand Masonic word, in any other
manner or form than that in which I shall receive it, and then in a low
breath.

"Further, that I will not give the Grand Hailing Sign of Distress,
except in case of the most imminent danger, in a just and lawful Lodge,
or for the benefit of instruction; and if ever I should see it given, or
hear the words accompanying it, by a worthy brother in distress, I will
fly to his relief, if there is a greater probability of saving his life
than losing my own.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

"All this I most solemnly, sincerely promise and swear, with a firm and
steady resolution to perform the same, without any hesitation, mental
reservation, or secret evasion of mind what-ever, binding myself, under
no less penalty than that of having my body severed in two, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) my bowels taken from thence and burned to
ashes, the ashes scattered before the four winds of heaven, that no more
remembrance might be had of so vile and wicked a wretch as I would be,
should I ever, knowingly, violate this my Master Mason's obligation. So
help me God, and keep me steadfast in the due performance of the same."

W. M.--You will detach your hands and kiss the book. In your present
condition, what do you most desire?

Candidate (prompted by conductor.)--Further light in Masonry.

W. M.--Let him receive further light.

Conductor here takes off the hoodwink and removes the cable-tow, and all
around the altar place their hands in the position of the duegard of a
Master Mason. (See [Fig. 5](dun02.htm#img_01703.md), [p.
17](dun02.htm#page_17)..md) The Worshipful Master gives one rap with his
gavel, when all the brethren retire to their seats, leaving at the altar
the Master, conductor, and candidate.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, on receiving further light, you perceive more than
you have heretofore. Both points of the compasses are elevated above the
square, which is to teach you never to lose sight of those truly Masonic
virtues, which are friendship, morality, and brotherly love.

The Master now steps back about three paces from the altar, and says.

Brother Gabe, you discover me approaching you from the east, under the
duegard (some say--step, duegard, and sign) of a Master Mason; and, in
token of the further continuance of my brotherly love and favor, I
present. you with my right hand, and with it the pass and token of the
pass of a Master Mason.

Takes the candidate by the "real grip" of a Fellow Craft, and says.

Your conductor will answer for you.

W. M.--Will you be off or from?

Conductor--From.

W. M.--From what and to what?

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Conductor--From the "real grip" of a Fellow Craft to the pass grip of a
Master Mason. <span id="img_09700"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/09700.jpg" alt="FIG. 16. PASS GRIP OF A MASTER MASON." /><br />
FIG. 16. PASS GRIP OF A MASTER MASON.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

W. M.--Pass.

Conductor here instructs candidate to pass his thumb from the second
joint to space beyond, which is the second space.

W. M. (looking conductor in the eye.)--What is that?

Conductor--The pass grip of a Master Mason.

W. M.--Has it a name?

Conductor--It has.

W. M.--Will you give it me?

Conductor--I did not so receive it, neither can I so impart it.

W. M.--How will you dispose of it?

Conductor--I will letter it or halve it.

W. M.--Halve it, and begin.

Conductor--No, you begin.

W. M.--Begin you.

Conductor--Tu.

W. M.--Bal.

Conductor--Cain. (Pronounced by the conductor--Tubal Cain.) <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

W. M. (lifting the candidate up.)--You will arise, and salute the Junior
and Senior Wardens as an obligated Master Mason.

Here Lodges differ in their mode of work; some only pass the candidate
around the Lodge once, and as he passes the Junior and Senior Wardens he
gives the Master's sign. (See [Fig. 6](dun02.htm#img_01800.md), [p.
18](dun02.htm#page_18)..md) The Master should instruct the candidate (and
he generally does) how to make the signs before he gets up from the
altar, after taking the obligation.

The following appears to be the proper way:--After the candidate gets up
from the altar, the conductor should lead him from the altar direct to
the Junior Warden's station in the south,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and give three raps on the floor with his rod, the Junior Warden
responding by three raps with his gavel.

J. W.--Who comes here?

Conductor--Brother Gabe, an obligated Master Mason.

J. W.--How shall I know him to be such?

Conductor--By the pass and token of the pass of a Master Mason.

J. W. (offering his hand to candidate.)--Advance the token. (They take
hold of each other's hands by the real grip of a Fellow Craft. See real
grip of a Fellow Craft, [Fig. 12](dun03.htm#img_06700.md), [p.
67](dun03.htm#page_67)..md)

J. W.--Will you be off, or from?

Conductor (for candidate.)--From.

J. W.--From what, and to what?

Conductor--From the real grip of a Fellow Craft to the pass grip of a
Master Mason.

J. W.--Pass. (They now pass to the pass grip of a Master Mason. (See
[Fig. 16](#img_09700), [p. 97](#page_97)..md)

J. W.--What is that?

Conductor--The pass grip of a Master Mason.

J. W.--Has it a name?

Conductor--It has.

J. W.--Will you give it me?

Conductor--I did not so receive it, neither can I so impart it.

J. W.--How will you dispose of it?

Conductor--I will letter or halve it.

J. W.--Halve it, and begin.

Conductor--No, you begin.

J. W.--Begin you.

Conductor--Tu.

J. W.--Bal.

Conductor--Cain. ([Pronounced](errata.htm#2) by conductor--Tubal Cain..md)

J. W.--The token is right, and the pass is right. You will pass on to
the Senior Warden's station in the west, for his examination.

They then pass on to this officer's station, where the same questions
and answers are repeated as at the Junior Warden's station, and he (the
Senior Warden) suffers them to pass on to the Worshipful Master's
station in the east. As they approach the Worshipful Master's station,
he says:

W. M.--Brother Senior Deacon, you will reconduct the candidate to the
Senior Warden in the west, with my orders that he teach him how to wear
his apron as a Master Mason.

The conductor then turns about to the Senior Warden in the west, and
says:

Brother Senior Warden, it is the orders of the Worshipful

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Master that you
teach this candidate how to wear his apron as a Master Mason.

The Senior Warden approaches the candidate and ties the apron upon him,
with the flap and corners turned down, and says:

Master Masons wear their aprons <span id="img_09900"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/09900.jpg" alt="A MASTER MASON&#39;S APRON." /><br />
A MASTER MASON'S APRON.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

with the flap and corners down, to designate them as Master Masons, or
as overseers of the work, and so you will wear yours.

The conductor now conducts the candidate back to the Worshipful Master
in the east.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, as you are clothed as a Master Mason, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) it is necessary that you should have the
working-tools or a Master Mason. (Master has a small trowel, which he
shows the candidate as he commences to read concerning it.)

The working-tools of a Master Mason are all the implements of Masonry
appertaining to the first <span id="img_09901"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/09901.jpg" alt="TROWEL." /><br />
TROWEL.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

three Degrees indiscriminately, but more especially the trowel.

The trowel is an instrument made use of by operative masons to spread
the cement which unites a building into one common mass; but we, as Free
and Accepted Masons are taught to make use of it for the more noble and
glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and
affection; that

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

cement which unites us into one sacred band, or society of friends and
brothers, among whom no contention should ever exist, but that noble
contention, or rather emulation, of who best can work and best agree.

W. M.--Brother Senior Deacon, you will now reconduct this candidate to
the place from whence he came, and reinvest him with what he has been
divested of, and await my further will and pleasure.

The conductor then leads the candidate to the centre of the Lodge, at
the altar, and makes duegard and sign of a Master Mason (see Figs.
[5](dun02.htm#img_01703), [6](dun02.htm#img_01800.md), pp.
[17](dun02.htm#page_17), [18](dun02.htm#page_18).md), which is responded to
by the Master, after which the conductor and candidate pass out of the
Lodge. While they are going out, the Master gives three sounds with his
gavel (• • •), and says, in a loud tone of voice:

W. M.--Brother Junior Warden, what is the hour? J. W.--High twelve,
Worshipful.

W. M.--If you are satisfied it is high twelve, you will erect your
column, and call the craft from labor to refreshment, for the space of
thirty minutes (or fifteen minutes, as the case may be), calling them in
at the sound of the gavel. On receiving this order, the Junior Warden
takes from his desk a small wooden column, about eighteen inches in
length, and sets it in an upright position at his right hand, and at the
same time he gives three raps (• • •) with the gavel, and says:

J. W.--Brethren, you are accordingly at refreshment.

It should be remarked here, that there is a similar column on the Senior
Warden's desk, which is always placed in a horizontal position (*i.e.*,
turned down on its side) when the Junior Warden's column is up, and
*vice versâ*. When the Lodge is opened, the Junior Warden's column is
turned down, and the Senior Warden's turned up, at his right hand.

The brethren are now allowed a few minutes for recreation, styled by
Masons refreshment; during which time the candidate is being prepared in
the ante-room, and the Lodge made ready for the remaining portion of the
ceremony of initiation.

This latter is accomplished as follows: a canvas, seven feet long and
about six feet wide, with five or six strong loops on each side, is
produced from a closet or chest in the room; and a buckskin bag, stuffed
with hair, about the size of two boxing-gloves, is taken from the same
receptacle. These implements are both used as will be described
hereafter.

The room is cleared by removing the altar and lights, and the two large
pillars used in the Second Degree. By this time the candidate is
dressed, his apron is tied on as a Master Mason,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

with the right-hand corner tucked up, and he wears a yoke with a Senior
Warden's jewel attached to it. In some Lodges, the brethren on this
occasion attire the candidate with a very rich apron and yoke.

When the candidate is fully dressed, the door is unceremoniously thrown
open, and he, in company with others, is permitted to enter the Lodge.
His friends now approach him, and congratulate him upon his Masonic
appearance, asking him how he likes the degree, and if he is not glad he
is through, &c., &c.

The object of this is to mislead the candidate, and to impress upon his
mind the idea that there is no more of the ceremony, and that his
initiation is completed.

Worshipful Master gives one rap with his gavel (•).

J. W.--Brethren, you are now called from refreshment to labor again.
(Gives one rap (•), steps to his desk, and turns the small column down
on its side, as already explained.)

At the same time the Senior Warden steps to his stand, and turns up the
column on his desk at his right. The brethren then all take their seats,
and the candidate with them.

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, do you know any further business before
this Lodge of Master Masons before we proceed to close?

S. W. (rising to his feet and making the sign of a Master
Mason.)--Nothing, Worshipful.

W. M.--Have you any thing to offer, Brother Junior Warden?

J. W. (making sign.)--Nothing, Worshipful.

W. M.--Have you any thing on your desk, Brother Secretary?

Sec. (makes the sign, see [Fig. 6](dun02.htm#img_01800.md), [p.
18](dun02.htm#page_18)..md)--Nothing, Worshipful.

W. M.--Has any brother present any thing to offer for the benefit of
Masonry? (nothing being said, Worshipful Master continues): We will then
proceed to close; but, before doing so, I would say to Brother Gabe (the
candidate)--Is he present?

Some Brother--He is.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, you will please approach the east.

Conductor (S. D.) leads the candidate up in front of the Master's seat
in the east.

(The author would here remark, with regard to the matter of closing the
Lodge, and asking the Wardens if they know any thing further before the
Lodge, previous to closing, that it is a ruse to deceive the candidate,
as the Master has no intention of closing until the ceremony of
initiation has been concluded.)

After the candidate is conducted to the east, before the Master, the
conductor takes his position behind the candidate, with a hoodwink
either in his hand or secreted in his pocket.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

W. M. (looking candidate seriously in the face.)--Brother Gabe, I
presume you now consider yourself a Master Mason, and, as such, entitled
to all the privileges of a Master Mason, do you not?

Candidate--I do.

W. M.--I presumed that you did from the jewel that you wear, it being
the Senior Warden's jewel.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, you are not yet a Master Mason, neither do I know
that you ever will be, until I know how well you will withstand the
amazing trials and dangers that await you. The Wardens and brethren of
this Lodge require a more satisfactory proof of your fidelity to your
trust, before they are willing to intrust you with the more valuable
secrets of this Degree. You have a rough and rugged road to travel,
beset with thieves, robbers, and murderers; and should you lose your
life in the attempt, it will not be the first instance of the kind, my
brother. You will remember in whom you put your trust, with that divine
assurance, that "he who endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved."
Heretofore you have had some one to pray for you, but now you have none.
You must pray for yourself. You will therefore suffer yourself to be
again hoodwinked, and kneel where you are, and pray orally or mentally,
as you please. When through, signify by saying Amen, and arise and
pursue your journey.

The candidate then kneels, and the conductor ties a hoodwink very
closely over both eyes, so that he cannot see.

After the candidate has said Amen, and the Lodge-room has been darkened
by turning down the gaslights or lamps, the conductor takes the
candidate by the right arm, assists him to arise, and they proceed to
travel three times around the room, travelling with the sun. As they
start, the conductor commences to relate to the candidate the following:

Conductor--Brother, it was the usual custom of our Grand Master, Hiram
Abiff (this is the first he hears about Hiram Abiff), to enter into the
unfinished "Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies," of King Solomon's
Temple, each day at high twelve, while the craft were called from labor
to refreshment, for the purpose of drawing out his designs upon the
trestle-board, whereby the craft might pursue their labors; after which,
it was further his custom to offer up his devotions to the Deity. Then
he would retire at the south gate of the outer courts of the Temple;
and, in conformity with the custom of our Grand Master, whose memory we
all so reverently adore, we will now retire at the south gate of the
Temple.

They have now passed around the Lodge three times, and as

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

they approach the Junior Warden's station in the south, he steps
silently out from his seat to the floor, and confronts the blind-folded
candidate, clinching him by the collar in a very rough manner, and at
the same time exclaiming:

<span id="img_10300"></span> ![The First Ruffian](img/10300.jpg.md)

<span class="small">left to right: S. D., or Conductor. Candidate. First
Ruffian, Jubela, generally the J. W. in the south.</span>

J. W. (Jubela, First Ruffian.)--Grand Master Hiram, I am glad to meet
you thus alone. I have long sought this opportunity. You will remember
you promised us, that when the Temple was completed, we should receive
the secrets of a Master Mason, whereby we might travel in foreign
countries, work, and receive Master's wages. Behold! the Temple is now
about to be completed, and we have not obtained that which we have so
long sought. At first, I did not doubt your veracity; but now I do!
(Gives candidate a sudden twitch by the collar.) I therefore now demand
of you the secrets of a Master Mason!

Conductor (for candidate.)--Brother this is an unusual way of asking for
them. It is neither a proper time nor place; but be true to your
engagement, and I will be true to mine. Wait until the Temple is
completed, and then, if you are found worthy and well qualified, you
will unquestionably receive the secrets of a Master Mason; but, until
then, you cannot.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Ruffian--This (shaking candidate) does not satisfy me! Talk not to me of
time or place, but give me the secrets of a Master Mason, or I will take
your life!

Conductor--I cannot; nor can they be given, except in the presence of
Solomon, king of Israel, Hiram, king of Tyre, and myself.

Ruffian--That does not satisfy me. I'll hear no more of your cavilling!
(Clinches candidate more fiercely.) Give me the Master's word, or I will
take your life in a moment!

Conductor--I shall not!

<span id="img_10400"></span> ![The Second Ruffian](img/10400.jpg.md)

<span class="small">left to right: S. D., or Conductor. Candidate.
Second Ruffian, Jubelo, generally the S. W. in the west.</span>

The Ruffian gives the candidate a brush across the throat with his right
hand, and at the same time relinquishes his hold with his left, steps
quietly to one side, and permits the conductor and candidate td pass on
to the Senior Warden's station in the west, which is done by the
conductor advancing very rapidly, pulling the candidate along with him.
As they approach the west, the Senior Warden steps out as did the Junior
Warden, facing the candidate, and, clinching him by the collar more
roughly than the Junior Warden, exclaiming as follows:

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

S. W. (Second Ruffian.)--Give me the secrets of a Master Mason!

Conductor (for candidate.)--I cannot.

Ruffian--Give me the secrets of a Master Mason! (Shakes candidate.)

Conductor--I shall not.

Ruffian--Give me the Master's word, or I will take your life in a
moment! (Gives candidate a sudden shake.)

Conductor--I will not!

Ruffian (*i.e.*, S. W.) gives candidate a brush with his right hand
across the left breast, and at the same time lets him pass, the
conductor hurrying him on toward the east end of the Lodge, where the
Master is stationed to perform the part of the Third Ruffian, Jubelum,
who is generally provided with a buckskin bag stuffed with hair, to
represent a setting-maul.

As the candidate is hurried along toward Jubelum (Worshipful Master),
the latter seizes him with both hands by the collar of his coat, and
swings him round, so as to place his back toward the east, with his
heels a few inches from the edge of the canvas before alluded to. This
canvas is usually held behind the candidate, in an inclined position, by
some of the brethren, and is for the purpose of catching him when he is
tripped up by the assumed ruffian, Jubelum. The Master (Third Ruffian)
then exclaims:

W. M. (as Third Ruffian.)--Give me the secrets of a Master Mason!

Conductor (for candidate.)--I cannot!

Ruffian--Give me the secrets of a Master Mason, or I will take your
life!

Conductor--I shall not!

Ruffian--You have (here Master seizes the candidate more fiercely, and
affects a great earnestness of purpose) escaped "Jubela" and "Jubelo";
me you cannot escape; my name is "Jubelum!" What I purpose, that I
perform. I hold in my hand an instrument of death; therefore, give me
the Master's word, or I will take your life in a moment!

Conductor--I will not!

Ruffian--Then die!

The Worshipful Master here gives the candidate a blow on his head with a
buckskin bag, or setting-maul; <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) at
the same

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

time, pushing him backward, brings the candidate's heels against the
edge of the canvas, trips him up, and the candidate falls upon his back,
caught in the canvas clear of the floor, unharmed, but, in many
instances, badly frightened.

<span id="img_10600"></span> ![The Third Ruffian](img/10600.jpg.md)

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                |                                                                                                           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Third Ruffian, Jubelum, Candidate. generally the W. M. in the east.</span> | <span class="small">Members of the Lodge, in the act of holding the canvas to catch the candidate.</span> |

</div>

It is the general belief (and it would be readily inferred from most
exposures of Masonry) that a candidate is knocked down with a large
setting-maul kept for that purpose, but no reasonably sane person would
for one moment entertain any such idea of the ceremony of making a
Master Mason. The candidate is not intentionally injured in any Degree
of Masonry, impressions of a lasting nature being all that are intended
by the ceremonies.

As the candidate falls into the canvas the brethren lower it to the
floor, when the following dialogue ensues between those who held the
canvas and the Master, or the brother acting as the Third Ruffian.

Ruffian--Is he dead?

Answer--He is, his skull is broken in.

Ruffian--What horrid deed is this we have done?

Answer--We have murdered our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff,

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and have not obtained that which we have sought: this is no time for
vain reflection--the question is, what shall we do with the body?

Answer--We will bury it in the rubbish of the Temple, until low twelve,
and then we will meet and give it a decent burial.

Answer--Agreed!

They roll the canvas around and over the candidate where he fell, which
is in the east or northeast corner of the Lodge, and, for a few moments,
retire, when the Lodge becomes still as the hour of midnight; not a
sound is permitted to be made; all go--if at all--from place to place on
tiptoe. The Master silently steps to the east, near the candidate's
head, and strikes the hour of low twelve (which is twelve o'clock at
night) on a triangle or bell. As the last sound of twelve dies away, the
three ruffians cautiously approach the body, and converse among
themselves nearly as follows:

First Ruffian--Is that you, Jubela?

Answer--Yes.

Second Ruffian--Is that you, Jubelum? <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)

Answer--Yes.

Third Ruffian--Is that you, Jubelo?

Answer--Yes.

First Ruffian--Well, we have all met as agreed upon: the question is,
what shall we do with the body? It is now past mid-night, and if we do
not act with decision, daylight will be upon us, and we will be
discovered and taken. We will carry the body a westerly course from the
Temple to the brow of the hill west of Mount Moriah, where I have dug a
grave due east and west, six feet perpendicular.

Answer--Agreed!

A sufficient number of the brethren now take up the body (yet rolled up
in the canvas), and, raising it on their shoulders, proceed to carry it
around the Lodge, head foremost, three times, in representation of
ascending a hill, the last time halting in the west end of the Lodge,
nearly in front of the Senior Warden's station, and a little to the
right. Upon arriving there they commence to lower it into the grave, as
they style it, but in reality only from their shoulders to the floor.
After the candidate is lowered, one of the ruffians says:

Let us plant an acacia at the head of the grave, in order to

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

conceal it so that the place may be known should occasion hereafter
require.

Some Lodges have a small box with a house-plant or dry twig in it, which
is set down on the floor near the candidate's head. One of the ruffians
exclaims:

Now let us make our escape out of the country.

And immediately one of the most intelligent brethren stations himself at
the door of the ante-room, and when those who have been acting the part
of the ruffians approach him, the following colloquy ensues:

First Ruffian--Hallo, friend! Are you a sea-captain?

Captain--I am.

Second Ruffian--Are you going to put to sea soon?

Captain--Immediately.

Third Ruffian--Whither are you bound?

Captain--To Ethiopia.

Ruffian--The very port to which we wish to go. We three should like to
take a passage with you.

Captain--Very well, you can have a passage. I suppose you are brothers,
workmen from the Temple, and journeying, are you not?

Ruffians--We are.

Captain--I should be glad of your company. You have a pass from King
Solomon, I presume?

Ruffians (affecting surprise.)--No, we have no pass; we did not know it
was necessary. We were sent in haste and on urgent business; there was
nothing said about giving us a pass, and we presume it was forgotten, or
not deemed necessary.

Captain--What! no pass. What! no pass. If this is the case, you cannot
get a passage with me, I assure you. That is strictly forbidden; so you
may set your minds at rest.

Ruffians--We will go back and get a pass, if that is the case.

Captain--The sooner the better! Suspicious characters!

The Ruffians now return near to the body, when the following
conversation takes place:

First Ruffian--What shall we do in this case?

Second Ruffian--We will go to some other port.

Third Ruffian--But the rules are as strict in other ports as in this.

First Ruffian--If such are the regulations, we shall not get a pass at
any port, and what will become of us?

Second Ruffian--We shall be taken and put to death.

Third Ruffian--Let us secrete ourselves until night and steal a small
boat and put to sea.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

First Ruffian--We cannot make our escape in that way. It is a dangerous
coast, and we shall be taken; for before this time our escape is
discovered, and the sea-coast will be lined with our pursuers.

Second Ruffian--Then let us flee into the interior parts of the country,
and avoid being taken as long as possible.

Third Ruffian--Agreed!

They now retire from the body, in different directions. When all has
been again quiet in the Lodge for a few seconds, the brethren jump up,
commence laughing, singing, &c., exclaiming:

No work to-day. Craftsmen, we are having good times; I wonder if it will
last.

They shuffle about a few moments, when they are called to order by the
sound of the gavel from the Master's seat in the east, who inquires in a
loud voice as follows:

W. M. (now styled King Solomon.)--Brother Junior Grand Warden, what
means all this confusion among the workmen? Why are they not at work as
usual?

S. W. (now styled J. G. W.)--Most Worshipful King Solomon, there is no
work laid out for us, and it is said we can have none. No designs are
drawn on the trestle-board, and for this reason many of us are idle.

K. S.--No work laid out--no designs drawn on the trestle-board? What is
the meaning of this? Where is our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff?

J. G. W.--We do not know, Most Worshipful King Solomon. He has not been
seen since high twelve yesterday.

K. S.--Not been seen since high twelve yesterday! I fear he is
indisposed. It is my orders that strict search be made for him through
the apartments of the Temple, and due inquiry made. Let him be found, if
possible.

The brethren commence, in loud voices to inquire of one another:

Have you seen any thing of our Grand Master Hiram Abiff? Not since high
twelve yesterday, &c., &c.

J. G. W.--Most Worshipful King Solomon, diligent search has been made.
He cannot be found. He has not been seen in or about the Temple.

K. S.--I fear that some accident has befallen him. Brother Grand
Secretary (turning to the Secretary of the Lodge), you will go out and
see to calling the several rolls of the craft, and report to me as soon
as possible.

G. Sec.--Assemble, Craftsmen! It is King Solomon's orders that the
several rolls be called, and report made as soon as possible.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

At this command the Secretary passes out of the Lodge, accompanied by
ten or fifteen of the brethren, into the ante-room, leaving the door
open, so that the candidate can hear the rolls called. The brethren form
around the Secretary like a class at school. The Secretary commences to
call off a lot of Bible names, to which each brother responds "Here!" in
a loud voice, until he calls that of the First Ruffian, "Jubela!
Jubela!! Jubela!!!" After calling a few more names, which are responded
to by the brethren, he says: "Jubelo! Jubelo!! Jubelo!!!" and after a
few more names, that of the Third Ruffian, "Jubelum! Jubelum!!
Jubelum!!!" finishing with a few other names; when he leaves the
brethren in the ante-room, closes the door, and reports as follows to
King Solomon:

G. Sec.--Most Worshipful King Solomon, the several rolls have been
called, and reports made, by which it appears that three Fellow Crafts
are missing, namely, Jubela, .Jubelo, and Jubelum, who, from the
similarity of their names, I presume are brothers, and men from Tyre.

J. G. W.--Most Worshipful King Solomon, there are at the gate twelve
Fellow Crafts, who wish to be admitted: they say they come with
important tidings.

K. S.--Let them be admitted.

Here the Warden opens the ante-room door, and says: "Come in, you twelve
Fellow Crafts;" when all those that were left out by the Secretary come
into the Lodge, stamping and scuffling along, especially if only a few
of them, to impress upon the candidate's mind the idea that there are
more. They advance before the Master in the east, and form across the
Lodge, when all make the duegard and sign of a Fellow Craft ([Figs.
3](dun02.htm#img_01701) and [p. 17](dun02.htm#page_17).md) which is
responded to by the Master. Then one of the best posted relates the
responded following, in a clear and distinct voice:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, we come to inform you that fifteen of us
Fellow Crafts, seeing the Temple about to be completed, and being
desirous of obtaining the secrets of a Master Mason, by which we might
travel in foreign countries, and receive Master's wages, entered into a
horrid conspiracy to extort them from our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, or
take his life; but, reflecting with horror on the atrocity of the crime,
twelve of us recanted; but the other three persisted in their murderous
design, and we fear that they have taken the Grand Master's life. We
therefore now appear before your Majesty, clothed with white gloves and
aprons, in token of our innocence, and, acknowledging our premeditated
guilt, we humbly implore your pardon." (They all kneel.)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

K. S.--Arise, you twelve Fellow Crafts, divide yourselves into parties
and travel--three east, three north, three south, and three west--with
others whom I shall appoint, in search of the ruffians.

The brother who has acted the part of sea-captain now takes his station
at the door again, when these Fellow Crafts approach him in the west.

First Craftsman--Hallo, friend! have you seen any strangers pass this
way?

Capt.--I have, three.

Craftsman--Describe them, if you please.

Capt.--They were three brothers, workmen from the Temple, seeking a
passage to Ethiopia, but, not having King Solomon's pass, were not able
to obtain one, and returned back into the country.

Second Craftsman--The very fellows of whom we are in pursuit. You say
they turned back into the country?

Capt.--Yes.

Craftsman--We will go in pursuit of them; they are the fellows we want.
(Moving off, one says:)

Let us report.

And at the same time he steps to the Master's desk, and re-ports as
follows:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, I, being one of those who pursued a
westerly course, coming down near the port of Joppa, met a seafaring
man, of whom I inquired if he had seen any strangers pass that way; he
informed me that he had--three--who from their appearance were workmen
from the Temple, seeking a passage to Ethiopia, but not having King
Solomon's pass, were not able to obtain one, and returned back into the
country.

K. S.--Divide yourselves and travel, as before, with positive
instructions to find the ruffians, and with as positive assurance that,
if you do not, the twelve shall be deemed the murderers, and suffer
severally, for the crime committed.

They now separate about the Lodge, saying to each other:

"This is very unjust of the King. We are told, if we do not find the
ruffians we must be punished--put to death, probably. What have we done?
It is very true, we have been associated with these three ruffians, but
we have not committed any actual crime"

By this time they have got near the candidate (who is still lying on the
floor, rolled up in the canvas), when one of the party sits down near
his head, and at the same time says:

"Well, brothers, I am very weary; I must sit down and rest before I can
go any farther."

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

One of his companions exclaims: "I am tired, too!" and sits down near
the candidate.

Another says: "What course shall we pursue? we must not go and report
ourselves; if we do, the twelve will be put to death. Here are three of
the poor fellows with us; we must not go and give them up, to be put to
death; rather let us take a northwesterly or a southwesterly course.
Which way shall we go?"

One of the brethren then replies: "We will go a southwesterly course,
and will come up with our brothers." Attempting to get up, he exclaims,
"Hallo! what's this?" at the same time pulling up the evergreen--or
acacia, as it is styled--at the head of the grave. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) "What means this acacia coming up so
easily? The ground has been newly broken; this has the appearance of a
grave," pointing to the candidate on the floor.

One of the brothers, representing one of the three ruffians, in a corner
near by, is now heard to exclaim, in a loud, but deep tone of voice:

"Oh! that my throat had been cut across, my tongue torn out by its
roots, and buried in the rough sands of the sea, at low-water mark,
where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours, ere I had been
accessory to the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram
Abiff."

"Hark! that is the voice of Jubela."

"Oh! that my breast had been torn open, my heart plucked out, and placed
upon the highest pinnacle of the Temple, there to be devoured by the
vultures of the air, ere I had consented to the death of so good a man
as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff."

"Hark! that is the voice of Jubelo."

"Oh! that my body had been severed in two, my bowels taken from thence
and burned to ashes, the ashes scattered to the four winds of heaven,
that no more remembrance might be had of so vile and wicked a wretch as
I. Ah! Jubela, Jubelo, it was I

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

that struck him harder than you both: it was I that gave him the fatal
blow; it was I that killed him."

"That is the voice of Jubelum."

The three craftsmen, having stood by the candidate all this time,
listening to the ruffians, whose voices they recognize, say one to
another:

"What shall we do? There are three of them, and only three of us."

One says:

Our cause is just; let us rush in and seize them."

Upon which the three Fellow Crafts rush forward over benches and chairs,
and secure the ruffians in no very gentle manner, and lead them to the
Worshipful Master's seat in the east, when one of them reports to the
Master:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, I, being one who pursued a westerly
course, and, on my return, after several days of fruit-less search,
being more weary than my companions, sat down on the brow of a hill to
rest and refresh myself; and, on rising, accidentally caught hold of a
sprig of acacia, <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) which, easily
giving way, excited my suspicions. Having my curiosity aroused, I
examined it, and found it to be a grave."

As soon as the craftsman has finished this report, another party arrives
with the ruffians, and reports as follows:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, while sitting down to rest and refresh
ourselves, we heard the following horrid exclamations from the clefts of
the adjacent rocks. The first was the voice of Jubela exclaiming: <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md) 'Oh! that my throat had been cut across,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

my tongue torn out by its roots, and buried in the rough sands of the
sea, at low-water mark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in
twenty-four hours, ere I had been accessory to the death of so good a
man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff.' The second was that of Jubelo,
exclaiming: 'Oh! that my breast had been torn open, my heart plucked out
and placed upon the highest pinnacle of the Temple, there to be devoured
by the vultures of the air, ere I had consented to the death of so good
a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff.' The third was the voice of
Jubelum, exclaiming, louder than the rest: 'It was I that gave the fatal
blow, it was I that killed him. Oh! that my body had been severed in
two, my bowels taken from thence, and burned to ashes, the ashes
scattered to the four winds of heaven, that no more remembrance might be
had of so vile and wicked a wretch as I. Ah! Jubela! Jubelo! it was I
that struck him harder than you both; it was I that gave him the fatal
blow; it was I that killed him.' Upon which we rushed in, seized and
bound the ruffians, and now have them before your majesty."

K. S.--Jubela, you stand charged as accessory to the death of our Grand
Master, Hiram Abiff. What say you, guilty or not guilty?

One answers, in a very penitent manner:

Guilty, my lord.

K. S.--.Jubelo, you also stand accessory to the death of our Grand
Master, Hiram Abiff. What say you, sir, guilty or not guilty?

Answer--Guilty, my lord.

K. S.--Jubelum, you stand charged as the wilful murderer of our Grand
Master, Hiram Abiff. What say you, sir, guilty or not guilty?

Answer--Guilty, my lord.

K. S.--Vile, impious wretches! despicable villains! reflect with horror
on the atrocity of your crime, and on the amiable character of your
Worshipful Grand Master, whom you have so basely assassinated. Hold up
your heads, and hear your sentence. It is my orders that you be taken
without the gates of the court, and be executed, according to your
several imprecations, in the clefts of the rocks. Brother Junior Grand
Warden, you will see my orders duly executed. Begone!

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

They all pass out of the Lodge with a rush, into the ante-room, where
they form into a circle. One, acting as the principal mover, raises his
right foot from the floor, at the same time his hands, in the manner of
slapping them together, makes two false motions, but at the third all
bring down their right feet and hands together, producing a very sharp
noise. A momentary silence then ensues, during which one of the party
groans, as if nearly dying. This is all intended to produce its effect
upon the ears of the candidate. It also represents the execution and
dying groans of Jubela, the first ruffian, and is repeated twice more to
represent the death of the other two ruffians. Some Lodges use a large
drum, others roll a large cannon-ball across the ante-room floor,
letting it strike on a cushion placed against the wall. This is not,
however, practised in city Lodges.

The ruffians being executed, the brethren all return quietly to the
Lodge, when one of them reports, in a loud tone of voice:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, your orders have been duly executed upon
the three murderers of Grand Master, Hiram Abiff." <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md)

K. S.--You twelve Fellow Crafts will go in search of the body, and, if
found, observe whether the Master's word, or a key to it, or any thing
that appertains to the Master's Degree, is on or about it.

The brethren representing the twelve repentant conspirators now walk out
near the spot where the candidate is lying, and, when close to him, one
of the party says:

"Well, brothers, can we find where the acacia was pulled up?"

Approaching the candidate, another replies:

"Yes, this is the place; let us remove the rubbish and dig down here."

A third, lifting up the canvas, says:

"Yes, here is the body of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, in a mangled
and putrid state. Let us go and report. But what were our orders? We
were ordered to observe whether the Master's word, or a key to it, or
any thing appertaining to the Master's Degree, was on or about the body;
but, brothers, we are only Fellow Crafts, and know nothing about the
Master's word, or a key to it, or any thing appertaining to the Master's

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Degree; we must,
however, make an examination, or we will be put to death."

They then commence to search about the candidate, lifting off the
canvas, feeling about his neck, &c., &c.: finally, one of the brethren,
taking hold of the jewel which is attached to the yoke about the
candidate's neck, exclaims:

"This is the jewel of his office."

Another says:

"Let us go and report that we find nothing on or about the body
excepting the jewel of his office."

One of the brothers now takes off the jewel from the candidate's neck,
and all repair to the Master's seat in the east, and report:

"Tidings of the body."

K. S.--Where was it found?

Answer--A westerly course, where our weary brother sat down to rest and
refresh himself.

K. S.--Was the Master's word, or a key to it, or any thing appertaining
to the Master's Degree, on or about it? <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md)

Answer--Most Worshipful King Solomon, we are but Fellow Crafts; we
therefore know nothing about the Master's word or the Master's Degree.
There was nothing found on or about the body excepting the jewel of his
office, by which his body was discovered.

They present the jewel to the Master, who, on examination of it, says:

"This is the jewel of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff; there can be no
longer any doubt as to the identity of the body."

K. S.--You twelve Fellow Crafts will now go and assist in raising the
body.

Turning in his seat toward the Treasurer's desk, he says to the
Treasurer:

"My worthy brother of Tyre, as the Master's word is now lost, the first
sign given at the grave, and the first word spoken, after the body is
raised, shall be adopted for the regulation of all Masters' Lodges,
until future generations shall find out the right."

Treasurer--Agreed.

All now form in a circle around the body, the Master and

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wardens at the
head, when the Master makes the sign of "distress" of a Master Mason,
which is done by raising both hands and arms above the head. (See grand
hailing sign of distress, [Fig. 7](dun02.htm#img_01801.md), [p.
18](dun02.htm#page_18)..md) As the Master makes this sign, he says:

"O Lord my God, I fear the Master's word is forever lost!"

I would remark here, that in some Lodges the Master does not make the
sign of distress first at the body, but only gives the sign of a Master
Mason, which is done by drawing the right hand across the body, with the
thumb inward. (See sign of a Master Mason, [Fig.
6](dun02.htm#img_01800), [p. 18](dun02.htm#page_18)..md) After the sign is
made, the whole party commence marching around the body with the sun,
singing the following dirge; and, if the Lodge has an organ or melodeon,
it is played on this occasion, in a very solemn and impressive manner.

<span id="img_11700"></span> ![Sheet music](img/11700.jpg.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I.

"Solemn strikes the funeral chime,  
Notes of our departing time;  
As we journey here below,  
Through a pilgrimage of woe!" <span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

II\.

"Mortals, now indulge a tear,  
For Mortality is here:  
See how wide her trophies wave  
O’er the slumbers of the grave!

III\.

"Here another guest we bring.  
Seraphs of celestial wing,  
To our funeral altar come:  
Waft this friend and brother home.

IV\.

"Lord of all! below--above--  
Fill our hearts with truth and love;  
When dissolves our earthly tie,  
Take us to thy Lodge on High."

</div>

Master (as K. S.) makes the "grand hailing sign of distress" (see [Fig.
7](dun02.htm#img_01801), [p. 18](dun02.htm#page_18.md)--some Masters make
this sign twice), accompanied by the following exclamation, viz.: "O
Lord my God, I fear the Master's word is forever lost!" He then turns to
the Junior Warden, and says: "You will take the body by the Entered
Apprentice grip, and see if it can be raised."

The Junior Warden then takes hold of the candidate's right hand, giving
him the Entered Apprentice's grip (see [Fig. 9](dun02.htm#img_03600.md),
[p. 36](dun02.htm#page_36).md), and then lets his hand slip off in a
careless manner, and reports:

"Most Worshipful King Solomon, owing to the high state of putrefaction,
it having been dead already fifteen days, the skin slips, and the body
cannot be raised."

K. S. (making grand hailing sign of distress.)--O Lord my God, I fear
the Master's word is forever lost!

Turning to the Senior Warden, he continues:

K. S.--My worthy brother of Tyre, I will thank you to endeavor to raise
the body by the Fellow Craft's grip.

The Senior Warden then takes the candidate's right hand, giving the real
grip of a Fellow Craft (see [Fig. 12](dun03.htm#img_06700.md), [p.
67](dun03.htm#page_67).md), and letting his hand slip off quickly, he
reports as follows:

"Owing to the reason before given, the flesh cleaves from the bone, and
the body cannot be so raised."

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

K. S.--O Lord my God! O Lord my God!! O Lord my God!!! Is there no hope
for the widow's son?

At each exclamation he gives the grand hailing sign of distress (see
[Fig. 7](dun02.htm#img_01801), [p. 18](dun02.htm#page_18).md), which would
be three times, then, turning to the Senior Warden, says:

"My worthy brother of Tyre, what shall we do?"

S. W.--Let us pray.

The brethren now all kneel around the body on one knee. The Master
kneels at the head of the candidate, and, taking off his hat, repeats
the following prayer, which may be found in all the Masonic Monitors:

### PRAYER.

Thou, O God! knowest our down-sitting and our uprising, and
understandest our thoughts afar off. Shield and defend us from the evil
intentions of our enemies, and support us under the trials and
afflictions we are destined to endure, while travelling through this
vale of tears. Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of
trouble. He cometh forth as a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as
a shadow, and continueth not. Seeing his days are determined, the number
of his months are with thee; thou hast appointed his bounds that he
cannot pass; turn from him that he may rest, till he shall accomplish
his day. For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will

<span id="img_11900"></span> ![BRETHREN KNEELING AT PRAYER AROUND THE
GRAVE OF HIRAM ABIFF, THE WIDOW'S SON.](img/11900.jpg.md)  
BRETHREN KNEELING AT PRAYER AROUND THE GRAVE OF HIRAM ABIFF, THE WIDOW'S
SON.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. But man
dieth and wasteth away; yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?
As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up,
so man lieth down, and riseth not up till the heavens shall be no more.
Yet, O Lord! have compassion on the children of thy creation, administer
them comfort in time of trouble, and save them with an everlasting
salvation. Amen.

Response--So mote it be.

All the brethren now rise to their feet.

K. S. (to the S. W.)--My worthy brother of Tyre, I shall endeavor (with
your assistance) to raise the body by the strong grip, or lion's paw, of
the tribe of Judah. (See [Fig. 17](#img_12000)..md)

The Master steps to the feet of the candidate, bending over, takes him
by the real grip of a Master Mason, places his right foot against the
candidate's <span id="img_12000"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/12000.jpg" alt="FIG 17. REAL GRIP OF A MASTER MASON." /><br />
FIG 17. REAL GRIP OF A MASTER MASON.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

right foot, and his hand to his back, and, with the assistance of the
brethren, raises him up perpendicularly in a standing position, and,
when fairly on his feet, gives him the

grand Masonic word on the five points of fellowship. (See [Fig.
18](#img_12100)..md) In the mean time, the canvas is slipped out of the
Lodge, and as the Master commences to give or whisper the word in the
candidate's ear, some one of the brethren slips off the hoodwink, and
this is the first time he has seen light, probably, in an hour. The
following is the representation of the Master giving candidate the grand
Masonic word, or at least this is a substitute, for, ac-cording to
Masonic tradition, the right one was lost at the death of Hiram
Abiff. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) This word cannot be given in
any other way, and by Masons is considered a test of all book Masons.

The Master having given the word, which is MAH-HAH-BONE, in low breath,
requests the candidate to repeat it with him, which is in this wise:

Master whispers in candidate's ear--Mah.

Candidate--Hah.

Master--Bone.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Master telling candidate never to give it in any other way than that in
which he has received it. The Master, stepping back one pace, now says:

"Brother Gabe, you have now received that grand Masonic word, which you
have solemnly sworn never to give in any other way or form than that in
which you have received it, which is on the five points of fellowship,
and then in low breath. (See page [247](dun08.htm#page_247)..md)

'The five points of fellowship are--foot to foot, knee to knee, breast
to breast, hand to back, and cheek to cheek, or mouth to ear.

<span id="img_12100"></span> ![FIG 18. MASTER GIVING THE GRAND MASONIC
WORD ON THE FIVE POINTS OF FELLOWSHIP.&lt;br&gt; It is done by putting
the inside of your right foot to the inside of the right foot of the one
to whom you are going to give the word, the inside of your own knee to
his, laying your breast close against his, your left hands on each
other's back, and each one putting his mouth to the other's right
ear.](img/12100.jpg.md)  
FIG 18. MASTER GIVING THE GRAND MASONIC WORD ON THE FIVE POINTS OF
FELLOWSHIP.  
It is done by putting the inside of your right foot to the inside of the
right foot of the one to whom you are going to give the word, the inside
of your own knee to his, laying your breast close against his, your left
hands on each other's back, and each one putting his mouth to the
other's right ear.

"1st. Foot to foot--that you will never hesitate to go on foot, and out
of your way, to assist and serve a worthy brother.

"2nd. Knee to knee--that you will ever remember a brother's welfare, as
well as your own, in all your adorations to Deity.

"3d. Breast to breast--that you will ever keep in your breast a
brother's secrets, when communicated to and received by you as such,
murder and treason excepted.

"4th. Hand to back--that you will ever be ready to stretch forth your
hand to assist and save a fallen brother; and that you will vindicate
his character behind his back, as well as before his face.

"5th. Cheek to cheek, or mouth to ear--that you will ever caution and
whisper good counsel in the ear of an erring brother, and, in the most
friendly manner, remind him of his errors, and aid his reformation,
giving him due and timely notice, that he may ward off approaching
danger."

All the brethren take their seats but the Master and candidate, when the
Master continues:

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

"Brother Gabe, you will now repair to the east, and receive an
historical account of this degree."

Master now takes his seat in the east, and requests candidate
[to](errata.htm#3.md) stand before him.

### HISTORICAL ACCOUNT.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, the second section of this degree exemplifies an
instance of virtue, fortitude, and integrity seldom equalled, if ever
excelled, in the history of man.

You have this evening represented one of the greatest men, and perhaps
the greatest Mason, the world ever knew, viz., our Grand Master, Hiram
Abiff, who was slain just before the completion of King Solomon's
Temple. His death was premeditated by fifteen Fellow Crafts, who, seeing
the Temple about to be completed, and being desirous of obtaining the
secrets of a Master Mason, whereby they might travel in foreign
countries and receive Master's wages, entered into a horrid conspiracy
to extort them from our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, or take his life;
but, reflecting with horror on the atrocity of the crime, twelve of them
recanted; the other three persisted in their murderous designs.

Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, was slain at high twelve. It was his
usual practice at that hour, while the craft were called from labor to
refreshment, to enter into the unfinished "Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of
Holies," of the Temple, and there offer up his adorations to the Deity,
and draw his designs on the trestle-board.

The three Fellow Crafts who persisted in their murderous designs,
knowing this to be his usual practice, placed themselves at the south,
west, and east gates of the inner courts of the temple, and there
awaited his return.

Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, having finished his usual exercises,
attempted to retire by the south gate, when he was accosted by Jubela,
who thrice demanded of him the secrets of a Master Mason, or the
Master's word, and, on his being refused, gave him a blow with the
twenty-four-inch gauge across his throat, upon which he fled and
attempted to pass out at the west gate, where he was accosted by Jubelo,
who, in like manner, demanded of him the secrets of a blaster Mason, or
the Master's word, and, on his being refused, gave him a blow with the
square across his breast, upon which he fled, and attempted to make his
escape out at the east gate, where he was accosted by Jubelum, who, in
like manner, thrice demanded the secrets of a Master Mason, or the
Master's word, and, on his like refusal, gave him a violent blow with
the setting-maul on his forehead, which felled him dead on the spot.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

The ruffians buried the body in the rubbish of the Temple until
low-twelve, or twelve at night, when they met by agreement and carried
it a westerly course from the Temple, to the brow of a hill west of
Mount Moriah, where they buried it in a grave dug due east and west, six
feet, perpendicular, at the head of which they planted an acacia, in
order to conceal it, and that the place might be known, should occasion
ever require, and made their escape.

Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, was found to be missing on the following
day; his absence was discovered by there being no designs drawn on the
trestle-board.

King Solomon, believing him to be indisposed, ordered strict search and
due inquiry to be made for him through the several apartments of the
Temple, that he might be found, if possible. But nothing could be seen
or heard of him.

Then, fearing some accident had befallen him, the king ordered the
several rolls of the workmen to be called, and there appeared to be
three missing, namely: Jubela, Jubelo, and Jubelum, who, from the
similarity of their names, were supposed to be brothers and men from
Tyre.

About this time, the twelve Fellow Crafts, who had recanted from their
murderous designs, appeared before King Solomon, clothed in white gloves
and aprons, in token of their innocence, acknowledging their
premeditated guilt, and, kneeling, implored his pardon.

King Solomon then ordered them to divide themselves into parties, and
travel three east, three west, three north, and three south; and that
they should, with others whom he should appoint, go in search of the
ruffians.

The three that pursued a westerly course, coming down near the port of
Joppa, met with a seafaring man, of whom they made inquiry, if he had
seen any strangers pass that way; he informed them that he had, three,
who, from their appearance, were work-men from the Temple, seeking a
passage into Ethiopia, but not having King Solomon's pass, were not
allowed to obtain one, and had returned back into the country.

They returned and bore this information to King Solomon, who ordered
them to disguise themselves and travel as before, with positive
instructions to find the ruffians and with as positive assurance that,
if they did not, they twelve should he deemed the murderers, and suffer
severely for the crime committed.

They travelled as before, and after fifteen days of weary travel and
hardships, one of the brethren, being more weary than the rest, sat down
on the brow of a hill, west of Mount Moriah, to rest and refresh
himself, and, on attempting to rise, caught hold

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of an acacia, which easily giving way, excited his curiosity: upon
examination they found it to be a grave.

About this time a party arrived with the ruffians, and related that
while sitting down to rest and refresh themselves, they heard the
following horrid exclamations from the clefts of an adjacent rock.

The first was the voice of Jubela, exclaiming:

"Oh! that my throat had been cut across," &c., &c.

The second was the voice of Jubelo, exclaiming:

"Oh! that my body had been cut in two," &c., &c.

The third was the voice of Jubelum, exclaiming:

"Oh! that my body had been cut in two," &c., &c.

Upon which they rushed in, seized, bound, and brought them before King
Solomon; who, after a due conviction of their guilt, ordered them to be
taken without the gates of the courts of the Temple, and executed
according to the several imprecations upon their own heads.

King Solomon then ordered the twelve Fellow Crafts to go in search of
the body, and, if found, to observe whether the Master's word, or a key
to it, or any thing appertaining to the Master's Degree, was on or about
it.

The body of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, was found in a westerly
course from the Temple, where our weary brothers sat down to rest and
refresh themselves.

On removal of the earth, they came to the body of our Grand Master,
Hiram Abiff, which they found in a high state of putrefaction, and in a
mutilated and mangled condition, it having been buried already fifteen
days: the effluvia which arose from it compelled them to place
involuntarily their hands thus (Master here places his hands in form of
a duegard of a Master Mason, which alludes to the manner in which his
hands were placed when he took the oath of a Master Mason), to guard
their nostrils--but nothing was found on or about the body excepting the
jewel of his office, by which his body was easily discovered. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

King Solomon then ordered them to go and assist in raising the body; and
it was agreed between him and Hiram, king of Tyre, that as the Master's
word was then lost, the first sigh given at the grave, and the first
word spoken after the body should be raised, should be used for the
regulation of all Masters'

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lodges, until
future generations should find out the right one.

They repaired to the grave, when King Solomon ordered one of the Fellow
Crafts to take the body by the Entered Apprentice grip, and see if it
could be raised; but, on account of its high state of decomposition, it
could not be raised--the flesh cleaved from the bone.

King Solomon then ordered them to take it by the Fellow Craft grip; but
on trial, for the reason before given, the Fellow Craft's grip failed to
benefit any--it could not be raised.

King Solomon then exclaimed:

"O Lord my God, I fear the Master's word is forever lost! My brother of
Tyre, what shall we do? Let us pray."

After prayer, King Solomon took the body by the strong grip of a Master
Mason, or lion's paw, and raised it on the five points of fellowship,
which have been explained to you. The body was then carried to the
Temple for a more decent burial, and was interred in due form.

The body of our Grand Master was buried three times: first, in the
rubbish of the Temple; secondly, on the brow of a hill west of Mount
Moriah; and, thirdly and lastly, as near the "Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy
of Holies," of King Solomon's Temple, as the Jewish law would permit;
and Masonic tradition informs us that there was erected to his memory a
Masonic monument, consisting of "a beautiful virgin, weeping over a
broken column; before her was a book open; in her right hand a sprig of
acacia, in her left an urn; behind her stands Time, unfolding and
counting the, ringlets of her hair."

The beautiful virgin weeping over the broken column denotes the
unfinished state of the Temple, likewise the untimely death of our Grand
Master, Hiram Abiff; the book open before her, that his virtues lay on
perpetual record; the sprig of acacia in her right hand, the divinity of
the body; the urn in her left, that his ashes were therein safely
deposited, under the "Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies," of King
Solomon's Temple.

Time, unfolding the ringlets of her hair, denoted that time, patience,
and perseverance accomplish all things.

The Master now gives and explains to the candidate the several signs and
tokens of this Degree, commencing with the first (see Figs.
[5](dun02.htm#img_01703), [6](dun02.htm#img_01800.md), and
[7](dun02.htm#img_01801), pages [17](dun02.htm#page_17.md) and
[18](dun02.htm#page_18).md) and ending with the grips. (See Figs.
[16](#img_09700) and [17](#img_12000), pages [97](#page_97.md) and
[120](#page_120); also see Note  [L](dun10.htm#xref_L), Appendix..md)

The Master next calls the candidate's attention to the three grand
Masonic pillars, usually delineated on Master's carpet (a

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Master's carpet is
a large map that Lodges generally keep, which is highly embellished with
Masonic emblems).

Master, pointing to these pillars, says: "These are called the three
grand Masonic columns or pillars, and are designated Wisdom, Strength,
and Beauty.

"The pillar of Wisdom represents Solomon, King of Israel, whose wisdom
contrived the mighty fabric; the pillar of Strength, Hiram, king of
Tyre, who strengthened Solomon in his grand undertaking; the pillar of
Beauty, Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, whose cunning craft and curious
workmanship beautified and adorned the Temple.

"The construction of this grand edifice was attended with two remarkable
circumstances. From Josephus we learn, that although seven years were
occupied in building it, yet, during the whole time, it rained not in
the daytime, that the workmen might not be obstructed in their labor,
and from sacred history it appears that there was neither the sound of
hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron, heard in the house while it was
building. This famous fabric was supported by fourteen hundred and
fifty-three columns, and two thousand nine hundred and six
pilasters--all hewn from the finest Parian marble.

"There were employed in its building three Grand Masters; three thousand
three hundred Masters, or overseers of the work; eighty thousand Fellow
Crafts, or hewers on the mountains and in the quarries; and seventy
thousand Entered Apprentices, or bearers of burdens. All these were,
classed and arranged in such a manner, by the wisdom of Solomon, that
neither envy, discord, nor confusion was suffered to interrupt that
universal peace and tranquillity which pervaded the world at that
important period." <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

"Brother Gabe, seven constitute a Lodge of Entered Apprentices--one
Master Mason, and six Entered Apprentices. They usually meet on the
Ground Floor of King Solomon's Temple.

"Five constitute a Lodge of Fellow Crafts two Master Masons and three
Fellow Crafts. They usually meet in the Middle Chamber of King Solomon's
Temple.

"Three constitute a Lodge of Master Masons--three Master Masons. They
meet in the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies of King Solomon's
Temple."

The Master either reads or repeats the following from a *Monitor*, which
by many is committed to memory; but when he has the "work" (*i.e.*, that
part which is not monitorial), it is not necessary that he should commit
to memory what is called the Master's carpet of emblems, but as it is a
part of the initiation of the Third Degree, the author proposes to give
it in its regular order of Lodge business.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_12700"></span> <img src="img/12700.jpg" alt="GROUND FLOOR" /><br />
GROUND FLOOR.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_12701"></span> <img src="img/12701.jpg" alt="MIDDLE CHAMBER" /><br />
MIDDLE CHAMBER.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_12702"></span> <img src="img/12702.jpg" alt="SANCTUM SANCTORUM" /><br />
SANCTUM SANCTORUM.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

### THE THREE STEPS

Usually delineated upon the Master's carpet, are emblematical of the
three principal stages of human life, viz.: youth, man-hood, and age. In
youth, in Entered Apprentices, <span id="img_12703"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/12703.jpg) |

we ought industriously to occupy our minds in the attainment of useful
knowledge; in manhood, as Fellow Crafts, we should apply our knowledge
to the discharge of our respective duties to God, our neighbors, and
ourselves; so that in age, as Master Masons, we may enjoy the happy
reflections consequent on a well-spent life, and die in the hope of a
glorious immortality.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### THE POT OF INCENSE

<span id="img_12800"></span>

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| ![The Pot of Incense](img/12800.jpg.md) |

Is an emblem of a pure heart, which is always an acceptable sacrifice to
the Deity; and as this glows with fervent heat, so should our hearts
continually glow with gratitude to the great and beneficent Author of
our existence, for the manifold blessings and comforts we enjoy.

### THE BEEHIVE

<span id="img_12801"></span>

|                               |
|-------------------------------|
| ![The Beehive](img/12801.jpg.md) |

Is an emblem of industry, and recommends the practice of that virtue to
all created beings, from the highest seraph in heaven to the lowest
reptile of the dust. It teaches us that, as we come into the world
rational and intelligent beings, so we should ever be industrious ones;
never sitting down contented while our fellow-creatures around us are in
want, when it is in our power to relieve them without inconvenience to
ourselves.

When we take a survey of nature, we view man, in his infancy, more
helpless and indigent than the brute creation; he lies languishing for
days, months, and years, totally incapable of providing sustenance for
himself, of guarding against the attack of the wild beasts of the
forest, or sheltering himself from the in-clemencies of the weather.

It might have pleased the great Creator of heaven and earth to have made
man independent of all other beings; but, as dependence is one of the
strongest bonds of society, mankind were made dependent on each other
for protection and security, as they thereby enjoy better opportunities
of fulfilling the duties of reciprocal love and friendship. Thus was man
formed for social and active life, the noblest part of the work of God;
and he that will so demean himself as not to be endeavoring to add to
the common stock of knowledge and understanding, may be deemed a drone
In the hive of nature, a useless member of society, and unworthy of our
protection as Masons.

### THE BOOK OF CONSTITUTIONS, GUARDED BY THE TYLER'S SWORD,

<span id="img_12802"></span>

|                                                                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![The Book of Constitutions, Guarded by the Tyler's Sword](img/12802.jpg.md) |

Reminds us that we should be ever watchful and guarded in our thoughts,
words, and actions, particularly when before the enemies of Masonry;
ever bearing in remembrance those truly masonic virtues, silence and
circumspection.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### THE SWORD POINTING TO A NAKED HEART

<span id="img_12900"></span>

|                                                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| ![The Sword Pointing to a Naked Heart](img/12900.jpg.md) |

Demonstrates that justice will sooner or later overtake us; and although
our thoughts, words, and actions may be hidden from the eyes of man, yet
that

### ALL SEEING EYE!

<span id="img_12901"></span>

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| ![The All-seeing eye](img/12901.jpg.md) |

whom the sun, moon, and stars obey, and under whose watchful care even
comets perform their stupendous revolutions, beholds the inmost recesses
of the human heart, and will reward us according to our works.

### THE ANCHOR AND ARK

<span id="img_12902"></span>

|                                          |
|------------------------------------------|
| ![The Anchor and the Ark](img/12902.jpg.md) |

Are emblems of a well-grounded hope and a well-spent life. They are
emblematical of that divine ark which safely bears us over this
tempestuous sea of troubles, and that anchor which shall safely moor us
in a peaceful harbor, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the
weary shall find rest.

### THE FORTY-SEVENTH PROBLEM OF EUCLID. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

This was an invention of our ancient friend and brother, the great
Pythagoras, who, in his travels through Asia, Africa, and <span
id="img_12903"></span>

|                                              |
|----------------------------------------------|
| ![The 47th Problem of Euclid](img/12903.jpg.md) |

Europe, was initiated into several orders of priesthood, and raised to
the sublime degree of a Master Mason. This wise philosopher enriched his
mind abundantly in a general knowledge of things, and more especially in
geometry or masonry. On this subject he drew out many problems and
theorems, and, among the most distinguished he erected this, which in
the joy of his heart he called "Eureka," In the Grecian language
signifying, "I have found it; "and upon the discovery of which he is
said to have sacrificed a hecatomb. It teaches Masons to be general
lovers of the arts and sciences.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

### THE HOUR-GLASS

Is an emblem of human life. Behold! how swiftly the sands run, and how
rapidly our lives are drawing to a close. We cannot <span
id="img_13000"></span>

|                                 |
|---------------------------------|
| ![The Hourglass](img/13000.jpg.md) |

without astonishment behold the little particles which are contained in
this machine, how they pass away almost imperceptibly, and yet, to our
surprise, in the short space of an hour they are all exhausted. Thus
wastes man! To-day he puts forth the tender leaves of hope; to-morrow
blossoms, and bears his blushing honors thick upon him, the next day
comes a frost, which nips the shoot, and, when he thinks his greatness
still aspiring, he falls, like autumn leaves, to enrich oar mother
earth.

### THE SCYTHE

Is an emblem of time, which cuts the brittle thread of life, and <span
id="img_13001"></span>

|                              |
|------------------------------|
| ![The Scythe](img/13001.jpg.md) |

launches us into eternity. Behold! what havoc the scythe of time makes
among the human race: if by chance we should escape the numerous evils
incident to childhood and youth, and with health and vigor arrive at the
years of manhood, yet withal we must soon be cut down by the
all-devouring scythe of time, and be gathered into the land where our
fathers have gone before us.

Brother Gabe, permit me to call your attention to the last emblem on the
carpet--the spade, setting-maul, coffin, grave, and sprig of acacia.

The spade, which dug the grave of our Grand Master, may soon dig ours;
the setting-maul, which terminated his earthly existence, may be among
the casualties which will, sooner or later, terminate ours; the coffin,
which received his remains, may soon receive ours; the grave, that abode
for the dead, may soon be our grave; the acacia (that evergreen which
once marked the temporary resting-place of the illustrious dead), that
bloomed and flourished at the head of our Grand Master's grave, and was
the cause of its timely discovery, is an emblem of our faith in the
immortality of the soul, which never! never--no, never dies.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_13100"></span> <img src="img/13100.jpg" alt="SETTING-MAUL" /><br />
SETTING-MAUL.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_13101"></span> <img src="img/13101.jpg" alt="COFFIN, GRAVE, AND ACACIA" /><br />
COFFIN, GRAVE, AND ACACIA</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p><span id="img_13102"></span> <img src="img/13102.jpg" alt="SPADE" /><br />
SPADE.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

This, my brother, may soon designate our last resting-place in that
everlasting and silent abode, that haven of rest, that peaceful home,
"where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest."

Brother, be ever mindful of that great change, when we shall be called
from labors on earth to that everlasting refreshment in the paradise of
God.

Let me admonish you, in the most serious manner, in reference to the
close of life, that, when the cold winter of death shall have passed,
and the bright summer morn of the resurrection appears, the Sun of
Righteousness shall descend and send forth His angels to collect our
ransomed dead; then, if we are found worthy, by the benefit of his
"pass" we shall gain a ready admission into that celestial Lodge above,
where the Supreme Architect of the Universe presides, where we shall see
the King In the beauty of holiness, and with him enter into an endless
eternity.

Some Masters add the following:

Thus, brother, we close our lecture on the emblems with the solemn
thought of death. We are all born to die; we follow our friends to the
brink of the grave, and, standing on the shore of a vast ocean, we gaze
with exquisite anxiety until the last struggle is over, and we see them
sink into the fathomless abyss. We feel our own feet sliding from the
precarious brink on which We stand, and a few more suns, and we will be
whelmed ’neath death's awful wave, to rest in the stilly shades, and
darkness Said silence will reign around our melancholy abode. But is
this

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the end of man, and of the aspiring hopes of all faithful Masons? No!
blessed be God, we pause not our feet at the first or second step; but,
true to our principles, look forward for greater light. As the embers of
mortality are faintly glimmering in the sockets of existence, the Bible
removes the dark cloud, draws aside the sable curtains of the tomb, bids
hope and joy rouse us, and sustains and cheers the departing spirit; it
points beyond the silent grave, and bids us turn our eyes with faith and
confidence upon the opening scenes of our eternity.

The Worshipful Master gives three raps with his gavel, which brings the
whole Lodge to their feet.

### CHARGE TO THE LODGE

And now, my brethren, let us see to it, and so regulate our lives by the
plumb-line of justice, ever squaring our actions by the square of
virtue, that when the Grand Warden of Heaven may call for us, we may be
found ready; let us cultivate assiduously the noble tenets of our
profession--brotherly love, relief, and truth--and, from the square,
learn morality; from the level, equality; from the plumb, rectitude of
life. Let us imitate, in all his various perfections, him who, when
assailed by the murderous band of rebellious craftsmen, maintained his
integrity, even in death, and sealed his pledge with his own blood. Let
us emulate his amiable and virtuous conduct, his unfeigned piety to his
God, his inflexible integrity to his trust; and as the evergreen that
bloomed at the head of the grave be. tokened the place of his interment,
so may virtue's ever-blooming loveliness designate us as free and
accepted Masons. With the trowel, spread liberally the cement of
brotherly love and affection; and, circumscribed by the compass, let us
ponder well our words and actions, and let all the energies of our minds
and the affections of our souls be employed in the attainment of our
Supreme Grand Warden's approbation. Thus, when dissolution draws nigh,
and the cold winds of death come sighing around us, and his chilly dews
already glisten on our foreheads, with joy shall we obey the summons of
the Grand Warden of Heaven, and go from our labors on earth to
everlasting refreshments in the Paradise of God. Then, by the benefit of
the pass--a pure and blameless life--with a firm reliance on Divine
Providence, shall we gain ready admission into that Celestial Lodge
above, where the Supreme Grand Warden forever presides--forever reigns.
When, placed at his right hand, he will be pleased to pronounce us just
and upright Masons, then shall we be fitted as living stones for that
spiritual temple, "that house not made

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

with hands, eternal in the heavens," where no discordant voice shall be
heard, but all the soul shall experience shall be perfect bliss, and all
it shall express shall be perfect praise, and love divine shall ennoble
every heart, and hallelujahs exalted employ every tongue.

The Master gives one rap with his gavel, when all take their seats
except the candidate, who remains standing before the Master, by whom he
is addressed as follows:

W. M.--Brother Gabe, in closing this Degree, I now give you the
following

### CHARGE

Brother, your zeal for the institution of Masonry, the progress you have
made in the mystery, and your conformity to our regulations, have
pointed you out as a proper object for our favor and esteem.

You are now bound by duty, honor, and gratitude, to be faithful to your
trust; to support the dignity of your character on every occasion; and
to enforce, by precept and example, obedience to the tenets of the
Order.

In the character of a Master Mason, you are authorized to correct the
errors and irregularities of your uninformed brethren, and to guard them
against a breach of fidelity.

To preserve the reputation of the fraternity unsullied must be your
constant care; and, for this purpose, it is your province to recommend
to your inferiors obedience and submission; to your equals, courtesy and
affability; to your superiors, kindness and condescension. Universal
benevolence you are always to cultivate; and, by the regularity of your
own behavior, afford the best example for the conduct of others less
informed. The ancient landmarks of the order, intrusted to your care,
you are carefully to preserve; and never suffer them to be infringed, or
countenance a deviation from the established usages and customs of the
fraternity.

Your virtue, honor, and reputation are concerned in supporting with
dignity the character you now bear. Let no motive, there-fore, make you
swerve from your duty, violate your vows, or betray your trust; but be
true and faithful, and imitate the example of that celebrated artist
whom you this evening represent. Thus you will render yourself deserving
of the honor which we have conferred, and merit the confidence we have
reposed.

W. M.--Brother Gabe, you will now take your seat in this Lodge as a
Master Mason, after stepping to the Secretary's desk,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and signing your name to the constitution and by-laws--which will then
make you a member of this Lodge.

There is a lecture to this Degree, as well as in the other Degrees, but
it is not generally given by the Master to the candidate on the night of
his "raising." The candidate generally gets this from some of the
brethren who are well posted in the work. This Degree is very lengthy,
and to give the lecture at an initiation would take up too much of the
night; but if there is time, the Master and Senior Warden usually go
through with the first section before closing the Lodge, so that the
candidate and brethren may become conversant with it. The lecture is as
follows:

### FIRST SECTION.

Q. Are you a Master Mason?

A. I am.

Q. What induced you to become a Master Mason?

A. In order that I might travel in foreign countries, work and receive
Master's wages, being better enabled to support myself and family, and
contribute to the relief of worthy distressed Master Masons, their
widows and orphans.

Q. What makes you a Master Mason?

A. My obligation.

Q. Where were you made a Master Mason?

A. In a regularly constituted Lodge of Masons.

Q. How were you prepared?

A. By being divested of all metals, neither naked nor clothed, barefoot
nor shod, hoodwinked, with a cable-tow three times around my body, in
which condition I was conducted to the door of the Lodge by a brother.

Q. Why had you a cable-tow three times around your body?

A. To signify that my duties and obligations become more and more
binding as I advance in Masonry.

Q. How gained you admission?

A. By three distinct knocks.

Q. To what do they allude?

A. To the three jewels of a Master Mason, which are friend-ship,
morality, and brotherly love.

Q. What was said to you from within?

A. Who comes here?

Q. Your answer?

A. Brother A. B., who has been regularly initiated Entered Apprentice,
passed to the Degree of Fellow Craft, and now wishes

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime Degree of a
Master Mason.

Q. What were you then asked?

A. If it was of my own free-will and accord, if I was worthy and well
qualified, duly and truly prepared, had made suitable proficiency in the
preceding Degree, and was properly vouched for; all which being answered
in the affirmative, I was asked by what further right or benefit I
expected to gain admission.

Q. What followed?

A. I was directed to wait with patience until the Worshipful Master
should be informed of my request, and his answer returned.

Q. What answer did he return?

A. Let him enter, and be received in due form.

Q. How were you received?

A. On both points of the compasses, extending from my naked left to my
right breast, which was to teach me that, as the most vital parts of man
are contained within the breast, so the most excellent tenets of our
institution are contained between the points of the compasses, which
are, friendship, morality, and brotherly love.

Q. How were you then disposed of?

A. I was conducted three times around the Lodge, to the Junior Warden in
the south, where the same questions were asked, and like answers
returned as at the door.

Q. How did the Junior Warden dispose of you?

A. He directed me to the Senior Warden in the west, and he to the
Worshipful Master in the east, where the same questions were asked, and
like answers returned as before.

Q. How did the Worshipful Master dispose of you?

A. He ordered me to be returned to the Senior Warden in the west, who
taught me to approach the east by three upright regular steps, my feet
forming the angle of a perfect square, my body erect at the altar,
before the Worshipful Master in the east.

Q. What did the Worshipful Master do with you?

A. He made me a Master Mason in due form.

Q. What was that due form?

A. Kneeling on both my naked knees, both hands resting on the Holy
Bible, square, and compasses; in which due form I took the solemn oath
of a Master Mason, which is as follows:

(Here give the obligation; but it is never required--being only a matter
of form.)

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

Q. After the obligation, what were you asked?

A. What I most desired.

Q. Your answer?

A. Further light in Masonry.

Q. Did you receive it?

A. I did, by order of the Worshipful Master and the assistance of the
brethren.

Q. On being brought to light, what did you discover more than you had
heretofore discovered?

A. Both points of the compasses elevated above the square, which was to
teach me never to lose sight of those truly Masonic virtues, which are
friendship, morality, and brotherly love.

Q. What did you then discover?

A. The Worshipful Master approaching me from the east, under the duegard
of a Master Mason, who, in token of further continuance of his brotherly
love and favor, presented me with his right hand, and with it the pass
and token of the pass of a Master Mason, and ordered me to arise and
salute the Junior and Senior Wardens as such.

Q. After saluting the Wardens, what did you first discover?

A. The Worshipful Master, who ordered me to the Senior Warden in the
west, who taught me how to wear my apron as a Master Mason.

Q. How should a Master Mason wear his apron?

A. With the flap and corners turned down, which is to distinguish him as
a Master Mason, or an overseer of the work.

Q. After being taught to wear your apron as a Master Mason, how were you
then disposed of?

A. I was conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, who presented
me with the working-tools of a Master Mason, which are all the
implements of Masonry indiscriminately, but more especially the trowel.

Q. What is the use of these tools?

A. The trowel is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to spread
the cement, which unites a building into one common mass; but we, as
free and accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more
noble and glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and
affection, &c., &c. (See *Monitor* for the balance of this answer, or
page [99](#page_99) of this work..md)

Q. How were you then disposed of?

A. I was ordered to be returned to the place from whence I came, and
reinvested of what I had been divested of, and wait the Worshipful
Master's will and pleasure.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### SECOND SECTION.

Q. What does a Master's Lodge represent?

A. The unfinished Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies, of King
Solomon's Temple.

Q. Did you ever return to the Lodge?

A. I did.

Q. On your return to the Lodge, where were you placed?

A. In the centre, where I was caused to kneel, and implore the blessings
of Deity.

Q. After imploring the blessings of Deity, what followed?

A. I arose, and on my passage around the Lodge was accosted by three
Fellow Crafts, who thrice demanded of me the secrets of a Master Mason;
and, on being refused, the first gave me a blow with the
twenty-four-inch gauge, across my throat; the second with a square,
across my breast; the third with a setting-maul, on my forehead, which
felled me on the spot.

Q. What did you then represent?

A. Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, who was slain just before the
completion of King Solomon's Temple.

Q. Was his death premeditated?

A. It was, by fifteen Fellow Crafts, who, seeing the Temple about to be
completed, and being desirous of obtaining the secrets of a Master
Mason, whereby they might travel in foreign countries, work, and receive
Master's wages, entered into a horrid conspiracy to extort them from our
Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, or take his life; but, reflecting with horror
on the atrocity of the crime, twelve of them recanted; the other three
persisted in their murderous designs.

Q. At what hour was our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, slain? A. At high
twelve. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Q. How came he to be assassinated at that hour?

A. It was his usual practice at high twelve, while the Craft were called
from labor to refreshment, to enter into the unfinished Sanctum
Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies of the Temple, and there to offer up his
adorations to Deity, and there to draw his designs on the
trestle-board. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)

Q. Who were the murderers?

A. The three Fellow Crafts who persisted in their murderous designs,
knowing this to be his usual practice, placed themselves at the south,
west, and east gates of the inner courts of the Temple, and there
awaited his return.

Q. What followed?

A. Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, having finished his usual exercises,
attempted to retire at the south gate, where he was accosted by Jubela,
who thrice demanded of him the secrets of a Master Mason, or the
Master's word; and, on being refused, gave him a blow with the
twenty-four-inch gauge across the throat, upon which he fled, and
attempted to pass out at the west gate, where he was accosted by Jubelo,
who, in like manner, thrice demanded of him the secrets of a Master
Mason, or the Master's word; and, on his being refused, gave him a blow
with a square across his breast, upon which he fled, and attempted to
make his escape out at the east gate, where he was accosted by Jubelum,
who, in like manner, thrice demanded of him the secrets of a Master
.Mason, or the Master's word: and, on his being refused, gave him a
violent blow with a setting-maul, on his forehead, which felled him dead
on the spot. <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md)

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Q. What did they do with the body?

A. They buried it in the rubbish of the Temple until low twelve, or
twelve at night, when they met by agreement and carried it a westerly
course from the Temple, to the brow of a hill west of Mount Moriah,
where they buried it in a grave dug due east and west, six feet
perpendicular, at the head of which they planted an acacia, in order to
conceal it, and that the place might be known, should occasion ever
require; and then made their escape.

Q. When was our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, found to be missing?

A. On the following day.

Q. How was his absence discovered?

A. By there being no designs drawn on the trestle-board.

Q. What followed?

A. King Solomon, being informed of this, supposed him to be indisposed,
and ordered strict search to be made for him through the several
apartments of the Temple, and due inquiry made; search and inquiry were
accordingly made, but he could not be found.

Q. What followed?

A. King Solomon, fearing some accident had befallen him, ordered the
several rolls of the workmen to be called; and, after roll-call, it was
found that three Craftsmen were missing, namely, Jubela, Jubelo, and
Jubelum, who, from the similarity of their names, were supposed to be
brothers, and men from Tyre.

Q. What followed?

A. At this time, the twelve Fellow Crafts, who had recanted from their
murderous designs, appeared before King Solomon, clothed in white gloves
and aprons, in token of their innocence, acknowledging their
premeditated guilt, and humbly imploring his pardon.

Q. What followed? /

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

A. King Solomon ordered them to divide in parties, and travel three
east, three west, three north, and three south, with others whom he
should appoint, in search of the ruffians.

Q. What followed?

A. The three, as they were passing a westerly course, coming down near
the port of Joppa, met a seafaring man, of whom they inquired if he had
seen any strangers pass that way. He informed them that he had seen
three, who, from their appearance, were workmen from the Temple, seeking
a passage into Ethiopia; but, not having King Solomon's pass, were
unable to obtain one, and had returned back into the country.

Q. What followed?

A. They returned and bore this intelligence to King Solomon, who ordered
them to divide themselves, and travel as before, with positive
instructions to find the ruffians, and with as positive assurance, that
if they did not the twelve should be deemed the murderers, and suffer
severely for the crime committed.

Q. What followed?

A. They travelled as before, and, after many days of hardships and toil,
on their return one of the brethren, more weary than the rest, sat down
on the brow of a hill to rest and refresh himself, and on attempting to
rise, accidentally caught hold of an acacia, which easily giving way,
aroused his curiosity; upon which he hailed his companions, and on
examination found it to be a grave.

Q. What followed? (See Note  [P](dun10.htm#xref_P.md), page
[272](dun10.htm#page_272)..md)

A. At this time a party arrived with the ruffians, and related that,
while sitting down to rest and refresh themselves, they heard the
following horrid exclamations from the clefts of an adjacent rock: the
first was the voice of Jubela, exclaiming, "Oh! that my throat had been
cut across," &c., &c.; the second was the voice of Jubelo, exclaiming,
"Oh! that my breast had been torn open." &c., &c.; the third was the
voice of Jubelum, exclaiming, "Oh! that my body had been severed in two,
my bowels taken from thence," &c., &c. (See p. 112.) Upon which they
rushed in, seized, bound, and brought them before King Solomon; who,
after due conviction of their guilt, ordered them to be executed
according to their several imprecations upon their own heads, uttered
from the clefts of the rocks. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) (See
Note  [P](dun10.htm#xref_P), page [271](dun10.htm#page_271)..md)

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### THIRD SECTION.

Q. How long was the Temple in building?

A. Seven years; during which it rained not in the daytime, that the
workmen might not be obstructed in their labor.

Q. What supported the Temple?

A. Fourteen hundred and fifty-three columns, and two thousand nine
hundred and six pilasters; all hewn from the finest Parian marble.

Q. What further supported it?

A. Three grand columns or pillars.

Q. What were they called?

A. Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty.

Q. What did they represent?

A. The pillar of Wisdom represented Solomon, king of Israel, whose
wisdom contrived the mighty fabric; the pillar of strength, Hiram, king
of Tyre, who strengthened Solomon in his grand undertaking; the pillar
of Beauty, Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, whose cunning craft and curious
workmanship beautified and adorned the Temple.

Q. How many were there employed in the building of King Solomon's
Temple?

A. Three Grand Masters, three thousand three hundred Masters or
overseers of the work, eighty thousand Fellow Crafts, and seventy
thousand Entered Apprentices, &c., &c. (See [p. 126](#page_126)..md)

Q. How many constitute an Entered Apprentices' Lodge?

A. Seven; one Master and six Entered Apprentices.

Q. Where did they usually meet?

A. On the Ground Floor of King Solomon's Temple.

Q. How many constitute a Fellow Crafts' Lodge?

A. Five; two Masters and three Fellow Crafts.

Q. Where did they usually meet?

A. In the Middle Chamber of King Solomon's Temple.

Q. How many constitute a Masters' Lodge?

A. Three Master Masons.

Q. Where did they usually meet?

A. In the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies, of King Solomon's
Temple.

Q. Have you any emblems in this Degree?

A. We have several, and they are divided into two classes.

Q. What are the first class?

A. The Pot of Incense, the Beehive. the Book of Constitutions guarded by
the Tyler's Sword, the Sword pointing to a Naked Heart, the All-seeing
Eye, the Anchor and Ark, the Forty-seventh

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Problem of Euclid,
the Hour-Glass, the Scythe, and the Three Steps on the Master's Carpet.

Q. How are they explained?

These answers are monitorial. (See pp. [127](#page_127)-130..md)

Q. What are the second class of emblems?

A. The Setting-Maul, Spade, Coffin, Grave, and Sprig of Acacia; and are
thus explained. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) (See [p.
130](#page_130)..md)

Reader, I have given you the whole of the first three Degrees in
Masonry. This ends the third, or Master Masons' Degree.

But few Masons take sufficient interest in Masonry to be advanced
further, and consequently do not get the password which was lost by the
tragical death of Hiram Abiff.

King Solomon is said to have substituted, in place of the lost one, the
word now used in the Master Masons' Degree, viz.: Mah-Hah-Bone, which is
given on the five points of fellowship, and in low breath.

The missing word was found, after four hundred and seventy years, and
was then, and still is, used in the Royal Arch Degree, as will be seen
in the ceremonies of that Degree.

### CLOSING THE LODGE.

The Lodge is closed in nearly the same manner that it is opened, and, in
fact, all three of the Degrees are closed alike.

We will suppose the business of the Lodge finished, and that the Master
proceeds to close.

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, do you know of any thing further before
this Lodge of Masons previous to closing?

S. W. (rising to his feet, and giving the sign of a Master Mason, if
opened on that Degree.)--Nothing, Worshipful (some say), in the west.
(Sits down.)

W. M.--Any thing in the south, Brother Junior Warden?

J. W. (makes the same sign as the Senior Warden.)--Nothing, Worshipful.

W. M.--Brother Secretary, have you any thing on your desk?

Sec.--Nothing, Worshipful.

W. M.--Has any brother around the Lodge any thing to offer for the
benefit of Masonry before we proceed to close?

W. M.--Reading of the present communication. (Secretary reads the
minutes, &c., &c.)

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, have you any alterations or additions to
make to the minutes?

S. W. (rising to his feet and making the sign.)--I have none,
Worshipful.

W. M.--Brother Junior Warden, have you any to make?

J. W.--None, Worshipful.

W. M.--Has any brother present any?

W. M.--Brethren, the minutes will stand approved, if there are no
objections. (Gives one rap (•), when the Junior Deacon, at the inner
door of the Lodge, rises to his feet.) Brother Junior Deacon, the last
as well as the first care of Masons, when convened?

J. D. (makes sign.)--To see that the Lodge is duly tyled.

W. M.--You will attend to that part of your duty, and inform the Tyler
that we are about to close this Lodge, and direct him to tyle
accordingly. (Deacon opens the door, and delivers his message.)

J. D.--The Lodge is tyled, Worshipful.

W. M.--How tyled?

J. D.--By a brother of this Degree within the outer door.

W. M.--His duty there?

J. D.--To keep off all cowans and eavesdroppers, and suffer none to pass
or repass, except such as are duly qualified and have the Worshipful
Master's permission. (Sits down.)

W. M. (one rap, Senior Warden rises to his feet.)--Brother Senior
Warden, at the opening of this Lodge you informed me that you were a
Master Mason. What induced you to become a Master Mason?

S. W.--In order that I might travel in foreign countries, work, and
receive Master's wages, being better enabled to support myself and
family, and contribute to the relief of worthy distressed Master Masons,
their widows and orphans.

W. M.--Have you ever travelled?

S. W.--I have; from west to east, and from east to west again. Some
Lodges use the following questions and answers, both at opening and
closing:

W. M.--Why did you leave the west and travel to the east?

S. W.--In search of that which was lost.

W. M.--To what do you allude, my brother?

S. W.--The Master's word.

W. M.--Did you find it?

S. W.--I did not, but found a substitute.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

This is also used occasionally by some Masters in the lecture:

W. M.--The Junior Deacon's station?

S. W.--At the right hand of the Senior Warden in the west.

W. M. (two raps, all the officers rise to their feet.)--Your duty there,
Brother Junior Deacon?

J. D.--(See opening ceremony, [p. 14](dun02.htm#page_14)..md)

W. M.--The Senior Deacon's station?

J. D.--At the right hand of the Worshipful Master in the east.

W. M.--Your duty there, Brother Senior Deacon?

S. D.--(See opening ceremony, [p. 14](dun02.htm#page_14)..md)

W. M.--The Secretary's station?

S. D.--At the left hand of the Worshipful Master in the east.

W. M.--Your duty there, Brother Secretary?

Sec.--(See opening ceremony, [p. 14](dun02.htm#page_14)..md)

W. M.--The Treasurer's station?

S. D.--At the left hand of the Worshipful Master in the east.

W. M.--Your duty there, Brother Treasurer?

Treasurer--(See opening ceremony, [p. 14](dun02.htm#page_14)..md)

W. M.--The Junior Warden's station?

Treasurer--In the south, Worshipful.

W. M.--Why in the south, and your duty there, Brother Junior?

J. W.--(See opening ceremony, [p. 15](dun02.htm#page_15)..md)

W. M.--The Senior Warden's station?

J. W.--In the west, Worshipful Master.

W. M.-- Why in the west, and your duty there, Brother Senior?

S. W.--(See opening ceremony, [p. 15](dun02.htm#page_15)..md)

W. M.--The Worshipful Master's station?

S. W.--In the east, Worshipful.

W. M.--Why in the east, and his duty there?

S. W.--As the sun rises in the east, to open and govern the day, so
rises the Worshipful Master in the east (here the Master gives three
raps (• • •), when all in the Lodge rise to their feet, the Master
rising first), to open and govern his Lodge, set the Craft to work, and
give them proper instructions.

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, it is my orders that this Lodge be now
closed, and stand closed until our next regular communication (barring
emergency), when all, or a suitable number, shall have due and timely
notice. In the mean time, it is hoped and expected that every brother
will demean himself as becomes a man and a Mason. This you will
communicate to the Junior Warden in the south, and he to the brethren
about the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lodge, that they
having due and timely notice, may govern themselves accordingly.

S. W.--Brother Junior Warden, it is the orders of the Worshipful Master,
&c., &c.

J. W.--Brethren, you have heard the orders of the Worshipful Master, as
communicated to me through the Senior Warden in the west--you will take
notice, and govern yourselves accordingly.

W. M.--Brethren, together on the signs. (The signs are just the same as
at opening. See pp. [16](dun02.htm#page_16), [17](dun02.htm#page_17.md),
[18](dun02.htm#page_18); also [p. 155](dun05.htm#page_155)..md)

After the signs are gone through with by the whole Lodge, the Master
gives one rap with his gavel, which is responded to by the Senior
Warden, and then by the Junior Warden, and then again by the Master, one
rap. Senior Warden, one. Junior Warden, one. Again, the Master, one.
Senior Warden, one. Junior Warden, one. Rapping three times each.

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, how should Masons meet?

S. W.--On the Level.

W. M.--And how act, Brother Junior?

J. W.--On the Plumb.

W. M.--And part on the Square; and so let us ever meet, act, and part.

Master takes off his hat, and repeats the following prayer:

"May the blessing of Heaven rest upon us, and all regular Masons; may
brotherly love prevail, and every moral and social virtue cement us.
Amen."

Response--So mote it be.

Some Lodges sing the following, to the air of "Bonny Doon";

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Adieu! a heart-warm, fond adieu,  
  Ye brothers of our mystic tie,  
Ye favored and enlightened few,  
  Companions of my social joy."

</div>

See *Monitors* for balance of the verses.

### CHARGE AT CLOSING A LODGE

BRETHREN:--You are now about to quit this sacred retreat of friendship
and virtue, to mix again with the world. Amid its concerns and
temptations, forget not the duties you have heard so frequently
inculcated and so forcibly recommended in this Lodge. Be diligent,
prudent, temperate, discreet. Remember that you have promised to
befriend and relieve every brother

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

who shall need your assistance; you have promised to remind him, in the
most friendly manner, of his errors, and, if possible, to aid him in a
reformation. These generous principles are to extend further. Every
human being has a claim upon your kind offices. Do good unto all.
Remember it more "especially to the household of the faithful."

Finally, brethren, be ye all of one mind, live in peace, and may the God
of love and peace delight to dwell with and bless you.

W. M.--Brother Senior Warden, I now declare this Lodge duly closed.
Brother Junior Deacon (turning to that officer), you will inform the
Tyler.

Worshipful Master gives one rap with his gavel, when the Lodge is
closed, and the brethren divest themselves of their regalia, preparatory
to returning to their respective homes. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

The "work," or rather the lectures in the several degrees of Masonry,
more especially in the first three degrees (masonically termed the Blue
Degrees, or Blue Lodge), differ so much in each State that it would be a
difficult thing to get exactly at the proper responses to some of the
Masonic interrogatories. No three States in the Union "work" alike. Each
Grand Lodge has a "work" of its own, which is taught the subordinate
Lodges annually by its Grand Lecturer. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

It is generally known among Masons, that in the Northwestern States the
lectures and "work" are those as taught by Barney. There is a great
degree of uniformity in Michigan, Illinois, and Wisconsin--also in
Indiana and Iowa. The Barney "work" is that adopted by the Baltimore
Convention. The "work" in Minnesota and New York is strongly impregnated
with what is called, among Masons, "Morganry"--very similar to the
disclosures of Morgan and Richardson--so much so, that many Masters
purchase these publications for their instruction in their duties and in
the ritual. Masonry has but little changed, and a knowledge of the
alterations which have been made since Morgan's exposure was written is
all that is requisite to make a "bright Mason." The only alterations
which occur in the lectures of each degree are in the commencement. A
concise sketch of Brother Barney, the author of the three lectures
introduced in

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

this work, would not be out of place, as it will account to the reader
for the difference existing between Masonic "works" in the several
States, and in Europe:

"In the year 1817, Brother John Barney, formerly of Charlotte, Vermont,
went to Boston, and obtained possession of the Preston Lectures, taught
there by Gleason, and approved by the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. With
these lectures he returned to Vermont, and submitted them to the Grand
Lodge, at its annual session in October, 1817. The subject was there
referred for examination to a committee, which reported that these
lectures were according to the most approved method of 'work' in the
United States, and proposed to give Brother Barney letters of
recommendation to all Lodges and brethren in all parts as a brother well
qualified to give Masonic information to any desirous of his services.

"This report of the committee was accepted and adopted by the Grand
Lodge, and Brother Barney, provided with the recommendation thus
obtained, visited many of the Lodges of the State, and imparted to them
a knowledge of these lectures. At this time Brother Barney wrote a
portion of them in cipher. Subsequently to 1818, Brother Barney went to
the Western and Southwestern States, and, being in delicate health,
adopted the profession of Masonic lecturing as a means of subsistence.

"A few years afterward, on his return to his brethren in Vermont, he
stated to them, as I have been credibly informed and believe, that he
found in the Western and Southwestern States different systems of
lecturing prevailing, and that, upon presenting Gleason's Lectures to
them, they were objected to by the different Grand Masters, who would
not sanction his lecturing in their respective jurisdictions, unless he
would adopt the lectures then in use among them; that, desiring to
pursue his occupation there, he learned the different systems of
lecturing existing among them, and made use of his newly acquired
knowledge under the sanction of the respective Grand Masters." (See Note
 [Q](dun10.htm#xref_Q), Appendix..md)

These facts will account for the want of agreement between the East and
the West and Southwest, as to what are the true Barney Lectures.

From the foregoing remarks, it will be seen that the essential points of
Masonry are identical the world over, and that the differences, which
are of minor importance, may be gathered by comparing the present work
with Richardson's *Monitor* or Allyn's *Ritual*.

The "work" known among Masons as the "Webb Work,"

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

and inculcated by Robert Morris, <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md) is
generally accepted as the "Work" of ancient origin, and there is not
much doubt but that it will be adopted by the Grand Lodges throughout
the United States.

<span id="img_14900"></span> ![Masonic Trowel](img/14900.jpg.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[87:1](dun04.htm#fr_30.md) Our present Third Degree
is not architectural, but traditionary, historical, and legendary; its
traditions being unfortunately hyperbolical; its history apocryphal, and
its legends fabulous.--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 222.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[96:1](dun04.htm#fr_31.md) Here the conductor or
some brother draws his hand across candidate's naked belly: the sword is
often used, especially if the initiation takes place in winter, the
sword is left in a cold place--and when it is drawn across candidate's
belly, it has a very shocking effect, causing the candidate to jump or
tremble.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[97:1](dun04.htm#fr_32.md) What does it denote?
Worldly possession.--*Dr. Hemming*.

That Tubal Cain gave first occasion to the name and worship of Vulcan
been very probably conceived, both from the very great affinity of the
names, and that Tubal Cain is expressly mentioned to be an instructor of
every artificer in brass and iron; and as near relation as Apollo had to
Vulcan, Jubal had to Tubal Cain, who was the inventor of music, or the
father of all such as handle the harp and organ, which the Greeks
attribute to Apollo.--*Historical Landmarks*, vol. ii. pp. 204--5.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[99:1](dun04.htm#fr_33.md) The jewels of a Masters'
Lodge are suspended from blue velvet collars, bordered and embroidered
with silver. At the point is a blue rosette, in the centre of which is a
silver five-pointed star.

The apron is white, lined and bordered with blue. On the flap is
delineated an eye, and on the area selections from the Master's carpet.
A blue silk scarf, trimmed with silver, having a blue rosette at the
shoulder and hip, is worn from left to right.

The following are the jewels:

|                           |       |                                        |
|---------------------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| The Worshipful Master     | wears | a square.                              |
| The Past Master           | "     | a compass opened on a quarter-circle.  |
| The Senior Warden         | "     | a level.                               |
| The Junior Warden         | "     | a plumb.                               |
| The Secretary             | "     | cross pens.                            |
| The Treasurer             | "     | cross keys.                            |
| The Senior Deacon         | "     | square and compass, with sun.          |
| The Junior Deacon         | "     | square and compass, with quarter moon. |
| The Stewards              | "     | a cornucopia.                          |
| The Masters of Ceremonies | "     | cross swords.                          |
| The Tyler                 | "     | a sabre.                               |

<span id="fn_34"></span>[105:1](dun04.htm#fr_34.md) In the progress of
Masonry during the last century the fatal weapons underwent several
changes. At the revival in 1717, they were called setting-tool, setting
maul, and setting-beetle; later in the century, it was the
twenty-four-inch gauge, square, and gavel; then the setting-tool,
square, and rule; and now the plumb-rule, square, and strong or heavy
maul.--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 306.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[107:1](dun04.htm#fr_35.md) Professor Stuart, of
Andover, one of the most skilful linguists and earned men in the United
States, has endeavored to show that the legend of the Third Degree is an
imposture, "since the names of the criminals are formed from the Latin
language, and not from the Hebrew, to which they have no affinity
whatever."--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 213.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[112:1](dun04.htm#fr_36.md) The system of
Freemasonry, as practised in different countries and at different
periods, is not uniform on this subject; and I feel so little at liberty
to bring forward evidence on such a delicate point, that I am afraid it
will he impossible to place it clearly before the brethren. One system
says fifteen Fellow Crafts went in search; another, twelve; and asserts
that the three (*murderers*) left the sprig of acacia: others affirm
that it was the recanters who placed it there as a mark. Some say, that
many days were expended in the search, and that the lost (*body*) was
found near the seaside; others, that it was *soon* discovered near
Jerusalem. The York Masons name the seaside; the Americans say, Mount
Moriah; the French, Monet Lebanon. In one account, the brethren disperse
widely, east, west, and south; in another, they keep within hail of each
other.--*Historical Landmarks*, vol. ii. p. 148.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[113:1](dun04.htm#fr_37.md) CASSIA--sometimes
improperly and ignorantly used for acacia. (See ACACIA.) According to
the Jewish law, no interments were permitted within the walls of the
city, and as it was unlawful for the cohens or priests to pass over a
grave, it became necessary to place marks wherever a dead body had been
interred, to enable them to avoid it. For this purpose the ACACIA was
used.--*Lexicon*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[113:2](dun04.htm#fr_38.md) Brother Goodacre, of
the Witham Lodge, Lincoln, suggests that the various penalties which
have been introduced into Freemasonry appear to have reference to a
particular kind of covenant which was common among the Hebrews. but
which, he adds, "I can find only twice particularly described. Godwyn
says: 'Making a covenant was a solemn binding of each other to the
performance of a mutual promise, by outward ceremonies of cutting a
beast in twain, and passing between the parts thereof' (Jer. xxxiv.
.18); as if they would say--Thus let it be done to him, and thus let his
body be cut in two, who shall break this covenant. This reference to
Jeremiah, where the prophet denounced the curse of the Lord upon the
Princes and rulers who had broken the covenant which they had made with
King Zedekiah, may explain the self-imposed penalty of J------
(*Jubelum*)." But we must look a little closer into the manner of making
a covenant, in order to discover the connection of the different
penalties as references to one entire ceremony. After an animal had been
selected, *his throat was cut across with one single blow*, so as to
divide the windpipe, arteries, and veins, without touching any bone. The
next ceremony was to <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> *tear the breast
open and pluck out the heart*, and if there were the least imperfection,
the body would be considered unclean. The animal was then divided into
two parts, and placed north and south, that the parties to the covenant
may pass between them from east to west, *and the carcase was then left
as a prey to voracious animals*. The other example of such a covenant is
in Genesis xv.--*Historical Landmarks*, vol. ii. p. 178.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[115:1](dun04.htm#fr_39.md) Their real names (if
there be any thing real in the whole transaction, which is more than
doubtful), as preserved in a subsidiary degree. were GRAVELOT, QUIBO,
and AKIROP. In one form of the Degree of Elect of Fifteen, they assume
the Protean names of JUBELA-KURMAVIL (another corruption of Cromwell),
JUBELO-GRAVELOT, and JUBELUM-AKIROP.--*The Freemason's Treasury*, pp.
305-6.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[116:1](dun04.htm#fr_40.md) The occasion of the
brethren searching so diligently for their Master was, to receive from
him the secret word of Masonry, which should be delivered down as a test
to the fraternity of after ages.--*Historical Land marks*, vol. ii. p.
175.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[120:1](dun04.htm#fr_41.md) Respecting the lost
word and its substitute, some say that King Solomon advised the change,
while others affirm that the three Fellow Crafts adopted the substituted
word without consulting him. And Dalcho observes that the interpolated
word is not to be found in any language that ever was used. It is, in
fact, not a word, but merely a jumble of letters, forming a sound
without meaning."--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 301.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[124:1](dun04.htm#fr_42.md) Can any living Mason be
simple enough to believe that Dr. Anderson, in his "Defence of Masonry,"
intended to prove a real historical fact when he explained the
exhumation of the body of H. A. B.? Why, it is well known that the
celebrated artist was living at Tyre many years after the Temple was
completed.--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 291.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[126:1](dun04.htm#fr_43.md) Among such a vast
concourse of people as were assembled together at the construction of
this edifice, it is natural to expect every variety of propensities,
both good and evil. Accordingly our traditions furnish in stances, both
among the Apprentices and Craftsmen, of treachery--violation of sacred
pledges--and the commission of actual crime. . . These instances, some
of which have been thought worthy of preservation in the ineffable
Degrees, were not numerous. . . From the above causes. however, the
connection of the widow's son with the building of the Temple was
endeared to the two monarchs; and, to preserve and consecrate his
memory, a new arrangement of discipline was adopted; and a legend
incorporated into the system, which served to promote a similar object
with the fabulous narrative used in the spurious initiations, viz., to
inculcate and impress on the candidate's mind the doctrine of a
resurrection and a future state--*Theo. Phil.*, p. 232.

None but he who has visited the Holy of Holies, and travelled the road
of peril, can have any conception of the mysteries unfolded in this
degree. . The MASTER MASON represents a man under the doctrine of love,
saved from the grave of iniquity, and raised to the faith of salvation.
<span id="page_127">p. 127</span> It testifies our faith in the
resurrection of the body, and while it inculcates a practical lesson of
prudence and unshrinking fidelity, it inspires the most cheering hone of
that final reward which belongs alone to "just made
perfect."--*Lexicon*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[129:1](dun04.htm#fr_44.md) THEOREM.--In any
right-angled triangle, the square which is described <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> upon the side subtending the right angle, is
equal to the squares described upon the sides which contain the right
angle.--*Euclid*, Lib. i. Prop. 47.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[137:1](dun04.htm#fr_45.md) We are told that when
*the Temple was nearly finished*, it was customary at the hour of H.
(high) XII., when the men were called from labor to refreshment, for H.
A. B. (Hiram Abiff) to retire to the Most Holy Place, to draw his plans
and designs, and offer up his orisons, &c. But flow could this be
accomplished before the Sanctum Sanctorum was built. And, if finished,
he would not have been permitted to enter it; for one living person
alone possessed that privilege, viz., the High Priest, and he only once
a year. Besides, when a work is nearly completed, the necessity of Plans
and designs ceases altogether. But we are assured, that not only were
the plans drawn and the specifications approved, but every other
preparation was made for completing the work *before the foundations
were laid*; even the stone and timber were carved, marked, and numbered
before they were removed from the quarry and the forest; and, hence
nothing was required, when the materials were conveyed to Jerusalem, but
skilled labor to make it perfect and complete from foundation to
cope-stone.

Again, some of the rituals taught that H. A. B. divided the operatives
the three classes, viz., Apprentices, Fellow Crafts, and Masters; paying
the wages of the former at the pillar of J (*Jachin*), and the Masters
in the Middle Chamber. Now, as in <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> the
former case, this arrangement would be impossible before the pillars
were erected or the Middle Chamber built: and if it he pretended that
any such plan was adopted *after they were finished*, the tragic drama
could not be true because it professes to have been enacted before the
Temple was completed.

And finally, the veracity of the legend is completely ignored by a
reference to the Holy Scriptures. which constitute our authority for
affirming that no such event ever happened; for H. A. B. not only lived
to finish all the work, in whatever capacity he might have been engaged,
but also, according to the testimony of Josephus, who calls him ABDEMON,
he returned to Tyre, and died there at a good old age.--*The Freemason's
Treasury*, pp. 299-300.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[138:1](dun04.htm#fr_46.md) Our traditions further
say, that the time when this celebrated use went into the H. of H.
(*Holy of Holies*) to offer up his orisons to God, at the hour of H
(*high*) twelve, the Ark of the Covenant had not been removed thither,
for that took place at the dedication, after which no one was permitted
to enter but the H. P. (*High Priest*), and he only ours a year, on the
great day of expiation, at which time he had a string or belt around his
waist, which extended into the court of the tabernacle, that he might be
drawn forth from the S. S. (*Sanctum Santorum*) in case sudden death
should occur while he officiated there.--Historical Land-marks, vol. it.
p. 154.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[138:2](dun04.htm#fr_47.md) A similar divergence
from uniformity will be found in describing the <span id="page_139">p.
139</span> places where the above-mentioned instruments were supposed to
have been used with such terrible effect. In the primitive
lectures--*i.e.*, those which were used after the Revival in 1717, for
the subject was never ventilated before that date--they were called "the
three principal entrances to the Temple"; but subsequently it was
thought expedient to particularize these entrances; and the passage was
altered at first to "the *east*, west and south doors"; and, at the
Union in 1813, the version became "*north*, south, and east entrances."
In the United States they say that the first attack was made at the
south door, the second at the west door, and finally at the east. In
Scotland the arrangement is *east*, south, and west. In France, it was
originally *south*, north, and east, but now *west*, south, and east. In
the Adonhiramite Masonry, which was used there about 1787, the doors are
not mentioned at all.--*The Freemason's Treasury*, p. 307.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[140:1](dun04.htm#fr_48.md) The questions and
answers in this lecture, relative to the disposition of the body and its
discovery, &c., &c., are precisely like the historical part of this
Degree, page [122](#page_122.md), or that portion describing the conferring
of the Degree, page [107](#page_107.md).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[142:1](dun04.htm#fr_49.md) LECTURE.--In the
Masters' Degree, the first section illustrates the ancient and proper
mode of raising a candidate to this sublime Degree. In the second
section, the historical traditions of the Order are introduced, and an
important instance of Masonic virtue is exemplified. In the third
section, our emblems are explained, and the construction of Solomon's
Temple described.--*Lexicon*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[146:1](dun04.htm#fr_50.md) "In the performance of
a ceremony so solemn and momentous as the closing of a Mason's Lodge,
every member has a lively interest. At the usual report, preceded by an
inquiry involving the best interests of Masonry, the brethren are again
reminded *what is the chief care of a Mason*. The avenues to the Lodge
are carefully inspected by the meridian officer, whose knowledge and
fidelity have entitled him to the confidence of the brethren, and, after
he had publicly proclaimed the security of the Lodge, the business of
closing proceeds. The particular duties of the leaders of the respective
bands of craftsmen are rehearsed. At the command of the Worshipful
Master, the Senior Warden performs his duty, after seeing that the
brethren have received their due proportion of Masonic instruction and
improvement; and the whole concludes with an impressive address to the
brethren on their respective duties as men and Masons, when pursuing
their accustomed avocations in the world; and with a fervent petition to
the Deity, supplicating his blessing on the fraternity wheresoever
dispersed under the wide canopy of heaven."--*Theo. Phil.*, p. 297.

This Degree has a reference to the Christian dispensation, when the day
of salvation is more fully revealed; atonement is made for sin; and *the
resurrection from the dead* plainly communicated and confirmed by the
resurrection of Christ from the grave. The Jewish law had degenerated
into a mass of *rottenness* and corruption:--piety, which planned the
Temple at Jerusalem, was expunged; the reverence and adoration due to
the Divinity *was buried in the filth and rubbish* of the world; and
religion and morality were scattered to the four winds of heaven. *Three
ruffian* nations *from the south, the west, and the east*--the Syrians,
the Chaldeans, and the Romans--gave in succession this temporary
dispensation its *death-blow*; those who sought religion through the
wisdom of the ancients *were not able to raise her; she eluded their
grasp*, and the polluted hands were also stretched forth in vain for her
restoration. Her tomb *was in the rubbish and filth cast forth from the
Temple, and acacia waved its branches over her monument. In this state
of darkness and despair* she lay until the Saviour came, *instituted the
five points* of Christian fellowship, and *raised her from the dust, in
which she had been indecently interred*, to a more glorious
inheritance."--*Theo. Phil.*, p. 309.

This interpretation is borne out in the higher Degrees of sublime
Masonry. Thus, in the thirty-second, or Degree of Prince of the Royal
Secret, according to the Continental nomenclature, the following
analogies are <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> explained: "The
symbolical mystery of the death of (*Hiram Abiff*) represents that of
the Messiah; for the three (*blows*) which were given to him at the
three gates of (*the Temple*) allude to the three points of condemnation
against Christ at three separate places, viz.: before Caiaphas. Herod,
and Pilate. It was from the last that he was led to that most violent
and excruciating death. The three (*blows*) were given with the three
(*tools*, *i.e.*, gauge, square, and gavel). These are symbols of the
blow on the cheek of Christ, the flagellation, and the blow with the
spear. Some substitute for the latter, but with less propriety, the
crown of thorns. The brethren assembled around the grave of (*Hiram
Abiff*) is a representation of the disciples lamenting the death of
Christ. The Word, which was said to be lost, was pronounced upon the
cross, which the Jews could not comprehend. The false brethren are
represented by Judas, who proved false to his Master; and the sprig of
cassia represented the cross, of which wood it is said to have been
composed."--*Historical Landmarks*, vol. ii. p. 176.

I am decidedly of opinion that our tradition is merely allegorical; for
there can be no doubt but the Chief Architect was present at the
dedication of the Temple. Thus we find that "Hiram *made an end* of
doing all the work that he made King Solomon for the house of the Lord."
(1 Kings vii. 40.) To place the fact of Hiram's being alive at the
finishing the Temple beyond all doubt, it is said (2 Chron. iv. 11),
"And Hiram *finished the work* that he was to make for King Solomon for
the house of God,"--*Historical Landmarks*, vol. ii. p. 166.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[147:1](dun04.htm#fr_51.md) A Grand Lecturer is
elected annually at the session of the Grand Lodge of each State. His
business is to teach the subordinate Lodges the Ritual of Freemasonry,
and he is paid generally by salary, or so much from each Lodge before
whom he may lecture.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[149:1](dun04.htm#fr_52.md) See Robert Morris's
*Freemason's Monitor*, 1860.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Master, or Fourth Degree](dun05.md)
