[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dun08)  [Next](dun10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV4ZS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Duncan's Masoic Ritual and Monitor*, by Malcom C. Duncan, \[1866\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

# EXTRACTS FROM "A DICTIONARY OF SYMBOLICAL MASONRY, INCLUDING THE ROYAL ARCH DEGREE," BY THE REV. G. OLIVER, D. D.

ACHILLES.--Perhaps some worthy people may stare when we point out
Achilles as a Freemason. What! we hear them ex-claim, is it possible
that that fierce and ferocious man-slayer, nay, man-eater at heart, for
he exhibited a strong propensity to cannibalism in longing to have
devoured the dead body of Hector--is it possible that he could have been
one of our philanthropic society? Yes, we reply, such is the actual
fact, and Bonaparte was one, too, in the highest degree. But, if you
will not believe Homer, or us, believe your own eyes, if, indeed, you
are a Mason. *Ecce signum*! Behold Achilles giving Priam THE HAND, when
the latter is supplicating for the body of his slain son:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thus having spoken, the old man's *right hand at
the wrist*  
*He grasped*, that he might not in any respect be alarmed in
mind."</span>

</div>

Such is the Masonic and literal translation of the text by that
illustrious Grecian and brother, Christopher North; and who will say,
now, that Achilles was not a Mason?--*Freemasons' Quarterly Review*.

\[<span class="small">According to this, *Brother* Achilles gave
*Brother* Priam the Master Mason's Grip, but there is no evidence to
show whether they used the word MAH-HAH-BONE, and the Five Points of
Fellowship.</span>\]

 

ESSENTIAL SECRETS.--The essential secrets of Masonry consist of nothing
more than the signs, grips, pass-words, and tokens, essential to the
preservation of the society from the inroads of impostors; together with
certain symbolical emblems, the technical terms appertaining to which
served as a sort of universal language, by which the members of the
fraternity could distinguish -each other, in all places and countries
where Lodges were instituted.--*Stone*.

 

EYESIGHT.--He who has been temporarily deprived of his sight is reduced
to the condition of a new-born babe, or of one of those unfortunate
individuals whose natural infirmity renders the presence of a conductor
indispensably necessary; but when there are no outward objects to
distract his attention, it is then that with the eye of reflection he
probes into the deepest and

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

darkest recesses of his own heart, and discovers his natural
imperfections and impurities much more readily than he could possibly
have done had he not been deprived of his sight. This short deprivation
of sight has kindled in his heart a spark of the brightest and purest
flame. . . We must further admit, that those who have been deprived of
their sight, and who have hopes of being restored to it, strive most
industriously and diligently to obtain it; that they have no greater
desire, and that *they will most readily pledge themselves to do all
that can be required of them*, in order to obtain that inestimable
blessing.

A man who has been deprived of his sight may be introduced into places
where he is surrounded by the strangest and the rarest objects, *without
a possibility of his becoming a traitor*. At the same time, those who
are in possession of their sight cannot feel the care of their guides so
much as those who are hoodwinked, and who feel that without the constant
attention of their conductors they would be much more helpless than they
now are; but, however many proofs of attention and care they may
receive, there is still something left to wish for; and to the question,
What is your chief desire? the answer will ever assuredly be,
"Light."--*Gadicke*.

 

FIVE POINTS OF FELLOWSHIP.--The five points of fellowship were thus
illustrated in the lectures used by the Athol Masons of the last
century:

1\. When the necessities of a brother call for my support, I will be
ever ready to lend him a helping hand to save him from sinking, if I
find him worthy thereof.

2\. Indolence shall not cause my footsteps to halt, nor wrath to turn
them aside; but, forgetting every selfish consideration, I will be ever
swift of foot to save, help, and execute benevolence to a
fellow-creature in distress, but more particularly to a brother Mason.

3\. When I offer up my ejaculations to Almighty God, I will remember my
brother's welfare, even as my own; for as the voice of babes and
sucklings ascends to the throne of grace, so, most assuredly, will the
breathings of a fervent heart ascend to the mansions of bliss.

4\. A brother's secret, delivered to me as such, I will keep as I would
my own, because, if I betray the trust which has been reposed in me, I
might do him an irreparable injury; it would be like the villany of an
assassin, who lurks in darkness to stab his adversary when unarmed and
least prepared to meet an enemy.

5\. A brother's character I will support in his absence, as I

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

would in his presence. I will not revile him myself, nor suffer it to be
done by others, if it is in my power to prevent it.

Thus, by the five points of fellowship, we are linked together in one
indivisible chain of sincere affection, brotherly love, relief, and
truth.

 

GUTTERAL.--The gutteral sign alludes to temperance, which demands such a
cautious habit of restraint, as may be necessary to preserve us from the
risk of violating our obligation and *incurring its
penalty*.--*Hemming*.

\[<span class="small">This alludes to the "Duegard of an Entered
Apprentice."?</span>\]

 

LANDMARKS.--What are the landmarks? is a question often asked, but never
determinately answered. In ancient times, boundary-stones were used as
landmarks, before title-deeds were known, the removal of which was
strictly forbidden by law. With respect to the landmarks of Masonry,
some restrict them to the O. B. signs, tokens, and words. Others include
the ceremonies of initiation, passing, and raising; and the form,
dimensions, and support; the ground, situation, and covering; the
ornaments, furniture, and jewels of a Lodge, or their characteristic
symbols. Some think that the Order has no landmarks beyond its peculiar
secrets. It is quite clear, however, that the order against removing or
altering the landmarks was universally observed in all ages of the
Craft.

 

METAL.--Many men dote on the metals silver and gold with their whole
souls, and know no other standard whereby to estimate their own worth,
or the worth of their fellow-beings, but by the quantity of these metals
they possess, thereby debasing and degrading those qualities of the mind
or spirit by which alone mankind ought to be estimated. He who wishes to
be initiated into Free Masonry must be willing to relinquish all
descriptions of metal, and all the adventitious circumstances of rank
and fortune, for it is the MAN that is received into Free Masonry, and
not his rank or riches.--*Gadicke*.

 

ORIGINAL POINTS.--Ancient Masonry admitted twelve original points, which
constitute the basis of the entire system, and without which no person
ever did or can be legally received into the Order. Every candidate is
obliged to pass through all these essential forms and ceremonies,
otherwise his initiation would not be legal. They are--opening,
preparing, reporting, entering, prayer, circumambulation, advancing,
obligation, intrusted, invested, placed, closing.

 

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

PENAL.--The penal sign marks our obligation, and reminds us also of the
fall of Adam, and the dreadful penalty entailed thereby on his sinful
posterity, being no less than death. It intimates that the stiff neck of
the disobedient shall be cut off from the land of the living by the
judgment of God, even as the head is severed from the body by the sword
of human justice.

\[<span class="small">This applies as well to the Entered Apprentice's
as to the Royal Arch Mason's "Duegard."</span>\]

[PHRASES](errata.htm#9) OF ADMISSION.--When a candidate receives the
first Degree he is said to be *initiated*, at the second step he is
*passed*, at the third, *raised*; when he takes the Mark Degree, he is
*congratulated* (advanced); having passed the chair, he is said to have
*presided*; when he becomes a Most Excellent Master, he is
*acknowledged* and *received*; and when a Royal Arch Mason, he is
*exalted*.

 

SIGN OF DISTRESS.--In a society whose members ought fraternally to love
and assist each other, it is to be expected that they should have a sign
whereby they could make themselves known immediately to their brethren,
in however distressed circumstances they might be placed, and thereby at
the same time claim their assistance and protection. This is the sign of
distress, in conjunction with a few words. He who falls into the
greatest difficulty and danger, and supposes that there is a brother
within sight or hearing, let him use this sign, and a true and faithful
brother must spring to his assistance.--*Gadicke*.

 

UNIFORMITY.--It is almost unnecessary to argue the question in relation
to Uniformity of Work, because such can never be; we say never, as long
as we live up to the teachings of the Fathers and communicate, *orally*,
the mysteries to candidates. To obtain uniformity, the work must be
written, and that will never be done, so long as Freemasons regard their
obligations. A Gen. G. Lodge should be, if the fraternity, at any time
foolish enough to sanction such an organization, which they never will,
might, in imitation of such bodies among modern associations, attempt
for the sake of having uniformity, by its dicta authorize the work to be
written, but under no other circumstances could or would such a thing be
attempted; and even in that case there would be a general uprising of
the craft to prevent such a violation of obligation. Uniformity in all
things is not absolutely necessary, nor was it ever so considered. It
cannot be expected that different persons will communicate the same
ideas in precisely the same language; besides language changes in its

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

import and ideas change with the progress of science and advance of
philosophy. It was well enough for the ancients to advance that the sun
rises in the East, that this earth is stationary as a tree or a house is
stationary, and that the sun moves around this little globe of ours; but
the day of these ideas is past. Now, by a change of verbiage, the ideas
are expressed consistent with sound philosophical principles, as the sun
in the east opens and adorns the day, etc., and thus it must necessarily
be in relation to Masonic language and Masonic ideas. The language used
to express an idea several thousand years ago, or even a few hundred
years ago, would be unintelligible, and not understood. To expect
uniformity of language for all time, is a vain expectation, and can
never be attained.--*Key Stone*. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

 

VAULT.--Vaults are found in every country of the world as well as in
Judea, and were used for secret purposes. Thus Stephens, speaking of
some ruins in Yucatan, says: "The only way of descending was to tie a
rope around the body, and be lowered by the Indians. In this way I was
let down, and almost before my head had passed through the hole, my feet
touched the top of a heap of rubbish, high directly under the hole, and
falling off at the sides. Clambering down it, I found myself in a round
chamber, so filled with rubbish that I could not stand upright. With a
candle in my hand, I crawled all round on my hands and knees. The
chamber was in the shape of a dome, and had been coated with plaster,
most of which had fallen, and now encumbered the ground. The depth could
not be ascertained without clearing out the interior."

 

WAGES.--The tradition respecting the payment of the work-men's wages at
the building of Solomon's Temple, may or may not he accurate, as I am
ignorant of the authority on which the calculations are founded. Indeed
the probability is, that the tradition has been fabricated in a
subsequent age, without the existence of any documents to attest its
authenticity.

<span id="img_27000"></span> ![THE TRIPLE TAU.](img/27000.jpg)  
THE TRIPLE TAU.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[270:1](dun09.htm#fr_86) This is not taken from
Dr. Oliver's Dictionary, but is quoted from a popular Masonic journal,
and embodies the sentiments of a great majority of the fraternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](dun10)
