<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbc08)  [Next](tbc10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q84/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Buddhist Catechism*, by Henry S. Olcott \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### PART II.

### THE DHARMA OR DOCTRINE.

106\. Q. *What is the meaning of the word Buddha?*

A. The enlightened, or he who has the perfect wisdom.

107\. Q. *You have said that there were other Buddhas: before this one*.

A. Yes; our belief is that, under the operation of eternal causation, a
Buddha takes birth at intervals, when mankind have become plunged into
misery through ignorance and need the wisdom which it is the function of
a Buddha to teach (See also Q. 11).

108\. Q. *How is a Buddha developed?*

A. A person, hearing and seeing one of the Buddhas on earth, becomes
seized with the determination to so live that at some future time, when
he shall become-fitted for it, he also will be a Buddha for the
guiding-of mankind out of the cycle of re-birth.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

109\. Q. *How does he proceed?*

A. Throughout that birth and every succeeding one, he strives to subdue
his passions, to gain wisdom by experience, and to develop his higher
faculties. He thus grows by degrees wiser, nobler in character, and
stronger in virtue, until, finally, after numberless rebirths he reaches
the state when he can become Perfected, Enlightened, All-wise, the ideal
Teacher of the human race.

110\. Q. *While this gradual development is going on throughout all
these births, by what name do we call him?*

A. Bodhisat, or Bodhisattva, Thus the Prince Siddhârtha Gautama was a
[Bodhisattva](errata.htm#0.md) up to the moment when, under the blessed
Bodhi tree at Gaya, he became Buddha.

111\. Q. *Have we any account of his various rebirths as a Bodhisattva?*

A. In the *Jâtakatthakathâ*, a book containing stories of the
Bodhisattva's re-incarnations, there are several hundred tales of that
kind.

113\. Q. *What lesson do these stories teach?*

A. That a man can carry, throughout a long series of re-incarnations,
one great, good purpose which enables

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

him to conquer bad tendencies and develop virtuous ones.

113 Q. *Can we fix the number of re-incarnations through which a
Bodhisattva must pass before he can become a Buddha?*

A. Of course not: that depends upon his natural character, the state of
development to which he has arrived when he forms the resolution to
become a. Buddha, and other things.

114\. Q. *Have we a way of classifying Bodhisattvas? If so, explain it*.

A. Bodhisattvas—the future Buddhas—are divided into three classes.

115\. Q. *Proceed. How are these three kinds of Bodhisats called?*

A. Pannâdhika, or Udghatitagnya—"he who attains least quickly;"
Saddhâdhika, or Vipachitagnya—"he who attains less quickly;" and
Vîriyâdhika, or Gneyya—"he who attains quickly." The Pannâdhika
Bodhisats take the course of Intelligence; the Saddhâdhika take the
course of Faith; the Vîryâdhika take the course of energetic action. The
first is guided by Intelligence and does not hasten; the second is full
of Faith, and does not care to take the guidance

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

of Wisdom; and the third never delays to do what is good. Regardless of
the consequences to himself, he does it when he sees that it is best
that it should be done.

116\. Q. *When our Bodhisattva became Buddha, what did he see was the
cause of human misery? Tell me in one word*.

A. Ignorance (*Avidyâ*).

117\. Q. *Can you tell me the remedy?*

A To dispel Ignorance and become wise (*Prajña*).

118\. Q. *Why does ignorance cause suffering?*

A. Because it makes us prize what is not worth prizing, grieve for what
we should not grieve, consider real what is not real but only
illusionary, and pass our lives in the pursuit of worthless objects,
neglecting what is in reality most valuable.

119\. Q. *And what is that which is most valuable?*

A. To know the whole secret of man's existence and destiny, so that we
may estimate at no more than their actual value this life and its
relations; and so that we may live in a way to ensure the greatest
happiness and the least suffering for our fellowmen and ourselves.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

120\. Q. *What is the light that can dispel this ignorance of ours and
remove all sorrows?*

A. The knowledge of the "Four Noble Truths," as <span
class="smallcaps">Buddha</span> called them.

121\. Q. *Name these Four Noble Truths*.

A. 1. The miseries of evolutionary existence resulting in births and
deaths, life after life. 2. The cause productive of misery, which is the
selfish desire, ever renewed, of satisfying one's self, without being
able ever to secure that end. 3. The destruction of that desire, or the
estranging of one's self from it. 4, The means of obtaining this
destruction of desire.

122\. Q. *Tell me some things that cause sorrow*.

A. Birth, decay, illness, death, separation from objects we love,
association with those who are repugnant, craving for what cannot be
obtained.

123\. Q. *Do these differ with each individual?*

A. Yes: but all men suffer from them in degree.

124\. Q. *How can we escape the sufferings which result from unsatisfied
desires and ignorant cravings?*

A. By complete conquest over, and destruction of, this eager thirst for
life and its pleasures, which causes sorrow.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

125\. Q. *How may we gain such a conquest?*

A. By following in the Noble Eight-fold Path which <span
class="smallcaps">Buddha</span> discovered and pointed out.

126\. Q. *What do you mean by that word: what is this Noble Eight fold
Path?* (For Pâlî name see Q. 78).

A. The eight parts of this path are called aṅgas they are: 1. Right
Belief (as to the law of Causation, or Karma); 2. Right Thought; 3.
Right Speech; 4. Right Action; 5. Right Means of Livelihood; 6. Right
Exertion; 7. Right Remembrance and Self-discipline; 8. Right
Concentration of Thought. The man who keeps these aligns in mind and
follows them will be free from sorrow and ultimately reach salvation.

127\. Q. *Can you give a better word for salvation?*

A. Yes, emancipation.

128\. Q. *Emancipation, then, from what?*

A. Emancipation from the miseries of earthly existence and of re-births,
all of which are due to. ignorance and impure lusts and cravings.

129\. Q. *And when this salvation or emancipation is attained, what do
we reach?*

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

A. <span class="smallcaps">Nirvâṇa</span>.

130\. Q. What is Nirvâṇa?

A. A condition of total cessation of changes, of perfect rest; of the
absence of desire and illusion and sorrow; of the total obliteration of
everything that goes to make up the physical man. Before reaching <span
class="smallcaps">Nirvâṇa</span> man is constantly being re-born: when
he reaches <span class="smallcaps">Nirvâṇa</span> he is re-born no more.

131\. Q. *Where can be found a learned discussion of the word Nirvâṇa,
and a list of the other names by which the old Pâlî writers attempted to
define it?*

A. In the famous Dictionary of the Pâlî Language, by the late Mr. R. C.
Childers, is a complete list. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md)

132\. Q. *But some people imagine that Nirvâṇa is some sort of heavenly
place, a Paradise. Does Buddhism teach that?*

A. No. When Kûtadanta asked the Buddha "Where is Nirvâṇa," he replied
that it was "Wherever the precepts are obeyed."

133\. Q. *What causes us to be re-born?*

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

A. The unsatisfied selfish desire (Sk., *trishna;* Pâlî, *tanha*) for
things that belong to the state of personal existence in the material
world. This unquenched thirst for physical existence (*bhâva*) is a
force, and has a creative power in itself so strong that it draws the
being back into mundane life.

134\. Q. *Are our re-births in any way affected by the nature of our
unsatisfied desires?*

A. Yes; and by our individual merits or demerits.

135\. Q. *Does our merit or demerit control the state, condition or form
in which we shall be re-born?*

A. It does. The broad rule is that if we have an excess of merit we
shall be well and happily born the next time; if an excess of demerit,
our next birth will be wretched and full of suffering.

136\. Q. *One chief pillar of Buddhistic doctrine is, then, the idea
that every effect is the result of an actual cause, is it not?*

A. It is; of a cause either immediate or remote.

137\. Q. *What do we call this causation?*

A. Applied to individuals, it is Karma, that is, action. It means that
our own actions or deeds bring upon us whatever of joy or misery we
experience.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

138\. Q. *Can a bad man escape from the out-workings of his Karma?*

A. The *Dhammapada* says: "There exists no spot on the earth, or in the
sky, or in the sea, neither is there any in the mountain-clefts, where
an (evil) deed does not bring trouble (to the doer)."

139\. Q. *Can a good man escape?*

A. As the result of deeds of peculiar merit, a man may attain certain
advantages of place, body, environment and teaching in his next stage of
progress, which ward off the effects of bad Karma and help his higher
evolution.

140\. [ ](errata.htm#1.md) *What are they called?*

A. *Gati Sampatti*, *Upâdhi Sampatti*, *Kâla Sampatti* and *Payoga
Sampatti*.

141\. Q. *Is that consistent or inconsistent with common sense and the
teachings of modern science?*

A. Perfectly consistent: there can be no doubt of it.

142\. Q. *May all men become Buddhas?*

A. It is not in the nature of every man to become a Buddha; for a Buddha
is developed only at long intervals of time, and seemingly, when the
state of

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

humanity absolutely requires such a teacher to show it. the forgotten
Path to <span class="smallcaps">Nirvâṇa</span>. But every being may
equally reach Nirvâṇa, by conquering Ignorance and: gaining Wisdom.

143\. Q. *Does Buddhism teach that man is re-born, only upon our earth?*

A. As a general rule that would be the case, until he had evolved beyond
its level; but the inhabited worlds are numberless. The world upon which
a person is to have his next birth, as well as the nature of the
re-birth itself, is decided by the preponderance-of the individual's
merit or demerit. In other words, it will be controlled by his
attractions, as science would describe it; or by his Karma, as we,
Buddhists, would say.

144\. Q. Are there worlds more perfect and developed, and others less so
than our Earth?

A. Buddhism teaches that there are whole *Sakwalas* or systems of
worlds, of various kinds, higher: and lower, and also that the
inhabitants of each world correspond in development with itself.

145\. Q. Has not the Buddha summed up his whole doctrine in one *gâthâ*,
or verse?

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

146 A. Yes.

146\. Q. *Repeat it*.

A.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Sabba pâpassa akaranam  
Kusalassa upasampadâ  
Sachita pariyo dapanam—  
Etam Buddhânusâsanam:*

"To cease from all evil actions,  
To generate all that is good,  
To cleanse one's mind:  
This is the constant advice of the Buddhas."

</div>

147\. Q. *Have the first three of these lines any very striking
characteristics?*

A. Yes: the first line embodies the whole spirit of the *Vinâya Pitaka*,
the second that of the *Sutta*, the third that of the *Abhidhamma*. They
comprise only eight Pâlî words, yet, as the dewdrop reflects the stars,
they sparkle with the spirit of all the Buddha Dharma.

14S. Q. *Do these precepts show that Buddhism is an active or a passive
religion?*

A. To 'cease from sin' may be called passive, but to 'get virtue' and to
'cleanse one's own heart,' or mind, are altogether *active* qualities.
Buddha taught

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

that we should not merely not be evil, but that we should be positively
good.

149\. Q. *Who or what are the "Three Guides" <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md) that a Buddhist is supposed to follow?*

A. They are disclosed in the formula called the Tisaraṇa: "I follow
Buddha as my Guide: I follow the Law as my Guide: I follow the order as
my Guide." These three are, in fact, the Buddha Dharma.

150\. Q. *What does he mean when repeating this formula?*

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

A. He means that he regards the Buddha as his all-wise Teacher, Friend
and Exemplar; the Law, or Doctrine, as containing the essential and
immutable principles of Justice and Truth and the path that leads to the
realisation of perfect peace of mind on earth; and the Order as the
teachers and exemplars of that excellent Law taught by Buddha.

151\. Q. *But are not some of the members of this "Order" men
intellectually and morally inferior?*

A. Yes; but we are taught by the Buddha that only those who diligently
attend to the Precepts, discipline their minds, and strive to attain or
have attained one of the eight stages of holiness and perfection,
constitute his "Order." It is expressly stated that the Order referred
to in the "Tisaraṇa" refers to the "Attha Ariya Puggala"—the Noble Ones
who have attained one of the eight stages of perfection. The mere
wearing of yellow robes, or even ordination, does not of itself make a
man pure, wise or entitled to reverence.

152\. Q. *Then it is not such unworthy bhikkhus as they, whom the true
Buddhist would take as his guides?*

A. Certainly not.

153\. Q. *What are the five observances, or universal* 

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

*precepts, called the Pancha Sila, which are imposed on the laity in
general?*

A. They are included in the following formula, which Buddhists repeat
publicly at the vihâras (temples):—

1 observe the precept to refrain from destroying the life of beings.

I observe the precept to refrain from stealing.

I observe the precept to abstain from unlawful sexual intercourse. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10.md)

I observe the precept to refrain from falsehood.

I observe the precept to abstain from using intoxicants.

154\. Q. *What strikes the intelligent person on reading these Silas?*

A. That one who observes them strictly must escape from every cause
productive of human misery.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If we study
history we shall find that it has all sprung from one or another of
these causes.

155\. Q. *In which Silas is the far-seeing wisdom of the Buddha most
plainly shown?*

A. In the first, third and fifth: for the taking of life, sensuality,
and the use of intoxicants, cause at least 95 per cent. of the suffering
among men.

156\. Q. *What benefits does a man derive from the observance of these
Precepts?*

A. He is said to acquire more or less merit according to the manner and
time of observing the precepts, and the number observed. That is, if he
observes only one precept, violating the other four, he acquires the
merit of the observance of that precept only; and the longer he keeps
that precept the greater will be the merit. He who keeps all the
precepts inviolate will cause himself to have a higher and happier
existence hereafter.

157\. Q. *What are the other observances which it is considered
meritorious for the laity as such to undertake voluntarily to keep?*

A. The *Atthanga Silo*, or the Eight-fold Precept, which embraces the
five above enumerated (omitting

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the word "unlawful" in the third), with three additional; *viz*.:—

I observe the precept to abstain from eating at an unseasonable time.

I observe the precept to abstain from dancing, singing, music and
unbecoming shows, and from the use of garlands, scents, perfumes,
cosmetics, ointments, and ornaments.

I observe the precept to abstain from using high and broad beds.

The seats and couches here referred to are those used by the
worldly-minded for the sake of pleasure and sensual enjoyment. The
celibate should avoid these.

158\. Q. *How would a Buddhist describe trite merit?*

A. There is no great merit in any merely outward act; all depends upon
the inward motive that provokes the deed.

159\. Q. *Give an example*.

A. A rich man may expend lakhs of rupees in building dâgobas or vihâras,
in erecting statues of Buddha, in festivals and processions, in feeding

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

priests, in giving alms to the poor, or in planting trees, digging
tanks, or constructing rest-houses by the roadside for travellers, and
yet have comparatively little merit if it be done for display, and to
make himself praised by men, or for any other selfish motives. But he
who does the least of these things with a kind motive, as from love for
his fellow-men, gains great merit. A good deed done with a bad motive
benefits others, but not the doer. One who approves of a good deed when
done by another shares in the merit, if his sympathy is real, not
pretended. The same rule as to evil deeds.

160\. Q. *But which is said to be the greatest of all meritorious
actions?*

A. The *Dhammapada* declares that the merit of disseminating the Dharma,
the Law of Righteousness, is greater than that of any other good work.

161\. Q. *What books contain all the most excellent wisdom of Buddha's
teachings?*

A. The three collections of books called *Tripitakas*, or "*Three
Baskets*."

162\. Q. *What are the names of the three Pitakas, or groups of books?*

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

A. The *Vinâya Pitaka*, the *Sutta Pitaka* and the *Abhidhamma Pitaka*.

163\. Q. *What do they respectively contain?*

A. The first contains all that pertains to morality and rules of
discipline for the government of the Sangha, or Order; the second
contains instructive discourses on ethics applicable to all; the third
explains the psychological teachings of the Buddha, including the
twenty-four transcendental laws explanatory of the workings of Nature.

164\. Q. *Do Buddhists believe these books to be inspired, or revealed
by a Divine Being?*

A. No; but they revere them as containing all the parts of that most
Excellent Law, by the knowing of which man may break through the
trammels of *Samsâra*.

165\. Q. *In the whole text of the three Pitakas how many words are
there?*

A. Dr. Rhys-Davids estimates them at 1,752,800.

166\. Q. When were the Pitakas first reduced to writing?

A. In 88–76 B.C., under the Sinhalese King, Wattagamini; or 330 years
after the Parinirvâṇa of the Buddha.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

167\. Q. *Have we reason to believe that all the discourses of the
Buddha are known to us?*

A. Probably not, and it would be strange if they were. Within the
forty-five years of his public life he must have preached many hundreds
of discourses. Of these, in times of war and persecution, many must have
been lost, many scattered to distant countries, and many mutilated.
History says that enemies of the Buddha Dharma burnt piles of our books
as high as a cocoanut tree.

168\. Q. *Do Buddhists consider the Buddha as one who by his own virtue
can save us from the consequences of our individual sins?*

A. Not at all. Man must emancipate himself. Until he does that he will
continue being born over and over and over again—the victim of
ignorance, the slave of unquenched passions.

169\. Q. *What, then, was the Buddha to us, and all other beings?*

A. An all-seeing, all-wise Counsellor; one who discovered the safe path
and pointed it out; one who showed the cause of, and the only cure for,
human suffering. In pointing to the road, in showing

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

us how to escape dangers, he became our Guide. He is to us like one
leading a blind man across a narrow bridge over a swift and deep stream
and so saving his life.

170\. *Q. If we were to try to represent the whole spirit of the
Buddha's doctrine by one word, which word should we choose?*

A. Justice.

171\. Q. *Why?*

A. Because it teaches that every man gets, under the operations of
unerring KARMA, exactly that reward or punishment which he has deserved,
no more and no less. No good deed or bad deed, however trifling, and
however secretly committed, escapes the evenly-balanced scales of Karma.

172\. Q. *What is Karma?* <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md)

A. A causation operating on the moral, as well as on the physical and
other planes. Buddhists say there is no miracle in human affairs what a
man sows that he must and will reap.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

173\. Q. *What other good words have been used to express the essence of
Buddhism?*

A. Self-culture and universal love.

174\. Q. *What doctrine ennobles Buddhism, and gives it its exalted
place among the world's religions?*

A. That of *Mitta* or *Maitreya*—compassionate kindness. The importance
of this doctrine is moreover emphasised in the giving of the name
"Maitri" (the Compassionate One), to the coming Buddha.

175\. Q. *Were all these points of Doctrine that you have explained
meditated upon by the Buddha near the Bo-tree?*

A. Yes, these and many more that may be read in the Buddhist Scriptures.
The entire system of Buddhism came to his mind during the Great
Enlightenment.

176\. Q. *How long did the Buddha remain near the Bo-tree?*

A. Forty-nine days.

177\. Q. *What do we call the first discourse preached by the
Buddha—that which he addressed to his five former companions?*

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

A. The *Dhammacakka-ppavattana sutta*,—the Sûtra of the Definition of
the Rule of Doctrine. <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md)

178\. Q. *What subjects were treated by him in this. discourse?*

A. The "Four Noble Truths," and the "Noble Eight-fold Path." He
condemned the extreme physical mortification of the ascetics, on the one
hand, and the enjoyment of sensual pleasures on the other; pointing out
and recommending the Noble Eight-fold Path as the Middle Path.

179\. Q. *Did the Buddha hold to idol worship?*

A. He did not; he opposed it. The worship of gods, demons, trees, etc,
was condemned by the Buddha. External worship is a fetter that one has
to break if he is to advance higher.

160\. Q. *But do not Buddhists make reverence* 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

*before the statue to the Buddha, his relics, and the monuments
enshrining them?*

A. Yes, but not with the sentiment of the idolator.

181\. Q. *What is the difference?*

A. Our Pagan brother not only takes his images as visible
representations of his unseen God or gods, but the refined idolater, in
worshipping, considers that the idol contains in its substance a portion
of the all-pervading divinity.

182\. Q. *What does the Buddhist think?*

A. The Buddhist reverences the Buddha's statue and the other things you
have mentioned, only as mementos of the greatest, wisest, most
benevolent and compassionate man in this world-period (Kalpa). All races
and peoples preserve, treasure up, and value the relics and mementos of
men and women who have been considered in any way great. The Buddha, to
us, seems more to be revered and beloved than any one else, by every
human being who knows sorrow.

183\. *Q. Has the Buddha himself given us something definite upon this
subject?*

A. Certainly. In the *Mahâ Pari-Nirvâṇa Sutta* 

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

he says that emancipation is attainable only by leading the Holy life,
according to the Noble Eight-fold Path, not by external worship (*âmisa
pûja*), nor by adoration of himself, or of another, or of any image.

184\. Q. *What was the Buddha's estimate of ceremonialism?*

A. From the beginning, he condemned the observance of ceremonies and
other external practices, which only tend to increase our spiritual
blindness and our clinging to mere lifeless forms.

185\. Q. *What as to controversies?*

A. In numerous discourses he denounced this habit as most pernicious. He
prescribed penances for Bhikkhus who waste time and weaken their higher
intuitions in wrangling over theories and metaphysical subtleties.

186\. Q. *Are charms, incantations, the observance of lucky hours and
devil-dancing a part of Buddhism?*

A, They are positively repugnant to its fundamental principles. They are
the surviving relics of fetishism and pantheistic and other foreign
religions. In the *Brâhmajâta Sutta* the Buddha has

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

categorically described these and other superstitions as pagan, mean and
spurious. <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13.md)

187\. Q. *What striking contrasts are there between Buddhism and what
may be properly called "religions?"*

A. Among others, these: It teaches the highest goodness without a
creating God; a continuity of life without adhering to the superstitious
and selfish doctrine of an eternal, metaphysical soul-substance that
goes out of the body; a happiness without an objective heaven; a method
of salvation without a vicarious Savior; redemption by oneself as the
Redeemer, and without rites, prayers, penances, priests or intercessory
saints; and a *summun bonum*, i.e., Nirvâṇa, attainable in this life and
in this world by leading a pure, unselfish life of wisdom and compassion
to all beings.

188\. Q. *Specify the two main divisions of 'meditation,'* i.e.*, of the
process by which one extinguishes passion and attains knowledge*.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

A. *Samatha* and *Vidarsama*: (1) the attenuation of passion by leading
the holy life and by continued effort to subdue the senses; (2) the
attainment of supernormal wisdom by reflection: each of which embraces
twenty aspects, but I need not here specify them.

189\. Q. *What are the four paths or stages of advancement that one may
attain to?*

A. (1) *Sottâpatti*, the beginning or entering into which follows after
one's clear perception of the 'Four Noble Truths;' (2) *Sakardâgâmi*—the
path of one who has so subjugated lust, hatred and delusion that he need
only return once to this world; (3) *Anâgami*—the path of those who have
so far conquered self that they need not return to this world; (4)
*Arhat*—the path of the holy and worthy Arhat, who is not only free from
the necessity of re-incarnation, but has capacitated himself to enjoy
perfect wisdom, boundless pity for the ignorant and suffering, and
measureless love for all beings.

190\. Q. *Does popular Buddhism contain nothing but what is true, and in
accord with science?*

A. Like every other religion that has existed many centuries, it
certainly now contains untruth mingled with truth; ever gold is found
mixed with

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

dross. The poetical imagination, the zeal, or the lingering superstition
of Buddhist devotees have, in various ages, and in various lands, caused
the noble principles of the Buddha's moral doctrines to be coupled more
or less with what might be removed to advantage.

191\. Q. *When such perversions are discovered, what should be the tree
Buddhist's earnest desire?*

A. The true Buddhist should be ever ready and anxious to see the false
purged away from the true, and to assist, if he can. Three great
Councils of the Sangha were held for the express purpose of purging the
body of Teachings from all corrupt interpolations.

192\. Q. *When?*

A. The first, at Sattapanni cave, just after the death of the Buddha;
the second at Valukarama, in Vaisali; the third at Asokarama Vihâra, at
Pataliputra, 235 years after the Buddha's decease.

193\. Q. *In what discourse does the Buddha himself warn us to expect
this perversion of the true Doctrine?*

A. In the *Sanyutta Nikâya*.

194\. Q. *Are there any dogmas in Buddhism which we are required to
accept on faith?*

A. No: we are earnestly enjoined to accept

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

nothing whatever on faith; whether it be written in books, handed down
from our ancestors, or taught by the sages.

195\. Q. *Did he himself really teach that noble rule?*

A. Yes. The Buddha has said that we must not believe in a thing said
merely because it is said; nor in traditions because they have been
handed down from antiquity; nor rumours, as such; nor writings by sages,
merely because sages wrote them; nor fancies that we may suspect to have
been inspired in us by a deva (that is, in presumed spiritual
inspiration); nor from inferences drawn from some haphazard assumption
we may have made; nor because of what seems an analogical necessity; nor
on the mere authority of our own teachers or masters.

196\. Q. *When, then, must we believe?*

A. We are to believe when the writing, doctrine or saying is
corroborated by our own reason and consciousness. "For this," says he in
concluding, "I taught you not to believe merely because you have heard,
but when you believed of your own consciousness, then to act accordingly
and abundantly." (See the *Kâlâma Sutta* of the *Anguttara Nikâya*, and
the *Mahâ Pari Nirvâṇa Sutta*.)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

197\. Q. *What does the Buddha call himself?*

A. He says that he and the other Buddhas are only "preachers" of truth
who point out the way: we ourselves must make the effort.

198\. Q. *Where is this said?*

A. In chapter xx. of the *Dhammapada*.

199\. Q. *Does Buddhism countenance hypocrisy?*

A. The *Dhammapada* says: "Like a beautiful flower full of color without
scent, the fine words of him who does not act accordingly are
fruitless."

200\. Q. *Does Buddhism teach us to return evil for evil?*

A. In the *Dhammapada* the Buddha said: "If a man foolishly does me
wrong, I will return to him the protection of my ungrudging love; the
more evil comes from him, the more good shall go from me." This is the
path followed by the Arhat. <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) To
return evil for evil is positively forbidden in Buddhism.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

201\. Q. *Does it encourage cruelly?*

A. No, indeed. In the Five Precepts and in many of his discourses, the
Buddha teaches us to be merciful to all beings, to try and make them
happy, to love them all, to abstain from taking life, or consenting to
it, or encouraging its being done.

202\. Q. *In which discourse is this stated?*

A. The *Dhammika Sutta* says: "Let him (the householder) not destroy, or
cause to be destroyed, any life at all, or *sanction the acts of those
who do so*.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let him refrain
from even hurting any creature," <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md)
etc.

203\. Q. *Does it approve of drunkenness?*

A. In his *Dhammika Sutta* we are warned against drinking liquors,
causing others to drink, or sanctioning the acts of those who
drink. <span id="fr_16"></span>[†](#fn_16.md)

204\. Q. *To what are we told that drunkenness leads?*

A. To demerit, crime, insanity, and ignorance—which is the chief cause
of re-birth.

205\. Q. *What does Buddhism teach about marriage?*

A. Absolute chastity being a condition of full spiritual development, is
most highly commended; but a marriage to one wife and fidelity to her is
recognised as a kind of chastity. Polygamy was censured by the Buddha as
involving ignorance and promoting lust.

206\. Q. *In what discourse?*

A. The *Anguttara Nikâya*, chap. iv, 55.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

207\. Q. *What does it teach as to the duty of parents to children?*

A. They should restrain them from vice; train them in virtue; hive them
taught arts and sciences; provide them with suitable wives and husbands,
and give them their inheritance.

208\. Q. *What is the duty of children?*

A. To support their parents when old or needy; perform family duties
incumbent on them; guard their property; make themselves worthy to be
their heirs, and when they are gone, honor their memory.

209\. Q. *What of pupils to the teacher?*

A. To show him respect; minister to him; obey him; supply his wants;
attend to his instruction.

210\. Q. *What of husband to wife?*

A. To cherish her; treat her with respect and kindness; be faithful to
her; cause her to be honored by others; provide her with suitable
ornaments and clothes.

211\. Q. *What of the wife to her husband?*

A. To show affection to him; order her household aright; be hospitable
to guests; be chaste; be thrifty; show skill and diligence in all
things.

212\. Q. *Where are these precepts taught?*

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

A. In the *Sigâlovâda Sutta*.

213\. Q. *Do riches help a man to future happiness?*

A. The Dhammapada says: "One is the road that leads to wealth, another
the road that leads to Nirvâṇa."

214\. Q. *Does that mean that no rich man can attain Nirvâṇa?*

A. That depends on which he loves most. If he uses his wealth for the
benefit of mankind—for the suffering, the oppressed, the ignorant—then
his wealth aids him to acquire merit.

215\. Q. *But if the contrary?*

A. But if he loves and greedily hoards money for the sake of its
possession, then it weakens his moral sense, prompts him to crime,
brings curses upon, him in this life, and their effects are felt in the
next birth.

216\. Q. *What says the "Dhammapada" about ignorance?*

A. That it is a taint worse than all taints that a man can put upon
himself.

217\. Q. *What does it say about uncharitableness towards others?*

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

A. That the fault of others is easily perceived, but that of oneself
difficult to perceive; a man winnows his neighbor's faults like chaff,
but his own fault he hides, as a cheat hides the bad die from the
gambler.

218\. Q. *What advice does the Buddha give us as to man's duty to the
poor?*

A. He says that a man's nett income should be divided into four parts,
of which one should be devoted to philanthropic objects.

219\. Q. *What five occupations are said to be low and base?*

A. Selling liquor, selling animals for slaughter, selling poison,
selling murderous weapons, and dealing in slaves.

220\. Q. *Who are said to be incapable of progress in spirituality?*

A. The killers of father, mother, and holy Arhats; bhikkhus who sow
discord in the Sangha; those who attempt to injure the person of a
Buddha; those who hold extremely nihilistic views as to the future
existence; and those who are extremely sensual.

221\. Q. *Does Buddhism specify places or conditions of torment into
which a bad man's Karma draws him on leaving this life?*

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

A. Yes., They are: Sanjîva; Kâlasûtra; Sanghâta; Raurava; Mahâ-Raurava;
Tâpa; Pratâpa; Avîchi.

222\. Q. *Is the torment eternal?*

A. Certainly not. Its duration depends on a man's Karma.

223\. Q. *Does Buddhism declare that non-believers in Buddha will of
necessity be damned for their unbelief?*

A. No; by good deeds they may enjoy a limited term of happiness before
being drawn into re-birth by their unexhausted *tanhâ*. To escape
re-birth, one must tread the Noble Eight-fold Path.

224\. Q. *What is the spiritual status of woman among Buddhists?*

A. According to our religion they are on a footing of perfect equality
with men. "Woman," says the Buddha, in the *Chullavêdalla Sutta*, "may
attain the highest path of holiness "—Arhatship—that is open to man.

225\. Q. *What does a modern critic say about the effect of Buddhism on
woman?*

A. That "it has done more for the happiness and

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

enfranchisement of woman than any other creed" (Sir Lepel Griffin).

226\. Q. *What did the Buddha teach about caste?*

A. That one does not become of any caste, whether Pariah, the lowest, or
Brâhmaṇa, the highest, by birth, but by deeds. "By deeds, "said He, "one
becomes an outcast, by deeds one becomes a Brâhmaṇa" (See *Vasala
Sutta*).

227\. Q. *Tell me a story to illustrate this*.

A. Ânanda, passing by a well, was thirsty and asked Prakriti, a girl of
the Mâtanga, or Pariah caste, to give him water. She said she was of
such low caste that he would become contaminated by taking water from
her hand. But Ânanda replied: "I ask not for caste but for water;" and
the Mâtanga girl's heart was glad and she gave him to drink. The Buddha
blessed her for it.

228\. Q. What did the Buddha say in Vasalasutta about a man of the
Pariah Sopâka caste?

A. That by his merits he reached the highest fame; that many Khattiyas
(Kshattriyas) and Brahmans went to serve him; and that after death he
was born in the Brahma world: while there are many

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brâhmaṇas who for
their evil deeds are born in hell,

229\. Q. *Does Buddhism teach the immortality of the soul?*

A. It considers "soul" to be a word used by the ignorant to express a
false idea. If every thing is subject to change, then man is included,
and every material part of him must change. That which is subject to
change is not permanent: so there can be no immortal survival of a
changeful thing. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md)

230\. Q. What is so objectionable in this word 'soul'?

A. The idea associated with it that man can be an entity separated from
all other entities, and from the existence of the whole of the Universe.
This idea of separateness is unreasonable, not provable by logic, nor
supported by science.

231\. Q. *Then there is no separate "I," nor can we say "my" this or
that?*

A. Exactly so.

232\. Q. *If the idea of a separate human soul* 

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

*is to be rejected, what is it in man which gives him the impression of
having a permanent personality?*

A. *Tanhâ*, or the unsatisfied desire for existence. The being having
done that for which he must be rewarded or punished in future, and
having *Tanhâ*, will have a re-birth through the influence of Karma..

233\. Q. *What is it that is born?*

A. A new aggregation of Skandhas, or personality <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18.md)

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

caused by the last generative thought of the dying person.

234\. Q. *How many Skandhas are there?*

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

A. Five.

235\. Q. *Name the five Skandhas*.

A. Rûpa, Vêdanâ, Saññâ, Samkhârâ, and Viññâna.

236\. Q. *Briefly explain what they are*.

A. Rûpa, material qualities; Vedanâ, sensation; Saññâ, abstract ideas;
Samkhârâ, tendencies of mind; Viññâna, mental powers, or consciousness.
Of these we are formed; by them we are conscious of existence; and
through them communicate with the world about us.

237\. Q. *To what cause must we attribute the differences in the
combination of the five Skandhas which make every individual differ from
every other individual?*

A. To the ripened Karma of the individual in his preceding births.

235\. Q. *What is the force or energy that is at work, under the
guidance of Karma, to produce the new being?*

A. Tanhâ—the will to *live*. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md)

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

239\. Q. *Upon what is the doctrine of re-births founded?*

A. Upon the perception that perfect justice, equilibrium and adjustment
are inherent in the universal system of Nature. Buddhists do not believe
that one life—even though it were extended to one hundred or five
hundred years—is long enough for the reward or punishment of a man's
deeds. The great circle of re-births will be more or less quickly run
through according to the preponderating purity or impurity of the
several lives of the individual.

240\. Q. *Is this new aggregation of Skandhas—this new personality—the
same being as that in the previous birth, whose Tanhâ has brought it
into existence?*

A. In one sense it is a new being; in another it is not. In Pâlî it
is—"nacha so nacha añño," which means not the same nor yet another.
During this

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

life the Skandhas are constantly changing; <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20.md) and while the man A. B., of forty, is
identical, as regards. personality, with the youth A. B., of eighteen,
yet, by the continual waste and reparation of his body, and change of
mind and character, he is a different being. Nevertheless, the man in
his old age justly reaps the reward or suffering consequent upon his
thoughts and actions at every previous stage of his life. So the new
being of a re-birth, being the same individuality as before, with but a
changed form, or new aggregation of Skandhas, justly reaps the
consequences of his actions and thoughts in the previous existence.

241\. Q. *But the aged man remembers the incidents of his youth, despite
his being physically and mentally changed. Why, then, is not the
recollection of past lives brought over by us from our last birth into.
the present birth?*

A. Because memory is included within the Skandhas; and the Skandhas
having changed with the new reincarnation, a new Memory, the record of
that particular existence, develops. Yet the record or reflection of all
the past earth-lives must survive; for,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

when Prince Siddhârthâ became Buddha, the full sequence of his previous
births was seen by him. If their several incidents had left no trace
behind, this could not have been so, as there would have been nothing
for him to see. And any one who attains to the fourth state of Dhyâna
(psychical insight) can thus retrospectively trace the line of his
lives.

242\. Q, *What is the ultimate point towards which fend all these series
of changes in form?*

A. Nirvâṇa.

243\. Q. *Does Buddhism teach that we should do good with the view of
reaching Nirvâṇa?*

A. No; that would he as absolute selfishness as though the reward hoped
for had been money, a throne, or any other sensual enjoyment. Nirvâṇa
cannot be so reached, and the unwise speculator is foredoomed to
disappointment.

244\. Q. *Please make it a little clearer*.

A. Nirvâṇa is the synonym of unselfishness, the entire surrender of
selfhood to truth. The ignorant man aspires to nirvâṇic happiness
without the least idea of its nature. Absence of selfishness is Nirvâṇa.
Doing good with the view to getting results, or leading

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the holy life with the object of gaining heavenly happiness, is not the
Noble Life that the Buddha enjoined. Without hope of reward the Noble
Life should be lived, and that is the highest life. The nirvâṇic state
can be attained while one is living on this earth.

245\. Q. *Name the ten great obstacles to advancement, called
Sanyojanas, the Fetters*.

A. Delusion of self (Sakkâya-ditthi); Doubt (Vicikicchâ); Dependence on
superstitious rites (Sîlabbata-parâmâsa); Sensuality, bodily passions
(Kâma); Hatred, ill-feeling (Patigha); Love of life on earth (Rûparâga);
Desire for life in a heaven (Arûparâga); Pride (Mâna);
Self-righteousness (Uddhacca); Ignorance (Avijjâ).

246\. Q. *To become an Arahat, how many of these fetters must be
broken?*

A. All.

247\. Q. *What are the five Niwarânas or Hindrances?*

A. Greed, Malice, Sloth, Pride, and Doubt.

248\. Q. *Why do we see this minute division of feelings, impulses,
workings of the mind, obstacles and* 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

*aids to advancement so much used in the Buddha's teachings? It is very
confusing to a beginner*.

A. It is to help us to obtain knowledge of ourselves, by training our
minds to think out every subject in detail. By following out this system
of self-examination, we come finally to acquire knowledge and see truth
as it is. This is the course taken by every wise teacher to help his
pupil's mind to develop.

249\. Q. *How many of the Buddha's disciples were specially renowned for
their superior qualities?*

A. There are eighty so distinguished. They are called the *Asîti Maha
Sâvakas*.

250\. Q. *What did the Buddha's wisdom embrace?*

A. He knew the nature of the Knowable and the Unknowable, the Possible
and the Impossible, the cause of Merit and Demerit; he could read the
thoughts of all beings; he knew the laws of Nature, the illusions of the
senses and the means to suppress desires; he could distinguish the
births and re-births of individuals, and other things.

251\. Q. *What do we call the basic principle on which the whole of the
Buddha's teaching is constructed?*

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

A. It is called *Paticca Samuppâdâ*. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21.md)

252\. Q. *Is it easily grasped?*

A. It is most difficult; in fact, the full meaning and extent of it is
beyond the capacity of such as are not perfectly developed.

253\. Q. *What said the great commentator Buddha Ghosha about it?*

A. That even he was as helpless in this vast ocean of thought as one who
is drifting on the ocean of waters.

254\. Q. *Then why should the Buddha say, in the Parinibbâna Sutta, that
he "has no such thing as the closed fist of a teacher, who keeps
something back?" If his whole teaching was open to every one's
comprehension, why should so great and learned a man as Buddha Ghosha
declare it so hard to understand?*

A. The Buddha evidently meant that he taught

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

everything freely; but equally certain is it that the real basis of the
Dharma can only be understood by him who has perfected his powers of
comprehension. It is, therefore, incomprehensible to common,
unenlightened persons.

255\. Q. *How does the teaching of the Buddha support this view?*

A. The Buddha looked into the heart of each person, and preached to suit
the individual temperament and spiritual development of the hearer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[33:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_8.md) Mr. Childers takes a
highly pessimistic view of the Nirvâṇic state, regarding it as
annihilation. Later students disagree with him.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[38:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_9.md) *Sâranam*. Wijesinha
Mudaliyar writes me:—"This word has been hitherto very inappropriately
and erroneously rendered *Refuge*, by European Pâlî scholars, and
thoughtlessly so accepted by native Pâlî scholars. Neither Pâlî
etymology nor Buddhistic philosophy justifies the translation. *Refuge*,
in the sense of a *fleeing back or a place of shelter*, is quite foreign
to true Buddhism, which insists on every man working out his own
emancipation. The root *Sṛ* in Samskrit (*sara* in Pâlî) means to move,
to go; so that *Saranam* would denote a moving, or he or that which
goes. before or with another—a Guide or Helper. I construe the passage
thus: *Gacchāmi*, I go, *Buddham*, to Buddha, *Sâranam*, as my Guide.
The translation of the *Tisaraṇa* as the "Three Refuges," has given rise
to much misapprehension, and has been made by anti-Buddhists a fertile
pretext for taunting Buddhists with the absurdity of taking refuge in
nonentities and believing in unrealities. The term Refuge is more
applicable to Nirvâṇa, of which *Sâranam* is a synonym. The High Priest
Sumangala also calls my attention to the fact that the Pâlî root *Sara*
has the secondary meaning of killing, or that which destroys. *Buddham
sâranam gacchâmi* might thus be rendered "I go to Buddha, the Law, and
the Order, as the destroyers of my fears;—the first by his preaching,
the second by its axiomatic truth, the third by their various examples
and precepts."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[40:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_10.md) This qualified form
refers, of course, to laymen who only profess to keep five Precepts: a
Bhikkhu must observe strict celibacy. So, also, must the laic who binds
himself to observe eight of the whole ten Precepts for specified periods
during these periods he must be celibate. The Five Precepts were laid
down by Buddha for all people. Though one may not be a Buddhist, yet the
five and eight precepts may profitably be observed by all. It is the
taking of the "Three Refuges" that constitutes one a Buddhist.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[46:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_11.md) Karma is defined as the
sum total of a man's actions. The law of Cause and Effect is called the
*Paticca Samuppada Dhamma*. In the *Anguttara Nikaya* the Buddha teaches
that "my action is my possession, my action is my inheritance, my action
is the womb which bears me, my action is my relative, my action is my
refuge."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[48:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_12.md) After the appearance of
the first edition, I received from one of the ablest Pâlî scholars of
Ceylon, the late L. Corneille Wijesinha,. Esq., Mudaliar of Matale, what
seems a better rendering of *Dhammacakka-ppavattana* than the one
previously given; he makes it "The Establishment of the Reign of Law."
Professor Rhys-Davids. prefers, "The Foundation of the Kingdom of
Righteousness." Mr. Wijesinha writes me: "You may use 'Kingdom of
Righteousness,' too, but it savors more of dogmatic theology than of
philosophic ethics. *Dhammacakka-ppavattana suttam* is "The discourse
entitled 'The Establishment of the Reign of Law.'" Having shown this to
the High Priest, I am happy to be able to say that he assents to Mr.
Wijesinha's rendering.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[51:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_13.md) The mixing of these
arts and practices with Buddhism is a sign of deterioration. Their facts
and phenomena are real and capable of scientific explanation. They are
embraced in the term 'magic,' but when resorted to for selfish purposes,
attract bad influences about one, and impede spiritual advancement. When
employed for harmless and beneficent purposes, such as healing the sick,
saving life, etc., the Buddha permitted their use.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[55:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_14.md) A Buddhist ascetic who,
by a prescribed course of practice, has attained to a superior state of
spiritual and intellectual development. Arhats may be divided into the
two general groups of the *Samathayânika* and *Sukkha Vipassaka*. The
former have destroyed their passions, and fully developed their
intellectual capacity or mystical insight; the latter have equally
conquered passion, but not acquired the superior mental powers. The
former <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> can work phenomena, the latter
cannot. The Arhat of the former class, when fully developed, is no
longer a prey to the delusions of the senses, nor the slave of passion
or mortal frailty. *He penetrates to the root of whatsoever subject his
mind is applied to* without following the slow processes of reasoning.
His self-conquest is complete; and in place of the emotion and desire
which vex and enthral the ordinary man, he is lifted up into a condition
which is best expressed in the term 'Nirvâṇic.' There is in Ceylon a
popular misconception that the attainment of Arhatship is now
impossible; that the Buddha had himself prophesied that the power would
die out in one millennium after his death, This rumor—and the similar
one that is everywhere heard in India, *viz*., that this being the dark
cycle of the *Kali Yuga*, the practice of *Yôga Vidyâ*, or sublime
spiritual science, is impossible—I ascribe to the ingenuity of those who
should be as pure and (to use a non-Buddhistic but very convenient term)
psychically wise as were their predecessors, but are not, and who
therefore seek an excuse! The Buddha taught quite the contrary idea. In
the *Dīgha* *Nikâya* he said: "Hear, Subbhadra! The world will never be
without Arhats if the ascetics (Bhikkhus) in my congregations *well and
truly keep my precepts*." (*Imecha Subhaddhabhikkhu samma vihareiyum
asunno loko Arahantehiassa*.)

<span id="fn_15"></span>[57:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_15.md) Kolb, in his 'History
of Culture,' says: "It is Buddhism we 'have to thank for the sparing of
prisoners of war, who heretofore had been slain also for the
discontinuance of the carrying away into captivity of the inhabitants of
conquered lands."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[57:†](tbc09.htm#fr_16.md) The 5th Sila has
reference to the mere taking of intoxicants and stupefying drugs, which
leads ultimately to drunkenness.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[63:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_17.md) The 'soul' here
criticised is the equivalent of the Greek *psuche*. The word "material"
covers other states of matter than that of the physical body.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[64:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_18.md)Upon reflection, I have
substituted "personality" for "individuality" as written in the first
edition. The successive appearances upon one or many earths, or
"descents into generation," of the *tanhaically*-coherent parts
(Skandhas) of a certain being are a succession of personalities. In each
birth the *personality* differs from that of the previous or next
succeeding birth. Karma, the *deus ex [machinâ](errata.htm#2.md)*, masks
(or shall we say reflects?) itself, now in the personalities of a sage,
again as an artisan, and so on throughout the string of births. But
though personalities ever shift, the one line of life along which they
are strung like beads, runs unbroken; it is ever *that particular line*,
never any other. It is therefore individual—an individual vital
undulation—which is careering through the objective side of Nature,
under the impulse of Karma and the creative direction of Tanhâ, and
persists through many cyclic changes. Professor Rhys-Davids calls that
which passes from personality to personality along the individual chain,
'character' or 'doing'. Since "character" is not a mere metaphysical
abstraction, but the sum of one's mental qualities and moral
propensities, would it not help to dispel what Professor Rhys-Davids
calls "The desperate expedient of a mystery" \[*Buddhism*, p. 101\], if
we regarded the life-undulation as individuality and each of its series
of natal manifestations as a separate personality? We must have two
words to distinguish between the concepts, and I find none so clear and
expressive as the two I have chosen. The perfected individual,
Buddhistically speaking, is a Buddha, I should say; for a Buddha is but
the rare flower of <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> humanity, without the
least supernatural admixture. And, as countless generations—"four
asankheyyas and a hundred thousand cycles"—Fausboll and Rhys-Davids’
*Buddhist Birth Stories*, (13) are required to develop a man into a
Buddha, and *the iron will to become one runs throughout all the
successive births*, what shall we call that which thus wills and
perseveres? *Character*, or individuality? an individuality but partly
manifested in any one birth, but built up of fragments from all the
births.

The denial of "Soul" by Buddha (see *Sanyutta Nikâya*, the *Sutta
Pitaka*) points to the prevalent delusive belief in an independent
personality; an entity, which after one birth would go to a fixed place
or state where, as a perfect entity, it could eternally enjoy or suffer.
And what he shows is that the 'I am I' consciousness is, as regards
permanency, logically impossible, since its elementary constituents
constantly change and the "I" of one birth differs from the "I" of every
other birth. But every thing that I have found in Buddhism accords with
the theory of a gradual evolution of the perfected man—*viz*., a
Buddha—through numberless natal experiences. And in the consciousness of
that individual who, at the end of a given chain of births, attains
Buddhahood, or who succeeds in attaining the fourth stage of Dhyâna, or
mystic self-development, in any of his births anterior to the final one,
the scenes of all these serial births are perceptible. In the
*Jâtakatthavannanâ*—so well translated by Professor Rhys-Davids—an
expression continually recurs which, I think, rather supports such an
idea, *viz*.: "Then the Blessed One *made manifest an occurrence hidden
by change of birth*," or "that which had been hidden by," etc. Early
Buddhism then clearly held to a permanency of records in the Âkâsha, and
the potential capacity of man to read the same when he has evolved to
the stage of true individual enlightenment. At death, and in convulsions
and trance, the *javana chitta* is transferred to the object last
created by the desires. The will to live brings all thoughts into
objectivity.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[66:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_19.md) The student my
profitably consult Schopenhauer in this connection. Arthur Schopenhauer,
a modern German philosopher of the most eminent ability, taught that
"The Principle, or Radical, of Nature, and of all her objects, the human
body included, is intrinsically <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> what we
ourselves are the most conscious of in our own body, *viz*., Will.
Intellect is a secondary capacity of the primary will, a function of the
brain in which this will reflects itself as Nature and object and body,
as in a mirror...Intellect is secondary, but may lead, in saints, to a
complete renunciation of will, as far as it urges 'life' and is then
extinguished in Nirvâṇa" (L.A. Sanders in the *Theosopist* for May 1382,
p. 213).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[68:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_20.md) Physiologically
speaking, man's body is completely changed every seven years.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[72:\*](tbc09.htm#fr_21.md) This fundamental or
basic principle may be designated in Pâlî, *Nidâna*—chain of causation
or, literally, "Origination of dependence." Twelve Nidânas are
specified, *viz*.: *Avijjâ*—ignorance of the truth of natural religion;
*Samkhârâ*—causal action, karma; *Viññâna*—consciousness of personality,
the "I am I"; *Nâma rûpa*—name and form; *Salayatana*—six senses;
*Phassa*—contact, *Vedanâ*—feeling; *Tanhâ*—desire for enjoyment;
*Upâdâna*—clinging; *Bhava*—individualising existence; *Jati*—birth,
caste; *Jarâ*, *narana*, *sokaparidêsa*, *dukkha*, *domanassa*,
*upâyâsa*—Decay, death, grief, lamentation, despair.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III. The Sangha](tbc10.md)

</div>
