<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbc10)  [Next](tbc12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q84/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Buddhist Catechism*, by Henry S. Olcott \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### PART IV.

### THE RISE AND SPREAD OF BUDDHISM.

279\. Q. *As regards the number of its followers, how does Buddhism at
this date compare with the other chief religions?*

A. The followers of the Buddha Dharma out-Dumber those of every other
religious teacher.

280\. Q. *What is the estimated number?*

A. About five hundred millions (5,000 lakhs, or 500 crores): this is
five-thirteenths, or not quite half, of the estimated population of the
globe.

281\. Q. *Have many great battles been fought and many countries
conquered, has much human blood been spilt to spread the Buddha Dharma?*

A. History does not record one of those cruelties and crimes as having
been committed to propagate our religion. So far as we know, it has not
caused the spilling of a drop of blood. (See foot-note *ante*—Prof.
Kolb's testimony.)

282\. Q. *What, then, is the secret of its wonderful spread?*

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

A. It can be nothing else than its intrinsic excellence: its
self-evident basis of truth, its sublime moral teaching, and its
sufficiency for all human needs.

283\. Q. *How has it been propagated?*

A. The Buddha, during the forty-five years of his life as a Teacher,
travelled widely in India and preached the Dharma. He sent his wisest
and best disciples to do the same throughout India.

234\. Q. *When did He send for his pioneer missionaries?*

A. On the full-moon day of the month Wap (October).

285\. Q. *What did he tell them?*

A. He called them together and said: "Go forth, Bhikkhus, go and preach
the law to the world. Work for the good of others as well as for your
own. . . Bear ye the glad tidings to every man. Let no two of you take
the same way."

286\. Q. *How long before the Christian era did this happen?*

A. About six centuries.

257\. Q. *What help did Kings give?*

A. Besides the lower classes, great Kings, Râjâs

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

and Mahârâjas were converted and gave their influence to spread the
religion.

288\. Q. *What about pilgrims?*

A. Learned pilgrims came in different centuries to India and carried
back with them books and teachings to their native lands. So, gradually,
whole nations forsook their own faiths and became Buddhists.

289\. Q. *To whom, more than to any other person, is the world indebted
for the permanent establishment of Buddha's religion?*

A. To the Emperor Ashoka, surnamed the Great, sometimes Piyadâsi,
sometimes Dharmâshoka. He was son of Bindusâra, King of Magadha, and
grandson of Chandragupta, who drove the Greeks out of India.

290\. Q. *When did he reign?*

A. In the third century B.C., about two centuries after the Buddha's
time. Historians disagree as to his exact date but not very greatly.

291\. Q. *What made him great?*

A. He was the most powerful monarch in Indian history, as warrior and as
statesman; but his noblest characteristics were his love of truth and
justice,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

tolerance of religious differences, equity of government, kindness to
the sick, to the poor, and to animals. His name is revered from Siberia
to Ceylon.

292\. Q. *Was he born a Buddhist?*

A. No, he was converted in the tenth year after his anointment as King,
by Nigrodha Samanera, an Arhat.

293\. Q. *What did he do for Buddhism?*

A. He drove out bad bhikkhus, encouraged good ones, built monasteries
and dâgobas everywhere, established gardens, opened hospitals for men
and animals, convened a council at Patna to revise and re-establish the
Dharma, promoted female religious education, and sent embassies to five
Greek Kings, his allies, and to all the sovereigns of India, to preach
the doctrines of the Buddha. It was he who built the monuments at
Kapilavastu, Buddha Gaya, Isipatana and Kusinârâ, our four chief places
of pilgrimage, besides thousands more.

294\. Q. *What absolute proofs exist as to his noble character?*

A. Within recent years there have been discovered, in all parts of
India, 14 Edicts of his, inscribed on living rocks, and 8 on pillars
erected by his

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

orders. They fully prove him to have been one of the wisest and most
high-minded sovereigns who ever lived.

295\. Q. *What character do these inscriptions give to Buddhism?*

A. They show it to be a religion of noble tolerance, of universal
brotherhood, of righteousness and justice. It has no taint of
selfishness, sectarianism or intolerance. They have done more than
anything else to win for it the respect in which it is now held by the
great paṇ.dits of Western countries.

296\. Q. *What most precious gift did Dharmâshoka make to Buddhism?*

A. He gave his beloved son, Mahinda, and daughter, Sanghamitta, to the
Order, and sent them to Ceylon to introduce the religion.

297, Q. *Is this fact recorded in the history of Ceylon?*

A. O yes, it is all recorded in the Mahâvansa, by the keepers of the
royal records, who were then living and saw the missionaries.

298\. Q. *Is there some still visible proof of Sanghamitta's mission?*

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

A. Yes: she brought with her to Ceylon a branch ref the very Bodhi tree
under which the Buddha sat when he became Enlightened, and it is still
growing.

299\. Q. *Where?*

A. At Anurâdhapura. The history of it has been officially preserved to
the present time. Planted in 306 B C., it is the oldest historical tree
in the world.

300\. Q. *Who was the reigning sovereign at that time?*

A. Dêvanampiyatissa. His consort, Queen Anula, had invited Sanghamitta
to come and establish the Bhikkhunî branch of the Order.

301\. Q. *Who came with Sanghamitta?*

A. Many other bhikkhunîs. She, in due time, admitted the Queen and many
of her ladies, together with 500 virgins, into the Order.

302\. Q. *Can we trace the effects of the foreign work of the Emperor
Ashoka's missionaries?*

A. His son and daughter introduced Buddhism into Ceylon: his monks gave
it to the whole of Northern India, to fourteen Indian nations outside
its boundaries, and to five Greek Kings, his allies,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

with whom he made treaties to admit his religious preachers.

303\. Q. *Can you name them?*

A. <span class="smallcaps">Antiochus</span> of Syria, <span
class="smallcaps">Ptolemy</span> of Egypt, <span
class="smallcaps">Antigonus</span> of Macedon, <span
class="smallcaps">Margas</span> of Cyrene, and <span
class="smallcaps">ALEXANDER</span> of Epiros.

:304. Q. *Where do we learn this?*

A. From the Edicts themselves of Ashoka the Great, inscribed by him on
rocks and stone pillars, which are still standing and can be seen by
everybody who chooses to visit the places.

305\. Q. *Through what Western religious brother-floods did the Buddha
Dharma mingle itself with Western thought?*

A. 'Through the sects of the Therapeuts of Egypt and the Essenes of
Palestine.

306\. Q. *When were Buddhist books first introduced into China?*

A. As early as the second or third century B.C. Five of Dharmâshoka's
monks are said—in the *Samanta Pasâdika* and the *Sârattha Dîpauî*—two
Pâlî books—to have been sent to the five divisions of China.

307\. Q. *Whence and when did it reach Korea?*

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

A. From China, in the year 372 A.D.

308\. Q. *Whence and when did it reach Japan?*

A. From Korea, in 552 A.D.

309\. Q. *Whence and when did it reach Cochin China, Formosa, Java,
Mongolia, Yarkand, Balk, Bokhara, Afghanistan and other Central Asian
countries?*

A. Apparently in the fourth and fifth centuries A.D..

310\. Q. *From Ceylon, whither and when did it spread?*

A. To Burma, in 950 A.D., and thence gradually into Arakan, Kamboya and
Pegu. In the seventh century (638 A. D.) it got to Siam, where it is
now, as it has been always since then, the state religion.

311\. Q. *From Kashmir, where else did it spread besides to China?*

A. To Nepâl and Tibet.

312\. Q. *Why is it that Buddhism, which was once. the prevailing
religion throughout India, is now almost extinct there?*

A. Buddhism was at first pure and noble, the very teaching of the
Tathâgata; its Sangha were virtuous and observed the Precepts; it won
all hearts and spread joy through many nations, as the morning light
sends

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

life through the flowers. But after some centuries, bad bhikkhus got
ordination (*Upasampada*), the Sangha became rich, lazy and sensual, the
Dharma was corrupted, and the Indian nations abandoned it.

313\. Q. *Did anything happen about the ninth or-tenth century A.D. to
hasten its downfall?*

A. Yes.

314\. Q. *Anything besides the decay of spirituality, the corruption of
the Sangha, and the re-action of the populace from a higher ideal of man
to unintelligent idolatry?*

A. Yes. It is said that the Mussalmâns invaded, over-ran and conquered
large areas of India; everywhere doing their utmost to stamp out our
religion.

315\. Q. *What cruel acts are they charged with doing?*

A. They burnt, pulled down or otherwise destroyed our vihâras,
slaughtered our bhikkhus, and consumed with fire our religious books.

316\. Q. *Was our literature completely destroyed in India?*

A. No. Many bhikkhus fled across the borders-into Tibet and other safe
places of refuge, carrying. their books with them.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

317\. Q. *Have any traces of these books been recently discovered?*

A. Yes. Rai Bahâdur Sarat Chandra Dâs, C.I.E., a noted Bengali paṇ.dit,
saw hundreds of them in the vihâra libraries of Tibet, brought copies of
some of the most important back with him, and is now employed by the
Government of India in editing and publishing them.

318\. Q. *In which country have we reason to believe the sacred books of
primitive Buddhism have been best preserved and least corrupted?*

A. Ceylon. The Encyclopædia Britannica says that in this island Buddhism
has, for specified reasons, "retained almost its pristine purity to
modern times."

319\. Q. *Has any revision of the text of the Pitakas been made in
modern times?*

A. *Yes. A careful revision of the Vinâya Pitaka was made in Ceylon in
the year 1875 A. D., by a convention of the most learned bhikkhus, under
the presidency of H. Sumangala, Pradhâna Sthavira*.

320\. Q. *Has there been any friendly intercourse in the interest of
Buddhism between the peoples of the Southern and those of the Northern
Buddhist countries?*

A. In the year 1891 A.D., a successful attempt was

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

made to get the Pradhâna Nayakas of the two great divisions to agree to
accept fourteen propositions as, embodying fundamental Buddhistic
beliefs recognised' and taught by both divisions. These propositions,
drafted by Colonel Olcott, were carefully translated into Burmese,
Sinhalese and Japanese, discussed one by one, unanimously adopted and
signed by the chief monks, and published in January 1892.

321\. Q. *With what good result?*

A. As the result of the good understanding now existing, a number of
Japanese bhikkhus and samaneras have been sent to Ceylon and India to
study Pâlî and Samskrit.

322\. Q. *Are there signs that the Buddha Dharma is growing in favour in
non-Buddhistic countries?*

A. There are. Translations of our more valuable books are appearing,
many articles in reviews, magazines and newspapers are being published,
and excellent original treatises by distinguished writers are coming.
from the press. Moreover, Buddhist and non-Buddhist lecturers are
publicly discoursing on Buddhism to large audiences in Western
countries. The Shin Shu sect of Japanese Buddhists have actually opened

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

missions at Honolulu, San Francisco, Sacramento and other American
places.

323\. Q. *What two leading ideas of ours are chiefly taking hold upon
the Western mind?*

A. Those of Karma and Re-incarnation. The rapidity of their acceptance
is very surprising.

324\. Q. *What is [believed](errata.htm#3.md) to be the explanation of
this?*

A. Because of their appeals to the natural instinct of justice, and
their evident reasonableness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[93:\*](#fr_-1.md) See Appendix.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V. Buddhism and Science](tbc12.md)

</div>
