<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbc12)  [Next](tbc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q84/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddhist Catechism*, by Henry S. Olcott \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### APPENDIX.

The following text of the Fourteen items of belief which have been
accepted as fundamental principles in both the Southern and Northern
sections of Buddhism, by authoritative committees to whom they were
submitted by me personally, have so much historical importance that they
are added to the present Edition of the *Buddhist Catechism* as an
Appendix. It has very recently been reported to me by H. E. Prince
Ouchtomsky, the learned Russian Orientalist, that having had the
document translated to them, the Chief Lamas of the great Mongolian
Buddhist monasteries declared to him that they accept every one of the
propositions as drafted, with the one exception that the date of the
Buddha is by them believed to have been some thousands of years earlier
than the one given by me. This surprising fact had not hitherto come to
my knowledge. Can it be that the Mongolian Sangha confuse the real epoch
of Sâkya Muni with that of his alleged next predecessor? Be this as it

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

may, it is a most encouraging fact that the whole Buddhistic world may
now be said to have united to the extent at least of these Fourteen
Propositions.

H. S. O.

#### \_\_\_\_\_

#### FUNDAMENTAL BUDDHISTIC BELIEFS.

I. Buddhists are taught to show the same tolerance, forbearance, and
brotherly love to all men, without distinction; and an unswerving
kindness. towards the members of the animal kingdom.

II\. The universe was evolved, not created; and it functions according
to law, not according to the caprice of any God.

III\. The truths upon which Buddhism is founded are natural. They have,
we believe, been taught in successive kalpas, or world periods, by
certain illuminated beings called BUDDHAS, the name BUDDHA meaning
"Enlightened."

IV\. The fourth Teacher in the present Kalpa was Sâkya Muni, or Gautama
Buddha, who was born in a royal family in India about 2,500 years ago.
He is an historical personage and his name was Siddârtha Gautama.

V. Sâkya Muni taught that ignorance produces.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

desire, unsatisfied desire is the cause of rebirth, arid rebirth, the
cause of sorrow. To get rid of sorrow, therefore, it is necessary to
escape rebirth; to escape rebirth, it is necessary to extinguish desire;
and to extinguish desire, it is necessary to destroy ignorance.

VI\. Ignorance fosters the belief that rebirth is a necessary thing.
When ignorance is destroyed the worthlessness of every such rebirth,
considered as an end in itself, is perceived, as well as the paramount
need of adopting a course of life by which the necessity for such
repeated rebirths can be abolished. Ignorance also begets the illusive
and illogical idea that there is only one existence for man, and the
other illusion that this one life is followed by states of unchangeable
pleasure or torment.

VII\. The dispersion of all this ignorance can be attained by the
persevering practice of an all-embracing altruism in conduct,
development of intelligence, wisdom in thought, and destruction of
desire for the lower personal pleasures.

VIII\. The desire to live being the cause of rebirth, when that is
extinguished rebirths cease and the perfected individual attains by
meditation that highest state of peace called *Nirvâṇa*.

IX\. Sâkya Muni taught that ignorance can be

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

dispelled and sorrow removed by the knowledge of the four Noble Truths,
*viz*.:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The miseries of existence;

2\. The cause productive of misery, which is the desire ever renewed of
satisfying oneself without being able ever to secure that end;

3\. The destruction of that desire, or the estranging of oneself from
it;

4\. The means of obtaining this destruction of desire. The means which
he pointed out is called the noble eight-fold Path, *viz*.; Right
Belief; Right Thought; Right Speech; Right Action; Right Means of
Livelihood; Right Exertion; Right Remembrance; Right Meditation.

</div>

X. Right Meditation leads to spiritual enlightenment, or the development
of that Buddha-like faculty which is latent in every man.

XI\. The essence of Buddhism, as summed up by the Tathâgata (Buddha)
himself, is—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

To cease from all sin,

To get virtue,

To purify the heart.

</div>

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

XII\. The universe is subject to a natural causation known as "Karma."
The merits and demerits of a being in past existences determine his
condition in the present one. Each man, therefore, has prepared the
causes of the effects which he now experiences.

XIII\. The obstacles to the attainment of good karma may be removed by
the observance of the following precepts, which are embraced in the
moral code of Buddhism, *viz*.: (1) Kill not; (2) Steal not; (3) Indulge
in no forbidden sexual pleasure; (4) Lie not; (5) Take no intoxicating
or stupefying drug or liquor. Five other precepts which need not be here
enumerated should be observed by those who would attain, more quickly
than the average layman, the release from misery and rebirth.

XIV\. Buddhism discourages superstitious credulity. Gautama Buddha
taught it to be the duty of a parent to have his child educated in
science and literature. He also taught that no one should believe what
is spoken by any sage, written in any book, or affirmed by tradition,
unless it accord with reason.

Drafted as a common platform upon which all Buddhists can agree.

H. S. OLCOTT, P. T. S.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

Respectfully submitted for the approval of the High Priests of the
nations which we severally represent, in the Buddhist Conference held at
Adyar, Madras, on the 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th of January 1891 (A.
B. 2434).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Japan: Kozen Gunaratana, Chiezo Tokuzawa

Burmah: U. Hmoay Tha Aung

Ceylon: Dhammapala Hevavitarana

The Maghs of Chittagong: Krishna Chandra Chowdry, by his appointed
Proxy, Maung Tha Dwe.

</div>

BURMAH.

Approved on behalf of the Buddhists of Burmah, this 3rd clay of
February, 1891 (A. B. 2434):

Tha-tha-na-baing Saydawgyi; Aung Myi Shwebôn Sayadaw; Me-ga-waddy
Sayadaw; Hmat-Khaya Sayadaw; Hti-lîn Sayadaw; Myadaung Sayadaw; Hla-Htwe
Sayadaw; and sixteen others.

CEYLON.

Approved on behalf of the Buddhists of Ceylon this 25th day of February,
1891 (A. B. 2434); Mahanuwara upawsatha puspârâma vihârâdhipati Hippola

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dhamma Rakkhita
Sobhitâbhidhâna Mahâ Nâyaka Sthavirayan wahanse wamha.

(Hippola Dhamma Rakkhita Sabhitâbhidhàna, High Priest of the Malwalta
Vihare at Kandy).

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">Hippola</span>.

Mahanuwara Asgiri vihârâdhipati Yatawattê Chandajottyâbhidhana Mahâ
Nâyaka Sthavirayan wahanse wamha—(Yatawattê Chandajottyâbhidhana, High
Priest of Asgiri Vihare at Kandy).

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">Yatawatte</span>.

Hikkaduwe Sri Sumangala Stipâdasthâne saha Kolamba palate pradhana
Náyaka Sthavirayo (Hikkaduwe Sri Sumangala, High Priest of Adam's Peak
and the District of Colombo).

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">H. Sumangala</span>.

Maligawe Prâchina Pustakâlâyadhyakshaka Suriyagoda Sonuttara Sthavirayo
(Suriyagoda Sonuttara, Librarian of the Oriental Library at the Temple
of the Tooth Relic at Kandy).

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">S. Sonuttara</span>.

Sugata Sâsanadhaja Vinayâ chariya Dhammalankârâbhidhâna Nayaka Sthavira.

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">Dhammalankara</span>,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

Pawara neruttika chariya Mahâ Vibhavi Subhuti of Waskaduwa.

(Signed) <span class="smallcaps">W. Subhuti</span>.

JAPAN.

Accepted as included within the body of Northern Buddhism.

<div align="center">

|                  |                  |
|------------------|------------------|
| Shaku Genyu      | (Shingon Shu)    |
| Fukuda Nichiyo   | (Nichiren „ )    |
| Sanada Seyko     | (Zen „ )         |
| Ito Quan Shyu    | ( „ „ )          |
| Takehana Hakuyo  | (Jodo „ )        |
| Kono Rioshin     | (Ji-Shu „ )      |
| Kira Ki-ko       | (Jodo Seizan „ ) |
| Harutani Shinsho | (Tendai „ )      |
| Manabe Shun-myo  | (Shingon „ )     |

</div>

CHITTAGONG.

Accepted for the Buddhists of Chittagong.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Nagawa Parvata Vihârâdhipati

Guna Megu Wini-Lankara,

                Harbing, Chittagong, Bengal.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](tbc14)

</div>
