[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb10)  [Next](bb12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### Chapter IV

### Perfect Knowledge, or Knowledge of Reality

HEN MAHAMATI ASKED the Blessed one: Pray tell us, Blessed One, about the
five Dharmas, so that we may fully understand Perfect Knowledge?

The Blessed One replied: The five Dharmas are: appearance, name,
discrimination, right-knowledge and Reality. By appearance is meant that
which reveals itself to the senses and to the discriminating-mind and is
perceived as form, sound, odour, taste, and touch. Out of these
appearances ideas are formed, such as clay, water, jar, etc., by which
one says: this is such and such a thing and is no other,--this is name.
When appearances are contrasted and names compared, as when we say: this
is an elephant, this is a horse, a cart, a pedestrian, a man, a woman,
or, this is mind and what belongs to it,--the things thus named are said
to be discriminated. As these discriminations come to be seen as
mutually conditioning, as empty of self-substance, as un-born, and thus
come to be seen as they truly are, that is, as manifestations of the
mind itself,--this is right-knowledge. By it the wise cease to regard
appearances and names as realities.

When appearances and names are put away and all discrimination ceases,
that which remains is the true and essential nature of things and, as
nothing can be predicated as to the nature of essence, it is called the
"Suchness" of Reality. This universal, undifferentiated,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

inscrutable, "Suchness" is the only Reality but it is variously
characterised as Truth, Mind-essence, Transcendental Intelligence, Noble
Wisdom, etc. This Dharma of the imagelessness of the Essence-nature of
Ultimate Reality is the Dharma which has been proclaimed by all the
Buddhas, and when all things are understood in full agreement with it,
one is in possession of Perfect Knowledge, and is on his way to the
attainment of the Transcendental Intelligence of the Tathagatas.

\*

THEN MAHAMATI SAID to the Blessed One: Are the three self-natures, of
things, ideas, and Reality, to be considered as included in the Five
Dharmas, or as having their own characteristics complete in themselves.

The Blessed One replied: The three self-natures, the eightfold
mind-system, and the twofold egolessness are all included in the Five
Dharmas. The self-natures of things, of ideas, and of the sixfold
mind-system, correspond with the Dharmas of appearance, name and
discrimination; the self-nature of Universal Mind and Reality
corresponds to the Dharmas of right-knowledge and "Suchness."

By becoming attached to what is seen of the mind itself, there is an
activity awakened which is perpetuated by habit-energy that becomes
manifest in the mind-system. From the activities of the mind-system
there rises the notion of an ego-soul and its belongings; the
discriminations, attachments, and notion of an ego-soul,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

rising simultaneously like the sun and its rays of light.

By the egolessness of things is meant that the elements that make up the
aggregates of personality and its objective world being characterised by
the nature of maya and destitute of anything that can be called
ego-substance, are therefore un-born and have no self-nature. How can
things be said to have an ego-soul? By the egolessness of persons is
meant that in the aggregates that make up personality there is no
ego-substance, nor anything that is like ego-substance nor that belongs
to it. The mind-system, which is the most characteristic mark of
personality, originated in ignorance, discrimination, desire and deed;
and its activities are perpetuated by perceiving, grasping and becoming
attached to objects as if they were real. The memory of these
discriminations, desires, attachments and deeds is stored in Universal
Mind since beginningless time, and is still being accumulated where it
conditions the appearance of personality and its environment and brings
about constant change and destruction from moment to moment. The
manifestations are like a river, a seed, a lamp, a cloud, the wind;
Universal mind in its voraciousness to store up everything, is like a
monkey never at rest, like a fly ever in search of food and without
partiality, like a fire that is never satisfied, like a water-lifting
machine that goes on rolling. Universal mind as defiled by habit-energy
is like a magician that causes phantom things and people to appear and
move about. A thorough understanding of these things is necessary to an
understanding of the egolessness of persons.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

There are four kinds of Knowledge: Appearance-knowledge,
relative-knowledge, perfect-knowledge, and Transcendental Intelligence.
Appearance-knowledge belongs to the ignorant and simple-minded who are
addicted to the notion of being and non-being, and who are frightened at
the thought of being unborn. It is produced by the concordance of the
triple combination and attaches itself to the multiplicities of objects;
it is characterised by attainability and accumulation; it is subject to
birth and destruction. Appearance-knowledge belongs to word-mongers who
revel in discriminations, assertions and negations.

Relative-knowledge belongs to the mind-world of the philosophers. It
rises from the mind's ability to consider the relations which
appearances bear to each other and to the mind considering them, it
rises from the mind's ability to arrange, combine and analyse these
relations by its powers of discursive logic and imagination, by reason
of which it is able to peer into the meaning and significance of things.

Perfect-knowledge belongs to the world of the Bodhisattvas who recognise
that all things are but manifestations of mind; who clearly understand
the emptiness, the un-bornness, the egolessness of all things; and who
have entered into an understanding of the Five Dharmas, the twofold
egolessness, and into the truth of imagelessness. Perfect-knowledge
differentiates the [Bodhisattva](errata.htm#0) stages, and is the
pathway and the entrance into the exalted state of self-realisation of
Noble Wisdom.

Perfect-knowledge (*jnana*) belongs to the Bodhisattvas who are entirely
free from the dualisms of being

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

and non-being, no-birth and no-annihilation, all assertions and
negations, and who, by reason of self-realisation, have gained an
insight into the truths of egolessness and imagelessness. They no longer
discriminate the world as subject to causation: they regard the
causation that rules the world as something like the fabled city of the
Gandharvas. To them the world is like a vision and a dream, it is like
the birth and death of a barren-woman's child; to them there is nothing
evolving and nothing disappearing.

The wise who cherish Perfect-knowledge, may be divided into three
classes: disciples, masters and Arhats. Common disciples are separated
from masters as common disciples continue to cherish the notion of
individuality and generality; masters rise from common disciples when,
forsaking the error of individuality and generality, they still cling to
the notion of an ego-soul by reason of which they go off by themselves
into retirement and solitude. Arhats rise when the error of all
discrimination is realised. Error being discriminated by the wise turns
into Truth by virtue of the "turning-about" that takes place within the
deepest consciousness. Mind, thus emancipated, enters into perfect
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom.

But, Mahamati, if you *assert* that there is such a thing as Noble
Wisdom, it no longer holds good, because anything of which something is
asserted thereby partakes of the nature of being and is thus
characterised with the quality of birth. The very assertion: "All things
are un-born" destroys the truthfulness of it. The same is true of the
statements: "All things are empty," and "All things have no
self-nature,"--both

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

are untenable when put in the form of assertions. But when it is pointed
out that all things are like a dream and a vision, it means that in one
way things are perceived, and in another way they are not perceived;
that is, in ignorance they are perceived but in Perfect-knowledge they
are not perceived. All assertions and negations being
thought-constructions are un-born. Even the assertion that Universal
Mind and Noble Wisdom are Ultimate Reality, is thought construction and,
therefore, is un-born. As "things" there is no Universal Mind, there is
no Noble Wisdom, there is no Ultimate Reality. The insight of the wise
who move about in the realm of imagelessness and its solitude is pure.
That is, for the wise all "things" are wiped away and even the state of
imagelessness ceases to exist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Mind System](bb12)
