[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb12)  [Next](bb14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### Chapter VI

### Transcendental Intelligence

THEN SAID MAHAMATI: Pray tell us, Blessed One, what constitutes
Transcendental Intelligence?

The Blessed One replied: Transcendental Intelligence is the inner state
of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. It is realised suddenly and
intuitively as the "turning-about" takes place in the deepest seat of
consciousness; it neither enters nor goes out-it is like the moon seen
in water. Transcendental Intelligence is not subject to birth nor
destruction; it has nothing to do with combination nor concordance; it
is devoid of attachment and accumulation; it transcends all dualistic
conceptions.

When Transcendental Intelligence is considered, four things must be kept
in mind: words, meanings, teachings and Noble Wisdom (*Arya-prajna*).
Words are employed to express meanings but they are dependent upon
discriminations and memory as cause, and upon the employment of sounds
or letters by which a mutual transference of meaning is possible. Words
are only symbols and may or may not clearly and fully express the
meaning intended and, moreover, words may be understood quite
differently from what was intended by the speaker. Words are neither
different nor not different from meaning and meaning stands in the same
relation to words.

If meaning is different from words it could not be made manifest by
means of words; but meaning is

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

illumined by words as things are by a lamp. Words are just like a man
carrying a lamp to look for his property, by which he can say: this is
my property. Just so, by means of words and speech originating in
discrimination, the Bodhisattva can enter into the meaning of the
teachings of the Tathagatas and through the meaning he can enter into
the exalted state of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, which, in itself,
is free from word discrimination. But if a man becomes attached to the
literal meaning of words and holds fast to the illusion that words and
meaning are in agreement, especially in such things as Nirvana which is
un-born and un-dying, or as to distinctions of the Vehicles, the five
Dharmas, the three self-natures, then he will fail to understand the
true meaning and will become entangled in assertions and refutations.
Just as varieties of objects are seen and discriminated in dreams and in
visions, so ideas and statements are discriminated erroneously and error
goes on multiplying.

The ignorant and simple-minded declare that meaning is not otherwise
than words, that as words are, so is meaning. They think that as meaning
has no body of its own that it cannot be different from words and,
therefore, declare meaning to be identical with words. In this they are
ignorant of the nature of words, which are subject to birth and death,
whereas meaning is not; words are dependent upon letters and meaning is
not; meaning is apart from existence and non-existence, it has no
substratum, it is un-born. The Tathagatas do not teach a Dharma that is
dependent upon letters. Anyone who teaches a doctrine that is dependent

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

upon letters and words is a mere prattler, because Truth is beyond
letters and words and books.

This does not mean that words and books never declare what is in
conformity with meaning and truth, but it means that words and books are
dependent upon discriminations, while meaning and truth are not;
moreover, words and books are subject to the interpretation of
individual minds, while meaning and truth are not. But if Truth is not
expressed in words and books, the scriptures which contain the meaning
of Truth would disappear, and when the scriptures disappear there will
be no more disciples and masters and Bodhisattvas and Buddhas, and there
will be nothing to teach. But no one must become attached to the words
of the scriptures because even the canonical texts sometimes deviate
from their straightforward course owing to the imperfect functioning of
sentient minds. Religious discourses are given by myself and other
Tathagatas in response to the varying needs and faiths of all manner of
beings, in order to free them from dependence upon the thinking function
of the mind-system, but they are not given to take the place of
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. When there is recognition that there
is nothing in the world but what is seen of the mind itself, all
dualistic discriminations will be discarded and the truth of
imagelessness will be understood, and will be seen to be in conformity
with meaning rather than with words and letters.

The ignorant and simple-minded being fascinated with their
self-imaginations and erroneous reasonings, keep on dancing and leaping
about, but are unable to

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

understand the discourse by words about the truth of self-realisation,
much less are they able to understand the Truth itself. Clinging to the
external world, they cling to the study of books which are a means only,
and do not know properly how to ascertain the truth of self-realisation,
which is Truth unspoiled by the four propositions. Self-realisation is
an exalted state of inner attainment which transcends all dualistic
thinking and which is above the mind-system with its logic, reasoning,
theorising, and illustrations. The Tathagatas discourse to the ignorant,
but sustain the Bodhisattvas as they seek self-realisation of Noble
Wisdom.

Therefore, let every disciple take good heed not to become attached to
words as being in perfect conformity with meaning, because Truth is not
in the letters. When a man with his finger-tip points to something to
somebody, the finger-tip may be mistaken for the thing pointed at; in
like manner the ignorant and simple-minded, like children, are unable
even to the day of their death to abandon the idea that in the
finger-tip of words there is the meaning itself. They cannot realise
Ultimate Reality because of their intent clinging to words which were
intended to be no more than a pointing finger. Words and their
discrimination bind one to the dreary round of rebirths into the world
of birth-and-death; meaning stands alone and is a guide to Nirvana.
Meaning is attained by much learning, and much learning is attained by
be coming conversant with meaning and not with words; therefore, let
seekers for truth reverently approach

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

those who are wise and avoid the sticklers for particular words.

As for teachings: there are priests and popular preachers who are given
to ritual and ceremony and who are skilled in various incantations and
in the art of eloquence; they should not be honored nor reverently
attended upon, for what one gains from them is emotional excitement and
worldly enjoyment; it is not the Dharma. Such preachers, by their clever
manipulation of words and phrases and various reasonings and
incantations, being the mere prattle of a child, as far as one can make
out and not at all in accordance with truth nor in unison with meaning,
only serves to awaken sentiment and emotion, while it stupifies the
mind. As he himself does not understand the meaning of all things, he
only confuses the minds of his hearers with his dualistic views. Not
understanding himself, that there is nothing but what is seen of the
mind, and himself attached to the notion of self-nature in external
things, and unable to know one path from another, he has no deliverance
to offer others. Thus these priests and popular preachers who are clever
in various incantations and skilled in the art of eloquence, themselves
never being emancipated from such calamities as birth, old age, disease,
sorrow, lamentation, pain and despair, lead the ignorant into
bewilderment by means of their various words, phrases, examples, and
conclusions.

Then there are the materialistic philosophers. No respect nor service is
to be shown them because their teachings, though they may be explained
by using hundreds of thousands of words and phrases, do not

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

go beyond the concerns of this world and this body and in the end they
lead to suffering. As the materialists recognise no truth as existing by
itself, they are split up into many schools, each of which clings to its
own way of reasoning. '

But there is that which does not belong to materialism and which is not
reached by the knowledge of the philosophers who cling to
false-discriminations and erroneous reasonings because they fail to see
that, fundamentally, there is no reality in external objects. When it is
recognised that there is nothing beyond what is seen of the mind itself,
the discrimination of being and non-being ceases and, as there is thus
no external world as the object of perception, nothing remains but the
solitude of Reality. This does not belong to the materialistic
philosophers, it is the domain of the Tathagatas. If such things are
imagined as the coming and going of the mind-system, vanishing and
appearing, solicitation, attachment, intense affection, a philosophic
hypothesis, a theory, an abode, a sense-concept,. atomic attraction,
organism, growth, thirst, grasping,--these things belong to materialism,
they are not mine. These are things that are the object of worldly
interest, to be sensed, handled and tasted; these are the things that
attract one, that bind one to the external world; these are the things
that appear in the elements that make up the aggregates of personality
where, owing to the procreative force of lust, there arise all kinds of
disaster, birth, sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, disease, old age,
death. All these things concern worldly interests and enjoyment; they
lie along the path of the philosophers, which is not the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

path of the Dharma. When the true egolessness of things and persons is
understood, discrimination ceases to assert itself; the lower
mind-system ceases to function; the various Bodhisattva stages are
followed one after another; the Bodhisattva is able to utter his ten
inexhaustible vows and is anointed by all the Buddhas. The Bodhisattva
becomes master of himself and of all things by virtue of a life of
spontaneous and radiant effortlessness. Thus the Dharma, which is
Transcendental Intelligence, transcends all discriminations, all
false-reasonings, all philosophical systems, all dualism.

\*

THEN MAHAMATI SAID to the Blessed One: In the Scriptures mention is made
of the Womb of Tathagatahood and it is taught that that which is born of
it is by nature bright and pure, originally unspotted and endowed with
the thirty-two marks of excellence. As it is described it is a precious
gem but wrapped in a dirty garment soiled by greed, anger, folly and
false-imagination. We are taught that this Buddha-nature immanent in
every one is eternal, unchanging, auspicious. Is not this which is born
of the Womb of Tathagatahood the same as the soul-substance that is
taught by the philosophers? The Divine Atman as taught by them is also
claimed to be eternal, inscrutable, unchanging, imperishable. Is there,
or is there not a difference?

The Blessed One replied: No, Mahamati, my Womb of Tathagatahood is not
the same as the Divine Atman

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

as taught by the philosophers. What I teach is Tathagatahood in the
sense of Dharmakaya, Ultimate Oneness, Nirvana, emptiness, unbornness,
unqualifiedness, devoid of will-effort. The reason why I teach the
doctrine of Tathagatahood is to cause the ignorant and simple-minded to
lay aside their fears as they listen to the teaching of egolessness and
come to understand the state of non-discrimination and imagelessness.
The religious teachings of the Tathagatas are just like a potter making
various vessels by his own skill of hand with the aid of rod, water and
thread, out of the one mass of clay, so the Tathagatas by their command
of skillful means issuing from Noble Wisdom, by various terms,
expressions, and symbols, preach the twofold egolessness in order to
remove the last trace of discrimination that is preventing disciples
from attaining a self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. The doctrine of the
Tathagata-womb is disclosed in order to awaken philosophers from their
clinging to the notion of a Divine Atman as transcendental personality,
so that their minds that have become attached to the imaginary notion of
"soul" as being something self-existent, may be quickly awakened to a
state of perfect enlightenment. All such notions as causation,
succession, atoms, primary elements, that make up personality, personal
soul, Supreme Spirit, Sovereign God, Creator, are all figments of the
imagination and manifestations of mind. No, Mahamati, the Tathagata\*s
doctrine of the Womb of Tathagatahood is not the same as the
philosopher's Atman.

The Bodhisattva is said to have well grasped the teachings of the
Tathagatas when, all alone in a lonely

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

place, by means of his Transcendental Intelligence, he walks the path
leading to Nirvana. Thereon his mind will unfold by perceiving,
thinking, meditating, and, abiding in the practise of concentration
until he attains the "turning about" at the source of habit-energy, he
will thereafter lead a life of excellent deeds. His mind concentrated on
the state of Buddhahood, he will become thoroughly conversant with the
noble truth of self-realisation; he will become perfect master of his
own mind; he will be like a gem radiating many colors; he will be able
to assume bodies of transformation; he will be able to enter into the
minds of all to help them; and, finally, by gradually ascending the
stages he will become established in the perfect Transcendental
Intelligence of the Tathagatas.

Nevertheless, Transcendental Intelligence (*Arya-jnana*) is not Noble
Wisdom (*Arya-prajna*) itself; it is only an intuitive awareness of it.
Noble Wisdom is a perfect state of imagelessness; it is the Womb of
"Suchness"; it is the all-conserving Divine Mind (*Alaya-vijnana*) which
in its pure Essence forever abides in perfect patience and undisturbed
tranquility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Self-Realisation](bb14)
