[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb14)  [Next](bb16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### Chapter VIII

### The Attainment of Self- Realisation

THEN SAID MAHAMATI to the Blessed One: Pray tell us more as to what
constitutes the state of self-realisation?

The Blessed One replied: In the life of an earnest disciple there are
two aspects that are to be distinguished: namely, the state of
attachment to the self-natures arising from discrimination of himself
and his field of consciousness to which he is related; and second, the
excellent and exalted state of self-realisation of Noble Wisdom. The
state of attachment to the discriminations of the self-natures of
things, ideas and selfhood is accompanied by emotions of pleasure or
aversion according to experience or as laid down in books of logic.
Conforming himself to the egolessness of things and holding back wrong
views as to his own egoness, he should abandon these thoughts and hold
himself firmly to the continuously ascending journey of the stages.

The exalted state of self-realisation as it relates to an earnest
disciple is a state of mental concentration in which he seeks to
identify himself with Noble Wisdom. In that effort he must seek to
annihilate all vagrant thoughts and notions belonging to the externality
of things, and all ideas of individuality and generality, of suffering
and impermanence, and cultivate the noblest ideas of egolessness and
emptiness and imagelessness; thus will he attain a realisation of truth
that is free from passion and is ever serene. When this

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

active effort at mental concentration is successful it is followed by a
more passive, receptive state of Samadhi in which the earnest disciple
will enter into the blissful abode of Noble Wisdom and experience its
consummations in the transformations of Samapatti. This is an earnest
disciple's first experience of the exalted state of realisation, but as
yet there is no discarding of habit-energy nor escaping from the
transformation of death.

Having attained this exalted and blissful state of realisation as far as
it can be attained by disciples, the Bodhisattva must not give himself
up to the enjoyment of its bliss, for that would mean cessation, but
should think compassionately of other beings and keep ever fresh his
original vows; he should never let himself rest in nor exert himself in
the bliss of the Samadhis.

But, Mahamati, as earnest disciples go on trying to advance on the path
that leads to full realisation, there is one danger against which they
must be on their guard. Disciples may not appreciate that the
mind-system, because of its accumulated habit-energy, goes on
functioning, more or less unconsciously, as long as they live. They may
sometimes think that they can expedite the attainment of their goal of
tranquillisation by entirely suppressing the activities of the
mind-system. This is a mistake, for even if the activities of the mind
are suppressed, the mind will still go on functioning because the seeds
of habit-energy will still remain in it. What they think is extinction
of mind, is really the non-functioning of the mind's external world to
which they are no longer attached. That is, the goal of tranquillisation
is to be reached

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

not by suppressing all mind activity but by getting rid of
discriminations and attachments.

Then there are others who, afraid of the suffering incident to the
discriminations of life and death, unwisely seek Nirvana. They have come
to see that all things subject to discrimination have no reality and so
imagine that Nirvana must consist in the annihilation of the senses and
their fields of sensation; they do not appreciate that birth-and-death
and Nirvana are not separate one from the other. They do not know that
Nirvana is Universal Mind in its purity. Therefore, these stupid ones
who cling to the notion that Nirvana is a world by itself that is
outside what is seen by the mind, ignoring all the teachings of the
Tathagatas concerning the external world, go on rolling themselves along
the wheel of birth-and-death. But when they experience the
"turning-about" in their deepest consciousness which will bring with it
the perfect self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, then they will understand.

The true functioning of the mind is very subtle and difficult to be
understood by young disciples, even masters with all their powers of
right-knowledge and Samadhis often find it baffling. It is only the
Tathagatas and the Bodhisattvas who are firmly established on the
seventh stage who can fully understand its workings. Those earnest
disciples and masters who wish to fully understand all the aspects of
the different stages of Bodhisattvahood by the aid of their
right-knowledge must do so by becoming thoroughly convinced that objects
of discrimination are only seen to be so by the mind and, thus, by
keeping themselves

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

away from all discriminations and false reasonings which are also of the
mind itself, by ever seeking to see things truly (*yathabhutam*), and by
planting roots of goodness in Buddha-lands that know no limits made by
differentiations.

To do all this the Bodhisattva should keep himself away from all
turmoil, social excitements and sleepiness; let him keep away from the
treatises and writings of worldly philosophers, and from the ritual and
ceremonies of professional priestcraft. Let him retire to a secluded
place in the forest and there devote himself to the practise of the
various spiritual disciplines, because it is only by so doing that he
will become capable of attaining in this world of multiplicities a true
insight into the workings of Universal Mind in its Essence. There
surrounded by his good friends the Buddhas, earnest disciples will
become capable of understanding the significance of the mind-system and
its place as a mediating agent between the external world and Universal
Mind and he will become capable of crossing the ocean of birth-and-death
which rises from ignorance, desire and deed.

Having gained a thorough understanding of the mind-system, the three
self-natures, the twofold egolessness, and established himself in the
measure of self-realisation that goes with that attainment, all of which
may be gained by his right-knowledge, the way will be clear for the
Bodhisattva's further advance along the stages of Bodhisattvahood. The
disciple should then abandon the understanding of mind which he has
gained by right-knowledge, which in comparison with Noble Wisdom is like
a lame donkey,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and entering on the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, he should then
discipline himself in Noble Wisdom according to its three aspects.

These aspects are: First, imagelessness which comes forth when all
things belonging to discipleship, mastership, and philosophy are
thoroughly mastered. Second, the power added by all the Buddhas by
reason of their original vows including the identification of their
lives and the sharing of their merit with all sentient lives. Third, the
perfect self-realisation that thus far has only been realised in a
measure. As the Bodhisattva succeeds in detaching himself from viewing
all things, including his own imagined egoness, in their phenomenality,
and realises the states of Samadhi and Samapatti whereby he surveys the
world as a vision and a dream, and being sustained by all the Buddhas,
he will be able to pass on to the full attainment of the Tathagata
stage, which is Noble Wisdom itself. This is the triplicity of the noble
life and being furnished with this triplicity the perfect
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom has been attained.

\*

THEN MAHAMATI ASKED the Blessed One, saying: Blessed One, is the
purification of the evil outflowings of the mind which come from
clinging to the notions of an objective world and an empirical soul,
gradual or instantaneous?

The Blessed One replied: There are three characteristic out-flows of the
mind, namely, the evil outflowings that rise from thirst, grasping and
attachment;

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the evil out-flowings that arise from the illusions of the mind and the
infatuations of egoism; and the good non-outflowings that arise from
Noble Wisdom. The evil out-flowings that take place from recognising an
external world, which in truth is only a manifestation of mind, and from
becoming attached to it, are gradually purified and not instantaneously.
Good behavior can only come by the path of restraint and effort. It is
like a potter making pots that is done gradually and with attention and
effort. It is like the mastery of comedy, dancing, singing,
lute-playing, writing, and any other art; it must be acquired gradually
and laboriously. Its reward will be a clearing insight into the
emptiness and transiency of all things.

The evil out-flowings that arise from the illusions of the mind and the
infatuations of egoism, concern the mental life more directly and are
such things as fear, anger, hatred and pride; these are purified by
study and meditation and that, too, must be attained gradually and not
instantaneously. It is like the amra fruit that ripens slowly; it is
like grass, shrubs, herbs and trees that grow up from the earth
gradually. Each must follow the path of study and meditation by himself
gradually and with effort, but because of the original vows of the
Bodhisattvas and all the Tathagatas who have devoted their merits and
identified their lives with all animate life that all may be
emancipated, they are not without aid and encouragement; but even with
the aid of the Tathagatas, the purification of the evil out-flowings of
the mind are at best slow and gradual, requiring both zeal and patience.
Its reward is the gradual understanding of the twofold egolessness and

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

its patient acceptance, and the feet well set on the stages of
Bodhisattvahood.

But the good non-outflowings that come with self-realisation of Noble
Wisdom, is a purification that comes instantaneously by the grace of the
Tathagatas. It is like a mirror reflecting all forms and images
instantaneously and without discrimination; it is like the sun or the
moon revealing all forms instantaneously and illuminating them
dispassionately with its light. In the same way the Tathagatas lead
earnest disciples to a state of imagelessness; all the accumulations of
habit-energy and karma that had been collecting since beginningless time
because of attachment to erroneous views which have been entertained
regarding an ego-soul and its external world, are cleared away,
revealing instantaneously the realm of Transcendental Intelligence that
belongs to Buddahood. Just as Universal Mind defiled by accumulations of
habit-energy and karma reveals multiplicities of ego-souls and their
external worlds of false-imagination, so Universal Mind cleared of its
defilements through the gradual purifications of the evil out-flowings
that come by effort, study and meditation, and by the gradual
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, at the long last, like the Dharmata
Buddha shining forth spontaneously with the rays that issue from its
pure Self-nature, shines forth instantaneously. By it the mentality of
all Bodhisattvas is matured instantaneously: they find themselves in the
palatial abodes of the Akanistha heavens, themselves spontaneously
radiating the various treasures of its spiritual abundance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Fruit of Self- Realisation](bb16)
