[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb21)  [Next](bb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### The Diamond Scripture

### (*Vajracchedika Sutra*)

THUS HAVE I HEARD. Upon a memorable occasion, the Lord Buddha sojourned
in the kingdom of Shravasti, lodging in the grove of Jeta, a park within
the royal domain which Jeta, the heir-apparent, had bestowed upon
Sutana, a minister of state renouned for his charities and benefactions.
With the Lord Buddha there were assembled twelve hundred and fifty
mendicant disciples, besides many who had attained to eminent degrees of
spiritual wisdom.

As the hour for the morning meal approached, Lord Buddha attired in a
mendicant's robe and carrying an alms bowl, walked towards the great cry
of Shravasti which he entered to beg for food. Within the city he went
from door to door and received such gifts as the good people severally
bestowed. Concluding this religious exercise, the Lord Buddha returned
to the grove of Jeta and after bathing his sacred feet partook of the
frugal meal which he had received as alms. Thereafter he divested
himself of the mendicant's robe, laid aside the alms bowl and accepted
the seat of honor which his disciples had reserved for him.

The venerable Subhuti, who occupied a place in the midst of the
assembly, rose from his seat, arranged his robe so that his right
shoulder was exposed, pressing the palms of his hands together, and
kneeling upon his right knee, respectfully bowed to the Lord Buddha,
saying: "Thou art of transcendent wisdom, Honored

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

of the Worlds! With wonderful solicitude thou dost instruct in the
Dharma and preserve in the faith this illustrious assembly of
enlightened disciples. Blessed One, may I beseech of you to discourse
upon the theme: How should a disciple who has entered upon the path
behave? How should he advance? How should he restrain his thoughts? How
may he realise Buddahood? What immutable Truth is there that shall
sustain the mind of a good disciple, who is seeking to attain supreme
spiritual wisdom, and bring into subjection every inordinate desire?"

The Lord Buddha replied to Sabuti, saying: "Truly a most excellent
theme. Attend diligently unto me and I will enunciate a Truth whereby
the mind of a good disciple, whether man or woman, seeking to attain
supreme spiritual wisdom shall be adequately sustained and enabled to
bring into subjection every inordinate desire.

"Subhuti, it is by the Truth of emptiness and egolessness that
enlightened disciples are to advance along the Path, to restrain their
thoughts, to attain Buddahood. If they diligently observe the Paramitas,
and fully enter into a realisation of the profound Prajna Paramita, they
will attain the supreme spiritual wisdom they seek."

### DANA PARAMITA--IDEAL CHARITY

"Subhuti, good disciples, whether man or woman, should thus arrange
their thoughts. Every species of life whether hatched in an egg, formed
in a womb, evolved from spawn, produced by metamorphosis, with or
without form, possessing or devoid of natural

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

instinct or intelligence,--from these changeful conditions of being, I
urge you to seek deliverance in the transcendental concept of Nirvana.
Thus shall disciples be delivered from the immeasurable, innumerable,
and illimitable world of sentient life, but, in reality, there is no
world of sentient life from which to seek deliverance. And why? Because,
in the minds of enlightened disciples there have ceased to exist such
arbitrary concepts of phenomena as an entity, a being, a living being, a
personality."

(Subhuti, regarding the Dana Paramita--Ideal Charity, the Awakening of
Faith Scripture teaches how disciples should practise charity. It says:
"If persons should come to them and ask for something, they should as
far as their means allow, supply it ungrudgingly and thus make them
happy. If they see people threatened with danger, they should try every
means for rescuing them and restore them to a feeling of safety. If
people come to them desiring instruction in the Dharma, they should, as
far as they are acquainted with it and according to their discretion,
deliver discourses upon religious themes. And when they are performing
these acts of charity, let them not cherish any desire for fame or
advantage, nor covet any earthly reward. Thinking only of the benefits
and blessings that are to be mutually shared, let them aspire for the
most excellent, the most perfect wisdom.")

The Lord Buddha resumed: "Moreover, Subhuti, an enlightened disciple in
his acts of charity, ought to act spontaneously, uninfluenced by such
things as form, sound, taste, odour, touch, discrimination, and
favoritism. It is imperative that an enlightened disciple,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

in the exercise of charity, should act independent of phenomena. And
why? Because, acting without regard to illusive forms of phenomena, he
will realise in the exercise of charity a merit inestimable and
immeasurable.

"Subhuti, what think you? Is it possible to estimate the distances that
comprise the illimitable universe of space?"

Subhuti replied: "Blessed One! It is impossible to estimate the
distances comprising the illimitable universe of space."

The Lord Buddha continued: "It is equally impossible to estimate the
merit of an enlightened disciple who practises charity unperturbed by
the disturbing influences of Phenomena. Subhuti, the minds of all
disciples ought thus to be taught."

### SILA PARAMITA--IDEAL BEHAVIOR

The Lord Buddha addressing Subhuti, said: "What think you? If a
benevolent person bestowed as alms an abundance of the seven treasures
sufficient to fill the universe, would there accrue to that person a
considerable merit?"

Subhuti replied, saying: "A very considerable merit; Honored of the
Worlds! Because what is referred to does not partake of the nature of
ordinary merit; in that sense the Lord Buddha rightly speaks of 'a
considerable merit.'"

The Lord Buddha continued: "If a disciple studies and adheres with
implicit faith to even a stanza of this Scripture, the intrinsic merit
of such a disciple would

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

be relatively greater. And why? Because, the Tathagatas who have
attained supreme spiritual wisdom, all owe their beginning to the Truth
of this sacred Scripture--the Truth of Emptiness and Egolessness."

(Regarding the Sila Paramita--Ideal Behavior--the Sutra says: "Lay
members should abstain from all unkindness, stealing, unchastity, lying,
duplicity, slander, frivolous talk, covetousness, malice, currying
favor, and false teachings. Disciples, in order to disarm prejudice,
should retire from the excitement of the worldly life and, abiding in
solitude, should practise those deeds which lead to restraint and
contentment. In the case of advanced bhikshus, they have other rules to
follow and should feel all the more shame, fear and remorse for any
failure to observe the minor precepts. Strictly observing all the
precepts given by the Tathagatas, they should endeavor, by their
example, to induce all beings to abandon evil and practise the good.")

"What do you think, Subhuti? If a disciple, whether man or woman, were
to collect a store of precious gems as great as this universe and was to
bestow them on the holy Tathagatas, would that disciple on the strength
of his gift lay up a large stock of merit?"

Subhuti replied: "Yes, Blessed One, he would lay up a very great merit."

The Lord Buddha replied: "Subhuti, if another disciple after reading
even one verse of this Scripture and observing it by living a good life,
he will lay up a greater merit than the one who merely makes gifts in
charity and continues his egoistic life. And why? Because, making gifts
may or may not involve an advance

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

along the Path that leads to Nirvana, but this Scripture points the way
to the stages of Bodhisattvahood and the supreme spiritual enlightenment
of the Buddhas. The disciple who sincerely reads this Scripture and
lives a virtuous life is laying up merit immeasurable. But, Subhuti, a
virtuous life, even the life of a Buddha, what is it? There is no such
thing, it is only a name.

"Subhuti, suppose a man had a body as large as Mount Sumeru, would he be
counted a great man?"

Subhuti replied: "Exceedingly great, Honored of the Worlds!"

The Lord Buddha enquired: "Would his mind and heart be correspondingly
great, Subhuti? What is it that makes a man great? Is it the size of his
body? Is it his unusual personality? Is it the work he accomplishes? Or
is it the wisdom and compassion and selflessness of this behavior?
Subhuti, what is behavior? There is no such thing; it is something the
mind imagines, just like body and personality; it is only a name.

Then the Lord Buddha continued: "Nevertheless, if a good disciple, man
or woman, studies this Scripture and thoughtfully observes even a verse
of it, his merit will be very great. What words can express the merit of
a disciple who, living with restraint and kindness, diligently studies
and observes it! Such a disciple is attaining powers commensurate with
the supreme and most wonderful Dharma. Wherever there is the hermitage
of such a good disciple, it is the treasure-house of this sacred
Scripture; it is a shrine of the Lord Buddha; and over it will hover
uncounted Bodhisattvas of highest reverence and honor."

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

### KSHANTI PARAMITA--IDEAL PATIENCE

At that time the Lord Buddha addressed Subhuti, saying: "If a good
disciple, whether man or woman, devoted to the observance and study of
this Scripture, is thereby lightly esteemed or despised, it is because,
in a previous life there had been committed some grievous transgression,
now followed by its inexorable retribution. But, although in this life
lightly esteemed or despised, he bears it patiently, the compensating
merit thus acquired will cause the transgression of a former life to be
fully expiated, and the patient disciple will be adequately recompensed
by his final attainment of supreme spiritual enlightenment."

(Regarding this Kshanti Paramita--Ideal Patience--it is said in the
Sutra: "If disciples meet with the ills of life they should not shun
them. If they suffer painful experiences, they should not feel afflicted
or treated unjustly, but should always rejoice in remembering and
contemplating the deep significance of the Dharma.')

The Lord Buddha continued: "Numberless ages ago, Subhuti, before the
advent of Dipankara Buddha, there were many other Buddhas and I recall
my difficult experiences while serving them and receiving their
religious instruction and discipline, but I endured it patiently and,
because my conduct was entirely blameless and without reproach, I was
reborn in the days of Dipankara Buddha. But in the ages to come, if a
disciple faithfully study and put into practice the teaching of this
Scripture, the merit that he will thus acquire will far exceed the merit
of my service in the days of those many Buddhas.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

"In a previous life, Subhuti, when the Prince of Kalinga severed the
flesh from my limbs and body, because of the discipline I had undergone
in the past I remained patient, I was oblivious to such ideas as
phenomena as an entity, a person, a living person, a personality. If I
had not been oblivious to such ideas, when my limbs and body were torn
apart, there would have originated in my mind feelings of anger and
resentment. I recollect, five hundred incarnations ago, that I was
practising this Kshanti Paramita and, because of it, I got rid of such
arbitrary ideas. Therefore, Subhuti, an enlightened disciple ought to
discard, as being unreal and illusive, every conceivable form of
hindering phenomena.

Subhuti, in aspiring to supreme spiritual wisdom, the mind ought to be
insensible to every sensuous influence, and be independent of everything
pertaining to form, sound, odour, taste, touch, or discrimination. There
ought to be cultivated a condition of complete independence of mind;
because, if the mind is depending upon any external thing, it is
cherishing a delusion; in reality, there is nothing external to the
mind. Even the whole realm of sentient life is ephemeral and illusory.
Therefore, in the exercise of this Paramita, the mind of an enlightened
disciple ought to be unperturbed by any form of phenomena."

The Lord Buddha addressed Subhuti, saying: "If an enlightened disciple
in the exercise of this Paramita was patient in the face of external
difficulties and steadily studied and observed this Scripture; and
another disciple, realising that within the meaning and purport of it,
there could be no abstract individual

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

existence--no suffering, no one to suffer, no one to attain supreme
spiritual enlightenment--and yet patiently accepts it and continues to
perfect himself in its virtue, this disciple will have a cumulative
merit greater than the former. And why? Because, he is unaffected by any
consideration of merit or reward."

Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha: "In what respect are enlightened
disciples unaffected by merit or reward?"

The Lord Buddha replied: "Enlightened disciples, having patiently
accepted the truth of egolessness, do not aspire for supreme
enlightenment in any spirit of covetousness or acquisitiveness; they
never think of merit and its commensurate reward. But the Tathagata,
because of his perfect wisdom, knows of their patience and knows that
for them there is reserved a cumulative merit that is immeasurable and
illimitable."

### VIRYA PARAMITA--IDEAL ZEAL

The Lord Buddha said to Subhuti: "If within this universe a good
disciple heaped together the seven treasures forming many elevations as
Mount Sumeru, and entirely bestowed these treasures on the Tathagata as
a gift in his exercise of charity; and another disciple sacrificed his
life as many times as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges,
would such disciples accumulate great merit, Subhuti?"

Subhuti replied: "They would accumulate great merit, indeed, Blessed
One."

The Lord Buddha continued: "If a good disciple were to select a single
verse of this Scripture, faithfully

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

observe and study it, and then zealously explain it to others, he would
relatively accumulate a greater merit."

(Regarding this Virya Paramita--Ideal Zeal-the Sutra says: "In the
practice of all good deeds, disciples should never indulge in indolence.
They should recall all their great mental and physical sufferings that
they have undergone in the past on account of having coveted worldly
objects and comforts during former [existences](errata.htm#3) and which
did not give the least nourishment to their physical lives. They should,
therefore, in order to be emancipated in the future from these
sufferings, be indefatigably zealous and never let even the thought of
indolence arise in their minds; but steadily and persistently out of
deep compassion endeavor to benefit all beings. They should dauntlessly,
energetically, unintermittently, six watches, day and night, pay homage
to all the Buddhas, make offerings to them, praise them, repent and
confess to them, aspire to the most excellent knowledge, and make
sincere vows of unselfish service. It is only, thereby, that they can
root, out the hindrances and foster their root of merit.")

"Subhuti, if a disciple takes pleasure in a narrow and exclusive form of
doctrine, or is attached to false ideas as to an entity, a being, a
living being, a personality, he cannot receive with profit the
instruction of this Scripture nor can he find delight in its study. This
Scripture is intended for those who are entering upon the path, as well
as for those who are attaining the highest planes of spiritual wisdom.
If a disciple zealously observes, studies and widely disseminates the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

knowledge of this Scripture, for such an one there will be cumulative
merit, immeasurable, incomparable, illimitable, inconceivable. All such
disciples will be endowed with transcendent spiritual wisdom and
enlightenment."

The Lord Buddha continued: "What think you? May an enlightened disciple
ponder within himself, saying, 'I will create numerous Buddhist
Kingdoms?'"

Subhuti replied: "No, Honored of the Worlds! And why? Because, such
thoughts would be incompatible with the Virya Paramita, and kingdoms
thus imagined would not, in reality, be Buddhist Kingdoms. Such a phrase
as 'the creation of Buddhist Kingdoms,' is merely a figure of speech."

The Lord Buddha continued: "What think you, Subhuti? Do you imagine that
the Tathagata reflects within himself, 'I will bring salvation to all
beings'? Entertain no such delusive thought. And why? Because, in
reality, there is no such dharma as 'salvation' for any one; and there
is no such thing as a living being to whom 'salvation' can be brought.
What is referred to as an entity, a being, a living being, a
personality, is not so in reality--it is only so understood by ignorant
and uneducated people."

The Lord Buddha enquired of Subhuti, saying: "May a disciple who has
'entered the stream' which bears on to Nirvana, thus moralise within
himself: I have attained the fruits commensurate with the merits of one
who has 'entered the stream'?"

Subhuti replied: "No, Honored of the Worlds! And why? Because, 'entered
the stream' is simply a descriptive term. A disciple who avoids the
seductions of

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

form, sound, odour, taste, touch, and their discriminations, is merely
called, 'one who has entered the stream.'"

The Lord Buddha again enquired of Subhuti, saying: "What think you? Is a
bhikshu who is subject to only one more reincarnation, to muse within
himself, 'I have obtained the fruits in agreement with the merits of "a
once returner"?' "Subhuti replied, saying: "No, Honored of the Worlds!
And why? Because, 'a once returner' is merely a descriptive title
denoting only one more reincarnation; but, in reality, there is no such
condition as 'only one more reincarnation.' 'A once returner' is merely
a descriptive title."

The Lord Buddha once again enquired of Subhuti, saying: "What think you?
May a bhikshu who has attained so high a degree of spiritual merit that
he is never again to be reincarnated, may he thus reflect within
himself, I have obtained the fruits which accord with the merits of one
who is never to return to this world of life-and-death?" Subhuti
replied, saying: "No, Honored of the Worlds! And why? Because, 'a never
returner' is merely a designation, meaning, 'immunity from
reincarnation'; but, in reality, there is no such condition, hence 'a
never returner' is merely a convenient name."

The Lord Buddha yet again enquired of Subhuti, saying: "What think you?
May a Bodhisattva who has attained to absolute tranquillity of mind thus
meditate within himself: I have obtained the position of an Arhat?"
Subhuti replied, saying: "No, Honored of the Worlds! And why? Because,
in reality, there is no such condition synonymous with the term Arhat.
If an

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Arhat thus meditates within himself, 'I have
obtained the condition of an Arhat,' there would be the obvious
occurrence to his mind of such arbitrary concepts as an entity, a being,
a living being, a personality. When the Blessed One declared of me that
in tranquillity of mind, observance of the Dharma and spiritual
perception, I was preeminent among the disciples, I did not think within
myself: 'I am free from desire, I am an Arhat.' Had I thought thus, the
Blessed One would not have declared concerning me: 'Subhuti delights in
the austerities of an Arhat.' It was because I was perfectly tranquil
and oblivious to all conditions, that the Lord Buddha declared: 'Subhuti
delights in the austerities practised by the Arhats.'"

The Lord Buddha added: "True, Subhuti! Enlightened disciples in the
exercise of the Viya Paramita ought to maintain within themselves a pure
and single mind; they should be unconscious of sensuous conditions and
cultivate a mind that is independent of material circumstances. And why?
Because, all sensuous conditions and material circumstances are only
manifestations of mind and are alike dream-like and imaginary.

"Subhuti, A Bodhisattva should have a heart filled with compassion for
all sentient life, but if he should think within his mind: 'I will
deliver all beings,' he ought not to be called a Bodhisattva. And why?
Because, in the first place, if there is no living being, no
personality, then there is no one to be called a Bodhisattva. And in the
second place, the Tathagata has declared: 'All beings are without self,
without life, without personality.' Who then is to be delivered?

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If a Bodhisattva were to say: 'I will create
many Buddha-lands,' he would say what is untrue. And why, Because, the
idea of a Buddha-land is wholly imaginary, it is only a name.

"But O Subhuti, the Bodhisattva who believes that all things are without
selfhood, and still has compassion and faith, he is, indeed, a noble
minded Bodhisattva, and is so considered by the all-wise Tathagatas."

### DHYANA PARAMITA--IDEAL TRANQUILLITY

Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha, saying: "Honored of the Worlds! In
future ages, when this scripture is proclaimed amongst those beings
destined to hear it, shall any conceive within their minds a sincere,
unmingled faith?"

The Lord Buddha replied, saying: "Have no such apprehensive thought.
Even at the remote period of five centuries subsequent to the Nirvana of
the Tathagata, there will be many disciples observing the monastic vows
and assiduously devoted to good works. These, hearing this Scripture
proclaimed, will believe in its immutability and will conceive within
their minds a pure, unmingled faith. Besides, it is important to realise
that faith thus conceived, is not exclusively in virtue of the
individual thought of any particular Buddha, but because of its
affiliation with the universal thought of all the myriad Buddhas
throughout the infinite ages. Therefore, among the beings destined to
hear this Scripture proclaimed, many, by the Dhyana Paramita, will
intuitively conceive a pure and holy faith.

"Subhuti, the Tathagata by his prescience is perfectly

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

cognisant of all such potential disciples, and for these also there is
reserved an immeasurable merit. And why? Because, the minds of these
will not revert to such arbitrary concepts of phenomena as an entity, a
being, a living being, a personality, having qualities or ideas
coincident with the Dharma, or existing apart from the principle of the
Dharma. And why? Because, assuming the permanency and reality of
phenomena, the minds of these disciples would be involved in such
distinctive ideas as an entity, a being, a living being, a personality.
Affirming the permanency and reality of qualities or ideas coincident
with the Dharma, their minds would inevitably be involved in resolving
these same definitions. Postulating the inviolate nature of qualities or
ideas which have an existence apart from the Dharma, there yet remains
to be explained these abstruse distinctions--an entity, a being, a
living being, a personality. Therefore, enlightened disciples ought not
to affirm the permanency or reality of qualities or ideas coincident
with the Dharma, nor postulate as being of an inviolate nature,
qualities and ideas having an existence apart from the concept of the
Dharma.

"Thus enlightened disciples are enabled to appreciate the significance
of the words which the Tathagatas invariably repeat to their follows:
'Disciples must realise that the Dharma is presented to your minds in
the simile of a raft.' If the Dharma--having fulfilled its function in
bearing you to the other shore--must be abandoned together with all its
coincident qualities and ideas, how much more inevitable must be the
abandonment of qualities and ideas which have an existence apart from
the Dharma?"

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

The Lord Buddha continued: "If a disciple had an amount of treasure
sufficient to fill the illimitable universe and bestowed it upon the
Tathagata in the exercise of charity, and if another disciple, having
aspired to supreme spiritual wisdom, selected from this Scripture even a
stanza of four lines only, observed it, diligently studied it and with
zeal explained it to others, the cumulative merit of such a disciple
would be relatively greater than the merit of the former. But, Subhuti,
the attitude of his mind in which he explained it is important. It
should be explained with a mind filled with compassion but free from any
assumption as to the reality of an entity, a being, a living being, a
personality, or as to the permanency or reality of earthly phenomena, or
as to the validity of any ideas concerning them. And why? Because the
phenomena of life are like a dream, a phantasm, a bubble, a shadow, the
glistening dew, a lightning flash; thus should they be contemplated by
an enlightened disciple. His mind should, at all times, be resting in
the blessedness of tranquillity which invariably accompanies the
practice of the Dhyana Paramita."

(Regarding the Dhyana Paramita--Ideal Tranquillity--the Sutra says: "The
beginner should consider and practise Dhyana in two aspects: as
cessation of the mind's intellectual activities, and as realisation of
insight. To bring all mental states that produce vagrant thinking to a
stand is called cessation. To adequately understand the transitory and
emptiness and egolessness of all things is insight. At first each of
them should be practised separately by the beginner, but when, by
degrees, he attains facility, and finally attains perfection,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

the two aspects will naturally blend into one perfect state of mental
tranquillity. Those who practise Dhyana should dwell in solitude and,
sitting erect, should remain motionless, seeking to quiet the mind. Do
not fix the thoughts on any definite thing that you have sensed or
discriminated, or memorised; all particularisations, all imaginations,
all recollections, are to be excluded, because all things are uncreate,
devoid of all attributes, ever changing. In all thinking, something
precedes that has been awakened by an external stimuli, so in Dhyana one
should seek to abandon all notions connected with an external world.
Then in thinking, something follows that has been elaborated in his own
mind; so he should seek to abandon thinking. Because his attention is
distracted by the external world, he is warned to turn to his inner,
intuitive consciousness. If the process of mentation begins again, he is
warned not to let his mind become attached to anything, because,
independent of mind they have no existence. Dhyana is not at all to be
confined to sitting erect in meditation; one's mind should be
concentrated at all times, whether sitting, standing, moving, working;
one should constantly discipline himself to that end. Gradually entering
into the state of Samadhi, he will transcend all hindrances and become
strengthened in faith, a faith that will be immovable.")

The Lord Buddha resumed his words to Subhuti, saying: "What think you,
Subhuti, are the atoms of dust in the myriad worlds which comprise the
universe, are they very numerous?"

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Subhuti replied: "Very numerous, indeed, Blessed One."

The Lord Buddha continued: "Subhuti, these atoms of dust, many as they
are, are not in reality 'atoms of dust,' they are merely termed so.
Moreover, these 'myriad worlds' are not really worlds, they are merely
termed so because of ignorance.

"Subhuti, if a good disciple were to take these infinite worlds and
reduce them to exceedingly minute particles of dust and blow them away
into space, would the so-called 'infinite worlds' cease to exist?"

Subhuti replied: "The Blessed One has already taught us that 'myriad
worlds' is only a name; how can that which is only a name, cease to
exist?"

Then the Lord Buddha continued: "True, Subhuti, but if it were
otherwise, and the infinite worlds were a reality, then it would be
asserting the unity and eternality of matter, which every one knows is
dream-like, changing and transitory. Unity and eternality of matter,
indeed! There is neither matter, nor unity, nor eternality--they are
merely names. Belief in the unity and eternality of matter is
incomprehensible; only common and worldly minded people, for purely
materialistic reasons, cling to that hypothesis. Subhuti, enlightened
disciples must thoroughly understand that emptiness and egolessness are
characteristic of' all Truth. The Dhyana Paramita can be successfully
practised only from that viewpoint."

Then the Lord Buddha continued: "If a disciple should affirm that the
Tathagata had enunciated a doctrine that the mind could comprehend the
idea of an entity, a being, a living being, a personality, or ally

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

other discrimination, would that disciple be interpreting aright the
meaning of this Scripture?"

Subhuti replied: "Blessed One, that disciple would not be interpreting
aright the meaning of the Lord Buddha's discourse. And why? Because,
Blessed One, when you discoursed on belief in the reality of an entity,
a being, a living being, a personality, it was plainly declared that
there were no such things; that they were entirely unreal and illusive;
that they were merely words."

The Lord Buddha continued: "Subhuti, the disciples who aspire to supreme
spiritual wisdom ought thus to know, to believe in, and to interpret all
phenomena. They ought to eliminate from their minds every seeming
evidence of concrete objects; they ought to eliminate from their minds
even the notions of such things; and [become](errata.htm#4) oblivious to
every idea connected with them. And why? Because, so long as he
cherishes ideas of and concerning an entity, a being, a living being, a
personality, his mind is kept in confusion. He must even become
oblivious to the idea that there is any one to whom the idea of sentient
life can become oblivious. If he were to think within his mind, 'I must
become oblivious to every idea of sentient life,' he could not be
described as being wholly enlightened. And why? Because, within the
bounds of reality there is no such thing, no entity, no being, no living
being, no personality, nothing whatever that can be discriminated, and
therefore, there can be no reality to ideas concerning them, for all
these things are merely manifestations of the mind itself."

Subhuti enquired, saying: "Blessed One, in the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

ages to come, will sentient beings destined to hear this Dharma, awaken
within their minds these essential elements of faith?"

The Lord Buddha replied, smiling: "Subhuti, it cannot be asserted that
there are or will be any such things as sentient beings, nor can it be
asserted that there will not be. At present there are none, they are
merely termed 'sentient beings.' And as to any one being saved: how can
there be one to find it by seeking, or to know it if it is ever found?
One cannot gain self-realisation of Prajna Paramita without transcending
the conscious faculty. To fully realise emptiness, egolessness,
imagelessness by the use of the discriminating mind is futile. It is
only by practising the Dhyana Paramita, by identifying oneself with
emptiness and egolessness, that emptiness and egolessness is to be
realised. In the exercise of the Dhyana Paramita, unless the mind of the
enlightened disciple is independent of all phenomena, he is like a
person lost in impenetrable darkness, to whom every object is invisible
and himself helpless. But an enlightened disciple practising the
Paramita with a mind independent of every phenomena, is like unto a
person to whom suddenly the power of vision is restored, and he sees
every thing as in the meridian glory of the sunlight."

The Lord Buddha said:

"*Not by means of visible form,  
Not by audible sound,  
Is Buddha to be perceived;  
Only in the solitude and purity of Dhyana  
Is one to realise the blessedness of Buddha*."

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

### PRAJNA PARAMITA--IDEAL WISDOM

The Lord Buddha addressing Subhuti, said: "What think you? When in a
previous life I was a disciple of Dipankara Buddha, did I eventually
become a Buddha because of some prescribed teaching or system of
doctrine?"

Subhuti replied: "No, Blessed One. When the Lord Buddha was a disciple
of Dipankara Buddha neither prescribed teaching nor system of doctrine
was communicated to him, whereby he eventually became a Buddha."

The Lord Buddha continued, saying: "In my discourses have I presented a
system of doctrine that can be specifically formulated?"

Subhuti replied: "As I understand the meaning of the Blessed One's
discourses, he has no system of doctrine that can be specifically
formulated. And why? Because, what the Blessed One adumbrates in the
terms of the Dharma is, in reality, inscrutable and inexpressible. Being
a purely spiritual concept, it is neither consonant with the Dharma, nor
synonymous with anything apart from the Dharma; but it is exemplified in
the manner in which Bodhisattvas and holy Buddhas have regarded
intuitive self-realisation as the highest law of their minds and by it
have severally attained to different planes of spiritual wisdom."

The Lord Buddha endorsed these words, saying: "True it is; Subhuti! True
it is. There is no dharma by means of which Buddhas attain supreme
spiritual wisdom. Wisdom is attained only by self-realisation through
the practice of the Dhyana Paramita. If there had been such a Dharma,
Dipankara would not have

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

prophesied when I was a disciple of his: 'In future ages, my boy, you
will become Shakyamuni Buddha.' And why? Because in the concept *Buddha*
every dharma is wholly and intelligibly comprehended. How could there be
a Dharma by which that all-inclusive state could be attained? The
supreme spiritual wisdom to which Buddhas attain, cannot, in its
essence, be defined as either real or unreal. That which is commonly
spoken of as the Buddha Dharma is synonymous with every moral and
spiritual dharma. Subhuti, what are spoken of as 'systems of dharma,'
including even the so-called Buddha Dharma, are not in reality systems
of dharma, they are merely termed 'systems of dharma.'"

(Regarding the Prajna Paramita--Ideal Wisdom--really, there is no such
thing. Prajna Paramita transcends all ideation, all knowledge, all
wisdom; It is Noble Wisdom in its "suchness" and its self-nature is
manifested in the transformation-bodies of the Tathagatas.)

Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha: "In attaining supreme spiritual
wisdom did the Lord Buddha, then, attain nothing definite and tangible?"

The Lord Buddha replied: "In attaining supreme spiritual wisdom, not a
[vestiage](errata.htm#5) of dharma nor doctrine was obtained, that is
why it is called 'supreme spiritual wisdom.' Prajna Paramita is
universal, coherent, indivisible; it is neither above nor below; it
excludes all such arbitrary ideas as an entity, a being, a living being,
a personality, discrimination, ideation; but it includes every dharma
pertaining to the cultivation of wisdom and compassion. And even these,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

when defined and thought about, are not in reality 'dharmas of wisdom
and compassion'; they are only termed 'dharmas of wisdom and
compassion.'

"Do not think that the Tathagatas consider within themselves: 'I ought
to promulgate a system of Dharma.' Have no such irrelevant thought,
Subhuti. and why? because by so thinking the disciple would expose his
ignorance and defame the Tathagatas. In reality there is no 'system of
Dharma' to promulgate; it is only termed 'a system of Dharma.'

"What think you? Can the Tathagatas be perceived by their perfect
material bodies, or by any physical phenomena?"

Subhuti replied: "It is improbable that a Lord Buddha can be perceived
by his perfect material body, or by any physical phenomena; because, in
reality, there is no such thing as a material body, nor physical
phenomena; they are only terms that are in common use."

Then the Lord Buddha said: "Why is the Tathagata so named? It is because
he manifests the essential nature of reality. 'He who thus comes,' comes
from nowhere. He symbolises the emptiness of qualities, the egolessness,
the imagelessness, of ultimate reality. He symbolises the un-born, the
un-originate, the truly eternal because the ultimate. And yet, Subhuti,
if any one should affirm that by the Tathagata ultimate Wisdom is
manifested, he would speak an untruth, he would slander me by his
limited knowledge. That which is manifested by the Tathagatas is neither
truth nor falsehood: it is no-thing-ness; and yet it is inconceivable
Oneness, because it is Prajna Paramita, because it is the essence nature
of Buddahood.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

"Subhuti, the plane of thought to which the Buddhas attain and which the
Tathagatas manifest, cannot be expressed in terms of reality or in terms
of non-reality. Their utterances are neither extravagant nor chimerical;
they are true, credible, immutable, but can never be expressed in the
limits of words and doctrines.

Then the Lord Buddha enquired of Subhuti, saying: "Are Tathagatas to be
recognised by the works they do and the effects they produce?"

Subhuti replied: "No, Blessed One; a Buddha is not to be known by his
works, else would a great world-conquering King be a Buddha."

The Lord Buddha said: "Just so, Subhuti. It is not by a great show of
erudition, nor by the building of anything, nor by the destruction of
anything, that the Tathagatas are to be known. It is only within the
deepest consciousness of Bodhisattvas through the self-realisation of
the Prajna Paramita, that the Tathagatas are to be realised.

The Lord Buddha continued: "What think you, Subhuti? Does the Tathagata
possess a physical eye?" Subhuti assented, saying: "The Blessed One
truly possesses a physical eye."

"What think you, Subhuti? Does the Tathagata possess the eye of
enlightenment?" Subhuti assented, saying: "The Blessed One truly
possesses the eye of enlightenment."

"What think you, Subhuti? Does the Tathagata possess the eye of Wisdom?"
Subhuti assented, saying: "The Blessed One truly possesses the eye of
Wisdom."

"What think you, Subhuti? Does the Tathagata

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

possess the eye of Compassion?" Subhuti assented, saying: "The Blessed
One truly possesses the Buddha eye of Compassion."

The Lord Buddha continued: "If there were as many river Ganges as there
are grains of sand in the river Ganges, and if there were as many
Buddha-lands as there are grains of sand in all the innumerable rivers,
would these Buddha-lands be numerous?"

Subhuti replied: "Buddha-lands are innumerable."

The Lord Buddha continued: "Subhuti, within these innumerable worlds are
every form of sentient life with all their various mental capacities,
dispositions, and temperaments, all alike are fully known to the
Tathagatas, and the Tathagatas are filled with compassion for them.
Nevertheless, what are referred to as mental capacities, dispositions,
and temperaments, are not in reality mental capacities, dispositions and
temperaments; they are merely termed such. Dispositions of mind, modes
of thought, whether relating to the past, present or future, are all
alike unreal and illusory.

"Thus should the Noble Prajna Paramita be explained. Thus should a young
disciple, whether man or woman, thus should the highest Bodhisattva,
understand and explain the Prajna Paramita. Everything should be seen as
solitude, as egoless, as imageless; everything should be seen as the
sky, as sunlight, as darkness, as a phantom, as a dream, as a flash of
lightning, as a bubble. Thus is Prajna Paramita to be conceived and to
be explained."

Then the venerable Subhuti, hearing the text of this sacred Scripture
expounded by the Lord Buddha,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

and realising its profound meaning, was moved to tears and, addressing
the Lord Buddha, said: "Thou art of transcendent wisdom, Blessed One! In
thus expounding this supreme Scripture, thou hast surpassed every
exposition previously given. True it is that all things and all
phenomena and all definitive ideas are transitory, empty, egoless,
imageless and dream-like! Only Prajna Paramita abides."

The Lord Buddha assenting, said: "Subhuti, in future ages, disciples
destined to hear this Scripture, discarding every arbitrary idea,
neither becoming perturbed by its extreme mode of thought, nor carried
away by its lofty sentiment, nor fearful as to realising its noble
sentiment, who faithfully and zealously study it, observe its precepts,
and patiently explain it to others, their intrinsic merits will excite
superlative wonder and praise. Moreover, as they gain in realisation of
this profound Prajna Paramita through the practice of Dhyana, they will
eventually become wholly enlightened, wholly compassionate--themselves
revealed as Buddha."

Subhuti enquired of the Lord Buddha: "Blessed One, by what name shall
this Scripture be known, that we may regard it with reverence?"

The Lord Buddha replied: "Subhuti, this Scripture shall be known as THE
DIAMOND SCRIPTURE, because, by its Transcendent Wisdom all sentient life
shall reach the other shore. By this name you shall reverently regard
it, always remembering that what is referred to as Transcendental Wisdom
is only a name,--Prajna Paramita transcends all wisdom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](bb23)
