[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srp09)  [Next](srp11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

# CHAPTER V.

### FUNERAL SONGS.

FROM the gaiety of the epithalamium we now abruptly pass to the
melancholy of the dirge. Marriage and death were often brought into
strange fellowship by at least some of the Old Slavonians. Strongly
impressed with the idea that those whom the nuptial bond had united in
this world were destined to live together also in the world to come,
they so sincerely pitied the lot of the unmarried dead, that, before
committing their bodies to the grave, they were in the habit of finding
them partners for eternity. The fact that, among some Slavonian peoples,
if a man died a bachelor a wife was allotted to him after his death,
rests on the authority of several witnesses, and in a modified form the
practice has been retained in some places up to the present day. In
Little-Russia, for instance, a dead maiden is, dressed in nuptial
attire, and friends come to her funeral as to a wedding, and a similar
custom is observed on the death of a lad. In Podolia, also, a young
girl's funeral is conducted after the fashion of a wedding, a youth
being chosen as the bridegroom who attends her to the grave, with the
nuptial

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

kerchief twined around his arm. From that time her family consider him
their relative, and the rest of the community look upon him as a
widower. In some parts of Servia when a lad dies, a girl dressed as a
bride follows him to the tomb, carrying two crowns; one of these is
thrown to the corpse, and the other she keeps at least for a time <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240.md). And so the ideas of the Old Slavonians
about the grave were not always of a sombre nature, nor are those of the
Russians of the present day. A proof of this is afforded by the strange
combination of grief and rejoicing which characterizes the festival of
the *Rádunitsa*. This is held soon after Easter, the tenth day after
Easter Sunday being generally devoted to it in North-east Russia. At
that time of year the dead "Fathers" are supposed to feel some relief
from the cold of the long winter, and from the idea of their "rejoicing"
most etymologists derive the name of R*ádunitsa* \[*radost'* = joy,
*rádovat'sya* = to rejoice\].

This seems doubtful <span id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_241.md), but thus much
is certain, that the festival has always been one of a partly mirthful
nature. In olden days it seems to have commenced with heathen rites,
after which the relatives of the dead wept and wailed for their loss.
Then a feast

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

was celebrated over the graves, on which were scattered and poured some
portions of the viands and the drinks, and revels commenced which lasted
long. All these features are to be distinctly traced in the festival
celebrated by the modern Russians, only Christian have been substituted
for heathen rites at its commencement. On the second Tuesday after
Easter, crowds flock early in the morning to the cemeteries, carrying
with them small bundles, and there celebrate the commemoration of their
dead. He who does not have a *Panikhída*, or requiem, sung in honour of
his departed "Fathers," is held to commit a grievous sin, for the
omission is the cause of great pain and distress to their sad ghosts,
who would have attended the service, and have received from it much
solace. Moreover, it is generally believed that if the end of the world
shall at any time happen to coincide with the performance of one of
these requiems, the souls to whom the service refers will go straight to
Paradise, along with those of the persons at whose request it is being
performed.

After the service the mourners visit their ancestral graves, and wail
there, uttering loud invocations to the dead. Then they eat and drink to
their repose, moistening the earth with beer, meal, or spirits, and
strewing crumbs of their viands over it. Among

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

other things thus offered to the dead are coloured Easter Eggs, and on
that account some of the peasants call the act of commemoration their
*Khristósovanie* with their departed relatives: for when people meet at
Easter they kiss each other joyfully three times, one of each couple
saying, "Christ is risen!" and the other replying, "He is risen indeed!"
and to perform this rite, which is often attended with the presentation
of Easter eggs, is called *Khristósat'sya* <span
id="fr_242"></span>[3](#fn_242.md). Newly-married couples frequently take
such eggs with them at this time, and visit the tombs of their
respective parents, in order to ask for the parental blessing upon their
union.

After this, in Little-Russia,--where, as well as in White-Russia, says
Tereshchenko, the joyous nature of the festival is most clearly
seen,--singers of a semi-ecclesiastical nature, seminarists and the
like, are invited to chant "spiritual songs" to funereal strains.
Thereupon the mourners take to weeping, and wailing piteously. Then the
senior of the party calls on the secular minstrels who are in attendance
to perform. They begin with funeral songs, on hearing which the grief of
the mourners bursts forth anew. All of a sudden the musicians strike up
a lively tune. In a moment all sorrow is forgotten, merriment takes its
place, and the rest of the day is devoted to songs, dances, and strong
drinks. "Beer was drunk at the Carnival," says a proverb, but it was
after the Rádunitsa that heads ached." The memorial cakes,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

it should be remarked, must be supplied in odd numbers, in threes,
fives, and so forth, and must be eaten without sauce. If any one is too
poor to provide them for himself, his richer neighbours are expected to
furnish him with what is necessary <span
id="fr_243"></span>[4](#fn_243.md).

Before speaking about the relies of old poetry relating to the dead
which have been preserved in the memories of the Russian peasantry, it
may not be amiss to say a few words with respect to the heathen rites
celebrated at funerals by the Old Slavonians, and to point out such
traces of the influence of those rites as are to be found in the customs
still kept up at funerals among the modern Slavonians, especially among
the Russians. This subject has been so exhaustively treated by
Kotlyarevsky in the erudite work to which we have already referred, that
little more is required than to give a summary of his conclusions. We
will begin with the customs which are still observed on the occasion of
a death in a Slavonic village. They vary, of course, to a certain
extent, according to the nationality and the religion of the villagers,
but still a marked similarity is to be found in the descriptions which
have been written of them, whether the describer had in view the
inhabitants of Great, Little, or White-Russia, the various Slavonic
subjects of Austria or of Turkey, or such scattered fragments of the
stock as the Kashoubes of the Baltic and the Wends of Lusatia. It need
hardly be observed that, under the influence of modern ideas,

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

old customs are fast dying out in all much-frequented neighbourhoods,
and that, when it is said in the following sketch that such and such
practices occur, it is not always meant that they are of notorious and
constant occurrence.

When the course of a Slavonic peasant is evidently all but run, those
who are in attendance on the sufferer do their best to mitigate his
dying agony. For this purpose they often take the patient from his bed,
on which they think he would "die hard," and stretch him on the floor,
sometimes on the bare earth, some times on a couch of straw. This
practice is common to nearly all the Slavonic peoples, among several of
whom there prevails also the custom of clearing the way for the
departing spirit. Thus in some parts of Ruthenia they make a hole in the
roof over the sufferer's head, and in Bulgaria they sweep off the dust
and cobwebs, and all else that is attached to or hanging from the
ceiling. Some of the Slovaks also fumigate the dying person with burning
grass, under the impression that his soul will flyaway together with the
smoke, as with something of a kindred nature.

When all is over, the window is immediately opened, and sometimes a cup
of water is set on the sill for the use of the departing soul. Some
Slavonians place bread there also, and others set apart a chair as a
resting-place for the spirit. As a general rule a lighted candle is
placed by the side of the corpse, or in its hand.

Within the house in which the dead man lies all labour ceases, so that
his rest may not be disturbed.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

Some of the family prepare the body "for its long journey;" others go
round with the tidings of death, or engage themselves in completing any
thing that the defunct may have left unfinished. The Western Lusatians
still keep up an old custom which used to be general among the Baltic
Wends, of announcing a death by passing a black wand from hand to hand
through the village. Among the Polish Mazovians, as soon as a peasant is
dead, it is customary for his heir to make the round of his homestead,
and announce the change of ownership to its buildings, its trees, and
its live-stock, saying, "Your former master is dead. I am your new one
now." The Lusatian Wends make a similar announcement to their bees also.

The body is generally washed after death, but in some parts of Ruthenia
and Carniola this must be done while the dying person is still alive. In
some places a burial garment, a *Sávan*, or shroud, is put on at once,
but in others, among the South Slavonians for instance, this dressing is
deferred till a later period. Great care is taken to provide the dead
man with what he requires on his long journey, especially with a
handkerchief or towel, which is tied round the neck or waist, and with a
coin, which is placed in the hand of the corpse, or wrapped in the
handkerchief. The Russian peasants say that the dead man will require
the handkerchief to wipe his face with after his long journey, and the
coin for the purpose of buying a place in the other world; but the
money, if

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

not the handkerchief, was undoubtedly intended for the ghostly ferryman,
the Charon of the Slavonic spirit world. The custom of providing money
for the corpse has always been universal among the Slavonians, but
practice varied with regard to the disposal of the coins, which were
sometimes used for the purpose of closing the eyes of the dead,
sometimes thrown into the grave at the burial. The practice of
furnishing the corpse with the parings of human and other nails, to be
used by the climbing spirit, has already been mentioned. \[See [p.
110](srp06.htm#page_110.md).\]

In all Slavonic Countries great stress has from time immemorial been
laid on loud expressions of grief for the dead. These was formerly
attended by laceration of the faces of the mourners, a custom still
preserved among some of the inhabitants of Dalmatia and Montenegro. The
keening begins immediately after a death, continues until the body has
been laid in the grave, and afterwards breaks out afresh at certain
intervals.

As a general rule! a wife laments for her husband, a daughter for a
parent, a mother for a son, and a sister for a brother. If there is no
relative to perform the duty, it devolves upon a stranger. But in some
places the lamenting is done by deputy, a professional mourner being
called in for the purpose. This may be in accordance with the idea,
prevalent among so many different nations, that a man's relatives must
not mourn for him, that their tears would cause him discomfort or even
pain. At the present day, however, the Russian *Plakal'shchitsa*, or
Public

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

Wailer, is generally employed at a funeral merely because she is better
acquainted with the conventional expressions of grief than the relatives
of the. dead person can be expected to be. All Slavonic peoples are rich
in stores of the wailings used on such occasions, but it is among the
Little-Russians and the Servians that they flourish most luxuriantly.
After the dead man has been properly dressed, his body is set in some
appointed place, and all who are present kiss him and say farewell to
him, and drink to his prosperous journey. Liquor is provided for this
purpose, and with it is brought bread, for bread (or corn) plays a
considerable part in the funeral rites. The Pinsk peasantry, for
instance, when they take the corpse from the bench on which it is
usually laid, strew corn on the place it has occupied, and set bread on
the spot which its shoulders have pressed.

Among most Slavonian peoples at the present day the corpse is put into a
coffin, but the practice is not universal. Neither the Bulgarians nor
the Montenegrines use regular coffins, but they employ planks in their
graves. The Russian word for coffin, *grob*, \[Lithuanian *grabas*,
Gothic *graban*\] did not originally bear that meaning, but signified
something dug out.

The old heathen Slavonians commonly placed their dead in hollowed-out
trunks of trees. Such a trunk is called *koláda*, and by that name a
coffin is known in many of the provincial dialects of Russia. The
Slovenes used these trunk-coffins up to the beginning

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

of the present century, and to this day the Raskolniks of the Chernigof
Government still inter their dead in them.

The corpse was often carried out of the house through a window, or
through a hole made for the purpose, and the custom is still kept up in
many parts. Among some of the Hungarian Slavonians it was customary to
tap three times with the coffin at the corner of the *izba*, or at the
threshold of the doors, and the Czekhs used to shake the bier above the
threshold, or sign a cross with it. For under the threshold live the
domestic deities, the guardians of the family, the souls of ancestors.
In some places the old custom is still observed of placing on the
threshold an axe, or some other implement, the axe corresponding to the
hammer to which, in Scandinavian mythology, a consecrating influence was
so often attributed. When the corpse of a rustic proprietor is being
carried out, it is customary in some parts of Poland to let loose all
his cattle, that they may take leave of their old master.

In some places, after a man's body has left the house, his widow takes a
new pitcher, and breaks it to pieces on the earth, and afterwards strews
oats over the ground traversed by the funeral procession.

In former times the corpse is said to have been conveyed on *sani*, a
sledge; whence comes an old Russian phrase, "to sit in a sledge,"
meaning "to be at the point of death." But by the term *sani* was
probably meant, not the modern sledge, which is used only in winter, but
a light sort of vehicle

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

employed at all seasons of the year. A mare was seldom used for the
conveyance of the corpse, for fear she might prove barren for the
future.

The funeral rites have always been performed before sunset. The sun had
to show the disembodied spirit the way to its future abode. After dark
the ghost would have been obliged to wander about, painfully seeking its
way. Among some of the Croatians it is customary to open the coffin
before it descends into the tomb, in order that the sunbeams may warm
it.

As regards the ceremonies performed at the grave itself, we will pass
over them for the moment, to recur to them when we are dealing with the
old burial customs of heathen times, and will now proceed to those which
follow the actual interment, and in the first place to the rites of
purification. Of these no written evidence exists; their nature can be
gathered only from the customs of the people, among which are the
following:--The bed on which the dying person lay is carried out of the
house, the straw of which use has been made is burnt, and the cottage
itself, or its principal room, is strewed with corn. Among the South
Slavonians the mourners, on their return from the funeral, are met by an
old woman, who carries a vessel containing live coals. On these they
pour water, or else, having washed their hands, they take a live coal
from the hearth, and fling it over their heads. In Ruthenia they look
steadfastly at the stove, or place their hands on it. In olden times the
Bohemians, when returning from a funeral, avoided

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

looking back, and were accustomed to throw sticks and stones behind
them. The Lusatian Wends still make a point of placing water between
themselves and the dead as they return from a burial, even breaking ice
for the purpose if necessary.

Among the Servians neither the spades which dug the grave, nor the cart
and horses which conveyed the coffin, are brought into the farm-yard,
but the horses are turned loose into the pastures, and the other
accessories of the burial are left for the space of three days outside
the gates; otherwise they might introduce death into the homestead.

After the purification comes the funeral banquet, the partakers of which
eat and drink to the memory of the dead. This is the descendant of the
ancient *Strava*, which will presently be described; but that meal was
held either on the grave or near it, whereas its modern representative
generally takes place in the house in which the death occurred. The
Bulgarians, however, still celebrate it near the grave, and in the Pinsk
Government some of the funeral party are in the habit of rising from
table in order to finish the meal above the tomb.

With this feast the funeral rite may be said to close. But the departed
one is not soon forgotten. In olden days a memorial banquet was held in
his honour on the third, sixth, ninth, and fortieth day after his death,
and on its anniversary, and he was remembered also in the feasts
celebrated at springtide in memory of the Fathers, the collective family
dead. To these feasts it was customary to invite the dead,

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

standing before the open door. Silently the living sat down to table,
they ate without using knives, and they threw portions of the food under
the table for their spirit-guests. What fell by accident was the share
of orphan souls who had no friends to nourish them. After a time the
unseen banqueters were escorted out, and their hosts turned their
attention to drink and merriment.

The customs of the present day are of an equally heathenish nature; some
of them, indeed, seem to be even older than those just described. In the
Government of Pinsk the peasants at their memorials cover a table with a
white cloth, and in the middle of it place a vessel in which *vodka*, or
whiskey, is set on fire. They also throw salt on burning coals, and
listen to its crackling. When the memorial cakes are ready the oldest of
the party walks round the house, gazes at the family graves, and invites
the ancestors to the feast. On his return the rest of the party stand
silent for a time, as if listening to spiritual accents, and then begin
to eat, taking care to pour out for the dead the first three spoonfuls
of each dish.

But even stranger than this custom is one kept up in some parts of the
Government of Olonets, in which the inhabitants of a village sometimes
celebrate a joint festival in honour of their collective dead. Having
chosen a house for the purpose, they spread three tables, one outside
the front door, one in the passage, and one in the *izba* itself. Then
they go out of doors as if to meet their unseen guests, and

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

return escorting them into the house with the words, "Ye are tired, our
own ones; take something to eat." After sitting down to the first table
they pass on to the second, and then enter the *izba*. There the master
of the house says to the ghostly visitors, "Doubtless ye have grown cold
in the moist earth, and on the road, perhaps, it was not warm. Warm
yourselves, our own ones, at the stove." Thereupon the living guests
take their seats at table. Just before the end of the repast, when the
*kisel* (a sort of pudding) is served, the host "opens the window, and
lets down into the street the linen in which the dead had been lowered
into the grave," and then the whole party begins to escort the unseen
visitors from the stove into the outer air, saying, "Now it is time for
you to go home, and your feet must be tired: the way is not a little one
to travel. Here it is softer for you \[i. e. along the linen\]. Now, in
God's name, farewell!" And the dead are supposed to descend by means of
the linen, just as, on the day of their burial, they had been let down
into the grave <span id="fr_244"></span>[5](#fn_244.md).

From these interesting specimens of survival, we will now turn to the
rites of which they are fragments, those with which the Old Slavonians,
while yet heathens, celebrated the burial of their dead.

Though the subject is one of great interest I do not purpose to enter at
all deeply into it, for the evidence which its Russian investigators
have

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

brought together with regard to it is almost entirely derived from
foreign and well-known sources, and my main object in the present work
is to render intelligible to the general public the speech of
exclusively Slavonic witnesses. It will be sufficient, therefore, merely
to allude to what has been said about Slavonic funerals by Greek,
Arabian, Teutonic, and other writers--to mention how the Emperor Maurice
\[† A.D. 602\] in his *Strategica* explained why the wives of Slavonian
warriors refused to survive their husbands; that Theophylactus, early in
the seventh century, relates how the Roman General Priscus penetrated
into the Slavonic territory, and captured "the king of the Barbarians,"
one Mousokios, who had been celebrating a brother's funeral with too
many wine cups--a piece of evidence which is valuable, and would have
been still more so had it been clearly stated that Mousokios was really
a Slavonian; that the statement of Theophylactus was copied by
Theophanes and by Anastasius the Librarian \[about A.D. 886\]; that
Saint Boniface \[A.D. 755\] testified, that among the Slavonic *Winedi*,
or Wends, the marriage tie was so strong that wives killed themselves
when their husbands died, a passage which has given rise to much
discussion; that during the first half of the tenth century the Arabian
travellers, Ibn Dosta, Masudi, and Ibn Fozlan, gave full accounts of
Slavonic burials, including some sensational descriptions of the
sacrifices which attended them, some of which accounts were afterwards
incorporated into his own work by Leo the Deacon; that

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

Dithmar, Bishop of Merseburg \[A.D. 1018\], wrote on the subject, and
made one remark in particular to which reference will presently be made;
that Otto, Bishop of Bamberg \[A.D. 1125\], has left behind him some
valuable pieces of evidence in his letters forbidding burials in woods
and fields, and other heathenish customs; that from the writings of
Cosmas of Prague, who died in 1125, copious information is to be gained;
and that the Latin poem by Klonowicz, called *Roxolania*, published at
Cracow in 1584, contains a graphic sketch of a funeral among its
pictures of Ruthenian life in the sixteenth century. The testimony borne
by Menetius, or Meletius, in 1551, in his letter *De sacrificiis et
ydolatria veterum Borussorum*, and repeated by Lasicius in his work,
"*De Diis Samogitarum*," is too well known to require more than a
passing reference <span id="fr_245"></span>[6](#fn_245.md).

Having thus alluded to some of the chief authorities on the subject, we
will pass to the consideration of a few of the most important facts
which their evidence appears to substantiate, such as the
following:--that the old Slavonians sometimes buried and sometimes burnt
their dead; that, in some cases at least, human sacrifices were offered
on the occasion of a burial, and that it was not an uncommon occurrence
for a man's widow to kill herself, or allow herself to be killed, at his
funeral; and that the burial was followed always by a feast, and
sometimes by martial games, in honour of the dead.

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

The question as to whether the Old Slavonians disposed of their dead by
interment or by cremation has given rise to much discussion, and a great
amount of writing has been bestowed upon the adverse theories of Dobner
and Anton; the first of whom asserted that the Slavonians buried,
whereas the Teutons burnt, while the second maintained an exactly
opposite opinion. Some writers, moreover, have explained that the
Slavonians, while Nomads, used to burn their dead, but took to burying
them when they accepted a settled form of life. Others have divided the
heathen Slavonians into two religious sects, each of which had its own
ideas about burial. Others, again, have held that the Slavonians used to
burn their dead so long as they were heathens, but gave up the practice
on becoming Christians; and a fourth set of scholars have suggested that
rich Slavonians used to be burnt, while poor ones could only get buried.
After duly weighing all these arguments, Kotlyarevsky arrives at the
conclusion that there never was any general rule, but that some
Slavonians buried without burning, while others first burnt their dead,
and then buried their ashes, acting in accordance with old family
traditions. In excavating, it is not uncommon to find traces of both
customs in the same tomb: near the remains of a corpse interred without
cremation lie the ashes of one which has been calcined or at least
partially burnt.

As regards the spots in which they deposited either the bodies or the
ashes of their departed relatives,

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

various customs seem to have prevailed. Sometimes hills, and especially
eaves in hills, were chosen as burial-places. In very remote times it is
possible that they may have buried the remains of their dead within
their dwellings, under the threshold, the spot still selected by many of
their descendants for the burial of unchristened babes. The Baltic
Slavonians and the Czekhs are known to have chosen fields and forests
for this purpose. General cemeteries do not seem to have been known
(except for strangers) among the heathen Slavonians, for no ancient word
for such places occurs in any Slavonic dialect <span
id="fr_246"></span>[7](#fn_246.md); and the excavations which have been
made in Slavonic lands bear out this idea, the tombs having almost
always been found to stand either singly or in family groups.

Whether the Slavonians ever sent their dead afloat on an actual sea it
is impossible to say, but the geographical position of most of them
renders such an idea improbable, so far as the European period of their
history is concerned. The term *nav'* for a dead person is supposed by
some writers to imply ideas connected with navigation, and there seems
to be reason for supposing that boats, or at least boat-shaped cases,
were used for the reception of corpses at funerals, but these boats may
merely have been intended to allude to the (atmospheric) sea which the
soul had to cross after death.

From the accounts of the foreigners who have written on the subject it
may be gathered that it

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

was customary among the old Slavonians to place the boat, or other
wooden case containing the corpse, on a pyre, which, after the family
had taken a last farewell of the dead, was lighted by one of their
number. It has been supposed, but it is not certain, that a particular
kind of wood was always used on such occasions--that, namely, of the
thorn, one of the trees connected with the lightning.

Together with the corpse various objects were burnt, or buried. The dead
took with them to the other world, according to the popular belief,
their favourite horses and other animals, their dress, their arms, and
their ornaments, and many other things which were likely to conduce
towards their comfort and happiness in the grave. Of certain material
aids to the aspiring soul, such as leather thongs, ladders, and
nail-parings, mention has already been made. But by far the most
important among the companions of the dead were the human beings who
either killed themselves, or were put to death, upon the occasion of a
funeral.

The fact that, in Slavonic lands, a thousand years ago, widows used to
destroy themselves in order to accompany their dead husbands to the
world of spirits, seems to rest on incontestable evidence; and at an
earlier period there can be no doubt that "a rite of suttee, like that
of modern India," prevailed among the heathen Slavonians, the
descendant, perhaps, as Mr. Tylor remarks of "widow-sacrifice" among
many of the European nations, "of an ancient Aryan rite belonging
originally to a period even

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

earlier than the Veda <span id="fr_247"></span>[8](#fn_247.md)." According
to Ibn Dosta, in some places it was customary for the dead man's
favourite wife to hang herself, in order that her body might be burnt
with that of her lord; in others she was expected to allow herself to be
buried alive with his corpse. To this practice there are many allusions
in the songs and the customs of the people. Among the latter may be
reckoned the so-called "marriages" between the living and the dead,
which have already been mentioned, and among the former those Moravian
songs in which the dead are described as rising from their graves, and
carrying off their wives or their betrothed, the Builina, in which the
dead Potok is buried together with his living wife, and some other poems
of a similar nature.

In addition to being accompanied by his widow, the heathen Slavonian, if
a man of means and distinction, was solaced by the sacrifice of some of
his slaves. The fullest description of what occurred on such an occasion
is that given by Ibn Fozlan, who declares that he was an eyewitness of
what took place. According to him, when one of the "Russian" merchants,
with whom he became acquainted in Bulgaria, died "they asked his girls
which of them would die with him. One answered that she would,"
whereupon she was handed over to the care of the two daughters of an old
woman who had the appearance of a "yellow, wrinkled witch," and who bore
the

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

name of "The Angel of Death." They kept watch over her till the final
moment in which "the woman called Death's angel fixed about her neck a
twisted rope, which she gave two men to pull," and at the same time
drove a knife in between her ribs, so that she died. Her dead body was
then placed beside that of her lord, in a ship which had been taken from
the river for the purpose, and which was propped up by four trees and
surrounded by "wooden images of men and giants." With the human corpses
were placed those of a dog, two horses, and a pair of fowls, and finally
the ship was set on fire. Just before the girl was killed, says Ibn
Fozlan, she cried out three times, saying, "Look! there do I see my
father and my mother!" and again, "Look! I see all my relations sitting
together there!" and finally, "Look! There is my lord! He sits in
Paradise. Paradise is so green, so beautiful! By his side are all his
men and boys. He calls me: bring me to him!" And after all was over the
"Russians" scoffed at their Arabian friend as belonging to a race who
buried their dead, and so gave them as a prey to worms and corruption;
whereas they themselves burnt their dead at once, and so obtained
admittance for them without delay into Paradise. The whole of the
narrative is remarkably interesting, but unfortunately it is not quite
clear who these "Russians" were. Ibn Fozlan describes them as the
filthiest people he had ever seen, and Rasmussen repudiates them as
Scandinavians on account of the want of modesty attributed to their

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

king; but some Russian critics think they must have been Varangian
traders <span id="fr_248"></span>[9](#fn_248.md).

Above the spot on which the funeral rites were celebrated, a mound was
heaped. Ibn Dosta says that the ashes of the dead were collected the day
after the cremation, and placed in a memorial urn, which was set up on
the mound. Ibn Fozlan, on the other hand, states that the mound was
piled above the funeral pyre. In some of the tombs which have been
explored, vases have been found containing bones which showed traces of
fire; in others, the remains have been discovered of bodies which seem
to have been interred, and then to have had mounds piled above them. In
olden days every one who was present at a funeral deemed it a religious
duty to assist in the erection of the mound, just as now every bystander
throws a handful of earth into the grave.

Upon the mound, it is supposed, a memorial was set up in the shape of a
tent, or small wooden house, in which not only the soul might find rest
and shelter when visiting the body in which it used to abide, but also
the relatives of the dead when they came to mourn over his remains.
Traces of this custom are still to be found in Russia. In the

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

Government of Chernigof, for instance, the White-Russians still, in
spite of ecclesiastical prohibitions, erect over graves a kind of
log-hut. Such a construction is known in some other districts as a
*Golubets*, a term sometimes applied to the roofed cross commonly set up
over a grave.

Among most of the Slavonic tribes, directly after the funeral rites were
over came the *Strava*, the memorial feast, held above the grave, or
close beside it. According to Jacob Grimm <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249.md), the name *Strava* is one of Gothic
origin, and means a funeral pyre \[from *straujan* = *sternere*\]. But
Kotlyarevsky claims it as a Slavonic word.

Among some of the Slavonians was celebrated the solemn rite of parting
with the dead, called the *Trizna*. Its name and its nature are both
involved in some uncertainty, but the former is supposed to be akin to
*terzanie*, laceration; and, as regards the latter, we know that it took
the form of a meal of some kind, followed by games and contests,
horse-races and personal combats. It was a form of honouring the dead
which could only have prevailed among a warlike people--such as in a
like manner honoured a dead Patroclus or Beowulf--and therefore it does
not seem to have been known to all the Slavonians. Those of the south
were partially

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

acquainted with it, and it is known with certainty to have existed among
the Russians. With the course of time it passed into the form of the
*Strava*, and now lives in the memorial meal which follows a Russian
funeral.

After the tomb had closed over the body or the ashes of the dead, it did
not always remain intact. From time to time it was opened for the
reception of new tenants, for the heathen Slavonians often buried in one
such receptacle the remains of many generations, their respect for it
increasing with the number of protecting "Fathers" whose abiding place
it became. This custom has been kept up in some Slavonic countries till
the present day; and sometimes a corpse which has not lain long in the
ground has to make way for a new comer. Csaplovies states that he was
himself an eyewitness of the following occurrence:--A Slovene, whose
mother had died, dug up the corpse of his father, collected his bones,
washed them with red wine, tied them up in a clean white towel, placed
the bundle on his mother's coffin, and then buried the remains of his
two parents together <span id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_250.md). A similar
practice prevails in Bulgaria, where, it is said, if no relative dies
within the space of three years, the family tomb is opened, and any
stranger who happens to expire is buried in it--a custom due to the
lingering influence of the old idea, that the grave required a victim.

That of the rites celebrated every spring by the

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

Old Slavonians in memory of their dead, many traces are still to be
found in the customs of their descendants, has been shown in the account
given of the *Rádunitsa*, and of such entertainments as the Olonets
villagers offer to their family ghosts. To these descriptions may be
added one more, that of the old Russian practice of burying, at the
commencement of every spring, the bodies of the unknown and uncared-for
dead which had accumulated during the winter in the *Ubogie
domui*--"poor-houses" set apart for the reception of the bodies of
friendless strangers, or of persons who had been murdered or who had
died suddenly, and, in fact, for the remains of all the waifs and strays
of humanity. During the winter these corpses lay in pits dug within the
"poor-houses;" in the spring charitable people met together, took the
dead bodies from their temporary resting-place, and buried them decently
in consecrated ground. There was a cemetery near Moscow called the
"Potter's Field"--in allusion to that which was bought with the thirty
pieces of silver "to bury strangers in"--to which the charitable
citizens were wont to resort on the seventh Thursday after Easter, there
to dig graves for the bodies, and to have divine service performed for
the souls, of the friendless dead. They did not know the names of those
for whom they prayed, says Karamzin, but they trusted that God would
know, and would let their prayers be of good effect.

And now let us turn to the poetry itself--to the complaints, funeral
wailings, or keens, uttered at

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

the death or the burial of a relative, or, at a later period, over his
grave--*pláchki*, *zapláchki*, etc. \[*plakat'*, = to cry\], or
*Prichitan'ya* \[*prichitát'* = to read beside, to complain\]. The songs
with which a bride bewails the loss of her girlish freedom are called
Prichitan'ya, and so were those in which mothers used to lament the
departure of their sons to the army. At times, as has already been
shown, these *zapláchki* are improvised on the spot, but most of them
have been handed down by tradition from a very remote age. Such, for
instance, are those in which the lightning is represented as rending
graves open, and the spirits of the dead as manifesting themselves to
mortal eyes in the form of birds. The following will serve as a specimen
of this class:--

From the side of the East  
Have risen the wild winds,  
With the roaring thunders,  
And the fiery lightnings.  
All on my father's grave  
A star has fallen, has fallen from heaven . . . .  
Split open, O dart of the thunder,  
The moist mother Earth!  
Do thou fall to pieces, O mother Earth,  
On all four sides!  
Split open, O coffin planks,  
Unfold, O white shroud,  
Fall away, O white hands,  
From over the bold heart,  
And do ye become parted, O sweet lips!  
Turn thyself, O my own father,  
Into a bright, a swift-winged falcon;  
Fly away to the blue sea,  
To the blue sea, to the Caspian.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

Wash off, my own father,  
From thy white face the mould.  
Come flying, O my father,  
To thy own home, to the lofty terem;  
Listen, O my father,  
To our songs of sadness! <span id="fr_251"></span>[3](#fn_251.md)

It was generally a friendly ghost that thus revisited the earth beneath
the pale glimpses of the moon, being usually the spirit of a parent who
sympathized with a child, and longed to do it good service. But there
were cases, also, to which the *Skazki*, or stories, bear frequent
witness, in which the dead assumed a baleful shape, and, as vampires, or
werewolves, ran riot through the world, thirsting for human blood. It
was generally a wizard, or witch, or some other disreputable character
who behaved in this manner after death, but even the spirits of persons
who had led blameless lives might be induced, if proper respect was not
paid to them, to revenge themselves on their forgetful survivors. The
spirit invoked in the *zapláchki* is usually that of a parent, who is
entreated to be present at the wedding of an orphan bride, or at least
at the time when the bride and bridegroom are betrothed by the joining
of hands, and the parental blessing is bestowed on her: such is the
case, for instance in the following lament:--

There are who will give me to eat and to drink,  
But to bless me, the young one, there is none;  
Neither the father dear who nourished me,  
Nor the mother dear who bare me.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

See, O my sunlight, my own brother,  
If from the Nikolsk oak-wood  
Comes not the father dear who nourished me.  
For my father dear promised,  
At the moment of swift death,  
In his very last hour,  
To be at the striking fast of hands,  
At the last farewell,  
At the life-long blessing <span id="fr_252"></span>[4](#fn_252.md).

The same complaint, the same longing for the parental blessing, is heard
in the wailings of a girl who, in rude and untutored language, laments a
mother's death:--

There stands a green oak on the bill,  
There is no wind, and yet it shakes,  
There is no rain, but it is wet.  
Many, many on the green oak,  
Many a branch and spray is there,  
Many a green branch;  
Only the green oak  
Has no golden top,  
No gilded vane,  
Such as now it ought to have  
At this very time,  
Or in the summer fair,  
Or in the ample spring.

Much has the fair maiden,  
Much wealth of kin,  
Many and many a relative,  
Many a close friend,  
Many a near neighbour.  
Only the fair maiden  
Has no mother dear,  
Such as she now needs,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

At this very time,  
For the great marriage-blessing.  
There are who will give her to eat and drink,  
But to bless her there is none <span id="fr_253"></span>[5](#fn_253.md).

The next *zapláchka*--also a very unpolished one--gives utterance to the
grief of a mother who bewails the death of a young child.

I will sadly go  
To my own, my loved one,  
My own heart's love....  
Now on this day  
The sun burns not as in summertide,  
Warms not as in the spring.  
With what a fall have I let fall,  
With what a loss have I lost!  
I will go this day,  
In sorrow and tears,  
To my loved beloved.  
"Tell me, my loved,  
"Why hast thou deserted  
"Thy mother forlorn?  
"Not a word can I gain,  
"Not a single secret word,  
"To my careworn heart!  
"Oh listen, my loved one,  
"My own, my darling child!"  
Now am I indeed a mother ill-fated!  
A cuckoo ill-starred in a green pine-wood,  
Such am I, ill-fated, unhappy <span id="fr_254"></span>[6](#fn_254.md).

But the most remarkable among the group of "complaints" from which we
have been quoting, that collected by Ruibnikof in the neighbourhood of
Lake Onega, are the two which are intended to be sung at the funeral of
the father of a family. One of

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

them, at least, seems--worthy of being translated in full, although it
runs to some length. The language in which it is written proves, say
Russian critics, that it is of great antiquity. I have rendered it word
for word, without attempting to trim it.

After the body has been washed and dressed, it is placed upon a table,
and the relatives gather around it. Then, turning to the widow, they
address her in song. In the case of poor people the following form is
used:--

Wert thou sitting by the painful bedside,  
Wert thou present at the parting of the spirit,  
When the, soul was divided from the white body?  
And how did swift Death come to thee?  
Came she as a beggar-woman, a wandering cripple,  
Or as a brave youth, brisk and burly?  
Or as a stout burlák from Petersburg <span
id="fr_255"></span>[7](#fn_255.md)?

The widow replies:--

Had I been living in a rich and ample state,  
Then I should have been sitting by the painful bedside,  
And I should have seen swift Death.  
Had she come as a wandering cripple  
I would have spread the hospitable table,  
I would have fed the wandering cripple,  
And she would have left me my wedded spouse.  
And if she had come as a brave youth, brisk and burly,  
I would have clothed her in coloured vestments,  
And would have shod her with goatskin boots,  
And would have given her a silken girdle.  
If she had come as a stout Petersburg burlák,

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

I would have given her uncounted wealth of gold,  
And she would have left me my wedded spouse.  
But as I live in an accursed and unhappy condition,  
With little children dear, the cause of many cares,  
In our house there is no hospitable table,  
In our house are no sweet dainties,  
Neither are there clothes for youth,  
Nor goatskin boots for the feet,  
Nor uncounted wealth of gold.  
So I did not see my lawful spouse,  
When the soul was divided from the white body.

Too great for the peasant-woman's strength is her toil,  
Too great for her mind are her accursed cares.  
Well nigh all the thoughts in my head are in confusion,  
The untimely light fades from my eyes.  
How shall I bring up my dear little ones  
Without my wedded spouse?  
Shall I lose myself in the dark forest,  
Or fling myself into some round lake,  
Or drown in a swift brook,  
So as to get rid of my great misery?  
If I become a wandering beggar,  
And rid myself of my great misery in the open field,  
Then from my great misery  
Would spring up thick forests:  
No room would there be there for my misery:  
The neighbours living around would forbid it,  
For their fertile corn-fields would be covered over.  
If I were to get rid of my great misery  
In a glorious wide lake,  
There would be never-moving rocks under the waters of the lake,  
And on the meadows stones that never gave way:  
So there would be no room for my misery;  
It would become an obstacle to the fishermen.  
Were I to get rid of it in the whirling river Svir,

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

Roaring cataracts would become fixed there  
There too would be no room for my misery,  
For stagnant would become the spring waters in the rivers.

I will take my dear children \[and see\],  
Whether moist Mother Earth will not split open.  
If moist Mother Earth splits open,  
Straightway will I and my children bury ourselves in it,  
So hateful is it to me, the miserable one,  
To remain in this home life.  
Do thou forgive me, O my wedded spouse!  
Thou and I have taken counsel together,  
But never didst thou speak to me about this swift death.  
I would not have given thee up, O my wedded spouse,  
I would have given up my dear children,  
And so have preserved my wedded spouse.  
Split open, moist Mother Earth,  
And be thou open, O new coffin-planks,  
And come flying from heaven, Angels and Archangels,  
And set the soul in the white breast,  
And speech in the wise head,  
And white light in the clear eyes!  
And do thou arise, my wedded spouse;  
I have won-thee-by-asking from the Lord God.  
Make the sign of the cross, according to what is written,  
Bow low, according to the fashion of the wise,  
Pay me greeting!  
Not alone have I invited thee,  
But with me I bring thy dear children  
And let us return to our home life,  
For now has this life become weariness.  
It is plain that my wedded spouse remains angry  
With me, on whose head are many miseries.

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

I have remained in my husband's house,  
Bread and salt have I not set eyes on,  
And my misery have I not diminished but increased.  
Clearly this thing cannot be,  
That one dead shall return from the grave  
An orphan must I be without my husband <span
id="fr_256"></span>[8](#fn_256.md).

The companion song is of a similar nature, but is intended to be
employed in well-to-do households. It is one which I would fain
translate at equal length with its predecessor, but I fear to trespass
on the patience of my readers, to whom I can convey but little idea of
the merit of the original, depending as that does to a great extent upon
the charm of its simple, unaffected, but archaic language, in which so
much expression is conveyed by daring diminutives which would be utterly
void of meaning to our minds were an attempt made to translate them, and
upon the measured verse in which it moves, moulded in a form which holds
together and sustains without cramping, and strengthens without
impeding.

The preservation of poems so lengthy as are these widows' wailings is,
for the most part, due to the jealous care of the professional mourners.
In some parts of Russia their profession is unknown, and there the songs
are dying out most quickly, but in the remote districts in which
Ruibnikof made his collections, in the neighbourhood of Lake Onega, the
*Plakal'shchitsa*, or *Voplénitsa* \[*vopit'* = to sob or wail\], the
professional "Crieress"--is a personage of no small importance. She it
is, says Ruibnikof, who "watches over the genuineness of social rites;

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

it is she who guides the course of marriages, funerals, and memorial
feasts." On the day of betrothal, the *Plakal'shchitsa* attends the
bride, and sings *zapláchki* expressive of the sorrow a young girl feels
at leaving her family and going into "a strange and far-off land;" and
during the whole course of the ceremonies preceding that which takes
place in church, she settles every detail, and intones almost every
song. At a funeral, also, she renders invaluable aid, by seeing that all
the traditional ceremonies are observed, and by supplying the sad songs
in which the relations of the dead are expected to express the grief
they feel at their loss. It was from the lips of an excellent specimen
of her class, a *Plakal'shchitsa*, who was so celebrated for her
*zapláchki*, that she was frequently invited into outlying
districts--and even into one, the natives of which were famous for their
knowledge of such lore, and their faculty of improvisation--that
Ruibnikof gathered some of the best of his nuptial and funereal laments.

It is chiefly at the time of the *Pomniki*, or commemorations of the
dead, in the arrangement of which also the *Plakal'shchitsa* in some
districts takes a leading part, that the *Prichitaniya*, or lamentations
for the dead, of which we have already spoken, are to be heard. On those
occasions it is customary for women to go out to the graves of their
relatives, and there to wail or keen, or, as the Russians express it,
*golosít* \[*golos* = voice\]. Throwing themselves on the grave, says
Tereshchenko, they first shake their heads over it for a few minutes,
and begin whimpering, then

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

they take to wailing a little, and at last, throwing both arms about the
mound, they press their bosoms to it, raising their voices all the time,
louder and louder still, until they may be heard over the whole of the
cemetery. Here is a specimen of a *Prichitanie*, intended to be recited
over a grave on the twentieth of April, early in the morning. These
lamentations, it should be observed, though of a decidedly poetical
nature, do not assume a metrical form.

"O ye, our own fathers and mothers! in what have we angered you, our
own, that you have no welcome for us, no joy, no parental charm? O thou
sun, bright sun! Rise, rise at midnight, make bright with joyous light
all the graves, so that our departed ones may not sit in darkness, nor
languish in woe, nor endure endless longing.

"O thou moon, bright moon! Rise, rise at eventide, make bright with
joyous light all the graves, so that the departed may not in darkness
consume their bold hearts, nor in the darkness go sorrowing about the
white world, nor in the darkness pour forth burning tears to their dear
children.

"And, O wind, wild wind! do thou arise, arise at midnight, bring to our
dear departed the welcome tidings, that for them all their kinsmen are
painfully longing, that on account of them all their kinswomen are
steeped in sorrow <span id="fr_257"></span>[9](#fn_257.md)."

And here, by way of conclusion, is a specimen of an orphan's wailings
above her mother's grave:--

"O mother dear that bare me, O with sadness longed-for one! To whom hast
thou left us, on whom are we orphans to rest our hopes? From no quarter
do warm breezes breathe on us, we hear no words of kindness. Good folks
turn away from us,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

our kinsfolk renounce us; rust eats into our orphaned hearts. The red
sun burns in the midst of the hot summer, but us it beats not: scarcely
does it warm us, O green mother-grave! Have a care for us, mother, dear,
give us a word of kindness! No, thou hast hardened thy heart harder than
stone, and hast folded thy uncaressing hands over thy heart.

"O my white cygnet! for what journey hast thou prepared and equipped
thyself, from which side may we expect thee?

"Arise, O ye wild winds, from all sides! Be ye borne, O winds, into the
Church of God! Sweep open the moist earth! Strike, O wild winds, on the
great bell! Will not its sounds and mine awaken words of kindness <span
id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_258.md)?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_240"></span>[310:1](srp10.htm#fr_240.md) Kotlyarevsky, 58,
231.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[310:2](srp10.htm#fr_241.md) Kotlyarevsky, in his
excellent work "On the Funeral Rites of the heathen Slavonians,"
compares the name of *Rádunitsa* with a supposed Sanskrit word *radanh*
= sacrifice, offering, from the root *râdh*, to complete, sacrifice,
*etc*. But on this M. Lerch remarks that no such word as *radanh* exists
in Sanskrit. (Perhaps *râdhana* may have been intended.) The author, he
says (as quoted by Afanasief, P. V. S. III. 796), probably meant the
Zend word *râda<u>n</u>h* <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> to which a
Sanskrit *râdh-as* might correspond. But the guttural *n* before *h* in
Zend has nothing in common with the sound n in the syllable *ni* of
*Rádunitsa*. He thinks, however, that both *rádunitsa* and *rádovat'sya*
may spring from the same root as *râda<u>n</u>h* and *râdh-as*.
\[Doctrinally, though not etymologically, the *Rádunitsa* may possibly
have been linked with the Indian *Srâddha*.\]

<span id="fn_242"></span>[312:3](srp10.htm#fr_242.md) See "Russia n 1870,"
by W. Barry, p. 171; a book containing a great deal of useful
information about the Russian peasantry.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[313:4](srp10.htm#fr_243.md) Tereshchenko, V.
27-30.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[322:5](srp10.htm#fr_244.md) Tereshchenko, III.
123. Taken from Dashkof's "Description of the Olonets Government."

<span id="fn_245"></span>[324:6](srp10.htm#fr_245.md) Kotlyarevsky, pp.
42-153.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[326:7](srp10.htm#fr_246.md) Kotlyarevsky, p. 227.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[328:8](srp10.htm#fr_247.md) E. B. Tylor's
"Primitive Culture," I. 421; where the subject is discussed at length.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[330:9](srp10.htm#fr_248.md) Ibn Fozlan's
narrative was published in 1823 by the Russian Academy of Sciences, with
a German translation by C. M. Frähn. Rasmussen had previously translated
it into Danish, and an English rendering of his version appeared in the
4th vol. of "Blackwood's Magazine." Ibn Dosta's work was published for
the first time in 1869, at St. Petersburg, with notes and a Russian
translation by the editor, Prof. Chwolson.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[331:1](srp10.htm#fr_249.md) *Kleinere Schriften*,
II. 239. The words in which Jornandes describes a part of the ceremonies
performed at the burial of Attila are well known. "Postquam talibus
lamentis est deflectus, stravam super tumulum ejus, quam appellant ipsi,
ingenti commessatione concelebrant."--*De Getarum Origine*, cap. 49.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[332:2](srp10.htm#fr_250.md) *Slavonien*, I. 184,
as quoted by Kotlyarevsky, p. 252.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[335:3](srp10.htm#fr_251.md) Quoted by Orest
Miller, *Chrest*. I. ii, from a Perm collection.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[336:4](srp10.htm#fr_252.md) Ruibnikof, III. 423.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[337:5](srp10.htm#fr_253.md) Ruibnikof, III. 423.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[337:6](srp10.htm#fr_254.md) Ruibnikof, III. 117,
418.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[338:7](srp10.htm#fr_255.md) The burlák is here a
man who goes up to the city to work for wages.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[341:8](srp10.htm#fr_256.md) Ruibnikof, III.
410-413.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[343:9](srp10.htm#fr_257.md) Quoted by Orest
Miller from Sakharof, II. vii. 23.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[344:1](srp10.htm#fr_258.md) Quoted from Dashkof
by Tereshchenko, III. 102, 103. An interesting description of a Russian
cemetery on one of the "Parents' Days" is given by Madame Romanoff in
her "Rites and Ceremonies of the Greco-Russian Church," p. 247.

There is a striking resemblance between the Russian *zaplachki* and
those *myrologia* of the modern Greeks, of which Fauriel gives so
interesting an account in the introduction to his *Chants populaires de
la Grèce Moderne*. The *myrologion*, he says, "is, in the full sense of
the term, a poetic improvisation inspired by grief." Almost all Greek
women possess the faculty of improvisation to some degree, but
excellence is of course rare, and a good "myrologist" holds in her own
village a distinguished position. In Asiatic Greece and in the Islands
there are professional myrologists whose functions are very similar to
those of the Russian "wailers." The Myrologia are now sung by women
only, but in olden times men also sang them. Several specimens are given
in Passow's *Carmina popularia Græciæ recentioris*. See also Tozer's
"Researches in the Highlands of Turkey," II. 241.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Sorcery and Witchcraft](srp11.md)
