[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ara00)  [Next](ara02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VH8HW4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Aradia, Gospel of the Witches*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1899\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

If the reader has ever met with the works of the learned folk-lorist G.
Pitré, or the articles contributed by "Lady Vere De Vere" to the
*Italian Rivista*, or that of J. H. Andrews to *Folk-Lore*, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) he will be aware that there are in Italy
great numbers of *strege*, fortune-tellers or witches, who divine by
cards, perform strange ceremonies in which spirits are supposed to be
invoked, make and sell amulets, and, in fact, comport themselves
generally as their reputed kind are wont to do, be they Black Voodoos in
America or sorceresses anywhere.

But the Italian *strega* or sorceress is in certain respects a different
character from these. In most cases she comes of a family in which her
calling or art has been practised for many generations. I have no doubt
that there are in stances in which the ancestry remounts to mediæval,
Roman, or it may be Etruscan times. The result has naturally been the
accumulation in such families of much tradition. But in Northern Italy,
as its literature indicates, though there

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

has been some slight gathering of fairy tales and popular superstitions
by scholars, there has never existed the least interest as regarded the
strange lore of the witches, nor any suspicion that it embraced an
incredible quantity of old Roman minor myths and legends, such as Ovid
has recorded, but of which much escaped him and all other Latin
writers. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

This ignorance was greatly aided by the wizards themselves, in making a
profound secret of all their traditions, urged thereto by fear of the
priests. In fact, the latter all unconsciously actually contributed
immensely to the preservation of such lore, since the charm of the
forbidden is very great, and witchcraft, like the truffle, grows best
and has its raciest flavour when most deeply hidden. However this may
be, both priest and wizard are vanishing now with incredible
rapidity--it has even struck a French writer that a Franciscan in a
railway carriage is a strange anomaly--and a few more years of
newspapers and bicycles (Heaven knows what it

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

will be when flying-machines appear!) will probably cause an evanishment
of all.

However, they die slowly, and even yet there are old people in the
Romagna of the North who know the Etruscan names of the Twelve Gods, and
invocations to Bacchus, Jupiter, and Venus, Mercury, and the Lares or
ancestral spirits, and in the cities are women who prepare strange
amulets, over which they mutter spells, all known in the old Roman time,
and who can astonish even the learned by their legends of Latin gods,
mingled with lore which may be found in Cato or Theocritus. With one of
these I became intimately acquainted in 1886, and have ever since
employed her specially to collect among her sisters of the hidden spell
in many places all the traditions of the olden time known to them. It is
true that I have drawn from other sources, but this woman by long
practice has perfectly learned what few understand, or just what I want,
and how to extract it from those of her kind.

Among other strange relics, she succeeded, after many years, in
obtaining the following "Gospel," which I have in her handwriting. A
full account of its nature with many details will be found in an
Appendix. I do not know definitely whether my informant derived a part
of these traditions from *written* sources or oral narration,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

but believe it was chiefly the latter. However, there are a few wizards
who copy or preserve documents relative to their art. I have not seen my
collector since the "Gospel" was sent to me. I hope at some future time
to be better informed.

For brief explanation I may say that witch craft is known to its
votaries as *la vecchia religione*, or the old religion, of which Diana
is the Goddess, her daughter *Aradia* (or Herodias) the female Messiah,
and that this little work sets forth how the latter was born, came down
to earth, established witches and witchcraft, and then returned to
heaven. With it are given the ceremonies and invocations or incantations
to be addressed to *Diana* and *Aradia*, the exorcism of Cain, and the
spells of the holy-stone, rue, and verbena, constituting, as the text
declares, the regular church-service, so to speak, which is to be
chanted or pronounced at the witch-meetings. There are also included the
very curious incantations or benedictions of the honey, meal, and salt,
or cakes of the witch-supper, which is curiously classical, and
evidently a relic of the Roman Mysteries.

The work could have been extended *ad infinitum* by adding to it the
ceremonies and incantations which actually form a part of the Scripture
of Witchcraft, but as these are nearly all--or at

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

least in great number--to be found in my works entitled *Etruscan-Roman
Remains* and *Legends of Florence*, I have hesitated to compile such a
volume before ascertaining whether there is a sufficiently large number
of the public who would buy such a work.

Since writing the foregoing I have met with and read a very clever and
entertaining work entitled *Il Romanzo dei Settimani*, G. Cavagnari,
1889, in which the author, in the form of a novel, vividly depicts the
manners, habits of thought, and especially the nature of witchcraft, and
the many superstitions current among the peasants in Lombardy.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding his extensive knowledge of the subject,
it never seems to have once occurred to the narrator that these
traditions were anything but noxious nonsense or abominably un-Christian
folly. That there exists in them *marvellous* relics of ancient
mythology and valuable folklore, which is the very *cor cordium* of
history, is as uncared for by him as it would be by a common *Zoccolone*
or tramping Franciscan. One would think it might have been suspected by
a man who knew that a witch really endeavoured to kill seven people as a
ceremony or rite, in order to get the secret of endless wealth, that
such a sorceress *must* have had a store of wondrous legends; but of all
this there is no trace, and it

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

is very evident that nothing could be further from his mind than that
there was anything *interesting* from a higher or more genial point of
view in it all.

His book, in fine, belongs to the very great number of those written on
ghosts and superstition since the latter has fallen into discredit, in
which the authors indulge in much satirical and very safe but cheap
ridicule of what to them is merely vulgar and false. Like Sir Charles
Coldstream, they have peeped into the crater of Vesuvius after it had
ceased to "erupt," and found "nothing in it." But there was something in
it once; and the man of science, which Sir Charles was not, still finds
a great deal in the remains, and the antiquarian a Pompeii or a
Herculaneum--'tis said there are still *seven* buried cities to unearth.
I have done what little (it is really very little) I could, to disinter
something from the dead volcano of Italian sorcery.

If this be the manner in which Italian witchcraft is treated by the most
intelligent writer who has depicted it, it will not be deemed remarkable
that there are few indeed who will care whether there is a veritable
Gospel of Witches, apparently of extreme antiquity, embodying the belief
in a strange counter-religion which has held its own from pre-historic
time to the present day. "Witchcraft is all rubbish, or

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

something worse," said old writers, "and therefore all books about it
are nothing better." I sincerely trust, however, that these pages may
fall into the hands of at least a few who will think better of them.

I should, however, in justice to those who do care to explore dark and
bewildering paths, explain clearly that witch-lore is hidden with most
scrupulous care from all save a very few in Italy, just as it is among
the Chippeway Medas or the Black Voodoo. In the novel to the life of *I
Settimani* an aspirant is represented as living with a witch and
acquiring or picking up with pain, scrap by scrap, her spells and
incantations, giving years to it. So my friend the late M. Dragomanoff
told me how a certain man in Hungary, having learned that he had
collected many spells (which were indeed subsequently published in
folklore journals), stole into the scholar's room and surreptitiously
copied them, so that the next year when Dragomanoff returned, he found
the thief in full practice as a blooming magician. Truly he had not got
many incantations, only a dozen or so, but a very little will go a great
way in the business, and I venture to say there is perhaps hardly a
single witch in Italy who knows as many as I have published, mine having
been assiduously collected from many, far and wide. Everything of the
kind

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

which is written is, moreover, often destroyed with scrupulous care by
priests or penitents, or the vast number who have a superstitious fear
of even being in the same house with such documents, so that I regard
the rescue of the *Vangelo* as something which is to say the least
remarkable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](ara01.htm#fr_0) March, 1897: "Neapolitan
Witchcraft."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vi:1](ara01.htm#fr_1) Thus we may imagine what
the case would have been as regards German fairy-tales if nothing had
survived to a future day except the collections of Grimm and Musæus. The
world would fall into the belief that these constituted all the works of
the kind which had ever existed, when, in fact they form only a small
part of the whole. And folklore was unknown to classic authors: there is
really no evidence in any ancient Latin writer that he gathered
traditions and the like among the vulgar, as men collect at present.
They all made books entirely out of books--there being still "a few left
of the same sort" of literati.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ara02)
