[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ara17)  [Next](ara19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VH8HW4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Aradia, Gospel of the Witches*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1899\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

# APPENDIX

### Comments on the Foregoing Texts

So long ago as the year 1886 I learned that there was in existence a
manuscript setting forth the doctrines of Italian witchcraft, and I was
promised that, if possible, it should be obtained for me. In this I was
for a time disappointed. But having urged it on Maddalena, my collector
of folk-lore, while she was leading a wandering life in Tuscany, to make
an effort to obtain or recover something of the kind, I at last received
from her, on January 1, 1897, entitled *Aradia, or the Gospel of the
Witches*.

Now be it observed, that every leading point which forms the plot or
centre of the *Vangel*, such as that *Diana* is Queen of the Witches; an
associate of *Herodias (Aradia)* in her relations to sorcery; that she
bore a child to her brother the Sun (here *Lucifer*); that as a
moon-goddess she is in

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

some relation to Cain, who dwells as prisoner in the moon, and that the
witches of old were people oppressed by feudal lands, the former
revenging themselves in every way, and holding orgies to *Diana* which
the Church represented as being the worship of Satan--all of this, I
repeat, had been told or written out for me in fragments by Maddalena
(not to speak of other authorities), even as it had been chronicled by
Horst or Michelet; therefore all this is in the present document of
minor importance. All of this I expected, but what I did not expect, and
what was new to me, was that portion which is given as prose-poetry and
which I have *rendered* in metre or verse. This being traditional, and
taken down from wizards, is extremely curious and interesting, since in
it are preserved many relics of lore which, as may be verified from
records, have come down from days of yore.

Aradia is evidently enough *Herodias*, who was regarded in the beginning
as associated with *Diana* as chief of the witches. This was not, as I
opine, derived from the *Herodias* of the New Testament, but from an
earlier replica of *Lilith*, bearing the same name. It is, in fact, an
identification or twin-ing of the Aryan and Shemitic Queens of Heaven,
or of Night and of Sorcery, and it may be that this was known to the
earliest myth-makers. So far back as the sixth century the worship of
*Herodias* and *Diana* by witches was condemned

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

by a Church Council at Ancyra. Pipernus and other writers have noted the
evident identity of *Herodias* with *Lilith*. *Isis* preceded both.

Diana is very vigorously, even dramatically, set forth in this poem as
the goddess of the god-forsaken and ungodly, of thieves, harlots, and,
truth fully enough, of the "minions of the moon," as Falstaff would have
fain had them called. It was recognised in ancient Rome, as it is in
modern India, that no human being *can* be so bad or vile as to have
forfeited all right to divine protection of some kind or other, and
*Diana* was this protectress. It may be as well to observe here, that
among all free-thinking philosophers, educated *parias*, and literary or
book-Bohemians, there has ever been a most unorthodox tendency to
believe that the faults and errors of humanity are more due (if not
altogether due) to unavoidable causes which we cannot help, as, for
instance, heredity, the being born savages, or poor, or in vice, or unto
"bigotry and virtue" in excess, or unto inquisitioning--that is to say,
when we are so overburdened with innately born sin that all our free
will cannot set us free from it. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

It was during the so-called Dark Ages, or from the downfall of the Roman
Empire until the thirteenth century, that the belief that all which was

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

worst in man owed its origin solely to the monstrous abuses and tyranny
of Church and State. For then, at every turn in life, the vast majority
encountered downright shameless, palpable iniquity and injustice, with
no law for the weak who were without patrons.

The perception of this drove vast numbers of the discontented into
rebellion, and as they could not prevail by open warfare, they took
their hatred out in a form of secret anarchy, which was, however,
intimately blended with superstition and fragments of old tradition.
Prominent in this, and naturally enough, was the worship of *Diana* the
protectress--for the alleged adoration of Satan was a far later
invention of the Church, and it has never really found a leading place
in Italian witchcraft to this day. That is to say, purely *diabolical*
witchcraft did not find general acceptance till the end of the fifteenth
century, when it was, one may almost say, invented in Rome to supply
means wherewith to destroy the threatening heresy of Germany.

The growth of Sentiment is the increase of suffering; man is never
entirely miserable until he finds out how wronged he is and fancies that
he sees far ahead a possible freedom. In ancient times men as slaves
suffered less under even more abuse, because they believed they were
born to low conditions of life. Even the best reform brings

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

pain with it, and the great awakening of man was accompanied with
griefs, many of which even yet endure. Pessimism is the result of too
much culture and *introversion*.

It appears to be strangely out of sight and out of mind with all
historians, that the sufferings of the vast majority of mankind, or the
enslaved and poor, were far greater under early Christianity, or till
the end of the Middle Ages and the Emancipation of Serfs, than they were
before. The reason for this was that in the old "heathen" time the
humble did not know, or even dream, that all are equal before God, or
that they had many *rights*, even here on earth, as slaves; for, in
fact, the whole *moral* tendency of the New Testament is utterly opposed
to slavery, or even severe servitude. Every word uttered teaching
Christ's mercy and love, humility and charity, was, in fact, a bitter
reproof, not only to every lord in the land, but to the Church itself,
and its arrogant prelates. The fact that many abuses had been mitigated
and that there were benevolent saints, does not affect the fact that, on
the whole, mankind was for a long time worse off than before, and the
greatest cause of this suffering was what may be called a sentimental
one, or a newly-born consciousness of rights withheld, which is always
of itself a torture. And this was greatly aggravated by the endless
preaching to the people that it was a *duty* to suffer and endure
oppression and tyranny, and that

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the rights of Authority of all kinds were so great that they on the
whole even excused their worst abuses. For by upholding Authority in the
nobility the Church maintained its own.

The result of it all was a vast development of rebels, outcasts, and all
the discontented, who adopted witchcraft or sorcery for a religion, and
wizards as their priests. They had secret meetings in desert places,
among old ruins accursed by priests as the haunt of evil spirits or
ancient heathen gods, or in the mountains. To this day the dweller in
Italy may often find secluded spots environed by ancient chestnut
forests, rocks, and walls, which suggest fit places for the *Sabbat*,
and are sometimes still believed by tradition to be such. And I also
believe that in this Gospel of the Witches we have a trustworthy outline
at least of the doctrine and rites observed at these meetings. They
adored forbidden deities and practised forbidden deeds, inspired as much
by rebellion against Society as by their own passions.

There is, however, in the Evangel of the Witches an effort made to
distinguish between the naturally wicked or corrupt and those who are
outcasts or oppressed, as appears from the passage:--

"Yet like Cain's daughter (offspring) thou shalt never be,  
Nor like the race who have become at last  
Wicked and infamous from suffering,  
As are the Jews and wandering Zingari,  
Who are *all* thieves: like them ye shall *not* be."

The supper of the Witches, the cakes of meal, salt, and honey, in the
form of crescent moons, are known to every classical scholar. The moon
or horn-shaped cakes are still common. I have eaten of them this very
day, and though they are known all over the world, I believe they owe
their fashion to tradition.

In the conjuration of the meal there is a very curious tradition
introduced to the effect that the *spige* or glittering grains of wheat
from which spikes shoot like sun-rays, owe their brilliant like ness to
a resemblance to the fire-fly, "who comes to give them light." We have,
I doubt not, in this a classic tradition, but I cannot verify it. Here
upon the *Vangelo* cites a common nursery-rhyme, which may also be found
in a nursery-tale, yet which, like others, is derived from witch-lore,
by which the *lucciola* is put under a glass and conjured to give by its
light certain answers.

The conjuration of the meal or bread, as being literally our body as
contributing to form it, and deeply sacred because it had lain in the
earth, where dark and wondrous secrets bide, seems to cast a new light
on the Christian sacrament. It is a type of resurrection from the earth,
and was therefore used at the Mysteries and Holy Supper, and the grain
had pertained to *chthonic* secrets, or to what had been under the earth
in darkness. Thus even earth-worms are invoked in modern

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

witchcraft as familiar with dark mysteries, and the shepherd's pipe to
win the Orphic power must be buried three days in the earth. And so all
was, and is, in sorcery a kind of wild poetry based on symbols, all
blending into one another, light and darkness, fire-flies and grain,
life and death.

Very strange indeed, but very strictly according to ancient magic as
described by classic authorities, is the threatening *Diana*, in case
she will not grant a prayer. This recurs continually in the
witch-exorcisms or spells. The *magus*, or witch, worships the spirit,
but claims to have the right, drawn from a higher power, to *compel*
even the Queen of Earth, Heaven, and Hell to grant the request. "Give me
what I ask, and thou shalt have honour and offerings; refuse, and I will
vex thee by insult." So Canidia and her kind boasted that they could
*compel* the gods to appear. This is all classic. No one ever heard of a
Satanic witch invoking or threatening the Trinity, or Christ or even the
angels or saints. In fact, they cannot even *compel* the devil or his
imps to obey--they work entirely by his good-will as slaves. But in the
old Italian lore the sorcerer or witch is all or nothing, and aims at
limitless will or power.

Of the ancient belief in the virtues of a perforated stone I need not
speak. But it is to be remarked that in the invocation the witch goes
forth *in the earliest morning* to seek for verbena or

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

vervain. The ancient Persian magi, or rather their daughters, worshipped
the sun as it rose by waving freshly plucked verbena, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) which was one of the seven most powerful
plants in magic. These Persian priestesses were naked while they thus
worshipped, nudity being a symbol of truth and sincerity.

The extinguishing the lights, nakedness, and the orgie, were regarded as
symbolical of the body being laid in the ground, the grain being
planted, or of entering into darkness and death, to be revived in new
forms, or regeneration and light. It was the laying aside of daily life.

The Gospel of the Witches, as I have given it, is in reality only the
initial chapter of the collection of ceremonies, "cantrips,"
incantations, and traditions current in the fraternity or sisterhood,
the whole of which are in the main to be found in my *Etruscan Roman
Remains* and *Florentine Legends*. I have, it is true, a great number as
yet unpublished, and there are more ungathered, but the whole scripture
of this sorcery, all its principal tenets, formulas, medicaments, and
mysteries may be found in what I have collected and printed. Yet I would
urge that it would be worth while to arrange and edit it all into one
work, because it would be to every student of archæology, folk-lore, or
history of great value. It has been the faith of millions in the past;
it has made itself felt in innumerable traditions, which deserve to be
better

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

understood than they are, and I would gladly undertake the work if I
believed that the public would make it worth the publisher's outlay and
pains.

It may be observed with truth that I have not treated this Gospel, nor
even the subject of witchcraft, entirely as *folk-lore*, as the word is
strictly defined and carried out; that is, as a mere traditional fact or
thing to be chiefly regarded as a variant like or unlike sundry other
traditions, or to be tabulated and put away in pigeon-holes for
reference. That it is useful and sensible to do all this is perfectly
true, and it has led to an immense amount of valuable search,
collection, and preservation. But there is this to be said--and I have
observed that here and there a few genial minds are beginning to awake
to it--that the mere study of the letter in this way has developed a
great indifference to the spirit, going in many cases so far as to
produce, like Realism in Art (to which it is allied), even a contempt
for the matter or meaning of it, as originally believed in.

I was lately much struck by the fact that in a very learned work on
Music, the author, in discussing that of ancient times and of the East,
while extremely accurate and minute in determining pentatonic and all
other scales, and what may be called the mere machinery and history of
composition, showed that he was utterly ignorant of the fundamental fact
that notes and chords, bars

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and melodies, were in themselves ideas or thoughts. Thus *Confucius* is
said to have composed a melody which was a personal description of
himself. Now if this be not understood, we can not understand the soul
of early music, and the folk-lorist who cannot get beyond the letter and
fancies himself "scientific" is exactly like the musician who has no
idea of how or why melodies were anciently composed.

The strange and mystical chapter "How Diana made the Stars and the Rain"
is the same given in my *Legends of Florence*, vol. ii. p. 229, but much
enlarged, or developed to a cosmogonic-mythologic sketch. And here a
reflection occurs which is perhaps the most remarkable which all this
Witch Evangel suggests. In all other Scriptures of all races, it is the
male, Jehovah, Buddha, or Brahma, who creates the universe; in Witch
Sorcery it is the female who is the primitive principle. Whenever in
history there is a period of radical intellectual rebellion against
long-established conservatism, hierarchy, and the like, there is always
an effort to regard Woman as the fully equal, which means the superior
sex. Thus in the extraordinary war of conflicting elements, strange
schools of sorcery, Neo-Platonism, Cabala, Heretic Christianity,
Gnosticism, Persian Magism and Dualism, with the remains of old Greek
and Egyptian theologies in the third and fourth centuries at Alexandria,
and in the House of Light of Cairo in

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the ninth, the equality of Woman was a prominent doctrine. It was Sophia
or Helena, the enfranchised, who was then the true Christ who was to
save mankind.

When Illumination or Illuminé-ism, in company with magic and mysticism,
and a resolve to regenerate society according to extreme free thought,
inspired the Templars to the hope that they would master the Church and
the world, the equality of Woman, derived from the Cairene traditions,
again received attention. And it may be observed that during the Middle
Ages, and even so late as the intense excitements which inspired the
French Huguenots, the Jansenists and the Anabaptists, Woman always came
forth more prominently or played a far greater part than she had done in
social or political life. This was also the case in the Spiritualism
founded by the Fox sisters of Rochester, New York, and it is manifesting
itself in many ways in the *Fin de Siècle*, which is also a nervous
chaos according to *Nordau*,--Woman being evidently a fish who shows
herself most when the waters are troubled:--

"Oh, Woman, in our hours of ease!"

The reader will remember the rest. but we should also remember that in
the earlier ages the vast majority of mankind itself, suppressed by the
too great or greatly abused power of Church and State, only manifested
itself at such periods of

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

rebellion against forms or ideas grown old. And with every new
rebellion, every fresh outburst or *debâcle* or wild inundation and
bursting over the barriers, humanity and woman gain something, that is
to say, their just dues or rights. For as every freshet spreads more
widely its waters over the fields, which are in due time the more
fertilised thereby, so the world at large gains by every Revolution,
however terrible or repugnant it may be for a time.

The Emancipated or Woman's Rights woman, when too enthusiastic,
generally considers man as limited, while Woman is destined to gain on
him. In earlier ages a contrary opinion prevailed, and both are, or
were, apparently in the wrong, so far as the future is concerned. For in
truth both sexes are progressive, and progress in this respect means not
a *conflict* of the male and female principle, such as formed the basis
of the *Mahabarata*, but a gradual ascertaining of true ability and
adjustment of relations or co-ordination of powers--in doing which on a
scientific basis all conflict ceases.

These remarks are appropriate to my text and subject, because it is in
studying the epochs when woman has made herself prominent and
influential that we learn what the capacities of the female sex truly
are. Among these, that of Witchcraft as it truly was--not as it is
generally quite misunderstood--is as deeply interesting as any other.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the
*Witch*--laying aside all question as to magic or its non-existence--was
once a real factor or great power in rebellious social life, and to this
very day--as most novels bear witness--it is recognised that there is
something uncanny, mysterious, and incomprehensible in woman, which
neither she herself nor man can explain.

"For every woman is at heart a witch."

We have banished the broom and the cat and the working miracles, the
Sabbat and pacts with Satan, but the mystery or puzzle is as great as
ever; no one living knows to what it is destined to lead. Are not the
charms of love of every kind, and the enjoyment of beauty in all its
forms in nature, mysteries, miracles, or magical?

To all who are interested in this subject of woman's influence and
capacity, this Evangel of the Witches will be of value as showing that
there have been strange thinkers who regarded creation as a feminine
development or parthenogenesis from which the masculine principle was
born. Lucifer, or Light, lay hidden in the darkness of Diana, as heat is
hidden in lee. But the regenerator or Messiah of this strange doctrine
is a woman Aradia, though the two, mother and daughter, are confused or
reflected in the different tales, even as Jahveh is confused with the
*Elohim*.

"Remains to be said"--that the Adam-nable and Eve-il, or Adamite
assemblages enjoined in

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the Gospel of Sorcery, are not much, if at all, kept up by the now few
and far between old or young witches and venerable wizards of the
present day. That is to say, not to my knowledge in Central or Northern
Italy. But among the *roués*, *viveurs*, and fast women of Florence and
Milan--where they are not quite as rare as eclipses--such assemblies are
called *balli angelici* or angels' balls. They are indeed far from being
unknown in any of the great cities of the world. A few years ago a
Sunday newspaper in an American city published a detailed account of
them in the "dance-houses" of the town, declaring that they were of very
frequent occurrence, which was further verified to me by men familiar
with them.

A very important point to all who regard the finds or discoveries of
ancient tradition as of importance, is that a deep and extensive study
of the Italian witch-traditions which I have collected, a comparison of
them one with the other, and of the whole with what resembles it in the
writings of Ovid and other mythologists, force the conviction (which I
have often expressed, but not too frequently) that there are in these
later records many very valuable and curious remains of ancient Latin or
Etruscan lore, in all probability entire poems, tales, and invocations
which have passed over from the ancient tongue. If this be *true*, and
when it shall come to pass that scholars will read with interest what is
here given, then most

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

assuredly there will be critical examination and verification of what is
ancient in it, and it will be discovered what marvels of tradition still
endure.

That the witches even yet form a fragmentary secret society or sect,
that they call it that of the Old Religion, and that there are in the
Romagna entire villages in which the people are completely heathen, and
almost entirely governed by *Settimani* or "seven months' children," may
be read in the novel of the name, as well as several papers published in
divers magazines, or accepted from my own personal knowledge. The
existence of a *religion* supposes a Scripture, and in this case it may
be admitted, almost without severe verification, that the Evangel of the
Witches is really a very old work. Thus it is often evident that where a
tradition has been taken down from verbal delivery, the old woman
repeats words or sentences by whole chapters which she does not fully
understand, but has heard and learned. These are to be verified by
correlation or comparison with other tales and texts. Now considering
all this most carefully and critically, or severely yet impartially, no
one can resist the conviction that in the Gospel of the Witches we have
a book which is in all probability the translation of some early or
later Latin work, since it seems most probable that every fixed faith
finds its record. There are literary men among the Pariahs of India;
there were probably many among the minions of the moon,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

or nocturnal worshippers of *Diana*. In fact, I am not without hope that
research may yet reveal in the writings of some long-forgotten heretic
or mystic of the dark ages the parallel of many passages in this text,
if not the whole of it.

Yet a few years, reader, and all this will have vanished from among the
Italians before the newspaper and railroad, even as a light cloud is
driven before a gale, or pass away like snowflakes in a pond. Old
traditions are, in fact, disappearing with such incredible rapidity that
I am assured on best authority--and can indeed see for myself that what
I collected or had recorded for me ten years ago in the Romagna Toscana,
with exceptionably skilful aid, could not now be gathered at all by
anybody, since it no longer exists, save in the memories of a few old
sorcerers who are daily disappearing, leaving no trace behind. It is
going--going--it is all but gone; in fact, I often think that, old as I
am (and I am twelve years beyond the limit of extreme old age as defined
by the Duke of Marlborough in his defence), I shall yet live to hear the
rap of the auctioneer Time as he bids off the last real Latin sorcerer
to Death! It may be that he is passing in his checks even as I write.
The women or witches, having more vitality, will last a little longer--I
mean the traditional kind; for as regards innate natural development of
witchcraft and pure custom, we shall always have

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

with us sorceresses, even as we shall have the poor--until we all go up
together.

What is very remarkable, even to the being difficult to understand, is
the fact that so much antique tradition survived with so little change
among the peasantry. But legends and spells in families of hereditary
witches are far more likely to live than fashions in art, yet even the
latter have been kept since 2000 years. Thus, as E. Neville Rolfe
writes: "The late Signor Castellani, who was the first to reproduce with
fidelity the jewellery found in the tombs of Etruria and Greece, made up
his mind that some survival of this ancient and exquisite trade must
still exist somewhere in Italy. He accordingly made diligent search...
and in an out of the way village discovered goldsmiths who made
ornaments for the peasants, which in their character indicated a strong
survival of early Etruscan art." <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

And here I would remark, that where I have written perhaps a little too
bitterly of the indifference of scholars to the curious traditions
preserved by wizards and witches, I refer to Rome, and especially to
Northern Italy. *G. Pitré* did all that was possible for one man as
regards the South. Since the foregoing chapters were written, I received
*Naples in the Nineties*, by E. Neville Rolfe, B.A., in which a deep and
intelligent interest in the subject is well supported by extensive
knowledge. What will be to the reader of my book particularly
interesting is the amount of information which Mr. Rolfe gives regarding
the connection of Diana with witchcraft, and how many of her attributes
became those of the Madonna. "The worship of Diana," as he says,
"prevailed very extensively... so much so, that when Christianity
superseded Paganism, much of the heathen symbolism was adapted to the
new rites, and the transition from the worship of Diana to that of the
Madonna was made comparatively simple." Mr. Rolfe speaks of the key,
rue, and verbena as symbols of Diana; of all of these I have
incantations, apparently very ancient, and identified with Diana. I have
often found rue in houses in Florence, and had it given to me as a
special favour. It is always concealed in some dark corner, because to
take any away is to take luck. The bronze frog was an emblem of Diana;
hence the Latin proverb, "'He who loves a frog regards it as Diana." It
was made till recent

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

times as an amulet. I have one as a paper-weight now before me. There is
also an incantation to the frog.

That wherein Mr. Rolfe tacitly and unconsciously confirms what I have
written, and what is most remarkable in this my own work, is that the
wizards in Italy form a distinct class, still exercising great power in
Naples and Sicily, and even possessing very curious magical documents
and cabalistic charts, one of which (familiar to those who have seen it
among the *Takruri* and Arab sorcerers in Cairo, in their books) he
gives. These probably are derived from Malta. Therefore it will not seem
astonishing to the reader that this Gospel of the Witches should have
been preserved, even as I have given it. That I have not had or seen it
in an *old* MS. is certainly true, but that it has been written of yore,
and is still repeated here and there orally, in separate parts, I am
sure. <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

It would be a great gratification to me if any among those into whose
hands this book may fall, who may possess information confirming what is
here set forth, would kindly either communicate it or publish it in some
form, so that it may not be lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[103:1](ara18.htm#fr_30) Hence the saying that
to know all would be to forgive all; which may be nine-tenths true, but
there *is* a tenth of responsible guilt.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[109:1](ara18.htm#fr_31) Friedrich, *Symbolik*,
p. 283.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[118:1](ara18.htm#fr_32) I am here reminded, by
a strange coincidence, that I having rediscovered the very ancient and
lost art of the Chinese how to make bottles or vases on which
inscriptions, &c., appeared when wine was poured into them, communicated
the discovery on the spot where I made it to the brother of Signor
Castellani; Sir Austin Layard, who had sent for him to hear and judge of
it, being present. Signore Castellani the younger was overseer of the
glass-works a Murano, in which I made the discovery. Signore Castellani
said that he had heard of these Chinese vases, and always regarded the
story as a fable or impossible, but that they could be made perfectly by
my process, adding. however, that they would cost too much to make it
profitable. I admit that I have little faith in lost arts beyond
recovering. Described in my book (unpublished) on the *Hundred Minor
Arts*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[120:1](ara18.htm#fr_33) In a very recent work
by Messrs. Niceforo and Sighele, entitled *La Mala Vita a Roma* ("Evil
Life in Rome"), there is a chapter devoted to the Witches of the Eternal
City, of whom the writer says they form a class so hidden that "the most
Roman of Romans is perhaps ignorant of their existence." This is true of
the real *Strege*, though not of mere fortune-tellers, who are common
enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Children of Diana, or How the Fairies Were Born](ara19)
