[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ara15)  [Next](ara17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VH8HW4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Aradia, Gospel of the Witches*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1899\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

# CHAPTER XIV

### The Goblin Messengers of Diana and Mercury

The following tale was not given to me as connected with the Gospel of
the Witches, but as *Diana* appears in it, and as the whole conception
is that of *Diana* and *Apollo* in another form, I include it in the
series.

Many centuries ago there was a *folletto*, goblin, or spirit, or
devil-angel--*chi sa?*--who knows what? and *Mercurio*, who was the god
of speed and of quickness, being much pleased with this imp, bestowed on
him the gift of running like the wind, with the privilege that whatever
he pursued, be it spirit, a human being, or animal, he should certainly
overtake or catch it. This folletto had a beautiful sister, who, like
him, ran errands, not for the. gods, but for the goddess (there was a
female god for every male, even down to the small spirits); and Diana on
the same day gave to this fairy the power that, whoever might chase her,
she should, if pursued, never be overtaken.

One day the brother saw his sister speeding like a flash of lightning
across the heaven, and he felt a sudden strange desire in rivalry to
overtake her. So he

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

dashed after as she flitted on; but though it was his destiny to catch,
she had been fated never to be caught, and so the will of one supreme
god was balanced by that of another.

So the two kept flying round and round the edge of heaven, and at first
all the gods roared with laughter, but when they understood the case,
they grew serious, and asked one another how it was to end.

Then the great father-god said:--

"Behold the earth, which is in darkness and gloom! I will change the
sister into a moon, and her brother into a sun. And so shall she ever
escape him, yet will he ever catch her with his light, which shall fall
on her from afar; for the rays of the sun are his hands, which reach
forth with burning grasp, yet which are ever eluded."

And thus it is said that this race begins anew with the first of every
month, when the moon being cold, *is covered with as many coats as an
onion*. But while the race is being run, as the moon becomes warm she
casts off one garment after another, till she is naked and then stops,
and then when dressed the race begins again.

As the vast storm-cloud falls in glittering drops, even so the great
myths of the olden time  
are broken up into small fairy-tales, and as these drops in turn reunite

"En rivière ou sur l'estang,"  
("On silent lake or streamlet lone,")

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

as Villon hath it, even so minor myths are again formed from the fallen
waters. In this story we clearly have the dog made by Vulcan and the
wolf-Jupiter settled the question by petrifying them-as you may read in
*Julius Pollux* his fifth book, or any other on mythology. *Is canis
fuit postea à Jove in lapidem conversus*.

'Which hunting hound, as well is known,  
Was changed by Jupiter to stone."

It is remarkable that in this story the moon is compared to an onion.
"The onion," says Friedrich (*Symbolik der Natur*, p. 348), "was, on
account of its many skins, among the Egyptians the emblem and hieroglyph
of the many-formed moon, whose different phases are so clearly seen in
the root when it is cut through, also because its growth or decrease
corresponds with that of the planet. Therefore it was dedicated to Isis,
the Moon-Goddess." And for this reason the onion was so holy as to be
regarded as having in itself something of deity; for which reason
Juvenal remarks that the Egyptians were happy people to have gods
growing in their gardens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Laverna](ara17)
