[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe13)  [Next](boe15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Lost Atlantis

The fourth--or the third--catastrophe of the world-tradition is the
sinking of Atlantis, the great prehistoric continent. A generation ago
scientists would have smiled at the idea of taking this particular
tradition seriously. But they do not smile to-day; they give the theory
the Scotch verdict--"not proven." Even that conservative storehouse of
factual knowledge, the *Encyclopædia Britannica*, says of this
tradition, "It is impossible to decide how far this legend is due to
Plato's invention, and how far it is based on facts of which no record
remains." Fortunately for us, however, world-pictures are not based on
proven facts, or they would never have been drawn, and Plato's story of
the lost Atlantis, even if eventually proved "true," will always remain
one of the most charming of fantasies. If you have not read it, in the
*Timaeus* and the *Critias*, read it--his story of a golden world, when
men were sons of gods and had not lost their heritage; of a civilisation
that soared to heights of knowledge ours has never known--and sank. A
few escaped this continental Deluge--Atlas escaped, says the old story,
to support Heaven and Earth, in order that the Universe might not sink
also.

Every one has seen somewhere Kircher's drawing of the Island of
Atlantis--this was the last remnant of the continent, which tradition
says sank 12,000 years ago--but it is doubtful that any one has ever
seen it reproduced as it appeared in his *Mundus Subterraneus* of 1678
([Plate XV](#img_pl15)).

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It is always reversed, relettered, and made to
conform to the right geography. The ship in the upper right-hand corner
is turned bottom side up, and made to lie at anchor in the lower
left-hand corner. Let the old mistake stand, if mistake it was--and
mistake it was surely. Turning it upside down will put everything into
right relation with modern geography. Only the ship will be wrong, like
a mirage in the waters. [Plate XVI](boe15.htm#img_pl16) is Kircher's
accompanying illustration of "Ocean mountains," whose highest peaks may
be island remnants of sunken continents, a little ground plan of the
ocean floor.

Kircher, whose bold "guesses" on things he could not prove brought him
less fame than blame, guessed again on the combined problems of the
Deluge and lost continents, and in his *Arca Noë*, 1665, presented, in a
world-map, a "conjectural geography of the Earth's translation after the
Flood, from the opinions of various geographers, to which the author
subscribes" ([Plate XVII](boe15.htm#img_pl17)). This is a very odd map,
by the way, and one evidently little known to modern geographers.
Imagine a little German scholar, sitting in Rome under the shadow of St.
Peter's during the Thirty Years' War, and guessing simply, not only at
the form and extent of the then discovered but by no means explored
Americas, and not only at the form and extent of the still unknown
Arctic and Antarctic "continents," but also at the conformation and
extent of the "ocean-mountains," and of the sunken antediluvian
continents. To say he guessed wrong is to say a little less than
nothing. This map represents more clearly than his little drawing of
Atlantis, his then novel theory that the

 

<span id="img_pl15"></span>

[![PLATE XV &lt;i&gt;Situation of the Island of Atlantis, according to
the ideas of the ancient Egyptians and the description of
Plato&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Mundus Subterraneus&lt;/i&gt;;
Athanasius Kircher, 1678)](tn/pl15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl15.jpg)  
PLATE XV *Situation of the Island of Atlantis, according to the ideas of
the ancient Egyptians and the description of Plato*.  
(From *Mundus Subterraneus*; Athanasius Kircher, 1678)  

 

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lost Island had been situated west of Gibraltar,
and that the Canaries and the Azores are to-day its only remnants. But
what it really does, of course, is to send the conjectural Atlantean
continent straight west into the Americas, and almost across them. Who
knows? We are still guessing, and the Mayan excavations are furnishing
golden material for further guesses. It may very well be that half a
century from now this old "guess-map" of Kircher's will be even more
interesting than it is to-day.

According to the beautiful maps of W. Scott-Elliot <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](boe15.htm#fn_4)--Kircher's map may serve as a guide
for Scott-Elliot's slightly different theory--the Atlantean continent
extended from a point a few degrees east of Iceland to, approximately,
the site of Rio de Janeiro in South America, and across the ocean to the
African Gold Coast. It took in Texas, and the Gulf of Mexico, the
southern and eastern States of America up to and including Labrador, and
stretched across the Atlantic to the British Isles, embracing Scotland,
Ireland, and part of northern England. Atlantis is, by this assumption,
the parent land of America--a great continent surrounded by water at a
time so far away as that in which the Sahara Desert was an ocean floor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lost Land of the West](boe15)
