[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe17)  [Next](boe19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Wheel of Life

CLOSELY ASSOCIATED with the World Mountains are the many Wheels of Life,
by which the ancients sought to picture the relations of parts of the
universe to each other and to the whole. There is a hint of this in the
Tibetan world-picture, with Mount Meru the axis or hub of the world
about which are placed like spokes in a wheel the four quarters of the
Earth, with their three islands each, making the sum of twelve radii
from the centre. The Wheel of the Zodiac was of course the great
original for all such figures, particularly for the Wheels of Life. For
uncounted centuries man knew the geography of the heavens better than
the geography of the Earth, and whatever life on Earth meant to him, the
unfailing procession of the great star-groups of the Zodiac meant
certainty, law, order. There were zones written in the heavens long
before man stretched his imaginary lines of the terrestrial zones over
the Earth--"The circle called the Zodiac," said Plutarch, "is placed
under the three that are in the midst, and lies obliquely, gently
touching them all." And it is not hard to see how this great circle came
to seem to man a mirror of the Earth, a storehouse of its history, its
constant Watcher in the sky, and the unerring prophet of

 

<span id="img_pl26"></span>

[![PLATE XXVI. CREATIO UNIVERSI&lt;br&gt; (From Physica Sacra; Johann
Jacob Scheuchzer, 1731, Vol. q, Plate I).](tn/pl26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl26.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXVI. CREATIO UNIVERSI  
(From Physica Sacra; Johann Jacob Scheuchzer, 1731, Vol. q, Plate I).  

its future. The Greeks named this oblique ring of star-groups just
behind the Sun when it sets or just before it when it rises, the Zodiac
or Path of Animals, because the names and configurations of the groups
were mostly those of animals, and by that name we know it. But no one
knows how long before the days of the Greeks far earlier astronomers
first linked the single groups of stars into the twelve great signs of
the Star-bearing Circle.

*Physica Sacra* is an early eighteenth-century Bible illustrated almost
text for text, and [Plate XXVI](#img_pl26.md) is its first illustration,
for the first verse of the first chapter of the first book: "In the
beginning God created the heaven and the Earth." Outside the Zodiacal
Wheel are clouds upon clouds bearing a multitude of spheres, and, in
addition, seven numbered diagrams. Fig. I in this Plate illustrates the
system of the "eleven heavens," with the Earth the centre of the
universe. Fig. II is the Tychonian system; Fig. III, what is known as
the semi-Tychonian system; Fig IV, the blazing and effulgent Sun,
containing within himself his seven children, Earth and Moon and the
five great planets; Fig. V, a group of the heavenly bodies; Fig. VI, an
armillary sphere; Fig. VII, an Astrolabe, which is almost to say, "the
handle of the stars," and which was called by the old astronomers "the
Mathematical jewel."

The Northern and Southern hemispheres of the heavens (Figs.
[58](#img_fig058) and [59](#img_fig059).md) are merely supplementary to
Scheuchzer's *Creatio Universi*. They are taken from an Arabic celestial
globe, made of brass, in 1275 A.D., which was deposited in the Museum of
the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Near the South
Pole is an inscription

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

in Cufic characters, stating that it was "Made by the most humble in the
supreme God, Mohammed ben Helah, the astronomer of Monsul, in the year
of the Hegira

<span id="img_fig058"></span>

[![FIGURE 58. &lt;i&gt;An ancient Arabic Celestial Sphere. Northern
Hemisphere&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Transactions of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland&lt;/i&gt;, 1830, Vol. II,
Plate A.)](tn/fig058.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig058.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 58. *An ancient Arabic Celestial Sphere. Northern Hemisphere*.  
(From *Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland*, 1830, Vol. II, Plate A.)  

\[paragraph continues\] 674." The Zodiac was known to the Arabs, not as
The Path of Animals," but as The Girdle of the Castles," and contained,
with one or two variations in name, the same signs we have to-day:
Aries, Taurus and Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo (this the Arabs called the
Ear), Balance or

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces.

There are altogether, including the signs of the Zodiac, forty-seven
constellations on these Arabic celestial hemi-

<span id="img_fig059"></span>

[![FIGURE 59. &lt;i&gt;An ancient Arabic Celestial Sphere. Southern
Hemisphere&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Transactions of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland&lt;/i&gt;, 1830, Vol. II,
Plate B.)](tn/fig059.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig059.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 59. *An ancient Arabic Celestial Sphere. Southern Hemisphere*.  
(From *Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland*, 1830, Vol. II, Plate B.)  

spheres. The ones inscribed on the Northern hemisphere are: Little Bear;
Greater Bear; The Dragon; Cepheus; Boötes; the Northern Crown; The
Kneeling Hercules; The Lyre; The Hen, or Swan; The Lady in her Chair, or
Cassiopeia; The Bearer of Medusa's Head, *i.e.*, Perseus; The

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Charioteer; The Charmer of Serpents, or
Serpentarius; The Arrow, or Sagittarius; The Flying Eagle, or Aquila;
The Dolphin; Part of the Horse (the horse's head); The Greater Horse,
Pegasus; The Chain, or Andromeda; The Triangle.

The constellations inscribed on the Southern hemisphere are: Ketos, the
Whale; The Giant, or Orion; The River, or Acarnar; The Hare, or Lepus;
the Greater Dog, or Canis; The Dog, or Procyon; The Ship, or Argo; The
Hydra; The Flaggon, or Crater; The Crow, or Corvus; The Centaur, or
Centaurus; The Beast, or Fera; The Censer; The Southern Crown; The
Southern Fish.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

OF THE TWO WHEELS OF LIFE (or Fate or Law) to be given here, we begin
with the one that seems the simpler. This Chinese Wheel ([Plate
XXVII](#img_pl27).md) is almost a Zodiac or "path of animals," of itself.
(The Chinese Zodiac, or "Yellow Path of the Sun," differed materially in
its signs from the Greek-Arabic one just given; it contained twelve
animals: the Mouse, the Cow, the Tiger, the Rabbit, the Dragon, the
Serpent, the Horse, the Ram, the Ape, the Hen, the Dog, and the Pig.)
Six of the twelve divisions are separating paths or currents, through or
over which the traveller passes to the next stage. Four of the remaining
divisions are the abodes of beasts, of insects, of fish, and of birds.
The other two, separated from each other by one of the spiral-like
rivers, are inhabited by Poor Men and Rich Men, or by Mandarins and
Tillers of the Soil.

<span id="img_pl27"></span>

[![PLATE XXVII. THE WHEEL OF LIFE&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Dragon,
Image, and Demon&lt;/i&gt;; H. C. Du Bose, 1887)](tn/pl27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl27.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXVII. THE WHEEL OF LIFE  
(From *Dragon, Image, and Demon*; H. C. Du Bose, 1887)  

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

The second of these wheels is the one elaborately developed in the
Tibetan Wheel of Life (Plate XXVIII) to

<span id="img_fig060"></span>

[![FIGURE 60. &lt;i&gt;Key to the Tibetan Wheel of
Life&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The Buddhism of Tibet, or
Lamaism&lt;/i&gt;; L. Austine Waddell, 1899.)](tn/fig060.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig060.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 60. *Key to the Tibetan Wheel of Life*.  
(From *The Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamaism*; L. Austine Waddell, 1899.)  

which is an almost necessary Key. It is a Tibetan version of an Indian
painting in one of the abandoned cave-temples of Ajanta, which L.
Austine Waddell holds to be "a complete authentic account of human life
from the absolute standpoint of the earliest Buddhist philosophy."

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The Lamas of Tibet say that Buddha himself
originated the Wheel of Life, forming it on the Earth with grains of
rice from a "rice-field school room." According to the old story, while
tarrying for a while at the Squirrels' Feeding Ground in the Venuvana
forest near Rajagriha, Buddha instructed his disciple Ananda, to make a
Wheel, for the sake of illustrating what another disciple had seen when
he visited other spheres. This Wheel was to have five spokes, between
which were to be shown the several hells, animals, ghosts, gods and men.
In the middle a dove, a serpent, and a hog were to symbolise lust,
hatred, and ignorance. Around the outer rim was to wind "the twelve-fold
circle of causation," in regular and inverse order. Beings were to be
shown "as being born in a supernatural way as by the machinery of a
water-wheel falling from one state and being produced in another."
Buddha himself, as an "Enlightened One," liberated from the fate of
recurrence on the Wheel, was to be outside of it--one who had escaped.
This diagram, made first of rice-grains, was later filled in (second
century A.D.) with pictures by the Indian monk Nagarjuna, but these
pictures are said to be not his own inventions, but the visual images of
Buddha's own parables and allegories.

The Key to the Tibetan Wheel of Life will be found an aid in following
the interpretation of it, which is Waddell's, and is given here much
abridged. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md)

The disc, symbolising the endless cycle of life, is held

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

in the grasp of a monster who represents the horrors of Attachment, the
wretchedness of Clinging-to-Life.

The broad tire of the Wheel is filled with the twelve-linked closed
chain called the Causal Nexus, or "the twelve-fold circle of causation,"
*i.e.*, the causes of life and of misery. At the centre or nave lie the
three vices or delusions, "the Daughters of Desire," symbolising lust,
ill-will, and stupidity, which lie at the core of re-birth, and are here
given in the forms of a dove, a serpent, and a pig, coloured
respectively red, green, and black. The body of the Wheel, filled with
varied pictures, is supposed to be constantly revolving, thereby
producing "The Whirling on the Wheel" of Life.

The way of escape is indicated by the twelve "links," and the first link
is the connecting link between the old life and the new. It might be
denominated Unconscious Will to escape. The links in the causal chain
are:

I. A blind she-camel (ignorant unconscious will) led by a driver
(Karma). In this picture, however, the first link is represented by a
blind old woman led by a man, with its meaning the same. II. A potter
modelling clay on his wheel (Conformations and impressions of and on
formless clay). III. A monkey (the beginning of Consciousness; the new
man is approaching to the human, but is still an unreasoning automaton).
IV. A man being ferried across an Ocean (Self-consciousness--the
Individual crossing the Ocean of Life). V. An empty house (Understanding
achieved through "the empty house of the senses"). VI. The Kiss (or
contact with the outside world). VII. An arrow entering a man's eye
(Feeling or

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

perception). VIII. A man drinking wine (Desire--or thirst). IX. A man
gathering fruit and storing it in baskets (Greed, or the satisfying of
Desire). X. A married woman--wife of him whose life is here traced
(fuller life, Being, Becoming, even Re-birth and the continuance of
Being for another existence). XI. Parent and child (Birth--of an heir).
XII. A corpse being carried off to burial (Decay and Death), which leads
to I, Unconscious Will for re-birth--and the cycle of the Wheel is begun
again.

The ways of "life" or "re-birth" are, from highest to lowest, 1.
Gods--the *Sura*. 2. Titans--the *Asura*. 3. Man--*Nara*, or *Mi*. 4.
Beasts--the *Du-do* or "best goers." 5. Tantalised Ghosts--*Pretas*. 6.
Hell--*Naraka* or *Nal-k’am*.

To live in the first three worlds is superior; to live in the last three
is inferior--the highest world being Heaven, and the lowest Hell.

In Heaven, above the Titans, on the aethereal summit of Mount Meru,
dwell the gods ([Plate XXV](boe17.htm#img_pl25).md). In the lowest regions
of the heavens dwell the "guardian kings of the four quarters";
*Dritarashtra*, the white guardian of the East; *Virudhaka*, the green
guardian of the South; *Virupaksha*, the red guardian of the West; and
*Vaisravana*, the yellow guardian of the North.

In the upper right-hand section of the Wheel of Life the Titans (the
*Asura* or not-gods) have their abode. Since their chief characteristic
is pride, this is the world of re-birth for the "proud." The Titans
correspond to Satan and his hosts, having been, like Satan, and for like
cause,

 

<span id="img_pl28"></span>

[![PLATE XXVIII. THE WHEEL OF LIFE&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The Buddhism
of Tibet, or, Lamaism&lt;/i&gt;; L. Austine Waddell,
1899)](tn/pl28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl28.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXVIII. THE WHEEL OF LIFE  
(From *The Buddhism of Tibet, or, Lamaism*; L. Austine Waddell, 1899)  

The following image was scanned directly from the original book, and is
higher resolution than the previous.

<span id="img_pl28alt"></span>

[![THE WHEEL OF LIFE&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The Buddhism of Tibet, or,
Lamaism&lt;/i&gt;; L. Austine Waddell, 1899), p. 108](tn/pl28alt.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl28alt.jpg.md)  
THE WHEEL OF LIFE  
(From *The Buddhism of Tibet, or, Lamaism*; L. Austine Waddell, 1899),
p. 108  

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

cast out from Heaven. Living at the foot of Mount Meru, they hover
forever between Heaven and Earth. The life of the Titans is much longer
than the life of men; but it is the fate of every Titan to die warring
against the gods for the fruits of the heavenly *Parijata* tree, whose
branches are in Heaven, but whose roots are in their country--"the tree
of the concentrated essence of Earth's products." The Jambu tree is, in
reality, according to this reading, the "climber" which encircles the
aethereal tree, and through it the quintessence of Jambudvip, or the
Jambu continent" of Earth is instilled into the *Parijata* Tree.

Man--*Nara* or *Mi*--lives in the upper left-hand region, constantly
confronting the eight miseries--birth, old age, sickness, death,
ungratified wishes and struggle for existence, misfortune and punishment
for law-breaking, separation from relatives and cherished objects,
offensive objects and sensations. Of all these and other phases of
ordinary existence pictures abound within the Wheel--birth in a cottage;
children at play; village scenes--people drinking wine under a tree; a
flute player; women spinning and weaving; a borrower; two traders; a
drunken man; workers tilling a field or gathering fuel in a forest or
bent under heavy loads; the accidents of life--a man and a horse falling
into a river; crime--two men fighting--another on trial--another
suffering punishment; government--a king and his ministers; old age,
disease--a doctor feeling a sick man's pulse; death--a corpse and
funeral ceremonies; religion--a temple placed above all the other
objects within the Wheel--that is, Indra's Palace.

Beasts--lower right-hand quarter--are more miserable

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

than man. They are shown consuming each other and being consumed; hunted
by men, overburdened with loads, and filled with fear. Far beneath the
waters of this animal world is the region of the *Nagas* or Mermen
(great snakes), their home preyed upon by Garuda, Lord of birds, seeking
here the serpents of the deep for food.

The region of the Tantalised Ghosts--lower left-hand quarter, is
situated above Hell, and hunger and thirst torture the inhabitants.
Always before their eyes there are food and drink and jewels in
abundance, but the *Pretas* have mouths no larger than the size of a
needle's eye, throats no wider than a hair's diameter, and through these
openings they can never satisfy their huge bodily appetites. Add to this
that, when food is taken, it is changed into knives or molten metal, and
their hunger and thirst can be realised as incessant and never to be
appeased. The little pictures within the Wheel show flames pouring from
their mouths--if they touch water, it changes to liquid fire. The great
*Maudgalyayana* once descended to the Tibetan purgatory to relieve his
mother's distress, but even he could not aid her, and the rice he
offered her turned to fiery ashes as she touched it.

Hell, the lowest region, is "situated in the bowels of the human Earth,"
and is ruled over by *Yama*, king and judge of the dead, who must
himself every day swallow molten metal. His domain is divided into many
compartments, each with its special form of punishment for the expiation
of different sins. In the upper part of Hell sits *Yama* with his good
and evil angels, ghosts of the dead, the Weigher, and the Prisoner.
Below are the Hot Hells, and the Cold

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hells, to each of which the damned are assigned
according to their sins. The Hot Hells are sunk in the Earth, beginning
at a depth of 11,900 miles, and they reach to a depth of 40,000 miles.
They are of deepest black, although each is surrounded by a wall of
fire. The Cold Hells are at the very edge of the Universe, circled by
icy mountains and supplied with glacier water in which the victims are
constantly immersed, until chilblains appear and become great sores and
ulcers.

There is an exit from Hell, through a sort of borderland Hell called
"the near (to re-birth) cycle." This has four divisions; the first
filled with hot ashes and dead bodies and offal; the second a quagmire
or "sinking sands," beyond which is a forest of spears, which must be
crossed--like the razor-bridge of Mohammed, the Bi-frost of Yggdrasil,
the slippery fir-tree of the American Indians, or the wide river of *The
Pilgrim's Progress*. After--if--the bridge is crossed, there comes a
river of freezing water whose farther shore is thickly set with tree
stumps bearing three spiked leaves which impale the pilgrim. What is
left to man after this pilgrimage is called "The Surviving Thing."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[140:1](boe18.htm#fr_11.md) Buddhism, or The Lamas
of Tibet; L. Austine Waddell, pp. 105-121.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earth The Mundane Egg](boe19.md)
