[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe18)  [Next](boe20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Earth The Mundane Egg

THE GREAT MONAD, or the Great Beginning, or the Great Extreme, or the
Great Vacuum, or Yin and Yang, or "Heaven," is one of the old,
mysterious figures of Earth. It represents all the pairs of opposites
that we know--Light and Darkness, life and death, death and re-birth,
heat and cold, good and evil, subtle and gross, male-female

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

in Nature, or the great principles Yin and Yang. It is One yet All
Things, the great hermaphrodite--"the indivisible monad, of itself
generating itself, and out of this were formed all things." It looks
like a shell, it looks like an ear; it looks like a tadpole, an embryo,
a whirlpool,

<span id="img_fig061"></span> ![FIGURE 61. The Great Monad.&lt;br&gt;
(From Dragon, Image and Demon; H. C. Du Bose, 1887.)](img/fig061.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 61. The Great Monad.  
(From Dragon, Image and Demon; H. C. Du Bose, 1887.)

a claw, a comma, two eyes, strange Moon upon the Sun. It looks perhaps
like the Universe itself before the creation of Heaven and Earth. It is
the epitome of all the "egg-shaped" figures of Earth. It is animated
Chaos, primordial Air dividing into two Airs to generate a multiplied
cosmos, for they have the power to make and transmute all things. It is
the *Ovum Mundi*--Egg of the World.

It is never a life or a birth symbol merely; it is always associated
with the idea of primal causal cosmic energy. The Japanese *mitsu tomoe*
is a variation of the Great Monad of the Chinese; instead of the
two-comma-shaped figure, its "commas" are three.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

"The Great Extreme," says the Chinese philosopher Choo-tzse, writing of
this ancient symbol, "moved and generated the Light; having moved to the
utmost, it rested, and resting, generated the Darkness. . . .

"The Great Extreme resembles a root which sprouts upwards,

<span id="img_fig062"></span> ![FIGURE 62. &lt;i&gt;The Mitsu Tomoe of
the Japanese&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie&lt;/i&gt;; Bd. IX (1896), S. 265.)](img/fig062.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 62. *The Mitsu Tomoe of the Japanese*.  
(From *Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie*; Bd. IX (1896), S. 265.)

and divides into branches, and which also divides and produces blossoms
and leaves, generating unceasingly. When the fruit is formed, then, it
contains inside, the seed of endless generations, which generates and
springs forth. This is the Infinite Great Extreme, which never ceases
altogether, but only when the fruit is perfected it ceases to generate
for a while. . . .

"In the beginning Heaven and Earth were just Light and Dark Air. This
one Air revolved grinding round and round. When it ground quickly much
sediment was compressed, which, having no means of exit, coagulated and

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

formed the Earth in the centre. The subtle portion of the Air then
became Heaven, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars which unceasingly revolve on
the outside. The Earth is in the centre, and is motionless, it is not
below the centre.

The Earth is the sediment of the Air; and hence it is said that the
light and pure Air became Heaven; the heavy and muddy Air became
Earth." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md)

Here is a series of Chinese diagrams ([Fig. 63](#img_fig063).md)
illustrating the process of the Creation of the universe from the
beginning--the whole infinite mass of Primordial Air when in Chaos. This
is represented by the black disc (*e*), the *Ovum Mundi* or "Mind" of
the universe, inherent in which, even in its mingled state, is the
Divine Reason. In (*f*) is shown the separation of the Primordial Air
into two Airs, the division of Subtile from Gross, of Light from
Darkness. This is the beginning of all things, from which sprang the
First God, All Light (*a*), called Reason, Fate, the Immovable Mover, or
the Infinite. From this First God came the Second God, or Light, and the
Demon-god or Darkness (*b*), which, say the Chinese, represent Mind or
the two-fold Soul, contained within the body of the visible world (*c*).
To represent the complete being of the animated cosmos the three circles
or globes are placed like three bodies, one within the other (*d*); this
is sometimes called the Three-fold Air. The Great Extreme is represented
in another form in the upper half of the lower right-hand figure, whose
inner circle represents the First God inherent in all things, with the
Light and Dark Airs alternating unceasingly. From this ceaseless
alternation

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

are generated the Five Elements whose Chinese terms differ considerably
from those we have been using--namely,

<span id="img_fig063"></span>

[![FIGURE 63. &lt;i&gt;Chinese Conception of the
Creation&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Confucian
Cosmogony&lt;/i&gt;; Thomas M’Clatchie, Shanghai,
1874.)](tn/fig063.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig063.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 63. *Chinese Conception of the Creation*.  
(From *Confucian Cosmogony*; Thomas M’Clatchie, Shanghai, 1874.)  

earth, water, fire, air, and ether. For the first one, they say, is
termed water, and by some is called black. The

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

second is fire, and by some is termed red. The third is called wood and
is therefore termed green. The fourth is called metal and is white. The
fifth is called earth, and is presumed to be yellow.

Besides the Great Monad and its associated diagrams, the Chinese had yet
another series of diagrams by which, they asserted, it was possible to
account for all the changes and transmutations within the forces of
Nature. These are the Eight Diagrams of Fuh-he, which, according to him
and his disciples, manifest the Mind of Heaven and Earth, whose only
purpose is to generate--that is, to change and to transmute. "That which
proceeds gradually," they said, "is transmutation \[like the growth of a
tree\]. That which is united in one and is incomprehensible is God.
Transmutation is each thing succeeding in order." They tried to explain
this further by saying: "That which when at Rest cannot Move, and when
in Motion cannot Rest is Matter;. that which Moves yet moves not, Rests
yet rests not, is God." They said, too, that the "thirty-six
palaces"--the number of units that make up the Eight Diagrams--are no
more than merely the strokes of the Light and the Darkness.

Each set of three lines ([Fig. 64](#img_fig064).md) represents the three
powers, Heaven, Earth, and Man, and represents also the exact force
exerted by each one in each of the eight combinations. The three
undivided lines, for instance, indicate the tireless strength of Heaven,
the three divided lines, the divided Earth. Beginning at the top and
going to the left, the triads are supposed to read: river or running

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

water, Heaven, wind, Earth, Sun, lake or dormant water, mountain,
thunder. The centre of this mirror is said to

<span id="img_fig064"></span>

[![FIGURE 64. &lt;i&gt;The Chinese Zodiac. From a Mirror of the Tang
Dynasty&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society of Great Britain and Ireland&lt;/i&gt;, 1835, Vol.
II.)](tn/fig064.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig064.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 64. *The Chinese Zodiac. From a Mirror of the Tang Dynasty*.  
(From *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland*, 1835, Vol. II.)  

represent the Sun, surrounded by four constellations, which are in turn
encircled by the Eight Diagrams, and these again by the Chinese Zodiac,
or Yellow Path of the Sun, with its twelve animal signs--the Mouse, Cow,
Tiger,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Rabbit, Dragon, Serpent, Horse, Ram, Ape, Hen,
Dog, and Pig.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

THE FIVE FIGURES OF EARTH as the Mundane Egg, given in Plates
[XXIX](#img_pl29ab), [pl30](#img_pl30), and [XXXI](#img_pl31.md), are all
of them different, yet all of them the same, and they range in time and
region from ancient Egypt to seventeenth-century England. The idea of
the "Ophis et Ovum Mundanum" (Plate[XXIX, B](#img_pl29ab).md) is not to be
traced to its source; it is found everywhere, in the open or secret
traditions of all races--this concept of the great World Serpent
warming, guarding, hatching, sometimes feasting on the Earth Egg. The
"Deus Luna" () is one of the old attempts, in varying forms and with
more interpretations, to link the great triad of heavenly bodies, Sun,
Moon, and Earth, into a figure symbolic of the whole universe. Here the
Mundane Egg is held in its fiery vase very much as an acorn is held in
its cup. It is guarded by the Moon, which, as a "great white bird," was
supposed to rest at night upon the Earth; "like a goose," said the
Egyptians, "brooding over her egg."

The third figure ([Plate XXIX, C](#img_pl29c).md), as much a World Mountain
as a World Egg, is asserted by Flammarion to represent the world-concept
of Edrisi, an Arabian geographer of the eleventh century, "who, with
many others, considered the Earth to be like an egg with one-half
plunged into the water." This is identical with the figure illustrating
the "Theory of Two Centres" ([Fig. 54](boe17.htm#img_fig054).md). It

 

<span id="img_pl29ab"></span>

[![PLATE XXIX. A. &lt;i&gt;Deus Lunus&lt;/i&gt;. B. &lt;i&gt;Ophis et
Ovum Mundanum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Ancient
Mythology&lt;/i&gt;; Jacob Bryant, 1774, Vol. Il)](tn/pl29ab.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl29ab.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXIX. A. *Deus Lunus*. B. *Ophis et Ovum Mundanum*.  
(From *Ancient Mythology*; Jacob Bryant, 1774, Vol. Il)  

<span id="img_pl29c"></span>

[![PLATE XXIX. C. Earth as a floating Egg.&lt;br&gt; (From Flammarion's
&lt;i&gt;Astronomical Myths&lt;/i&gt;. 1877)](tn/pl29c.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl29c.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXIX. C. Earth as a floating Egg.  
(From Flammarion's *Astronomical Myths*. 1877)  

 

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

is also a modern religious rendering of the Northern hemisphere, with
Jerusalem and Palestine at the apex of the world.

The last two figures bring us back again to Thomas Burnet and his
*Theory of the Earth*, which emphatically was the theory that it is
almost literally, certainly by every analogy, the Mundane Egg.

"There is another thing in Antiquity," said this great English
Platonist, "relating to the form and construction of the Earth, which is
very remarkable, and hath obtained throughout all learned Nations and
Ages. And that is the comparison or resemblance of the Earth to an
*Egg*. And this is not so much for its external figure, though that be
true too, as for the inward composition of it; consisting of several
Orbs, one including another, and in that order, as to answer the several
elementary Regions on which the new-made Earth was constituted. For if
we admit for the *Yolk* a Central fire . . . and suppose the Figure of
the Earth *Oval*, and a little extended towards the Poles . . . those
two bodies do very naturally represent one another, as in this Scheme,
which represents the interiour faces of both, a divided Egg, or Earth.
Where, as the two inmost Regions (A. B.) represent the Yolk and the
Membrane that lies next above it; so the Exteriour Region of the Earth
(D.) is as the Shell of the Egg, and the Abysse (C.) under it as the
White that lies under the Shell. And considering that this notion of the
Mundane Egg, or that the World was Oviform, hath been the sence and
language of all Antiquity, *Latins*, *Greeks*, *Persians*, *Egyptians*,
*and others*, I thought it worthy our notice in this place."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

The unknown author of *De Imago Mundi* had, it happens, compared not the
Earth but the Universe itself to a ball, or an Egg. In his scheme, the
shell corresponded to the upper heavens; the white to the upper air; the
yolk to the lower air; and the *pinguidinis gutta*, or drop of grease in
the centre, to the Earth. And, even earlier than these, the Venerable
Bede had written (in the sixth century A.D.): "The Earth is an element
placed in the middle of the world, as the yolk in the middle of an egg;
around it is the water, like the white surrounding the yolk; outside
that is the air, like the membrane of the egg; and around all is the
fire, which closes it in as the shell does. . . . The ocean, which
surrounds it by its waves as far as the horizon, divides it into two
parts, the upper of which is inhabited by us, while the lower is
inhabited by our antipodes; although not one of them can come to us, nor
one of us to them." These three analogies are developed differently, but
Burnet's figure of the "divided egg" will serve to illustrate all of
them ([Plate XXX](#img_pl30).md).

Having divided his Earth-egg to show the order of arrangement of its
inner parts, Burnet then closed it up, to represent it entire, with only
a reminder of the great abyss under it ([Plate XXXI](#img_pl31).md), on
which his whole theory of the Deluge and the dissolution of the Earth
rested. Either the great abyss opened (which he doubted), "or the frame
of the Earth broke and fell down into the Great Abysse." In the latter
case, there would be two effects. This "smooth Earth" in which were the
first scenes of the world and the first generations of mankind, which
had the beauty of youth and not a wrinkle, scar or fracture in

 

<span id="img_pl30"></span>

[![PLATE XXX. ''A DIVIDED EGG, OR EARTH.''&lt;br&gt; (From The Theory of
the Earth; Thomas Burnet, 1697)](tn/pl30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl30.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXX. ''A DIVIDED EGG, OR EARTH.''  
(From The Theory of the Earth; Thomas Burnet, 1697)  

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

all its body, no Rocks or Mountains, no hollow Caves nor gaping
Chanels," would be first submerged during the agitation of the abyss by
the violent fall of the Earth into it. Then, when the flood had
subsided, "you would see," said he, "the true image of the present Earth
in the ruines of the first" ([Fig. 34](boe09.htm#img_fig034.md) and [Plate
XIV](boe13.htm#img_pl14).md). He compared his "smooth" or primal Earth to
an *Æolipile* or hollow sphere filled with water, which the heat of fire
rarefies and turns into vapours and winds. "The Sun here is as the
Fire," he said, "and the exteriour Earth is as the Shell of the
*Æolipile*, and the Abysse as the Water within it. . . . So we see all
Vapours and Exhalations enclos’d within the Earth, and agitated there,
strive to break out, and often shake the ground with their attempts to
get loose. And in the comparison we used of an *Æolipile*, if the mouth
of it be stopt that gives the vent, the Water rarefied will burst the
Vessel with its force. And the resemblance of the Earth to an Egg, which
we used before, holds also in this respect, for when it heats before the
Fire, the moisture and Air within being rarefied, makes it often burst
the Shell. And I do the more willingly mention this last comparison,
because I observe that some of the Ancients, when they speak of the
doctrine of the *Mundane* Egg, say that after a certain period of time
it was broken."

Another cosmogony worked out along this same analogy is that of the
Gnostics, a group that flourished during the first two centuries of the
Christian era, who are said to be the descendants in wisdom of other
groups far removed. But the Gnostic group was really an aggregation of
groups who combined the Christian teachings with a gnosis or

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

higher knowledge through which the inner meaning of Christianity was
revealed. Their doctrines were akin to those of Pythagoras, the higher
Egyptian, Indian and Chinese teachers, and to those of the Essenes who
for centuries before the Christian era had dwelt apart on the shores of
the Dead Sea. They strove after the knowledge of God; wisdom was their
goal, and the life of man on Earth their study. For gnosis, in the words
of Theodotus, is the knowledge of what we were, what we have become,
where we were, into what place we have been thrown; whither we are
hastening, whence we are redeemed; what is birth, and what is re-birth."
Their scheme of the universe has come down to us through "the diagram of
Celsus," who called it the diagram of the Ophites, a sect of the
Gnostics, with whose beliefs he was most familiar.

In the beginning, said the Gnostics, was the Trinity, Light, Spirit, and
Darkness, all intermingled; and from the striving of the Darkness to
retain the Light and Spirit, and so to imprison life sparks in matter,
and from the striving of Light and Spirit against the power of Darkness,
the first great form was produced, Heaven and Earth, symbolised by the
World Egg in the womb of the universe. This World Egg was represented as
a circle with a serpent twined several times around it, signifying the
mysterious force which first set into separating, light-producing motion
the mingled Light and Darkness of the Great Monad. The great serpent,
they believed, was not the Great Tempter, but the form through which
Divine Will and Divine Reason incessantly moved and manifested.

The diagram itself is divided into two great regions, the

 

<span id="img_pl31"></span>

[![PLATE XXXI. ''THE WHOLE EARTH IS AN EGG''&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;The Theory of the Earth&lt;/i&gt;; Thomas Burnet,
1697)](tn/pl31.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl31.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXXI. ''THE WHOLE EARTH IS AN EGG''  
(From *The Theory of the Earth*; Thomas Burnet, 1697)  

 

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

upper and the lower, separated from each other by the thick black line
called *Gehenna* or *Tartarus*. The upper region belonged to the supreme
Intelligences; it was the world of the Æons, or the Pleroma of the
Gnostics--the World of Light. Here was perfect harmony, the state of
ideal fulness or perfection.

The lower region is divided into two groups, one of ten, the other of
seven, spheres, each group of spheres being enclosed within a sphere,
and the two separated from each other by the band of Lower Air. The
circle enclosing the seven spheres is labelled *Leviathan*, and
represents the Soul of the World, as the body represents the spirit that
dwells in it. For it chanced that, one day, the Universal Mother,
brooding over the Waters, let a "Drop of Light" fall downwards into
chaotic matter, and this was called Sophia, or Wisdom, the *World*
Mother. The waters of the Æther being then set in motion, formed a body
for Sophia, called the Heaven-sphere. Whereupon Sophia, freeing herself,
rose upwards to the Middle Region, below her Mother who was herself the
bounding line of the Ideal Universe. Sophia had herself produced
Ialdabaoth (child of Chaos, and also identified with Saturn), who in his
turn produced a son, and so on, until there were seven in all, the
Formative powers of the phenomenal world.

The second group of spheres within a sphere is labelled *Behemoth*--it
is the terrestrial world. Its lower seven spheres carry within them the
signatures of seven great animals, and, without, the names of seven
angels. The higher three spheres bear only interrogation marks, but they
are supposed to belong to Ialdabaoth, the ruler of terrestrial affairs,
or perhaps to Sophia herself.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Concerning the signatures of animals inscribed within the seven lower
spheres and their relation to the seven angels named outside, Celsus
says that the first, a goat, "was shaped like a lion," and was a part of
Michael the Lion-like. The second in descending order was a bull--or
Suriel, the Bull-like; the third was "an amphibious sort of animal and
one that hissed frightfully"--Raphael the Serpent-like; the fourth had
the form of an eagle--Gabriel, the Eagle-like; the fifth had the
countenance of a bear--Thauthabaoth, the Bear-like; the sixth had the
face of, a dog--or Erataoth; "the seventh had the countenance of an ass
and was named Thaphabaoth or Onoel."

Might any soul succeed in escaping through these seven spheres and the
three empty globes or circles, he must then pass "the fence of
wickedness," or "gates" subjected to the world of ruling spirits called
Leviathan. Beginning with the lowest, he passed to what was called
Ialdabaoth, then to Iao, to Sabaoth, to Astaphæus ruler of the third
gate, to Alœus governor of the second, and to Horæus, keeper of the
first. Celsus calls this world of Leviathan "circles upon circles."

The Gnostics are famous for their strange symbolic figures. They
believed in a Watcher of the World, a Mind that perceived, and they
often represented this See-er of the World as a human body pierced with
eyes. The extraordinary frontispiece to Riccioli's *Almagestum Novum*
([Plate XXXII](boe20.htm#img_pl32).md) is by no means a Gnostic picture,
but its left-hand figure is a perfect delineation of the myriad-eyed
Watcher of the universe.

*Almagestum Novum* appeared at just the time when the whole universe had
been turned, so to say, inside out

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

 

<span id="img_fig065"></span>

[![FIGURE 65. &lt;i&gt;Gnostic Diagram of the
Universe&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Histoire critique du
Gnosticisme&lt;/i&gt;; Jacques Matter, 1826, Vol. III, Plate I,
D.)](tn/fig065.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig065.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 65. *Gnostic Diagram of the Universe*.  
(From *Histoire critique du Gnosticisme*; Jacques Matter, 1826, Vol.
III, Plate I, D.)  

 

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

half inside out, at least. For the Ptolemaic system of the universe, by
which we know that theory which places the Earth at the centre, with the
rest of the heavenly bodies revolving about it, had but lately fallen.
Copernicus, after many years of hesitancy, had at last dared, in 1543,
to publish his *De revolutionibus*, which declared the Sun to be at the
centre of our world. Eighteen years later Riccioli's *Almagestum Novum*
was published; and this little time-scheme lends even more interest to
its remarkable frontispiece. For between the "'Watcher of the World" and
the "Starry One," the two great systems of the universe hang in the
balance, one with the Earth, the other with the Sun, in the centre of
Space. The first disc is inscribed with the new Copernican system; the
second with the ancient Egyptian. At the goddess's feet lies the system
known as Ptolemy's. In one hand she holds the Balance, in the other an
armillary sphere. In the upper left-hand corner winged beings float,
bearing orbs associated with Light; in the upper right-hand corner move
the bearers of those heavenly bodies which bring Light into
Darkness--the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and the flying serpent of the
skies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[148:1](boe19.htm#fr_12.md) *Confucian Cosmogony*.
Thomas M’Clatchie, Shanghai, 1874.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Systems of the Universe](boe20.md)
