[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe09)  [Next](boe11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Babylonian Universe

WHAT PEOPLE AT WHAT TIME first imagined the Earth as a hollow
hemispherical shell floating on the world-waters we cannot know. But it
is another of the "oldest figures of Earth." This idea of the Earth as
"boat-shaped" had its origin probably in the almost universal myth of
the Deluge; the transition from an Ark floating right side up, to the
Earth, itself a boat, floating upside down, is an easy one. But
"boat-shaped" is a word which, thanks to our modern patterns, has lost
its early significance. The ancient world had, however, among a certain
people, a boat built on exactly such an hemi- spherical model. To-day,
on the Euphrates River, these same *kufas* float--the round boats of the
ancient Chaldeans, made of skins, stretched and sewed into a hollow
hemisphere. And to-day, likewise, on the same river, fishermen ride at
ease on the same inflated cushions or air-boats of skin that were in use
thousands of years ago. Nothing skimmed the waters more swiftly than
these circular

 

<span id="img_pl06"></span>

[![PLATE VI. THE PRIMORDIAL EARTH AND SEA&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Cosmographia Universalis&lt;/i&gt;, Sebastian Muenster,
1599).](tn/pl06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl06.jpg.md)  
PLATE VI. THE PRIMORDIAL EARTH AND SEA  
(From *Cosmographia Universalis*, Sebastian Muenster, 1599).  

boats, and nothing floated more safely than these hollow hemispheres of
stretched skin upturned on the waters.

There is a curious relation between the ancient boats and the Assyrian
story of the Creation. If these boats were hemispheres of stretched
skin, so were the Heavens and the Earth. Merodach, the world-maker of
this legend, lay for a long time helpless like the other gods under the
blind rule of Chaos-Tiemat, from whom sprang everything and who created
unceasingly, but who had yet created neither Heaven nor Earth. From her
issued spontaneously monstrous animals and figures, men with two wings
and others with four, with two faces or four, with goats' legs and
horns, or with the hindparts of a horse and the foreparts of a man;
animals with human heads or fishes' tails; other forms in which every
sort of animal shape was united in confusion, and this confusion of
creation run mad never ceased.

But finally Merodach arose, alone of all the gods, to meet her, and then
it was that Space witnessed its most terrific combat. He finally slew
her, but matters were hardly bettered, for Tiemat's great dead body
stretched throughout all Space. "He placed his foot upon her," reads the
Assyrian story, "and with his unerring knife he cut into the upper part
of her; then he cut the blood vessels, and caused the blood to be
carried by the north wind to the hidden places. . . . He contemplated
the great corpse, raised it and wrought marvels. He split it in two as
one does a fish for drying; then he hung up one of the halves on high,
which became the heavens." The

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

other half he spread out under his feet to form the Earth, and
immediately all the creatures that were in her disappeared. Merodach
again surveyed the empty world; then he cut off his own head, and,
having kneaded the blood flowing from it with the Earth, formed men, who
were thus endowed with a surviving particle of understanding and with a
surviving particle of divine thought.

This odd conception of the heavens as made of "skin" is found over and
over among primitive races. The Yakuts say that the sky is made of
several skins, tightly stretched and overlapping. The Buriats call the
Milky Way a "stitched seam" in the sky, and they speak with awe of a
"certain being" who murmurs from time to time, "Long, long ago, when I
was young, I sewed the sky together."

The picture of the *kufa* ([Plate VII, A](#img_pl07a).md) is given to make
clearer what most of the writers on the old Akkadian cosmogony mean when
they say, "The Akkadians or Chaldeans considered the Earth to be hollow
and boat-shaped." For "boat-shaped" meant to them no elongated oval
figure, but distinctly a hollow hemisphere, a round shell, even a
"stretched skin." Plate VII, B shows Myer's construction of their world
on just this model, and his interpretation is followed below. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

Briefly, E is the convex side of the hollow Earth shell. From C to E
stretches the Lower Firmament, or zone of the atmosphere--winds, storms
and clouds; this zone rests firmly upon the convex Earth shell. From C
to A is the Upper Firmament, divided into two layers; from A to B

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

is the zone of the spirit of the heavens; and from B to C is the zone of
the planets--"sheep," or "wanderers," or "watchers." This is the zone
also of lightning and of thunder. A, in this diagram, represents the
Zodiac, which is "in Space and the Great Celestial Ocean," called also
the "Deep" and the "Abyss." T’hom, the Great Dragon of this Great Sea,
was also called Tiemat, and it was really looked upon as the Primordial
Abyss out of which everything in the Universe, including Heaven and
Earth, came. The arrangement of the seven planets, between B and C, are,
according to Myer, *a*. Saturn, *b*. Jupiter, *c*. Mars, *d*. Sun, *e*.
Venus, *f*. Mercury, *g*. Moon, and Earth the centre.

F F is the concave side of the Earth shell, with seven zones described,
"answering," says Myer, "as shadows, to the orbits of the seven
planets." This was the realm of the king of the ghost-world, the king of
the dead. Curiously enough, it was believed to have been ruled over at
one time by Ea, deity of Wisdom. G was the Nadir, and I was the mountain
of the East, or the mountain of the world, which supported the Upper
Firmament and the Great Celestial Ocean. II is the Great Chaotic
Crystalline Sea, extending to an unknown distance beyond the Zodiacal
zone. III is the pivot of the Star zone, on the top of the World
mountain, upon which the firmament revolves. IV are the guarded gates to
the Underworld, abode of the dead, or home of the dark spirits, or a
place for punishment. Yet in it are concealed the waters of life, and
through this region of the Underworld the nightly journey of the Sun
takes place, from west to east.

Disregarding any number of merely technical differences

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

between them, this diagram of Myer's will serve as a fair picture of any
cosmogony based on the idea that the Earth is a hollow hemisphere with
an underworld. But there is sharp disagreement over whether after all
the ancient Assyrian people--certainly the Chaldeans and
Babylonians--believed that the Earth was a hemispherical shell, or
whether they believed that it was something quite other than that.

Babylon was mighty, and it perished utterly. Of all its wisdom, only
battered fragments of texts remain; which present-day scholars have
worked for years to interpret. Within a period of just twenty years,
from 1888 to 1908, eight different diagrams of the supposed figure of
this Babylonian Universe were offered by eight different men, of which
Myer's diagram was the first. The last of these is Dr. William Fairfield
Warren's, first published in *The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*,
1908. As he points out, no two of the other seven agree; certainly no
one of the other seven bears any likeness to this beautiful construction
of eight crystalline spheres surrounding a cubical, pyramidal, antipodal
Earth-figure ([Plate VIII](#img_pl08).md).

"For the reconstruction of the Babylonian universe," he says, "we have
no less than twelve most valuable data derived from the study of ancient
Babylonian texts." Following is an abstract of the twelve data on which
he modelled this translucent universe. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

1\. In the Babylonian conception of the universe the

 

<span id="img_pl07a"></span>

[![PLATE VII. A. &lt;i&gt;A kufa laden with stoner and manned by a crew
of four men. Drawn by Faucher-Gudin from a bas-relief at
Koyunjik&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The Dawn of
Civilization&lt;/i&gt;; Gaston Maspero, 1894)](tn/pl07a.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl07a.jpg.md)  
PLATE VII. A. *A kufa laden with stoner and manned by a crew of four
men. Drawn by Faucher-Gudin from a bas-relief at Koyunjik*.  
(From *The Dawn of Civilization*; Gaston Maspero, 1894)  

<span id="img_pl07b"></span>

[![PLATE VII. B. Construction of the Akkadian, Chaldean and Babylonian
Universe.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Qaballah&lt;/i&gt;; Isaac Myer,
1888)](tn/pl07b.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl07b.jpg.md)  
PLATE VII. B. Construction of the Akkadian, Chaldean and Babylonian
Universe.  
(From *Qaballah*; Isaac Myer, 1888)  

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

 

<span id="img_fig035"></span>

[![FIGURE 35. &lt;i&gt;Babylonian&lt;/i&gt; ''&lt;i&gt;Mappa
Mundi&lt;/i&gt;'' &lt;i&gt;inscribed on a Babylonian geographical tablet
in the British Museum, No. 92,687. Showing the ocean surrounding the
world, and marking the position of Babylon on the Euphrates as its
centre. It shows also the mountains at the source of the river, the land
of Assyria, Bit-Iakinu, and the swamps at the mouth of the
Euphrates&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Cuneiform Texts from
Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British Museum&lt;/i&gt;, 1906: Part
XXII, Plate 48. The reading is taken from &lt;i&gt;The Babylonian
Legends of the Creation&lt;/i&gt;. Brit. Mus. Pubs., 1921, p.
3.)](tn/fig035.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig035.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 35. *Babylonian* ''*Mappa Mundi*'' *inscribed on a Babylonian
geographical tablet in the British Museum, No. 92,687. Showing the ocean
surrounding the world, and marking the position of Babylon on the
Euphrates as its centre. It shows also the mountains at the source of
the river, the land of Assyria, Bit-Iakinu, and the swamps at the mouth
of the Euphrates*.  
(From *Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British
Museum*, 1906: Part XXII, Plate 48. The reading is taken from *The
Babylonian Legends of the Creation*. Brit. Mus. Pubs., 1921, p. 3.)  

 

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

earth occupied the central place. It was the accepted centre of their
planetary system.

2\. The northern half of the earth was called the upper, associated with
life and light. The southern half was called the under, associated with
darkness and death. The South and the Underworld are identical.

3\. The upper or northern half of the earth was regarded as consisting
of seven stages (*tupukati*), ranged one above the other in the form of
a staged pyramid. The staged Temple of Nippur, according to Sayce, was a
model of the Earth according to the belief of those who built it.

4\. Correspondingly, the antarctic or under half of the Earth was
supposed to consist of seven similar stages. The seven *tupukati* of the
underworld are a facsimile of the seven *tupukati* of the over world.

5\. Like the quadrilateral temple modelled after it, the Earth of the
Babylonians was four-cornered. In this particular it agreed with the
conception ascribed to the ancient Egyptians, Hebrews, Chinese, and to
the Indo-Aryans of the Rig-Veda period.

6\. In Babylonian thought there were seven heavens and seven hells. This
belief is one of untraceable antiquity.

7\. Above the seventh heaven was another, the "highest heaven," that of
the fixed stars, called by the Babylonians the "heaven of Anu," after
the name of one of their oldest and highest gods.

8\. This eighth heaven was divided by the Zodiac into two corresponding
portions, an upper, or Arctic, and an

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

under, or Antarctic. At the upper pole Anu had his palace and throne.

9\. In Babylonian thought, the north pole of the heavens was the true
zenith of the cosmic system, and the axis of the system upright;
consequently the diurnal movements of the sun and moon were regarded as
occurring in a horizontal plane.

10\. Proceeding outward from the central Earth, the order of the seven
known planets was as follows: Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn. That their respective distances from the Earth were not uniform
was already known.

11\. In order to pass from the upper half of the Earth to its under
half, that is, from the abode of living men to the abode of the dead, it
was necessary to cross a body of water which on every side separated the
two abodes.

12\. According to Diodorus Siculus, the Babylonians considered that the
twelve designated stars south of the Zodiac stood in the same relation
to the dead as do the twelve corresponding stars north of the Zodiac to
men in the land of the living. This representation clearly makes the
living and the dead the residents respectively of antipodal surfaces of
one and the same heaven-enclosed Earth. According to the Babylonian
Creation Tablets (V, line 8) Anu and Ea are antipodally located gods,
Anu being enthroned at the north pole of the heavens, and Ea at the
south pole.

These twelve propositions, says Dr. Warren, are the fundamental features
of the ancient Babylonian world-concept, and each of the twelve
requirements is met by

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

this figure. The upright central line represents the polar axis of the
heavens and Earth in perpendicular position. The two central
seven-staged pyramids represent the upper and lower halves of E-KUR, the
Earth; the upper is the abode of living men, the lower the abode of the
dead. The separating waters are the four seas. The seven dotted half
circles above the Earth represent the "seven heavens," and the
corresponding seven hemispheres below the earth, the "seven hells." The
seven inner concentric spheres are respectively the domains and abodes
of Sin, Shamash, Nabu, Ishtar, Nergal, Marduk, and Ninib, each being a
"world-ruler" in his own planetary sphere. (The order of these spheres
has been given above as Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn.) The outer-most sphere (with its upper half cut away, as are the
upper seven heavens, to show better the interior of the system) is the
sphere of the antipodal gods, Anu and Ea, and the heaven of the fixed
stars. It is to be noted further, Dr. Warren explains, that the spaces
between the spheres widen rapidly at each remove from the Earth, so
rapidly that in a world-view the size of this, they cannot be
represented other than as in this plate.

Dr. 'Warren calls this "The Babylonian Universe" principally because
Babylonia is almost the limit of our back-ward reach to the wisdom of
the past, and our retracing of the persistent recurrences of so many of
these principles--the "four-cornered Earth," or the cubical Earth, the
"seven heavens," "Earth and counter-Earth," the "crystalline spheres,"
the "mountains of the world," and so on--must end there. But its origin,
he says, was among

 

<span id="img_pl08"></span>

[![PLATE VIII. THE BABYLONIAN UNIVERSE&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The
Universe as pictured in Milton's Paradise Lost&lt;/i&gt;;&lt;br&gt;
William Fairfield Warren, 1915)](tn/pl08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl08.jpg.md)  
PLATE VIII. THE BABYLONIAN UNIVERSE  
(From *The Universe as pictured in Milton's Paradise Lost*;  
William Fairfield Warren, 1915)  

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

a people antedating the Babylonians. "A truer name therefore for the
system would be the Pre-Babylonian. The East-Semites received it from
their predecessors in the possession of the Euphratean valley, the
Akkado-Sumarians. At least such is the opinion and the teaching of our
highest experts. Did the system originate among those non-Semitic
predecessors in the valley? This has been assumed, but no man can
pretend to know."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[56:1](boe10.htm#fr_2.md) *Qabbalah*; Isaac Myer,
1888, pp. 448-450.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[58:1](boe10.htm#fr_3.md) Journal Royal Asiatic
Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 1908, pp. 977-983.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Egyptian Universe](boe11.md)
