[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe15)  [Next](boe17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Trees of the World

THERE ARE TWO UNIVERSAL WORLD-FIGURES, found everywhere, among all
races--the World Tree, and the World Mountain. For man could draw
analogies--his traditions prove it almost better than his written
records. He knew that he had been born, that he was living, that he must
die; yet of birth he remembered nothing, and death he would not know
until too late. But in the animal world--above all in the vegetable
world, he could watch the recurrent miracles of life and death, rebirth
and

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

growth, sleeping and waking states more easily than he could note the
same miracles in his own sphere. And so he came very early and easily to
see a correspondence between humanity, greatest of the animal world, and
the Tree, mightiest of its kingdom. It is true that in every great
cosmological system and in great and lesser cosmogonies, there stands
the figure of the World Tree, with its seed, its roots, its trunk, its
resting perches, its knitting knots, its pith, its main branch, its
leaves, its flowers and their sweet smell, its refreshing shade, its
immortal sap, and the spot where it grows, all brought into close and
exquisite analogy with man and his universe.

"Without doubt," sings one of the greatest of the Vedic poets, "though
possessed of density, trees have space within them. The putting forth of
flowers and fruits is always taking place in them. They have heat within
them in consequence of which leaf, bark, fruit and flower are seen to
droop. They sicken and dry up. That shows they have perception of touch.
Through sound of wind and fire and thunder, their fruits and flowers
drop down. Sound is perceived through the ear. Trees have, therefore,
ears, and do hear. A creeper winds round a tree and goes all about its
sides. A blind thing cannot find its way. For this reason it is evident
that trees have vision. Then again trees recover vigour and put forth
flowers in consequence of odours good and bad, of the sacred perfume of
various kinds of *dhupas*. It is plain that trees have scent. They drink
water by their roots. They catch diseases of divers kinds. Those
diseases again are cured by different operations. From this it is
evident that trees

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

have perception of taste. As one can suck up water through a bent lotus
stalk, trees also, with the aid of the wind, drink through their roots.
They are susceptible of pleasure or pain, and grow when cut or lopped
off. From these circumstances I see that trees have life. They are not
inanimate. Fire and wind cause the water thus sucked up to be digested.
Accordingly again, to the quantity of water taken up, the tree advances
in growth and becomes humid. In the bodies of all subtile things the
five elements occur. In each the proportions are different."

According again to the races of men, the type of the World Tree varied.
The Date-palm was the sacred Asherah of the Assyrians. To the Greeks,
and to the Norsemen, the cosmic Ash was the World Tree. But also to the
Greeks, and to the Germans, the Oak was the life-giver and the
life-sustainer. And the Greeks made the vine the "sacred tree" of
Dionysos. Persian legends centre about the haoma tree, and the Egyptians
had a mythical golden gem-bearing tree of the heavens, where the Sky
goddess Nut had her abode. The Japanese believed that a great metal-pine
grew far to the north at the centre of the world, and the Russians have
a legend of an Iron Tree whose root "is the power of God," and whose
head sustains the three worlds--the heavenly ocean of air, the Earth,
and Hell with its burning fire. To the branches of the Jambu or Rose
Apple tree, the Hindu dead clung and climbed to immortality. India has
also her incredible banyan tree, declared to be more like man than man
himself. Unlike plants, man can move at will over the surface

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of the Earth, but this sacred Indian Fig Tree bears the name of the Tree
of Many Feet, because its seed, rarely rooting in the ground, ordinarily
sends down its hanging garden of roots from its nest in the crown of
palms, where it has been deposited by birds. These aerial roots,
touching the Earth, sink into it, glide through it and from it spring
upward again to send down other drooping branches that root themselves,
and so, over and over, until the prodigious grove--myriad parts of a
single tree sprung from one air-nested seed--eventually destroys the
Palm that cradled it.

Countless books have been written about the origin of the myth of the
Cosmic Tree, but the gist of them all can be stated very briefly. First
of all, Heaven and Earth are separated. They must be, therefore, at one
and the same time held apart--lest the heavens fall down and crush the
Earth--and they must be also united by some subtle path of
communication, some bridge over the monstrous interval. If a mushroom,
delicate as a butterfly, can work a miracle in a night and raise a rock,
a tree rooted in the Earth may support the sky. But no tree of Earth
could reach to heaven unless it were itself divine, born somehow of the
gods; and so we find a host of literal "parent trees," said to be
produced from the body moisture of deities, and capable therefore, in
their turn, of producing man. In its more developed form, this parent
tree became the Tree of Life, the Tree of Knowledge, offering men
immortality and the wisdom of the gods. There is a Tibetan tree called
*Tarayana* or the Way of Safety which grows by the side of the great
river separating

 

<span id="img_pl18"></span>

[![PLATE XVIII. &lt;i&gt;Yggdrasil, the World Tree of the
Norsemen&lt;/i&gt;. &lt;i&gt;After Finn Magnusen's&lt;/i&gt;
](tn/pl18.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl18.jpg)  
PLATE XVIII. *Yggdrasil, the World Tree of the Norsemen*. *After Finn
Magnusen's*  

 

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the worlds, and only by grace of its overhanging branches may men pass
from the mortal to the immortal bank.

The oldest World Tree? who shall say? When in search of the "oldest" we
always think of the ancient East; but no one can assert--and prove--that
Yggdrasil, the Cosmic Ash, the World Tree of the Norsemen, had its
origin in the Orient, however remarkably its ideas coincide with the
sacred trees of Asia. Let us begin for a change with the Occident and
Yggdrasil.

"The chief and most holy seat of the gods," say the Eddas, "is by the
Ash Yggdrasil. There the gods meet in council every day. It is the
greatest and best of all trees. Its branches spread over the world and
reach above heaven. Three roots sustain the tree and stand wide apart;
one is with Asa; the second is with the Frost giants; the third reaches
into Niflheim, and under it is Hvergelmar, where Nidhug gnaws the roots
from below. But under the second root, which extends to the Frost
giants, is the well of Mimir, wherein knowledge and wisdom are
concealed. The third root of the Ash is in Heaven, and beneath it is the
most sacred fountain of Urd. Here the gods have their doomstead. The Asa
ride thither every day over the Bi-frost, which is also called
Asa-bridge. There stands a beautiful hall near the fountain beneath the
Ash. Out of it come three maids. These maids shape the lives of men, and
we call them the Norns. On the boughs of the Ash sits an eagle, who
knows many things. Between his eyes, sits the hawk, called Vedfolner. A
squirrel, by name Ratatösk, springs up and down the tree and bears words

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

of hate between the eagle and Nidhug. Four stags leap about in the
branches of the Ash and bite the buds. The Norns that dwell by the
fountain of Urd every day take

<span id="img_fig044"></span>

[![FIGURE 44. &lt;i&gt;Yggdrasil, the Cosmic Ash&lt;/i&gt;
(&lt;i&gt;From Finn Magnusen's&lt;/i&gt;
''&lt;i&gt;Eddalæren&lt;/i&gt;.'')&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The Sacred
Tree, or The Tree in Religion and Myth&lt;/i&gt;; Mrs. J. H. Philpot,
1897.)](tn/fig044.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig044.jpg)  
FIGURE 44. *Yggdrasil, the Cosmic Ash* (*From Finn Magnusen's*
''*Eddalæren*.'')  
(From *The Sacred Tree, or The Tree in Religion and Myth*; Mrs. J. H.
Philpot, 1897.)  

water from the fountain, and clay that lies around the fountain, and
sprinkle therewith the Ash, in order that its branches may not wither or
decay." <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)

There are a number of interesting things to note here,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

because of their constant recurrence in other world-concepts widely
separated in time and race. One is the close association of the World
Tree with the World Mountain; one springs from the other, take them in
what order we will. Another is the division of the Universe into nine
worlds. Another, for the sake of comparison with a Mayan World Tree
farther on, is the squirrel Ratatösk. Another is the Bi-frost or
Asa-bridge.

In the beginning of all things, says the Norse story of the Creation,
there were two worlds, Niflheim, the world of ice in the north, and
Muspelheim, the world of fire in the south, with all the space between
an empty abyss, called Ginungagap. The fierce flames in Muspelheim blew
constantly over into the abyss many sparks which confronted only
nothingness, until, from the ice-bound Niflheim, a great spring opened
and sent down twelve rivers, some of which flowed into the abyss and
formed great layers of frozen vapour. At last the sparks of fire met the
frozen air, and Ymir the giant was created, and then, in turn,

From Ymir's flesh  
the earth was formed,  
and from his bones the hills,  
the heaven from the skull  
of that ice-cold giant  
and from his blood the sea.

Of the nine worlds Asgard was the highest and was the world of the gods.
Below it was Mitgard or Earth, the world of men, a flat disc surrounded
by the River Ocean.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Beyond the River Ocean, but surrounding Mitgard,
was Jötunheim, the upper giant world, and, beneath the Earth plane, was
the great underworld divided into four worlds. In the North was the
lower giant world of Niflheim; at the South Urd and her two sisters
ruled over the kingdom of the dead, and between North and South was
Mimir's

<span id="img_fig045"></span> ![FIGURE 45. &lt;i&gt;Diagram of the Nine
Worlds, supported by the World Tree Yggdrasil&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;The Nine Worlds&lt;/i&gt;; Mary Elizabeth Litchfield,
1890.)](img/fig045.jpg)  
FIGURE 45. *Diagram of the Nine Worlds, supported by the World Tree
Yggdrasil*.  
(From *The Nine Worlds*; Mary Elizabeth Litchfield, 1890.)

land, where dwelt the wisest of the gods, and, with him, Day, Night,
Dawn and the Sun and Moon. Below Niflheim again was the world of
torture, and below Urd's realm of the dead, the land of subterranean
fire.

Just two things bound these worlds together, the tree Yggdrasil, and the
Asa-bridge, or Bi-frost. And a third--the spirit of heaven, the great
Energiser, passing ever to and fro, guiding, controlling all the
universe, from the first world to the ninth; at home everywhere, abiding
no-where, stirless when moving and moving when still; that

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

without which there would be nothing--here shown as merely a tiny timid
nimble squirrel.

But what was the binding and the separating bridge, the Bi-frost?

<span id="img_fig046"></span> ![FIGURE 46. Diagram of the Scandinavian
Cosmos.](img/fig046.jpg)  
FIGURE 46. Diagram of the Scandinavian Cosmos.

1 Spring Hvergelmir, in Niflhel or Niflheim, under Yggdrasil's northern
root.  
2 Well of Wisdom in Mimir's Realm, under Yggdrasil's middle root.  
3 Urd's Well in her Realm, under Yggdrasil's southern root.  
4 Home of the Vanir.  
5 Home of the Elves in Mimir's Realm.  
6 Castle where Baldur dwelt with the Asmégir.  
7 Northern End of Bifröst, guarded by Heimdall.  
8 Southern End of Bifröst, near Urd's Well.  
                   (From *The Nine World*s; Mary Elizabeth Litchfield,
1890.)

Again, who knows? Its arch was over Asgard, world of the gods; its
northern tip resting upon the mountains of the ice-girt Niflheim; its
southern end in the realm of the dead, where Urd and her sisters ruled.
Some say the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Milky Way is the original of Bi-frost or the
Trembling Bridge, as some say the Milky Way is the very trunk of the
Celestial Tree. Others believe that the Rainbow is the prototype for
Bi-frost and all the "bridges of the world." For the World bridges are
as universal as the "trees" and "mountains" of the world. Earth was cut
off from Heaven--yet somewhere, if man could only find it, there was a
path that might lead back home. The Bi-frost at its northern end was
inviolately guarded by the great Heimdall, "World-Judge" or
"World-Divider," "whose ears were so good that he could hear the grass
pushing up through the ground, and the wool growing on the backs of
sheep, and he needed less sleep than a bird." The gods crossed it every
day on their way to the judgment hall in the realm of Urd, but the way
was barred against all others, lest some thief in the night should find
his way into Heaven. Yet it was the bridge also on which the souls of
all the dead began their passage to the land of Urd.

The Persians had their Chinvat bridge, which is to say also, the Bridge
of the Judge, over which all souls, good and evil, passed--"that
bridge," says one of their sacred books, "like a beam of many sides, of
whose edges there are some which are broad, and there are some which are
thin and sharp; its broad sides are so large that its width is of
twenty-seven reeds, and its sharp sides are so contracted that in
thinness it is just like the edge of a razor." Mohammed too placed a way
over the middle of hell, "which is sharper than a sword and finer than a
hair, over which all must pass."

Certainly the North American Indians considered the

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Milky Way to be the "bridge" to the Land of
Souls--a great village situated "where the Sun sets." "They call the
milky way *Tchipai meskenau*, the path of souls, because they think that
the souls raise themselves through this way in going to that great
village," wrote Paul Le Jeune in 1634 of the Montagnais. One hundred
years later Pierre Aulneau wrote of the Crees of upper Lake Superior,
that they believed in a paradise of feasts and great hunts for the
*immortal* souls of the dead. "But, before reaching it, there is a spot
of extreme peril--the souls have to cross a wide ditch. One side of the
way it is full of muddy water, offensive to the smell and covered with
scum; while on the other the pit is filled with fire, which rises in
fierce tongues of flame. The only means of crossing it is on a fir tree,
the ends of which rest. on either bank. Its bark is ever freshly
moistened and besmeared with a substance which makes it as slippery as
ice. If the souls who wish to cross to the enchanting plains have the
misfortune to fall at this dangerous passage, there is no help left;
they are doomed forever to drink of the foul stagnant water or to burn
in the flames, according to the side on which they fall." Sometimes the
"bridge-building fiend" made the bridging spar a snake or a swinging
log.

A "Sketch of the World," by a Thompson River Indian, illustrates this
exactly. They believe that the Earth is square, level in the centre and
rising towards the north from whence comes the cold, that it rises also
in great mountain ranges about its borders, and that these mountains or
lands are topped by mountains of air--the clouds

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span id="img_fig047"></span>

[![FIGURE 47. &lt;i&gt;Sketch of the World, by a Thompson River
Indian&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/fig047.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig047.jpg)  
FIGURE 47. *Sketch of the World, by a Thompson River Indian*.  

*a*. Trail leading from the earth to the land of the ghosts, with tracks
of the souls; *b*. River and log on which the souls cross; *c*. Land of
the ghosts and dancing souls; *d*. Lake surrounding the earth; e. Earth,
with rivers and villages; N. S. E. W. points of the compass.

(From *Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History*, Vol. II,
1900, p. 343.)

and mists rising from the encircling lake of the world. All the rivers
of the world rise in the north and flow south.

This trail to the soul-world has been minutely described

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

by James Teit in his *The Thompson River Indians of British
Columbia*. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) According to him, the
country of souls is underneath us, towards the sunset, and its path is
one of perils, storms, narrow bridges, and gaping chasms. The trail
leads through a dim twilight; along it are always visible the tracks of
the people who last went over it, and also the tracks of their dogs, if
they had any with them. It winds along until it meets another road,
which the shamans, or medicine-men (their nearest approach to priests)
use as a short cut when trying to intercept a soul. From here on, the
trail is much smoother and straighter, and is painted red with ochre.
Farther on it winds to the westward, descends a long gentle slope, and
ends at a wide shallow stream of very clear mirror-like water. This
stream is spanned by a long slender log, on which the tracks of souls
may be seen again. After crossing the "bridge," if the traveller is
fortunate enough to hold his footing on the slippery edge between the
worlds, he finds himself again on the trail, which is now an ascending
one. At a certain height is heaped a great pile of clothes; this marks
the spot on the journey where the souls must leave behind them all that
they have brought from the other world. And from here on the trail not
only seems level, but little by little the dimness and twilight
confusion disappear.

Three guardians are stationed along the trail of the souls--one on each
side of the river that must be crossed, and the third at the very end of
the trail of the ghosts.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

The first of these, on the hither side of the stream, has built for
himself a sweat house where he spends most of his time. It is the duty
of all three to send back to the land of the living any soul not yet
ready to enter the land of the dead, even though he may have by some
miracle of accident crossed the bridge. For sometimes it happens that a
soul succeeds in passing the first two guardians, only to be turned back
by the third, who is the chief of the three, and who now and then, being
a great orator, sends back messages to the world of the living through
the medium of souls who, having survived all other tests of courage and
merit, fail in the final test of being judged worthy by the guardian of
the gate of life to pass through.

But, having been permitted by him to pass, the soul at last reaches a
large lodge at the end of the trail. It is made of a hard white
material, like limestone or white clay. It extends a long distance from
east to west, and is much shorter from north to south. Its top is "like
a round mound or ant-hill." The doors to this white lodge are at the
east and west, and the trail leads up to the eastern door, which is very
small, barely large enough to let a soul pass through. But the western
door, through which the soul passes to the land of ghosts, is much
higher and wider. Through the entire length of the lodge there is a
double row of fires, for when the deceased friends of a person expect
his soul to arrive, they go in a body to this lodge to talk about his
death and prepare to welcome him. As the newly arrived soul reaches the
entrance to the lodge of the dead, he finds some one standing at the
door to greet him and call him by name, while others sing, dance, and

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

beat upon drums. The air is always pleasant and still, and it is always
light and warm. There are sweet smells of flowers, an abundance of
grass, and berry-bushes laden with ripe fruit. The rest is hunting,
feasting, and dancing through eternity, for the dancing, or immortal,
souls.

The Wak wak Tree is a fabulous tree growing on a fabulous island
somewhere in the Southern Ocean--or somewhere near Japan, or near the
western (or the eastern) coast of Africa--it all depends on the
traveller who tells the legend. It appears to have had nothing to do
with America or the American Indians; yet here is a curious bit of Sioux
lore, which, in connection with one of the legends of the lost continent
of the Pacific, has an odd interest here.

The Sioux Indians have a special reverence for what they call the *waka
da* cedar. *Waka da*, according to W. J. McGee, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) who has made a special study of the word in
his *The Siouan Indians*, is a very curious word indeed. It has, he
says, as many connotations as the Sanscrit word *Karma*, and, like
Karma, is not to be translated by any single English word. The Sun, for
instance, is not "the" or "a" *waka da*, but simply *waka da*. So is
thunder, so is lightning, the stars, the winds, and especially *waka da*
cedar, by which they mean precisely the state of being which makes a
cedar human and more than human. Even a man might be *waka da*. The
term, he says, may be translated by "mystery" more satisfactorily than
by any other single English word; nevertheless, with its vague
implications of "power," "sacred," "ancient," "grandeur," "animate,"

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "immortal," "not even an English sentence of
ordinary length could quite convey the sum total of the aboriginal idea
expressed by the term *waka da*." Perhaps all its meaning is conveyed
when, applied to the cedar, they say it is that state of being which
makes a cedar human and more than human.

Now of the Wak wak tree which bore human fruit, Turkey, Arabia, Persia,
and India all had a tradition; that in the Southern Ocean--or some other
unexplored waste of waters--was an island called Wak wak--or a great
mountain called Wak wak--because on it grew a tree which produced fruit
with a human head, or fruit in the form of a human body, or even in the
form of animals, and these beings, at dawn and at sunset, cried aloud,
so that all might know the passage of the Sun, "Wak! wak!" The island
and the mountain are mentioned in *The Thousand and One Nights*--Hasan
al-Basri went there to find his wife and children. The tree is described
without being named by Friar Odorico of Pordenone who in the fourteenth
century left Italy to make the grand tour of the East. Arrived at
Malabar, he wrote thus: "And here I heard tell that there be trees which
bear men and women like fruit upon them. They are about a cubit in
measurement, and are fixed in the tree up to the navel, and there they
be; and when the wind blows they be fresh, but when it does not blow
they are all dried up. This I saw not in sooth, but I heard it told by
people who had seen it." [Plate XIX](#img_pl19) gives a drawing of the
Wak wak tree, taken from an old Turkish *History of Western India and
Its Wonders*, published at Constantinople in 1729. It represents

 

<span id="img_pl19"></span>

[![PLATE XIX. THE WAK WAK TREE&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Ta’rikh&lt;/i&gt; al-Hind al-Gharbi. Constantinople,
1729)](tn/pl19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl19.jpg)  
PLATE XIX. THE WAK WAK TREE  
(From *Ta’rikh* al-Hind al-Gharbi. Constantinople, 1729)  

 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the fruit of this fabulous tree not by human heads but by seven pendent
bodies. The two great birds at the foot of the tree are as fabulous as
the rest of it.

Sometimes these souls were imagined as suspended with their heads
downwards, alive, but clinging and climbing

<span id="img_fig048"></span> ![FIGURE 48. &lt;i&gt;The Tree of
Judas&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Maundevile's Voiage and
Travailes&lt;/i&gt;, 1839 reprint.)](img/fig048.jpg)  
FIGURE 48. *The Tree of Judas*.  
(From *Maundevile's Voiage and Travailes*, 1839 reprint.)

on a reversed path back to heaven. In an old Hindu legend it is related
that Garuda, lord of all birds, coursing one day towards a gigantic
banyan tree, with the fleetness of the mind, to sit thereon and "eat the
elephant and the tortoise," in alighting broke one of the branches. As
it broke he caught it and saw to his wonder that a tribe of Rishis
called Valikhilyas were hanging from it head downwards, engaged in
"ascetic penances." And gathering together

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

all of his strength, the lord of birds soared high into the heavens with
his burden of hanging men, and saved

<span id="img_fig049"></span>

[![FIGURE 49. &lt;i&gt;Osage Chart of the Universe, drawn by Red
Corn&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Picture-Writing of the American
Indians&lt;/i&gt;; Garrick Mallery, 1894, p. 251.)](tn/fig049.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig049.jpg)  
FIGURE 49. *Osage Chart of the Universe, drawn by Red Corn*.  
(From *Picture-Writing of the American Indians*; Garrick Mallery, 1894,
p. 251.)  

them. Sometimes, when the air is quiet, trees will move and their leaves
rustle--this very common phenomenon

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

had for the ancients a mystic meaning; at such times the invisible souls
were talking to each other of their trials and triumphs on the journey
back to heaven.

In their "Sketch of the World," the Thompson River Indians incorporated
one form of the World Tree, in the bridge between the worlds, literally,
"the path of life." The Osage Indians, in their chart of the universe,
have another. Few world-pictures can be found more simply and
beautifully drawn than this by Red Corn, with its Earth plane, its
"stages" or heavens, and its Tree of Life. Like the Lenape pictograph,
it is the "score" of a tradition chanted by members of a secret society
of his tribe. It is explained by J. Owen Dorsey as follows: <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

The tree at the top represents the tree of life. By this flows a river.
The tree and the river are described later in the degrees. When a woman
is initiated, she is required by the head of her gens to take four sips
of water (symbolising the river), then he rubs cedar on the palms of his
hands, with which he rubs her from head to foot. If she belongs to a
gens on the left side of a tribal circle, her chief begins on the left
side of her head, making three passes, and pronouncing the sacred name
three times. Then he repeats the process from her forehead down; then on
the right side of her head; then at the back of her head; four times
three times, or twelve passes in all.

Beneath the river are the following objects: The Watse *t*u*k*a, male
slaying animal (?), or morning star, which is a red star. 2. Six stars
called the "Elm rod"

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

by the white people in the Indian Territory. 3. The evening star. 4. The
little star. Beneath this are the moon, seven stars, and sun. Under the
seven stars are the peace pipe and war hatchet; the latter is close to
the sun, and the former and the moon are on the same side of the chart.
Four parallel lines extending across the chart represent four heavens or
upper worlds through which the ancestors of the Tsi*c*u people passed
before they came to this earth. The lowest heaven rests on an oak tree;
the ends of the others appear to be supported by pillars or ladders. The
tradition begins below the lowest heaven, on the left side of the chart,
under the peace pipe. Each space on the pillar corresponds with a line
of the chant; and each stanza (at the opening of the tradition) contains
four lines. The first stanza precedes the arrival of the first heaven,
pointing to a time when the children of the "former end" of the race
were without human bodies as well as human souls. The bird hovering over
the arch denotes an advance in the condition of the people; then they
had human souls in the bodies of birds. Then followed the progress from
the fourth to the first heaven, followed by the descent to earth. The
ascent to our heaven, and the descent to three, makes up the number
seven.

When they alighted, it was on a beautiful day, when the earth was
covered with luxuriant vegetation. From that time the paths of the
Osages separated; some marched to the right, being the war gentes, while
those on the left were peace gentes, including the Tsicu whose chart
this is.

Then the Tsi*c*u met the black bear, called in the tradition
Káxe-wáhü-sa<sup>n</sup>' (Crow-bone-white), in the distance. He offered
to become their messenger, so they sent him to the different stars for
aid. According to

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the chart, he went to them in the following order: Morning star, sun,
moon, seven stars, evening star, little star.

Then the black bear went to the Wa*c*iñ*k*a-*c*u*t*se, a female red bird
sitting on her nest. This grandmother granted his request. She gave them
human bodies, making them out of her own body.

The earth-lodge at the end of the chart denotes the village of Hañ*k*a
utaka<sup>n</sup> *t*si, who were a very war-like people. Buffalo skulls
were on the tops of the lodges, and the bones of the animals on which
they subsisted whitened on the ground. The very air was rendered
offensive by the decaying bodies and offal.

The whole of the chart was used mnemonically. Parts of it, such as the
four heavens, and the four ladders, were tattooed on the throat and
chest of the men belonging to the order.

Another Siouan tribe, the Sia Indians of New Mexico, believe that in
each of the six regions of the world--they name these as the four
quarters, zenith and nadir--there was a giant mountain bearing a giant
tree, at whose foot was a spring, in which dwelt one of the
"cloud-rulers," each attended by one of the six primal priestesses of
the Sia, who interceded constantly with the six cloud rulers to send
rain to the Sia. The six varieties of their World Trees were the spruce,
the pine, the aspen, the cedar, and two varieties of the oak.

It would be a brave, not to say a reckless scientist, who would say
to-day how young or how old the Mayan civilisation is. Thirty years ago,
answers would have come easily enough; but that was before the
excavations of the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

great buried cities in Central America began, which may very well result
in the uncovering of records which ante-date the oldest we have. Already
we know that America, youngest of the continents historically, is older
prehistorically than we yet dare to say. And, although we never knew
more than a little about the Mayas and their beliefs, we know to-day how
fragmentary and isolated those bits of knowledge are, and how
untrustworthy the conclusions we have drawn from them.

Nevertheless, under the date of 1640, there has come down to us a
picture of the Mayan Universe, copied by Father Cogolludo from the
central design of the *Chilam Balam*, or Sacred Book, *of Mani*, and
inserted in his *Historia de Yucathan*, written at the end of twenty-one
years spent among the Mayas ([Plate XX](#img_pl20)).

At the bottom of the "universe" lies a cube, which has long been
recognised as representing in the Mayan cosmogony the Earth. Above the
Earth cube, resting on four legs which rest in turn on the four quarters
of the Earth, is the heavenly vase, Cum, which holds the celestial
waters--the treasures of the snow and of the hail, of the rains and the
showers, on which all life, vegetable, animal and human, depends. Above
this vase hang the rain clouds, and within it grows the *Yax che*, the
Green Tree or the Tree of Life, its upper branches bearing on their tips
the flowers or fruits of life on Earth, *ol* or *yol*; that is to say,
the soul or immortal principle of man. Under the Green Tree *Yax che*,
the souls who have passed through *Mitna* or the underworld, dwell in
happiness, while the others sink into a region where they suffer

 

<span id="img_pl20"></span>

[![PLATE XX. THE WORLD TREE OF THE MAYAS&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Historia de Yucathan&lt;/i&gt;; Diez Lopez Cogolludo,
1640)](tn/pl20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl20.jpg)  
PLATE XX. THE WORLD TREE OF THE MAYAS  
(From *Historia de Yucathan*; Diez Lopez Cogolludo, 1640)  

 

eternal cold and hunger. In Brinton's *Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphics*,
the inner figure of the cube, the vase, the clouds and the tree, is
reproduced, lettered according to readings from other of the Sacred
Books. The Earth cube in that picture is not lettered IUM, Earth, but
*tem*, the Altar. "The Earth signifies the great Altar of the gods, and
the offering upon it is Life."

The thirteen heads surrounding the World Tree signify, according to
Brinton, the thirteen *ahau katuna*, or greater cycles of years. They
also may signify the thirteen possible directions of Space. That is, the
complete terrestrial globe is symbolised by the four cardinal points,
zenith, and nadir, with man in the centre making the seventh, and the
complete celestial sphere is symbolised by adding the six directions,
with man, the focal point, remaining the same. "The border therefore,"
says Brinton, "expresses the totality of Time and Space, and the design
itself symbolises Life within Time and Space."

Another Mayan world-picture is shown in [Fig. 50](#img_fig050), which is
the central design of the *Tableau of the Bacabs*. Instead of the
thirteen *ahau katuna* or greater cycles of years, this design is
surrounded by "the signs of the twenty days," which extend in the
original design, beyond the figure here given, to the four cardinal
points and to the gods and time-cycles connected with them. "Again,"
says Brinton, "it is Life within Time and Space."

Here, sitting beneath the shade of the Green Tree, at its root, are the
divine First Pair, *Cuculcan*, the feathered or winged serpent god, and
*Xmucane* his spouse,--"the Creator and the Former," says the *Popol
Vuh*, "Grandfather

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and Grandmother of the race . . . two-fold grand-mother, two-fold
grandfather . . . the Maker, the Former, the Ruler, the Serpent clothed
in feathers, they

<span id="img_fig050"></span>

[![FIGURE 50. &lt;i&gt;Our First Parents&lt;/i&gt;. &lt;i&gt;From the
Codex Cortesianus&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;A Primer of Mayan
Hieroglyphics&lt;/i&gt;; Daniel G. Brinton, 1894.)](tn/fig050.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig050.jpg)  
FIGURE 50. *Our First Parents*. *From the Codex Cortesianus*.  
(From *A Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphics*; Daniel G. Brinton, 1894.)  

who beget, they who impart life, they rest upon the waters like a
glowing light, they are clothed in colour green and blue, therefore
their name is *Gucumatz*, 'Feathered Serpent.'"

The resemblances between the divisions of this Mayan

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

tree and the Norse tree Yggdrasil are obvious, but here is a
correspondence in ideas that is very curious. Between the nine Norse
worlds, it will be recalled, from the roots of the tree to its topmost
branch, ran Ratatösk, scamperer between men and gods, matter and spirit,
Space and Time--the great Energiser under the guise of a tiny squirrel.
It is rather interesting to discover that under the green cosmic tree
*Yax che* of Yucatan sits a figure whose name, *Cuculcan*, is derived
from a Mayan verb, *cucul*, meaning

<span id="img_fig051"></span> ![FIGURE 51. The ](img/fig051.jpg)  
FIGURE 51. The

to "revolve," "to move round and round," as they moved their great
calendar wheels to accomplish the rotation of time; and that this
rotation itself is called *cuceb*, "the squirrel," derived directly from
the same verb *cucul*, "to revolve, to move round and round."

One more Mayan Tree of Life, too beautiful not to be included in any
group of "Cosmic Trees," particularly as it shows the mystery of
metamorphosis almost in the act of transmutation from one form to
another is given in [Fig. 51](#img_fig051). In the original drawing the
god of the north star rests upon it, as it rises from the heavenly vase
that holds the heavenly waters. And, to show that Egypt and Yucatan were
not separated in fancy at least by oceans

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Atlantic or Pacific, here is a little drawing of
the Sacred Tree of the Egyptians, with Heaven, or the Sky goddess Nut,
bestowing knowledge on man and his soul.

<span id="img_fig052"></span> ![FIGURE 52. &lt;i&gt;Sacred Tree of the
Egyptians&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Egyptian Mythology and
Egyptian Christianity&lt;/i&gt;; Samuel Sharpe,
1863.)](img/fig052.jpg)  
FIGURE 52. *Sacred Tree of the Egyptians*.  
(From *Egyptian Mythology and Egyptian Christianity*; Samuel Sharpe,
1863.)

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

"THE WHOLE WORLD," says an old Hebrew writing, "is like a gigantic tree
full of branches and leaves, the root of which is the spiritual world of
the Sph’roth; or it is like a firmly united chain the last link of which
is attached to the upper world; or like an immense sea, which is
constantly filled by a spring, everlastingly gushing forth its streams."

When we take up the *Kabbala*, to interpret anything in it, we touch a
book on which literally thousands of interpretative books have been
written. The *Arber Sephirotheca* is perhaps its keystone figure, and
the interpretations

 

<span id="img_pl21"></span>

[![PLATE XXI. ARBER SEPHIROTHECA&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Utriusque
Cosmi&lt;/i&gt;; Robert Fludd, 1621. Vol. II) ](tn/pl21.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl21.jpg)  
PLATE XXI. ARBER SEPHIROTHECA  
(From *Utriusque Cosmi*; Robert Fludd, 1621. Vol. II)  

 

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of the relation and meaning of the ten Sephiroth which compose the
"tree" differ so that any summary of them is not only hopeless but
useless here. It is possible, however, to sketch largely and with no
detail, a general explanation of this Hebrew World Tree.

First of all, what are the ten Sephiroth? First of all then, they are
indicated by the first ten letters of the primitive alphabet in which,
as we have noted before, Gods were Letters, Letters were Ideas, Ideas
were Numbers, and Numbers were perfect Signs. They may mean either "to
count" (that is, they may mean "numbers"), or "brilliance" or "spheres."
Or they may mean "qualities," standing for the several grades or stages
of wisdom. Or they may mean "emanations."

The *Arber Sephirotheca* ([Plate XXI](#img_pl21)) shows the Hebrew
scheme of Creation--the esoteric side of the Genesis story, beginning
with the assumption that Creation began, not from the act of God, but
from the emanation of God, due to his voluntary self-withdrawal in order
that the universe might be created. "When the Holy Aged, the concealed
of all concealed," says the Zohar, "assumed a form, he produced
everything in the form of male and female, for Wisdom expanded, and
Intelligence, the third Sephirah, proceeded from it, and thus were
obtained male and female, *viz.*, Wisdom the father, and Intelligence
the mother, from whose union other pairs of Sephiroth successively
emanated." The first Triad, then, which is represented, is Hochma or
Wisdom, Binah, or Intelligence, and Cheter the Crown or the
equilibrising force. These three in one are the Balance of forces,
otherwise the Reason

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

of the Universe. This Reason is not represented separately. It is held
to be inherent in the relation existing between and in the first group
of three.

Then, from this first group of three forces, or its result, Reason, came
the second group of three, Chesed or Mercy, the father, Geburah or
Justice, the mother, which together produce Tipherets, or Beauty. This
sixth again represents Balance or equilibrium in forms about to be
materialised, the mediator between the Crown or Creator and the Kingdom
or Creation.

The third triad consists of Netzeth or Victory, the father (explained
sometimes as the eternal triumph of Intelligence and Justice, the two
mothers), Hod or Glory, the mother, from which two springs Iesod, the
Foundation, the Absolute.

The three triads, three forms each of the intellectual, the spiritual,
and the material qualities, combine to form the tenth Sephirah, Malcuth
or the Kingdom--or Sovereignty over the Kingdom or universe, manifested
in the ten branching leaves. These branching leaves manifest, in turn,
the direct relation existing between the ten Sephiroth and Adam Kadmon,
the primordial, heavenly, incorruptible man, created in this way only
"in the image of God." Adam Kadmon is the branching fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, and holds the middle place between the En Soph or All in All
and the ten emanations; holds, that is, the point of Balance or
equilibrium. In this sense Adam Kadmon here, as in [Plate
IV](boe08.htm#img_pl04), is regarded as the supporter and upholder of
the universe. Nothing could be at first sight more unlike than these two
images of the three

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

worlds, but there are enormous likenesses between them.

Another way of expressing this interrelation between the ten emanations
is that the first Sephirah, by virtue of its equilibrising power, unites
the second and third--Wisdom and Intelligence; that the sixth Sephirah,
Beauty, by the same virtue, unites the fourth and fifth--Mercy and
Justice; that the ninth Sephirah, Foundation or Absolute, unites the
seventh and eighth--Victory and Glory, and by union with all, sends
forth the tenth Sephirah, the Kingdom or the Universe. Again, the first
three Sephiroth form the world of Reason; the second three, the world of
Spirit; the last four, the world of the Body.

A tree must have a soil in which to grow; soul and spirit must have a
body; moving energy must take a form. And a very beautiful and subtle
interpretation of the World Tree myth may be found in an old
black-figured kylix by Exekias, dating from the sixth century B.C. It is
called "Dionysos in the Ship," and its reading depends entirely on an
understanding of what the story of Dionysos meant to the Greeks and all
the peoples who came under their influence ([Plate XXII](#img_pl22)).

The story of Dionysos is always the story of Dionysos-and-Apollo. There
is not such a thing as even half of this story; one without the other
does not exist. It veiled one of the greatest of the Greek mysteries,
this conflict between these two gods, and the final reconciling of their
struggle. It symbolised the conflict between light and darkness, between
spirit and form--quite literally, the conflict between spirit and body.
It was a mythological drama based on the old cry of man, "I feel two
natures

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

struggling within me." The first impulse of antagonism is to defeat,
even to destroy; it seldom occurs to two opponents that there is a
middle point, an equilibrium or balance, where peace abides. The story
of Dionysos-Apollo is not one of destruction, but of final reconcilement
between two opposing forces. Neither was to be rightly judged on the
basis of "good" or of "evil," but on the basis of incompleteness only.
Each needed the complementary force of the other; without the other
neither was whole. It was not Dionysos alone, nor Apollo alone, but the
two reconciled and united that solved the struggle. In this *kylix*,
Dionysos-Apollo floats on the aethereal ocean. The body or boat--a great
fish--carries the unified god. The two are one, and from them united
spring two great vines laden with fruit and leaves. About the living
boat seven dolphins, "spies of the sea," keep guard to forecast storms
and to warn the pilot. In this Dionysian vine picture the myth-cycle of
the World Tree rounds upon itself. The Tree, given by the gods to mortal
man, is itself re-born through man reconciled and made immortal, and is
given back to heaven as a celestial vine. Dionysos-Apollo had escaped
the Wheel of Fate, and could forever mediate between the remnants of man
still bound to it, and the Olympian gods.

The mystery of the relation between Darkness and Light, which is the
mystery of Dionysos-Apollo, had another representation in the
seventeenth century, when Robert Fludd based the whole scheme of
Creation upon it ([Plate XXIII](#img_pl23)). It will be interesting to
compare this drawing with some Chinese conceptions of the primal

 

<span id="img_pl22"></span>

[![PLATE XXII. DIONYSOS IN THE SHIP&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;A black-figured
kylix by Exekias&lt;/i&gt; (&lt;i&gt;6th cen. B.C.&lt;/i&gt;).
&lt;i&gt;in Munich&lt;/i&gt; (&lt;i&gt;Furtwängler-Reichhold;
Griechische Vasenmalerei, No. 42&lt;/i&gt;).&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Mythology of All Races&lt;/i&gt;, 1927. Vol. I, Plate
XLIX)](tn/pl22.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl22.jpg)  
PLATE XXII. DIONYSOS IN THE SHIP  
*A black-figured kylix by Exekias* (*6th cen. B.C.*). *in Munich*
(*Furtwängler-Reichhold; Griechische Vasenmalerei, No. 42*).  
(From *Mythology of All Races*, 1927. Vol. I, Plate XLIX)  

 

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

causal cosmic struggle between Light and Darkness (pp.
[147](boe19.htm#page_147)-150).

"At the top of the figure," says Fludd, "is expressed the Head, or the
Root, of all things, both in the simplicity of His unity and the duality
of His universal attributes, namely, One God, One Supreme Being, One
Essence or Divine Mind, whether willing or non-willing. In the negative
aspect it withdraws within itself, and refrains from sending Itself
forth from Itself.

"B. is the effect of the divine potency, or non-willing, in which state
all things were formless and in potency only, before the beginning of
the world. B., in other words, is a hieroglyphic Image of God thus far
altogether non-willing; in which stage God is in His true Essence,
shining within Himself, but not sending Himself forth from Himself. Such
was the primal Chaos, from the bowels of which the materials of the
Universe were originally drawn forth.

"Just as B. was the hieroglyph of the latent God, so C. is the
representation of His glorious Emanation for the Creation of the World.
This Emanation is the *Word of God*.

"From the union of these two comes one World \[D. E.\] in the Image of
One Who participates in it both in His positive and negative aspects.
That is to say, from the two opposites the World is born in the Image of
its Creator. The World is in God, which means that the World is partly
created and partly uncreated. Created, if we consider the material
World, but uncreated if we consider its Maker.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

"According to the mystical theology of Orpheus, Hesiod, Euripides, and
Æschylus (who involved the divine mysteries in allegory), the Sun is
taken in Archetype, as that divine source from which all ornament and
beauty, embracing a multiple harmony of life, is derived. In His right
hand is pity and benevolence, in His left, severity and punishment \[F.
G.\]."

One aspect of this divine mystery of the Sun visible and the Sun
invisible, they concealed, he says, under the name of Apollo, god of Day
and of Light, the other under the name of Dionysos, god of Night and of
Darkness. Each was but half of the other; only the two are one; yet each
one, though separate, had within him the seeds of Darkness and Light.
Hence, they argued that God is both destruction and creation, corruption
and generation, author and actor; that "just as he composes by the
number 7, so he destroys by the number 7, for the sacred number 7 is
attributed to the God of life." Night in its darkness, or Dionysos,
symbolised God in His negative aspect of withdrawal within Himself, and
Day in its light, or Apollo, symbolised God in his positive aspect of
giving forth by emanation from himself.

THE FAMOUS ROSE TREE of the Rosicrucians has a Dionysian connection, for
the Rose as well as the Vine was sacred to this god. It has also a
Peruvian connection; the Peruvian Eve--there is a native drawing of her
later on--sinned not by eating the apple, but by picking

 

<span id="img_pl23"></span>

[![PLATE XXIII. ''&lt;i&gt;And God said, Let there be Light, and there
was Light&lt;/i&gt;.''&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Medicina
Catholica&lt;/i&gt;; Robert Fludd, 1629)](tn/pl23.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl23.jpg)  
PLATE XXIII. ''*And God said, Let there be Light, and there was
Light*.''  
(From *Medicina Catholica*; Robert Fludd, 1629)  

 

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

roses, which were, in the Peruvian tradition, the fruit of the Tree."
The bee is almost as much a part of this drawing ([Plate
XXIV](boe17.htm#img_pl24)) as the Rose Tree--here are a few odd myths of
this marvellous being. According to Porphyrios, the Moon was called a
bee; according to Virgil, the bee alone of all animate things descended
from Paradise, is a part of the mind of God, never perishes, and alone
of all animate things, ascends alive into heaven. Dionysos is sometimes
identified with the Moon, and is said in some traditions to have been
born again as a bee. Again, the wax of bees produces light, hence bees
are those that feed on fire. As for the rose, its bud resembles the
acuminated or pointed sphere that symbolises ether in the ancient Stupa
([Fig. 1](boe06.htm#img_fig001)), and the opened rose, to the
Rosicrucians, symbolised the Universe spread out like a book, which he
who could might read.

This representation of the universe by a rose appears to be a later
development of a very ancient figuration of the universe by an
onion--also a plant sacred to the old gods. Rather, the universe was
represented by the layers of the onion--the Egyptians and the Hebrews
and the Tibetans have used this over and over again. The core, to which
the layers cling, may be the axis of the world, or the polar mountain of
the world. In the Tibetan universe the onion's core is Mount Meru,
surrounded by fifteen opaque, semi-transparent layers of oceans and
mountains and oceans again until the outer skin is reached, which is the
wall of iron about the universe. And all the heavens are one above the
other, like the layers of an onion," says the Kabbala. ". . . And our
companions who live in the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

\[paragraph continues\] South, have seen in the First Book and in the
Book of Adam, that all these earths which are Below, are like the
firmaments Above, that upon that, and this upon this, and between each
earth, a heaven (firmament) is spread out between each other (like the
fine skin of the layers on the onion)."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[94:1](boe16.htm#fr_6) *The Prose of Younger
Edda*, translated by G. W. Dasent, p. 16.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[101:1](boe16.htm#fr_7) *Memoirs of the American
Museum of Natural History*, Vol. II, 1900, pp. 342-43.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[103:1](boe16.htm#fr_8) *U.S. Bur. Ethnol. Rep.*,
1893-94, p. 182."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[107:1](boe16.htm#fr_9) *Picture Writing of the
American Indians*: Garrick Mallery, 1894, pp. 251-252.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mountains of the World](boe17)
