[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe23)  [Next](boe25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tartar-Mongol Worlds

IN *Picture-Writing of the American Indians*, Garrick Mallery has
collected a delightful group of Tartar and Mongol magic drum tops, over
which a little time will not be wasted just here. These drums were
used--are used--by various Tartar and Mongol tribes in religious
ceremonies, and their shamans believe that the sound of one design or
figure painted on the stretched skin differs essentially from that of
another pattern painted, and that therefore, one drum sounded may kill
or torment, while

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

another may heal. Many of these designs are little world-pictures
purely.

<span id="img_fig080"></span>

[![FIGURE 80. &lt;i&gt;Painted Tartar and Mongol
drums&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Picture-Writing of the
America, Indians&lt;/i&gt;; Garrick Mallery, 1894, p.
515.)](tn/fig080.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig080.jpg)  
FIGURE 80. *Painted Tartar and Mongol drums*.  
(From *Picture-Writing of the America, Indians*; Garrick Mallery, 1894,
p. 515.)  

The upper left-hand design in [Fig. 80](#img_fig080), for instance,
suggests at first glance not only a two-storied division of heaven and
Earth, but a World Mountain and a World Tree. According to Mallery, the
two circles with inner dots above the cross-bar represent the Moon and
Sun.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Two shamans or priests of magic are pictured on
the left, and with them a wild goat and five serpents. On the right are
three shamans and a deer.

The upper right-hand design (*b*) had the same four-quarter division,
with a face indicated in the top loop of the axis or tree, and with the
upper heavens spangled with stars, suns and moons. Below the cross-bar
are a rainbow with stars beneath it, and, above the rainbow, two
"heavenly maidens." This magic drum design represents "the bringing of
the horse to sacrifice."

The lower left-hand design (*c*), says Mallery, "is the external
delineation of a head without eyes and nose." The shamans who owned this
drum said that the circles, two above the cross-bar and six below, all
empty, are "representations of drums, and the three human figures are
masters or spirits of localities."

The fourth design (*d*) was explained by the shaman no further than to
say that the five wave-lines on either side of the face above the
cross-bar are "serpents."

The upper left-hand design in [Fig. 81](#img_fig081) has above its
dividing line two trees. "On each of them sits the bird karagush with
the bill turned to the left." "On the left of the tree," Mallery goes on
to say, "are two circles, one dark (the moon), the other light (the
sun)." But the design as given shows but one. Below the horizontal lines
are three animals, a frog, a lizard, and a serpent--all of them watery
animals, who appear to be swimming in the waters under the tree-bearing
Earth.

The upper right-hand design (*b*) "has on the upper half two circles,
the sun and moon; on the left side four horsemen;

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and under them a bowman, also on horseback. The centre is occupied by a
picture of a net and sieve for winnowing the nuts and seeds of the cedar
tree. On the right

<span id="img_fig081"></span>

[![FIGURE 81. &lt;i&gt;Painted Tartar and Mongol
drums&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Picture-Writing of the
American Indians&lt;/i&gt;; Garrick Mallery, 1894, p.
516.)](tn/fig081.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig081.jpg)  
FIGURE 81. *Painted Tartar and Mongol drums*.  
(From *Picture-Writing of the American Indians*; Garrick Mallery, 1894,
p. 516.)  

side are two trees, beigamin (literally, the rich birch), over which two
birds, the karagush, are floating. Under a division on the right and on
the left side are oval objects

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

with lattice-figures or scaly skin. These are two whales. In the middle,
between them, are a frog and a deer, and below them a serpent. Above,
toward the hoop of the drum, is fastened an owl's feather."

The lower left-hand design (*c*) has, in the upper half, seven figures
"reminding one of horses, bura, going to heaven, *i.e.*, their
sacrifice." Above them are two light-giving circles, the sun and the
moon; on the right of the horses are three trees; under a horizontal
line on the left is a serpent, on the right a fish, "the kerbuleik, the
whale according to Verbitski, literally the bay-fish."

The lower right-hand design (*d*) has its upper half divided into three
layers, the first of which "is heaven, the second the rainbow, and in
the lower stratum the stars." At the left and right are the sun and
moon, below, a goat, and three trees." Mallery adds that underneath
there was an undefined figure not given in this drawing which the
interpreting shaman called "the bura. Some said that it meant a cloud;
others that it meant heavenly horses."

The left-hand design in [Fig. 82](#img_fig082) is divided by four
vertical and four horizontal lines. "The latter," says Mallery,
"represent the rainbow; the vertical lines borsui. Circles with dots in
the center are represented in three sections, and in the fourth one
circle." Further than this, the shaman did not interpret.

The right-hand design shows in its upper section five human figures.
"These, according to the shaman's own explanation, are heavenly maidens
(in the original Turkish, *tengriduing kuiz*). Below, under a rainbow,
which is represented by three arched lines, are portrayed two serpents,

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

each having a cross inside. These are *kurmos nuing tyungurey*, *i.e.*,
the drums are kurmos's. Kurmos is the Altaic word for spirits, which the
shamans summon."

The shamans of these tribes admit three worlds; the world of the Heavens
(hallan jurda); the middle one of the Earth (onto-doidu); and the lower
one of Hell (*jedăn tiigara*);

<span id="img_fig082"></span>

[![FIGURE 82. &lt;i&gt;Painted Tartar and Mongol
drum&lt;/i&gt;s.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;Picture-Writing of the
American Indians&lt;/i&gt;; Garrick Mallery, 1894, p.
517.)](tn/fig082.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig082.jpg)  
FIGURE 82. *Painted Tartar and Mongol drum*s.  
(From *Picture-Writing of the American Indians*; Garrick Mallery, 1894,
p. 517.)  

the first the realm of light, the last the realm of darkness. The middle
world, or Earth, has for a time been given over by the Creator
(*Jut-tas-olbohtah Jürdan-Ai-Tojan*) to the will of the devil or
tempter, and the souls of men at death, according to their merit, are
sent either to the upper or the lower world. When, however, "the earth
world has come to an end, the souls of the two realms will wage a war
against each other, and victory must remain on the side of the good
souls."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maps of the Earth](boe25)
