[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe28)  [Next](boe30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### St. Hildegard's Universe

THERE IS ANOTHER UNIVERSE of the Middle Ages in which the Earth is like
the heart." This is the Universe of Saint Hildegard of Bingen, who lived
from 1096 to 1179 or 1180. Saint Hildegard would have been a remarkable
woman in any age; in her own she had no parallel.

Abbess of a Benedictine convent near Bingen on the Rhine, she was the
first of a great line of women mystics. She founded two convents, was
the author of many letters and three books--possibly five--was for those
days a physician in her own right, and wrote a long treatise on the
nature and properties of herbs. She was interested in statecraft, was a
musician and a poet, and over half a hundred hymns are credited to her.
Her health was not good, but she governed her convent, wrote her books,
healed her sick and ailing, corresponded with the wisest men of her age,
and travelled hundreds of miles--in the twelfth century! And with all
this, she led the contemplative life.

In that contemplative active life her curious system of the universe
blossomed, and in her letters and her books she left the records of her
mystical visions of its structure and meaning. These records usually
begin with, "The

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Living Light sayeth . . ." It was her name for
God, but it was in "The Shade of the Living Light" that she had her
perceptions of the universe, and it is interesting to read her simple
account of these "Lights." "From my infancy until now in the seventieth
year of my age," she says, "my soul has always beheld this light, and in
it my soul soars to the summit of the firmament and into different air.
. . . The brightness which I see is not limited by space, and is more
brilliant than the radiance around the Sun. . . . I cannot measure its
height, length, breadth. Its name, which has been given me, is 'Shade of
the Living Light.' . . . With that brightness I sometimes see another
light for which the name *Lux Vivens* has been given me. When and how I
see *this* I cannot tell; but sometimes when I see it all sadness and
pain is lifted from me, and I seem a simple girl again, and an old woman
no more."

In Hildegard's universe, the Earth was the centre, and spherical, around
which were arranged concentric shells or zones. The inner zones are
spherical, the outer oval or egg-shaped, and the outermost ([Fig.
92](#img_fig092).md) so formed as to suggest the acuminated sphere that
symbolises the fifth element, quintessence of the other four. This point
that tapers into outer space is in the East, which is the top of the
diagram. One of her drawings shows, says Singer, that she believed the
antipodean surface of the Earth to be uninhabitable, "since it is either
beneath the ocean, or in the mouth of the Dragon."

In the interior of the Earth, she believed, are two vast spaces shaped
like truncated cones, where punishment was endured, and from whence
great evil came forth. The

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

 

<span id="img_fig092"></span>

[![FIGURE 92. &lt;i&gt;Hildegard's first scheme of the
Universe&lt;/i&gt;. Slightly simplified from the Wiesbaden Codex B,
folio 14 r.&lt;br&gt; (From ''The Scientific Views and Visions of Saint
Hildegard,'' by Charles Singer; in &lt;i&gt;Studies in the History and
Method of Science&lt;/i&gt;, ed. by Charles Singer, 1917. Vol. Fig.
2.)](tn/fig092.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig092.jpg.md)  
FIGURE 92. *Hildegard's first scheme of the Universe*. Slightly
simplified from the Wiesbaden Codex B, folio 14 r.  
(From ''The Scientific Views and Visions of Saint Hildegard,'' by
Charles Singer; in *Studies in the History and Method of Science*, ed.
by Charles Singer, 1917. Vol. Fig. 2.)  

 

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Earth itself was composed of the four elements,
which are represented, curiously unequal in proportion and shape. Their
arrangement is not orderly, and this very disorder illustrates one of
Hildegard's fundamental doctrines regarding the relation of this world
to the universe. Before man's fall, the elements were united in an
harmonious combination, and Earth was Paradise; after that catastrophe,
the harmony of the universe was disturbed, with the centre of all the
trouble on this planet which has ever since remained in its now familiar
state of chaotic confusion or *mistio*, as Hildegard's age called it.
This *mistio* she represents vigorously enough by the irregular
distribution of the elements over the Earth. "Thus mingled will they
remain until subjected to the melting pot of the Lord Judgment, when
they will emerge in a new and eternal harmony, no longer mixed as
matter, but separate and pure, parts of a new heaven and a new Earth."

Around this world, says Singer, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) is
spread the atmosphere, the *aer lucidus* or *alba pellis*, also
circular. Through this *alba pellis* no Earth creature can penetrate.
Later Hildegard seems to have divided this first zone of air into two,
the *aer tenuis* or atmosphere whose outer part is the inner zone of the
clouds, and the *fortis et albus lucidusque aer*, where certain fixed
stars are placed.

Beyond this are four outer zones belonging to the four winds, indicated
by the breath of supernatural beings.

 

<span id="img_pl37"></span>

[![PLATE XXXVII. &lt;i&gt;Nous pervaded by the Godhead embracing the
Macrocosm with the Microcosm&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; From ''The Scientific
Views and Visions of Saint Hildegard,'' by Charles Singer. In
&lt;i&gt;Studies in the History and Method of Science&lt;/i&gt;, ed. by
Charles Singer, 1917, Vol. I, Plate VII.](tn/pl37.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl37.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXXVII. *Nous pervaded by the Godhead embracing the Macrocosm with
the Microcosm*.  
From ''The Scientific Views and Visions of Saint Hildegard,'' by Charles
Singer. In *Studies in the History and Method of Science*, ed. by
Charles Singer, 1917, Vol. I, Plate VII.  

 

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They also correspond confusedly to the four
elements and to the four regions of the heavenly bodies.

The first is the *aer aquosus*, corresponding to water, and containing
the east wind. In its outer part float clouds, expanding, contracting,
and being blown this way and that, thus concealing or revealing the
heavenly bodies.

Beyond the *aer aquosus*, or watery zone, is the *purus aether*, or zone
of air, and containing the west wind. Of all the zones it is the widest,
and the long axis of this zone and the remaining outer zones is from
east to west, thus fixing the path of movement of the heavenly bodies.
It carries in it the constellations of the fixed stars, the Moon, and
the two interior planets, Mercury and Venus.

Beyond the zones of east wind and water and of west wind and air is the
*umbrosa pellis*, or *ignis niger*, the zone of the "dry" and the
"earthy," of the north wind, thunder, lightning, and storms. It is a
dark, narrow shell which is the storehouse of "the treasures of the snow
and of the hail."

The outermost shell is the *lucidus ignis*, zone of fire, of the south
wind, and of the three outer planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn--also, in
Hildegard's first scheme, of the Sun.

The movements of the four outer zones about each other, which carry the
heavenly bodies, are caused by the four winds; and the elements peculiar
to each zone are here comparatively pure. Each zone has also its own
special *mental* character, and has a specific influence on the mind and
the body of man. For, says Hildegard, "And

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

again I heard the voice from heaven saying, 'God, who created all
things, wrought also man in His own image and similitude, and in him He
traced (*signavit*) all created things, and He held him in such love
that He destined him for the place from which the fallen angel had been
cast."

[Plate XXXVII](#img_pl37.md) is an illustration from her *Liber Divinorum*
representing her second vision, which shows Nous, the "world-spirit,"
animated and controlled by the God-head, with arms outstretched
embracing the macrocosm with the microcosm. Only the head and the feet
of Nous are visible, for the body is covered with the disc of the
universe. In this picture of her universe, the zones are seven: they
are, from without inwards, says Singer:

a\. The *lucidus ignis*, containing the three outer planets, the sixteen
principal fixed stars, and the south wind.

b\. The *ignis niger*, containing the sun, the north wind, and the
materials for thunder, lightning, and hail.

c\. The *purus aether*, containing the west wind, the Moon, the two
inner planets, and certain fixed stars.

d\. The *aer aquosus*, containing the east wind.

e\. The *fortis et albus lucidusque aer* where certain other fixed stars
are placed.

f\. The *aer tenuis*, or atmosphere, in the outer part of which is the
zone of the clouds.

From all these zones with all their contents, elements, winds, Sun,
Moon, planets, fixed stars, and the great animals or qualities of the
heavens, are rained down influences upon the figure of the macrocosm.

Singer quotes a passage from Hildegard's *Liber Divinorum* 

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

to illustrate all this, and most of it can be followed in [Plate
XXXVII](#img_pl37), and in [Fig. 92](#img_fig092.md).

"In the middle of the disk \[of the universe\] there appeared the form
of a man, the crown of whose head and the soles of whose feet extended
to the *fortis et albus lucidusque aer*, and his hands were outstretched
right and left to the same circle. . . . Towards these parts there was
an appearance of four heads, a leopard, a wolf, a lion, and a bear.
Above the head of the figure, in the zone of the *purus aether*, I saw
the head of the leopard emitting a blast from its mouth, and on the
right side of the mouth the blast, curving itself somewhat backwards,
was formed into a crab's head . . . while on the left side of the mouth
a blast similarly curved ended in a stag's head. From the mouth of the
crab's head, another blast went to the middle of the space between the
leopard and the lion, and from the stag's head a similar blast to the
middle of the space between the leopard and the bear . . . and all the
heads were breathing towards the figure of the man. Under his feet in
the *aer aquosus* there appeared as it were the head of a wolf, sending
forth to the right a blast extending to the middle of the half space
between its head and that of the bear, where it assumed the form of the
stag's head; and from the stag's mouth there came as it were another
breath which ended in the middle line. From the left of the wolf's mouth
arose a breath which went to the middle of the half space between the
wolf and the lion, where was depicted another crab's head . . . from
whose mouth another breath ended in the same middle line . . . And the
breath of all the heads extended sideways from

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

one to another. . . . Moreover, on the right hand of the figure in the
*lucidus igni*, from the head of the lion, issued a breath which passed
laterally on the right into a serpent's head and on the left into a
lamb's head . . . similarly on the figure's left in the *ignis niger*,
there issued a breath from the bear's head ending on its right in the
head of \[another\] lamb, and on its left in another serpent's head . .
. And above the head of the figure the seven planets were ranged in
order, three in the *lucidus ignis*, one projecting into the *ignis
niger*, and three into the *purus aether*. . . . And in the
circumference of the circle of the lucidus ignis there appeared the
sixteen principal stars, four in each quadrant between the heads. . . .
Also the *purus aether* and the *fortis et albus lucidusque aer* seemed
to be full of stars which sent forth their rays towards the clouds,
whence . . . tongues like rivers descended to the disk and towards the
figure, which was thus surrounded and influenced by these signs."

In Hildegard's fourth vision--of the influence of the heavenly bodies
and the pure elements on men, animals, and plants, she saw, from the
upper fiery firmament, the *lucidus ignis*, ashes as it were cast to the
Earth, which produced rashes and ulcers in men and animals and fruits.
From the *ignis niger* she saw vapours (*nebulæ*) descending, which
withered the plants and dried up the earth. Against these descending
influences the *purus aether* struggled, seeking to hold back the
plagues of disease and drought.

From the *fortis et albus lucidusque aer* she saw certain clouds descend
to the Earth and infect men and beasts

 

<span id="img_pl38"></span>

[![PLATE XXXVIII (From &lt;i&gt;Uriusque Cosmi&lt;/i&gt;; Robert Fludd,
1621. Vol. I) ](tn/pl38.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl38.jpg.md)  
PLATE XXXVIII (From *Uriusque Cosmi*; Robert Fludd, 1621. Vol. I)  

 

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

with a pestilence, but this plague the *aer aquosus* opposed, so that
all were not destroyed. In the *aer tenuis* she saw its moisture as if
it were boiling above the surface of the Earth, rousing the force of the
Earth, and compelling it to bring forth its fruits by aid of the cosmic
rays.

In the whole of her scheme of the universe, the winds are of prime
importance. Were it not for the winds, which, she said, are the wings of
God's power, the other three elements, the fires of the south, the
waters of the west, and the great shadows of the north would burst over
the Earth and destroy it. Or, were the four winds to move forward at
once, the elements themselves would be split asunder, and the waters of
the sea would be dried up. As man's body, she said, is held together by
the soul, so the firmament is held together by the winds, which are,
like the soul, invisible.

In developing her theory of the correspondence of the microcosm to the
macrocosm, of man to the universe and God, she set down many of its
details. The firmament corresponds to the head of man, in which, from
the top of the cerebral cavity to "the last extremity of the forehead,"
are seven marked spaces all equal, which correspond to the seven
planets, all of which, says Hildegard, are equally distant from each
other in the heavens. The Sun, Moon, and stars she compares to his eyes;
air is his hearing, the winds his smelling, the dew of heaven his
tasting, and the sides of the world his arms and his touching. The Earth
is like the heart of the cosmos, for it, like the heart of man, can be
stirred by emotion; and, as the heart of man, moved by joy or sorrow,
excites the brain to cause tears to flow,

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

so the Earth, when the Moon begins to wax and wane, sends up her tears,
the fogs of her oceans and seas.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[220:1](boe29.htm#fr_17.md) "The Scientific Views
and Visions of Saint Hildegard;" Charles Singer: In *Studies in the
History and Method of Science*, Vol. I, 1917, pp. 22-36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Earths in the Universe](boe30.md)
