[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe32)  [Next](boe34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Earth a Hollow Sphere

WITH THE *Symmes Theory of Concentric Spheres* we take up, for the first
time, a cosmogony of the nineteenth century. In this flight through
worlds we have spanned not only the centuries but the oceans and
continents of the Earth. We are in the year of our Lord, 1818, in
America, and at St. Louis, Missouri, on the western bank of the
mightiest river of the Earth. We are on the continent whose aboriginal
inhabitants have, running through all their mythologies and traditions,
the tradition and myth of a "hollow Earth," and we are about to
consider, in their order, three modern American theories of the figure
of Earth, all of them based on the assumption that this planet is a
hollow sphere, habitable within.

A brief circular announced the first of these:

*Light gives light to light discover--ad infinitum*

St. Louis (Missouri Territory)

NORTH AMERICA, April 10, A.D., 1818

TO ALL THE WORLD:

I declare that the earth is hollow and habitable within; containing a
number of solid concentric spheres, one

 

<span id="img_pl42"></span>

[![PLATE XLII. THE THREE WORLD OCTAVES&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Utriusque Cosmi&lt;/i&gt;; Robert Fludd, 1621. Vol.
I)](tn/pl42.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl42.jpg)  
PLATE XLII. THE THREE WORLD OCTAVES  
(From *Utriusque Cosmi*; Robert Fludd, 1621. Vol. I)  

 

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

within the other, and that it is open at the poles twelve or sixteen
degrees. I pledge my life in support of this truth, and am ready to
explore the hollow, if the world will support and aid me in this
undertaking.

JNO. CLEVES SYMMES        
*Of Ohio, late Captain of Infantry*.   

N. B. I have ready for the press a Treatise on the Principles of the
matter, wherein I show proofs of the above position, account for the
various phenomena, and disclose Dr. Darwin's "Golden Secret."

I ask one hundred brave companions, well equipped, to start from Siberia
in the fall season, with reindeer and sleighs, on the ice of the frozen
sea; and I engage we find a warm and rich land, stocked with thrifty
vegetables and animals, if not men, on reaching one degree northwest of
latitude 62; we will return in the succeeding spring.

J. C. S.

Symmes never reached, nor even began his journey to reach, the "north
polar Verge of the world," let pass its interior. In 1822 and again in
1823, he petitioned the Congress of the United States to equip for him
two vessels "of 250 or 300 tons burden," and in 1824 even sought aid
from the General Assembly of the State of Ohio. Naturally no such
request was even considered by an American Congress or Legislature. In
1829 he died, and over his grave, at Hamilton, Ohio, was erected a
monument surmounted by a hollow globe open at the poles, inscribed: "He
contended that the Earth is hollow and habitable within."

Where Symmes got his notion that the Earth has a concave,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

habitable surface seems to have interested nobody. But it is interesting
to consider that three "concave" cosmogonies have sprung up within less
than a century on this continent whose aborigines believed in the
hollowness of their "great Island." The Montagnais held the earth to be
pierced through and through; that the Sun set by entering one hole and
hiding inside the Earth during the night; that it rose by emerging from
the opposite hole. Numberless tribes have the tradition that formerly
their race lived underground, until some adventurous youth climbed
upwards by some great vine to the outer surface of the Earth, and,
finding it delightful and habitable, returned and brought their people
out of the "concave." Indian gods fell from Heaven, through the Earth;
and vanished races were those who had returned to their first homes. How
much of this Symmes had picked up through [fraternising](errata.htm#0)
with the western Indians, or whether he had ever heard any of this
tradition from them, we shall probably never know.

In 1826, "A Citizen of the United States," otherwise James McBride,
published, at Cincinnati, a little book called *The Symmes Theory of
Concentric Spheres*, giving thesis and proofs.

"According to Symmes's Theory, the earth, as well as all the celestial
orbicular bodies existing in the universe, visible and invisible, which
partake in any degree of a planetary nature, from the greatest to the
smallest, from the sun down to the most minute blazing meteor or falling
star, are all constituted in a greater or less degree, of a collection
of spheres, more or less solid, concentric with each

 

<span id="img_pl43"></span>

[![PLATE XLIII. THE SYMMES THEORY OF CONCENTRIC SPHERES&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;The Symmes Theory of Concentric Spheres&lt;/i&gt;, compiled by
Americus Symmes, 1878)](tn/pl43.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl43.jpg)  
PLATE XLIII. THE SYMMES THEORY OF CONCENTRIC SPHERES  
(From *The Symmes Theory of Concentric Spheres*, compiled by Americus
Symmes, 1878)  

 

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

other, and more or less open at their poles; each sphere being separated
from its adjoining compeers by space replete with aerial fluids; that
every portion of infinite space, except what is occupied by spheres, is
filled with an aerial elastic fluid, more subtle than common atmospheric
air; and constituted of innumerable small concentric spheres, too minute
to be visible to the organ of sight assisted by the most perfect
microscope, and so elastic that they continually press on each other,
and change their relative situations as often as the position of any
piece of matter in space may change its position; thus causing a
universal pressure, which is weakened by the intervention of other
bodies in proportion to the subtended angle of distance and dimension;
necessarily causing the body to move towards the points of decreased
pressure."

Symmes believed that the planet "which has been designated the Earth,"
is composed of at least five concentric spheres, with spaces between
each, an atmosphere surrounding each, and each habitable upon both its
surfaces. Each sphere was widely open at its poles, and the north polar
opening of the outer sphere whose convex surface man inhabits, he
believed to be about four thousand miles in diameter. The southern polar
opening he estimated to be half again as large.

Each of the spheres composing the Earth is according to this theory
lighted and warmed "according to those general laws which communicate
light and heat to every part of the universe." This light and heat might
not be so bright or so intense as ours; and the probability of this is
indicated, he says, in those high northern latitudes, where

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

the "Verge" begins, by the paleness of the Sun and the darkness of the
sky; yet he does not doubt that they are sufficiently warmed and lighted
to support animal and vegetable life.

His "mid-plane-space" theory is interesting, and Gardner's diagram
([Plate XLIV](#img_pl44)) makes it very clear. Each sphere has a cavity,
or *mid-plane-space* near its centre--the medial line, that is, which
would split its crust or shell into inner and outer layers--filled with
this light, subtle, elastic aerial fluid, "partaking somewhat of the
nature of hydrogen gas; which aerial fluid is composed of molecules
greatly rarefied in comparison with the gravity of the extended or
exposed surfaces of the sphere." It is this *mid-plane-space* which
gives the sphere lightness and buoyancy, and the aerial fluid with which
it is filled may possibly, he conjectures, serve for the support of
animal life.

Clouds formed in the outer air of the planet would probably float
through the vast polar openings in the form of rain or snow. The great
winds or typhoons, known on the Earth, might have their force supplied
by winds sucked into one polar opening, and emerging through the other,
thus performing the circuit of the sphere.

He argues his hollow Earth by analogy--to hollow stalks of wheat, the
hollow quills and feathers of birds, the hollow bones of animals, and
the hollow hairs of our heads. This would be, he says, "the most perfect
system of creative economy, *a great saving of stuff*." And, this early
in the history of north polar exploration, and from the evidence of
whalers and fishermen in the northern seas regarding

 

<span id="img_pl44"></span>

[![PLATE XLIV. GARDNER'S DIAGRAM OF SYMMES'S EARTH&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Showing the five concentric spheres, with their polar openings
at the Verges of the World. their separating atmospheres, and their
mid-plane spaces&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;A Journey to the
Earth's Interior&lt;/i&gt;; Marshall B. Gardner, 1920)](tn/pl44.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl44.jpg)  
PLATE XLIV. GARDNER'S DIAGRAM OF SYMMES'S EARTH  
*Showing the five concentric spheres, with their polar openings at the
Verges of the World. their separating atmospheres, and their mid-plane
spaces*.  
(From *A Journey to the Earth's Interior*; Marshall B. Gardner, 1920)  

 

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the migration of birds, animals, and fish to and from the north polar
zone, he is arguing for a warm and habitable region beyond the
ice-packs, "where the fresh waters furiously contend with the salt." He
develops at great length the precise manner in which light and heat from
our Sun might, by reflection and refraction, penetrate into every part
of the interior shells. It is even possible, he suggests, that, "near
the Verges of the polar openings, and perhaps in many other parts of the
unfathomable ocean, the spheres are water quite through (at least all
except the *mid-plane-spaces* or cavities), which being the case, light
would probably be transmitted through the spheres."

Symmes believed that man, in his efforts to reach the North Pole, had
always failed just on the "Verge"; that once past the ice barrier and
headed inevitably for the interior of the hollow shell, he would find
himself almost at once in a temperate zone. The path to the interior, he
says, would be a tortuous one, by way of "the winding meridians of the
Verge."

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

THE KORESHAN COSMOGONY is another "hollow Earth" theory, which was first
given out in 1870 by Cyrus Reed Teed. The chart given in [Plate
XLV](#img_pl45) contains all the principal diagrams by which the theory
is illustrated.

This second of modern American cosmogonies holds that the Earth we live
upon and think we "know" to be the

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

outer surface of a sphere, is, in reality, its concave surface; that we
are actually living enclosed within a hollow shell, however much our
collective senses and our collective science seem to prove the contrary.
This, Teed affirms, is because we have been taught for centuries that
the Earth is a globe filled with molten matter on whose cooled crust we
live; that it is but a speck in infinite Space, a dot in a vast ocean of
worlds, revolving on its own axis every twenty-four hours and thus
creating its own days and nights in its yearly revolutions around the
Sun; that the Moon shines a borrowed light; that comets appear, fly off
into space, and return; that above and around and below our solar system
stretch the orbits of other worlds to illimitable distances; that our
Sun, the centre of our system, has a diameter of 866,000 miles, is
distant from the Earth 93,000,000 miles, and has a volume or bulk
1,300,000 times that of the Earth; that the planet nearest the Sun,
Mercury, is 36,000,000 miles distant from it, and 57,000,000 miles
distant from the Earth, and so on until we reach the planet Neptune
which is 2,800,000,000 miles from the Sun and guards the outermost
boundaries of our universe.

The Koreshan cosmogony, on the other hand, "maintains and demonstrates
that the universe is a unit; it is an alchemico-organic structure,
limited to the dimensions of 8,000 miles, diameter. According to the
great law of analogy we hold that its form is cellular, that all life is
generated in a cell--*omne vivum ex ovo*. The earth's shell, composed of
metals and minerals, is about 100 miles in thickness, constituting a
gigantic voltaic pile, the basis of the great galvano-magnetic battery,
furnishing the negative

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

elements of the cell for the generation and supply of the sun's fuel.
The concave surface of the earth alone is habitable. Superimposed upon
the strata of the shell and emplaced in their static planes are the
three atmospheres. At the centre we find the positive pole of the great
battery--the central sun, around and with which the heavens revolve in
twenty-four hours. All the energies of the physical universe are
engendered through the relation of the positive centre to the negative
circumference; a great complex battery of physical unity is thus
attained and perpetuated." <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

This shell, one hundred miles in thickness, is composed of seven
metallic, five mineral, and five geologic strata. The seven metallic
layers or laminæ are "the seven notable metals," of which gold
constitutes the outer rind of the shell. Beyond this is--nothing.

The inner surface of the shell is land and water, a concave expanse
inhabited by every form of life. That we live on a concave surface, this
cosmogony undertakes to prove by exactly the same phenomenon which
"proves" the Earth's surface is convex--the disappearance of a ship
"around" the world. Within the shell are the three atmospheres, of which
the outermost, the atmosphere in which we exist, is composed chiefly of
oxygen and nitrogen. The next or middle atmosphere is composed of pure
hydrogen; and the one above of "aboran." Within this is the solar
sphere, and within the whole and nucleus of all, the astral or stellar
centre. Thus the starry nucleus is the centre of Space, and the metallic
plates or laminæ the circumference

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

of Space. The heavens do not surround the Earth, but the Earth, the
heavens.

In and occupying these atmospheres are not only the Sun and stars, but
also "the reflections called the planets and the moon. The planets are
mercurial disci moving by electro-magnetic impulse between the metallic
laminæ or planes of the concave shell. They are seen through penetrable
rays, ultra electro-magnetic, reflected or bent back in their
impingement on the spheres of energy regularly graduated as the stories
in the heavens." And, later on, they are further described as "little
focal points of energy, partially materialized spheres in process of
combustion. Their diameter is very small. Jupiter is nothing like the
concept in the usual theory. The real planets are discs of mercury in
the earth, between the metallic shells. They focalise the sun's energies
in the atmosphere above us. They are what their names
indicate--plan-ets--little planes." Of these mercurial discs there are
seven.

Comets are not great streams of fiery matter; they are tiny things,
broken up bits of crystalline energies spirating about the central solar
sphere. "They do not fly off into space and return. They plunge into and
feed the sun."

Neither is the Sun 886,000,000 miles in diameter, nor distant from the
Earth 93,000,000 miles, since it is a body contained within the concave
Earth. Given the Earth's diameter of 8,000 miles, the Sun's diameter
would not be over 100 miles, or its distance from the concave habitable
surface over 1000 miles. "The sun, moon, stars, including Sirius,
Arcturus, Procyon, all the great nebulæ and comets, in short, all the
things that exist in the heavens

 

<span id="img_pl45"></span>

[![PLATE XLV. CHART OF THE KORESHAN COSMOGONY&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Cellular Cosmogony&lt;/i&gt;; Cyrus Reed Teed,
1898)](tn/pl45.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl45.jpg)  
PLATE XLV. CHART OF THE KORESHAN COSMOGONY  
(From *Cellular Cosmogony*; Cyrus Reed Teed, 1898)  

 

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

above, are contained in the shell. They are not worlds, or systems of
worlds; they are not wanderers or erratic orbs, but points of generation
of energy, every one of which has a distinctly different function
belonging and necessary to universal perpetuation."

The revolution of the Sun and not the rotation of the

<span id="img_fig099"></span> ![FIGURE 99. ''&lt;i&gt;All things shew
great through vapoures or myste&lt;/i&gt;.''&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;The Castle of Knowledge&lt;/i&gt;; Robert Recorde,
1556.)](img/fig099.jpg)  
FIGURE 99. ''*All things shew great through vapoures or myste*.''  
(From *The Castle of Knowledge*; Robert Recorde, 1556.)

\[paragraph continues\] Earth is the cause of day and night. Instead of
appearing to rise above a convex surface, the Sun simply comes into our
sphere of vision in the course of its revolution, and, at sunset, "goes
out over the earth beyond the sea of hydrogen and arc of the heavens."

As to the Moon, which is an interesting part of this reversed cosmogony,
it is to be first of all understood that there is uninterrupted
reciprocal interchange of substance from centre to circumference of the
shell; from the positive pole of the great battery--the central one,"

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

to the shell itself, described before as "a gigantic voltaic pile, the
basis of the great galvano-magnetic battery, furnishing the negative
elements of the cell for the generation and supply of the sun's fuel."
For energy, it is explained, "is the destruction of matter as matter,
and matter is the result of the destruction of energy as energy."

The origin of the Moon is in the Earth's shell, a sphere of energy
derived from the planets and from the energies generated in the concave
crust of the Earth. "The moon we see is projected or reflected from the
great concave mirror, the metallic laminæ in the circumference; this
moon is a sphere of force in the physical heavens, a sphere of
crystalline energy upon which is implanted the picture of the earth's
surface. The visible moon is a gravosphere or X-ray picture of the
crust; hence we see light and dark places upon it, produced from the
earth's surface and the geologic strata. The real moon is the laminæ of
the earth's shell. The sun is the centre, the moon the circumference;
the image or focalisation of each we see in the physical heavens. The
moon does not shine borrowed light direct as in the Copernican system.
But the sun and moon are two great lights; each shines with a light of
its own, the light of the moon being derived from thousands of qualities
of solar energies, after utilization, transmutation, and metamorphosis
in the great shell."

The figures of Earth in this cosmogony are at first bewildering, until
the eye becomes accustomed to the trick of "reverse." In the upper
left-hand sphere ([Plate XLV](#img_pl45)) we are looking at the
"geography" of a concave surface--downwards as into a bowl. In the upper
right-hand

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

spherical figure, we are looking at "the heavens in the Earth." The
central spherical figure shows the three atmospheres which are the cause
of day and night. It is a cross-sectional view of the "gigantic
electro-magnetic battery with the sun as the perpetual pivot and pole."
It is the southern hemisphere of the "cell." The smaller spheres
show--upper left and right--the summer and winter solstices; lower left,
the actual position of the Earth and its poles; lower right, the orbits
of the planetary mercurial discs *in* the Earth's shell.

In this cosmogony, the Earth is not "supported"; it is suspended; it is
dependent wholly upon its centre. It is eternal; it is the footstool of
God and necessary to His Own existence; but it is All; "it is the
ultimate and outermost limit of expression of the divine mind." Beyond
its outer plate of shining gold there is nothing.

These are two of the three modern theories of the Earth as a hollow
shell, differing widely from each other, but having as a common ground
the habitability of the concave surface. The first conceives the Earth
to be a body composed of at least five concentric spheres or shells,
with enormous polar openings through which light and heat enter from the
exterior Sun. The second affirms that the Earth is a single shell
containing within itself the whole universe--the atmospheres, the
planets, the heavens with the stars and Moon and Sun, and that on its
concave surface man lives without ever knowing that he is enclosed
within his world, like a bird in a cage. The third theory says that the
Earth is a single shell, habitable on both its surfaces, with polar
openings and an interior Sun.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

This theory of the figure of the Earth was first published in 1913, in
Marshall B. Gardner's *A Journey to the Earth's Interior, or Have the
Poles Really Been Discovered*. [Plate XLVI](#img_pl46) shows the
exterior of his working model, and [Fig. 100](#img_fig100) is a diagram
of the Earth bisected through its polar openings and showing the
interior Sun.

According to these figures, the Earth's shell is a solid mass about 800
miles thick, with its own centre of gravity. Within as without there is
land and water, their distribution inside being probably the reverse of
the distribution without. That is, the Pacific and Atlantic ocean areas
indicate great interior continents (perhaps the lost continents
Atlantis-Lemuria-Pan-Mu!), and the space occupied by our continents are
probably the places of the interior seas.

At each polar axis there is a great opening, about 1400 miles in
diameter, around which both the exterior and interior waters, whose
currents flow both ways, pour over "the lips of the world." Over this
great curve, says Gardner, mariners might float, or flying men fly, with
no more realisation--except for disturbances to their compass
needles--that they were describing a half circle about a Titanic
waterfall, than a voyager realises he is rounding the globe at any
single stage--or total of stages--of a world-voyage. "They would only
know that they had actually passed over the lip by the peculiar behavior
of the magnetic needle and by the fact that they would see above
them--as above them would mean toward the actual centre of the
earth--the interior sun, which of course

 

<span id="img_pl46"></span>

[![PLATE. XLVI. &lt;i&gt;The Earth according to Gardner, as it would
appear if viewed&lt;br&gt; from space shorting the North Polar opening
in the planet's interior. which is hollow and contains a central sun
instead of an ocean of liquid lava&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;A
Journey to the Earth's Interior&lt;/i&gt;, Marshall B. Gardner,
1920)](tn/pl46.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl46.jpg)  
PLATE. XLVI. *The Earth according to Gardner, as it would appear if
viewed  
from space shorting the North Polar opening in the planet's interior.
which is hollow and contains a central sun instead of an ocean of liquid
lava*.  
(From *A Journey to the Earth's Interior*, Marshall B. Gardner, 1920)  

 

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

would be shining whether the voyagers came under its influence during
the day or during the arctic night."

No mariner has ever rounded this hypothetical lip, entered the great
"concave," and emerged to tell his tale. But, says Gardner, messages
from the Earth's interior have drifted and constantly do drift out to us
by way of the contrary current. He cites log after log of North Polar
expeditions, from the first to the last, all of them filled with curious
contradictions and "unexplainable" phenomena; the "warm current flowing
from the polar regions," the migrations northwards--instead of south--of
birds and animals to feed and breed; the greater wealth of animal and
vegetable life in the higher latitudes of the arctic regions than in the
lower; the "red pollen of plants that grow--where?" scattered on
icebergs and glaciers; the trees--some of them green-leaved--washed down
in the warm polar current; the "case after case where the mammoth has
floated out from the interior incased in glaciers and bergs and has been
frozen in crevasses in the interior near the polar openings, and then
carried over the lip by glacial movements into Siberia." From the noted
evidence of fossil remains, complete coniferous trees, the presence of
butterflies and bees, gnats and mosquitoes, incalculable shoals of fish,
the musk-oxen and reindeer, the millions of birds--including the
sandpiper, the "red snow," fresh-water ice, the recurrent appearances of
"extinct" species--the mammoth, the mastodon, the mylodon, to say
nothing of the remains of the rhinoceros, hippopotamus, lion, hyena,
arid other tropical species all around the North Polar region, he
concludes a common origin, beyond the

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

curve of the polar sea, after it has dipped below our horizon and has
begun to flow, still north as we would say, yet south, into the Earth's
interior.

The interior Sun which warms this inner Earth may be perhaps 600 miles
in diameter. It is the central nucleus of the old nebular hypothesis;
but, instead of throwing off a series of rings, each of which, breaking,
formed a sphere and eventually a planet revolving around the central
nucleus or Sun, the original nebula, says Gardner, "did not break up
into a solar system, but condensed into one planet," this Earth. The
spiral nebula is the first stage, he says, of a planetary body; the
shell-like nebula with its central "star" or Sun is the second stage;
the oblate spheroid with its central Sun and the two openings "which are
always left when the nebula cools into a planet," is the third stage.
One planet, that is, is like another. As, for instance, Mars and Earth.

The "ice caps" of Mars have accounted, until comparatively recently, for
the clearly discernible bright spots at its poles. Of late astronomers
have begun to doubt that Martian "ice" could send light-flashes across
so many million miles of space. Gardner says that what we see is no more
or less than the light from Mar's interior Sun, and that now and then,
in observed brilliant points like stars flashing from the midst of the
polar caps, we have caught the direct cosmic ray from Mars.

The Aurora Borealis is another unexplained phenomenon--those pulsating
aerial fires of the north, which have their counterpart in the Aurora
Australis at the South Pole. Gardner says that the scientists themselves
know

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

 

<span id="img_fig100"></span>

[![FIGURE 100. &lt;i&gt;Diagram showing the earth as a hollow sphere
with its polar openings and central sun. The letters at top and bottom
of diagram indicate the various steps of an imaginary journey through
the planet's interior. At the point marked&lt;/i&gt;
''&lt;i&gt;D&lt;/i&gt;'' &lt;i&gt;we catch our first glimpse of the
corona of the central sun; at the point marked&lt;/i&gt;
''&lt;i&gt;E&lt;/i&gt;'' &lt;i&gt;we see the central sun in its
entirety&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;A Journey to the Earth's
Interior&lt;/i&gt;; Marshall B. Gardner, 1920.)](tn/fig100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig100.jpg)  
FIGURE 100. *Diagram showing the earth as a hollow sphere with its polar
openings and central sun. The letters at top and bottom of diagram
indicate the various steps of an imaginary journey through the planet's
interior. At the point marked* ''*D*'' *we catch our first glimpse of
the corona of the central sun; at the point marked* ''*E*'' *we see the
central sun in its entirety*.  
(From *A Journey to the Earth's Interior*; Marshall B. Gardner, 1920.)  

 

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

that the theory of their being the result of magnetic or electrical
discharges does not explain them. The nearer the Pole, the more
magnificent is the display--and he quotes Flammarion on them: "This
light of the earth, the emission of which towards the poles is almost
continuous . . ." It is just simply that, says Gardner, the light of the
Earth; the light of its interior Sun, which pours through the lips of
the Earth into the northern and southern skies. Nothing but interior
storms of great violence, which choke the orifices for a time with dense
clouds, can hold back the almost continuous stream of light. He quotes
from Nansen's *Farthest North* in this connection. Nansen saw one night
a marvelous Aurora. A brilliant corona circled the zenith with wreaths
of streamers in several layers, all tending upward towards the corona
which every now and then showed a dark patch in its centre towards which
all the rays converged: "The halo kept smouldering and shifting just as
if a gale in the upper atmosphere were playing a bellows to it." For a
time it appeared as if the celestial storm abated; then the gale seemed
to increase; it twisted the streamers into an inextricable tangle, until
at last everything merged "into a chaos of shining mist." There are
phrases in Nansen's description of this display which delight Gardner;
"bellows," "gale," "storm." As a matter of intelligent explanation, he
says, the light from the central Sun was being reflected from the higher
reaches of the Earth's atmosphere, and the reflection was being
interfered with by a violent storm in the interior of the Earth. Great
clouds were in rapid process of formation and dissipation near the polar
openings, so that at one moment the

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

rays of the central Sun shot clearly through, at the next moment they
were blackened and hid.

Instead of departing for the interior of the Earth by way of Siberia, as
Symmes begged to be aided to do, Gardner would pick up some
Eskimos--whose ancestors, according to their own tradition, came from
the "inside" where it is always light--some dogs and some sleds at
God-haven, Greenland, and then proceed north along its coast to about
82° or 83°. What warm air, or warm water, the expedition would encounter
would come from the north, and, if it were summer, mosquitoes would be
the plague of plagues. From the coast of Grant Land or Peary Land, it
would start on the last lap of the journey across the open polar sea.
The Aurora Borealis would be no longer in the north, but directly
overhead, and there would come a midnight perhaps that was strange
day--their ship would be surrounded by an angry reddish light and a
strange atmosphere. For the travellers would have passed far enough over
the lips of the world to see, no longer the exterior Sun, but the inner
Sun which never sets. It is no longer moving from east to west. It is
stationary, or practically so, in "the centre of the world."

In that interior world, Gardner surmises, is the treasure house of all
of the species of flora and fauna--and probably all of the races of
man--that through millions of years have followed each other in endless
procession over the exterior surface of the Earth; appearing, abiding
for a while, and then passing away. Warned by great climatic changes on
the outside, or by the tremors that precede great geological changes,
they would have retreated, a few

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

of the "saved," to the hidden cities of refuge within the globe. So that
here would be all of the myriad "missing links" in the disconnected
story of the fractured outer Earth.

The return, incidentally, to the exterior would be no easier than the
departure from it. For at each orifice the contrary waters endlessly
struggle to pass, and it might very well be that the traveller caught in
the wrong current would not be able to make the cross to the right one
on which he could float easily out.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[244:1](boe33.htm#fr_18) *Cellular Cosmogony*,
Cyrus Reed Teed, 1905, p. 172.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tetrahedral Earth](boe34)
