[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boe33)  [Next](boe35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Tetrahedral Earth

THE LAST FIGURE OF EARTH in this collecting of its endlessly changing
forms is, so far as I know, the latest figure of Earth to be drawn; it
differs in all ways from any other world-picture we have here. [Plate
XLVIII](#img_pl48) is a drawing of the Earth as a Tetrahedron or
three-sided pyramid; it appeared in the New York *World*, October 24,
1926, as an illustration to a review of Théophile Moreux's *Astronomy
To-day*. It is not "scientific"; it is just an example of how a "guess"
takes a form, even in this age. It has an interesting story, this figure
of Earth; and so we begin, far enough back.

"Continents rise and sink as if through some gentle act of respiration.
They move in long undulations which may be compared to waves of the
sea."

This sounds as if some mild mystic were speaking, but it is *Elisée
Reclus*, French geographer, writing of *The Earth* in 1870. Twenty years
later Clarence Dutton, American

 

<span id="img_pl47"></span>

[![PLATE XLVII. (&lt;i&gt;From Vestiges of the Molten Globe&lt;/i&gt;;
William Lowthian Green, 1875)](tn/pl47.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl47.jpg)  
PLATE XLVII. (*From Vestiges of the Molten Globe*; William Lowthian
Green, 1875)  

 

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

geologist, coined a term, the Theory of Isostacy, for the fast
developing theory of the floatation of the earth's crust, or floating
continents. Less than ten years ago Alfred Wegener, in *The Origin of
Continents and Oceans*, advanced this theory. The continents are masses
of sial or "continental rock," moving through the sima--that rock
forming the substratum of the ocean bed, which he compares in its
viscosity to *sealing wax*; it is, that is, an extremely viscous fluid,
offering a very great resistance to any change of form, but inevitably
yielding, under constant pressure, to the passage of the continental
masses. Very simply and fantastically imaged, it is as if the continents
were enormous leaves or flowers or branches springing from some great
parent stalk or trunk imbedded in the very earth of Earth, and floating
upwards through the ocean depths to the watery surface and far beyond
it.

And yet it is almost this very figure--the inverted pyramidal plant
figure of the floating continents--which William Lowthian Green worked
out in 1875 with the aid of a "model crystal," a tetrahedron with its
sides depressed and its four corners thereby slightly raised. His
hypothesis is that during the process of the Earth's cooling, and
because of what he calls "the tetrahedral collapse of the Earth's crust
in the southern hemisphere," the assumed spheroid form of the Earth
(giving a minimum of surface for a given volume) tended to develop into
a tetrahedron (giving a maximum of surface for a given volume), with the
continents as the edges and the ocean beds as the sides. "Thus," says
Green, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) "a general view of the
crystal, the six-

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

faced tetrahedron \[[Fig. 20](boe06.htm#img_fig020)\], supposed to be
three-fourths covered by water attracted towards the centre of gravity
of the figure, represents generally all the continents and oceans on the
globe in their actual relative positions. As there are four acute solid
angles on the crystal, so there are four and only four continents or
masses in relief on the globe, and as there are four obtuse angles on
the crystal, so there are four and only four grand depressions or oceans
on the globe."

Try to find any general reference to "Green's theory"; scientists knew
of it, of course, but otherwise it is as if it appeared like a comet in
the sky of 1875, not to appear again for over fifty years.

Moreux spoke of it, however, in his *Astronomy To-day*, and thanks to
the way he spoke of it, we have this last picture of a tetrahedral
Earth. He takes up one by one the unsolved problems of the Earth and the
heavens, and it is an amazing array of the unknown. The dozen or so
movements of the Earth is a puzzle; the irregularity of those movements
is a puzzle, the Earth's real centre of gravity is a puzzle, the
planetary system individually and as a whole is a puzzle, the
"respiration" of the Earth is a puzzle, the Earth-Moon system would be
the puzzle of puzzles if it were not for the fact that the still unknown
actual figure of the Earth is the puzzle that tops them all. It is more
of a problem to-day than it was in 1885.

For in 1885 that which was to solve it did no more than to tangle again
all the laboriously disentangled threads. The discovery of invar in that
year, an alloy of nickel and steel whose expansion and contraction at
ordinary temperature

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

is almost nothing, seemed to make possible for the first time, at least
in our recorded history, the accurate measuring of the supposed oblate
spheroid on which we live. The invar wire was the unerring instrument by
which scientists began again the painstaking re-measuring of the Earth.
"At the present time," says Moreux, "the survey of the Earth has been
carried out in all possible directions, and the results have made the
problem only more puzzling. It is found that, even between the same
latitudes, meridian arcs are not all of equal lengths, and dissymmetry
is everywhere; it becomes more pronounced still when the two hemispheres
are compared; and the equator itself, instead of being accurately a
circle, like the largest circle of a spheroid, has different radii of
curvature at different longitudes." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

Since astronomers must, in all their practical calculations, make use of
the mathematical elements of this globe so-called, they have, for
themselves, determined on a set of average values not too far removed
from the unknown real ones, which for the time serves them fairly well.
But geographers and geologists, says Moreux, are not interested in this
merely approximate solution of the enigma. "By considering the matter
closely, they have found that certain systematic variations which occur
in pendulum observations and in the value of gravity point more and more
to the truth of an old theory which was long ignored. It was suggested
by Green in 1875;" and then he re-states Green's hypothesis:

"According to this theory, the Earth would tend, in the

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

process of cooling, to take the form of a tetrahedron or triangular
pyramid, with four faces and four corners or coigns. The seas would
occupy the depressions and form the faces of the pyramid, while the
continents would be situated round the coigns and would reach out along
the edges.

"The facts seem to be in considerable agreement with this supposition.
Three of the coigns are in the northern hemisphere; to use the
picturesque expression of Suess, they are the Scandinavian, Canadian,
and Siberian 'bucklers,' the last being situated near Yakutsk. Moreover,
these projecting continents are of very ancient formation, and their
ramifications extend more or less uninterruptedly as far as the South
Pole. The opposite faces consist of the Southern Atlantic, the Indian
and the Pacific Oceans. Lastly, the fourth corner forms the Antarctic
continent, to which there corresponds, on the opposite face, the frozen
Arctic Ocean." <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

These are the words that gave the image that produced this latest figure
to be drawn of the Earth, a tetrahedron or three-sided pyramid, with
four continents and four oceans, spinning in space. It is worth noting
here that Green says of his "crystal model": "Crystallographers are
aware that the six-faced tetrahedron with convex faces may geometrically
as well as in nature and fact, approach to the form of a sphere, and
that many diamonds possessing that crystalline figure are hardly
distinguishable from spheres, but yet may be true six-faced
tetrahedrons."

Without committing himself at all to the tetrahedral

 

<span id="img_pl48"></span>

[![PLATE XLVIII. THE TETRAHEDRAL EARTH&lt;br&gt; (From &lt;i&gt;The
Sunday Magazine&lt;/i&gt;, New York World, Oct. 24,
1926)](tn/pl48.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl48.jpg)  
PLATE XLVIII. THE TETRAHEDRAL EARTH  
(From *The Sunday Magazine*, New York World, Oct. 24, 1926)  

 

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

figure of Earth as established, Moreux adds that "the tetrahedral theory
accounts for the inequality of the polar radii, and at the same time
gives a more satisfactory explanation than any rival theory does of
certain facts of astronomy which are inconsistent with the Earth's being
a true ellipsoid of revolution." So, too, he says, the general plan of
the Earth's relief and main lines of fractures or crumplings on its
surface would, by this theory, be the logical consequence of the
contracting process which began during the first of the geological eras
and has continued according to the same laws ever since.

Be very sure that science to-day is committed to nothing but "guesses"
on the still unknown figure of the Earth. We are doing to-day, in the
last analysis, no more than that first man, whoever and wherever and
whenever he was, who said, "Perhaps it is like this," and set down his
crude lines of an island in a sea. We know a great many facts about a
great many things, and a great many things about a great many facts; and
this multitude of facts and things is just exactly our confusion. The
facts are facts, but they are contradictory facts; they have not fused
into the one great truth about the one Earth of which we know--a little.
We have girdled the globe in ships on the surface of its waters, we have
rounded the unknown line of its curve under its waters, and we are
making our own curves through its air as we fly above it. But no man has
ever seen the Earth. It is invisible. We talk of the secrets of the
frozen North; they are no more than a handful of the secrets of the
Earth. It lies over the Sun and under the Moon, giving everything, but
forever withholding the

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

sum of everything--the right image of its own true, unimaginable form.

What is Earth?

A geoid.

What is a geoid?

An Earth-shaped body.

What is an Earth-shaped body?

A geoid.

What is Earth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[257:1](boe34.htm#fr_19) *Vestiges of the Molten
Globe*; William Lowthian Green, 1875, p. 5.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[259:1](boe34.htm#fr_20) *Astronomy To-day*;
Théophile Moreux, 1926, p. 65. 259

<span id="fn_21"></span>[260:1](boe34.htm#fr_21) *Astronomy To-day*;
Théophile Moreux, 1926, p. 66.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](boe35)
