<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sgr00)  [Next](sgr02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585426016/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62XWC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Science of Getting Rich*, by Wallace Delois Wattles, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Preface**

THIS book is pragmatical, not philosophical; a practical manual, not a
treatise upon theories. It is intended for the men and women whose most
pressing need is for money; who wish to get rich first, and philosophize
afterward. It is for those who have, so far, found neither the time, the
means, nor the opportunity to go deeply into the study of metaphysics,
but who want results and who are willing to take the conclusions of
science as a basis for action, without going into all the processes by
which those conclusions were reached.

It is expected that the reader will take the fundamental statements upon
faith, just as he would take statements concerning a law of electrical
action if they were promulgated by a Marconi or an Edison; and, taking
the statements upon faith, that he will prove their truth by acting upon
them without fear or hesitation. Every man or woman who does this will
certainly get rich; for the science herein applied is an exact science,
and failure is impossible. For the benefit, however, of those who wish
to investigate philosophical theories and so secure a logical basis for
faith, I will here cite certain authorities.

The monistic theory of the universe the theory that One is All, and that
All is One; That one Substance manifests itself as the seeming many
elements of the material world -is of Hindu origin, and has been
gradually winning its way into the thought of the western world for two
hundred years. It is the foundation of all the Oriental philosophies,
and of those of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Schopenhauer, Hegel, and
Emerson.

The reader who would dig to the philosophical foundations of this is
advised to read Hegel and Emerson for himself.

In writing this book I have sacrificed all other considerations to
plainness and simplicity of style, so that all might understand. The
plan of action laid down herein was deduced from the conclusions of
philosophy; it has been thoroughly tested, and bears the supreme test of
practical experiment; it works. If you wish to know how the conclusions
were arrived at, read the writings of the authors mentioned above; and
if you wish to reap the fruits of their philosophies in actual practice,
read this book and do exactly as it tells you to do.

—The Author

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. The Right To Be Rich](sgr02.md)

</div>
