[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cjl03)  [Next](cjl05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402180012/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Conjugial Love*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1768\] at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Conjugial Love

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

XI\. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF EUNUCHS SO BORN, OR OF EUNUCHS SO
MADE. Eunuchs so born are those more especially with whom the ultimate
of love is wanting from birth: and as in such case the first and middle
principles are without a foundation on which to stand, they have
therefore no existence; and if they exist, the persons in whom they
exist have no concern to distinguish between the chaste principle and
the unchaste, each being indifferent to them; but of these persons there
are several distinctions. The case is nearly the same with eunuchs so
made as with some eunuchs so born; but eunuchs so made, as they are both
men and women, cannot possibly regard conjugial love any otherwise than
as a phantasy, and the delights thereof as idle stories. If they have
any inclination, it is rendered mute, which is neither chaste nor
unchaste: and what is neither chaste nor unchaste, derives no quality
from either the one or the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

X. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO DO NOT BELIEVE ADULTERIES
TO BE EVILS IN REGARD TO RELIGION; AND STILL LESS OF THOSE WHO DO NOT
BELIEVE THEM TO BE HURTFUL TO SOCIETY. The reason why chastity cannot be
predicated of such is, because they neither know what chastity is nor
even that it exists; for chastity relates to marriage, as was shewn in
the first article of this section. Those who do not believe adulteries
be evil in regard to religion, regard even marriages as unchaste;
whereas religion with married pairs constitutes their chastity; thus
such persons have nothing chaste in them, and therefore it is in vain to
talk to them of chastity; these are confirmed adulterers: but those who
do not believe adulteries to be hurtful to society, know still less than
the others, either what chastity is or even that it exists; for they are
adulterers from a determined purpose: if they say that marriages are
less unchaste than adulteries, they say so merely with the mouth, but
not with the heart, because marriages with them are cold, and those who
speak from such cold concerning chaste heat, cannot have an idea of
chaste heat in regard to conjugial love. The nature and quality of such
persons, and of the ideas of their thought, and hence of the interior
principles of their conversation, will be seen in the second part of
this work,--ADULTEROUS LOVE AND ITS SINFUL PLEASURES.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

XI\. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO ABSTAIN FROM ADULTERIES
ONLY FOR VARIOUS EXTERNAL REASONS. Many believe that the mere abstaining
from adulteries in the body is chastity; yet this is not chastity,
unless at the same time there is an abstaining in spirit. The spirit of
man (\_homo\_), by which is here meant his mind as to affections and
thoughts, constitutes the chaste principle and the unchaste, for hence
it flows into the body, the body being in all cases such as the mind or
spirit is. Hence it follows, that those who abstain from adulteries in
the body, without being influenced from the spirit are not chaste;
neither are those chaste who abstain from them in spirit as influenced
from the body. There are many assignable causes which make a man desist
from adulteries in the body, and also in the spirit as influenced from
the body; but still, he that does not desist from them in the body as
influenced from the spirit, is unchaste; for the Lord says, "\_That
whosoever looketh upon another's woman, so as to lust after her, hath
already committed adultery with her in his heart\_," Matt. v. 28. It is
impossible to enumerate all the causes of abstinence from adulteries in
the body only, they being various according to states of marriage, and
also according to states of the body; for there are some persons who
abstain from them from fear of the civil law and its penalties; some
from fear of the loss of reputation and thereby of honor; some from fear
of diseases which may be thereby contracted; some from fear of domestic
quarrels on the part of the wife, whereby the quiet of their lives may
be disturbed; some from fear of revenge on the part of the husband or
relations; some from fear of chastisement from the servants of the
family; some also abstain from motives of poverty, avarice, or
imbecility, arising either from disease, from abuse, from age, or from
impotence. Of these there are some also, who, because they cannot or
dare not commit adultery in the body, condemn adulteries in the spirit;
and thus they speak morally against adulteries, and in favor of
marriages; but such person, unless in spirit they call adulteries
accursed, and this from a religious principle in the spirit, are still
adulterers; for although they do not commit them in the body, yet they
do in the spirit; wherefore after death, when they become spirits, they
speak openly in favor of them. From these considerations it is manifest,
that even a wicked person may shun adulteries as hurtful; but that none
but a Christian can shun them as sins. Hence then the truth of the
proposition is evident, that chastity cannot be predicated of those who
abstain from adulteries merely for various external reasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

XII\. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO BELIEVE MARRIAGES TO BE
UNCHASTE. These, like the persons spoken of just above, n. 152, do not
know either what chastity is, or even that it exists; and in this
respect they are like those who make chastity to consist merely in
celibacy, of whom we shall speak presently.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

XIII\. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO HAVE RENOUNCED
MARRIAGE BY VOWS OF PERPETUAL CELIBACY, UNLESS THERE BE AND REMAIN IN
THEM THE LOVE OF A LIFE TRULY CONJUGIAL. The reason why chastity cannot
be predicated of these, is, because after a vow of perpetual celibacy,
conjugial love is renounced; and yet it is of this love alone that
chastity can be predicated: nevertheless there still remains an
inclination to the sex implanted from creation, and consequently innate
by birth; and when this inclination is restrained and subdued, it must
needs pass away into heat, and in some cases into a violent burning,
which, in rising from the body into the spirit, infests it, and with
some persons defiles it; and there may be instances where the spirit
thus defiled may defile also the principles of religion, casting them
down from their internal abode, where they are in holiness, into things
external, where they become mere matters of talk and gesture; therefore
it was provided by the Lord, that celibacy should have place only with
those who are in external worship, as is the case with all who do not
address themselves to the Lord, or read the Word. With such, eternal
life is not so much endangered by vows of celibacy attended with
engagements to chastity, as it is with those who are principled in
internal worship: moreover, in many instances that state of life is not
entered upon from any freedom of the will, many being engaged therein
before they attain to freedom grounded in reason, and some in
consequence of alluring worldly motives. Of those who adopt that state
with a view to have their minds disengaged from the world, that they may
be more at leisure to apply themselves to divine things, those only are
chaste with whom the love of a life truly conjugial either preceded that
state or followed it, and with whom it remains; for the love of a life
truly conjugial is that alone of which chastity is predicated. Wherefore
also, after death, all who have lived in monasteries are at length freed
from their vows and set at liberty, that, according to the interior vows
and desires of their love, they may be led to choose a life either
conjugial or extra-conjugial: if in such case they enter into conjugial
life, those who have loved also the spiritual things of divine worship
are given in marriage in heaven; but those who enter into
extra-conjugial life are sent to their like, who dwell on the confines
of heaven. I have inquired of the angels, whether those who have devoted
themselves to works of piety, and given themselves up entirely to divine
worship, and who thus have withdrawn themselves from the snares of the
world and the concupiscences of the flesh, and with this view have vowed
perpetual virginity, are received into heaven, and there admitted among
the blessed to enjoy an especial portion of happiness according to their
faith. To this the angels replied, that such are indeed received into
heaven; but when they are made sensible of the sphere of conjugial love
there, they become sad and fretful, and then, some of their own accord,
some by asking leave, and some from being commanded, depart and are
dismissed, and when they are out of that heaven, a way is opened for
them to their consociates, who had been in a similar state of life in
the world; and then from being fretful they become cheerful, and rejoice
together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

XIV\. A STATE OF MARRIAGE IS TO BE PREFERRED TO A STATE OF CELIBACY.
This is evident from what has been said above respecting marriage and
celibacy. A state of marriage is to be preferred because it is a state
ordained from creation; because it originates in the marriage of good
and truth; because it corresponds with the marriage of the Lord and the
church; because the church and conjugial love are constant companions;
because its use is more excellent than all the other uses of the things
of creation, for thence according to order is derived the increase of
the human race, and also of the angelic heaven, which is formed from the
human race: moreover, marriage constitutes the completeness of a man
(\_homo\_); for by it he becomes a complete man, as will be shewn in the
following chapter. All these things are wanting in celibacy. But if the
proposition be taken for granted, that a state of celibacy is preferable
to a state of marriage, and if this proposition be left to the mind's
examination, to be assented to and established by confirming proofs,
then the conclusion must be, that marriages are not holy, neither can
they be chaste; yea, that chastity in the female sex belongs only to
those, who abstain from marriage and vow perpetual virginity: and
moreover, that those who have vowed perpetual celibacy are understood by
the eunuchs \_who make themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's
sake\_, Matt. xix. 12; not to mention other conclusions of a like
nature; which, being grounded in a proposition that is not true, are
also not true. The eunuchs who make themselves eunuchs for the kingdom
of heaven's sake, are spiritual eunuchs, who are such as in marriages
abstain from the evils of whoredoms: that Italian eunuchs are not meant,
is evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.*">151.\*</span></span>

To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. As I was going
home from the school of wisdom (concerning which, see above, n. 132), I
saw in the way an angel dressed in blue. He joined me and walked by my
side, and said, "I see that you are come from the school of wisdom, and
are made glad by what you heard there; and as I perceive that you are
not a full inhabitant of this world, because you are at the same time in
the natural world, and therefore know nothing of our Olympic gymnasia,
where the ancient \_sophi\_ meet together, and by the information they
collect from every new comer, learn what changes and successions wisdom
has undergone and is still undergoing in your world; if you are willing
I will conduct you to the place where several of those ancient \_sophi\_
and their sons, that is, their disciples, dwell." So he led me to the
confines between the north and east; and while I was looking that way
from a rising ground, lo! I saw a city, and on one side of it two small
hills; that which was nearer to the city being lower than the other.
"That city," said he, "is called Athens, the lower hill Parnassus, and
the higher Helicon. They are so called, because in the city and around
it dwell the wise men who formerly lived in Greece, as Pythagoras,
Socrates, Aristippus, Xenophon, with their disciples and scholars." On
my asking him concerning Plato and Aristotle, he said, "They and their
followers dwell in another region, because they taught principles of
rationality which relate to the understanding; whereas the former taught
morality which relates to the life." He further informed me, that it was
customary at times to depute from the city of Athens some of the
students to learn from the literati of the Christians, what sentiments
they entertain at this day respecting God, the creation of the universe,
the immortality of the soul, the relative state of men and beasts, and
other subjects of interior wisdom: and he added, that a herald had that
day announced an assembly, which was a token that the emissaries had met
with some strangers newly arrived from the earth, who had communicated
some curious information. We then saw several persons going from the
city and its suburbs, some having their heads decked with wreaths of
laurel, some holding palms in their hands, some with books under their
arms, and some with pens under the hair of the left temple. We mixed
with the company, and ascended the hill with them; and lo! on the top
was an octagonal palace, which they called the Palladium, into which we
entered; within there were eight hexangular recesses, in each of which
was a book-case and a table: at these recesses were seated the laureled
\_sophi\_, and in the Palladium itself there were seats cut out of the
rock, on which the rest were seated. A door on the left was then opened,
through which the two strangers newly arrived from the earth were
introduced; and after the compliments of salutation were paid, one of
the laureled \_sophi\_ asked them, "WHAT NEWS FROM THE EARTH?" They
replied, "This is news, that in forests there have been found men like
beasts, or beasts like men: from their face and body they were known to
have been born men, and to have been lost or left in the forests when
they were two or three years old; they were not able to give utterance
to any thought, nor could they learn to articulate the voice into any
distinct expression; neither did they know the food suitable for them as
the beasts do, but put greedily into their mouths whatever they found in
the forest, whether it was clean or unclean; besides many other
particulars of a like nature: from which some of the learned among us
have formed several conjectures and conclusions concerning the relative
state of men and beasts." On hearing this account, some of the ancient
\_sophi\_ asked, "What were the conjectures and conclusions formed from
the circumstances you have related?" The two strangers replied, "There
were several: but they may all be comprised under the following: 1. That
a man by nature, and also by birth, is more stupid and consequently
viler than any beast; and that he remains so, unless he is instructed.
2. That he is capable of being instructed, because he has learnt to
frame articulate sounds, and thence to speak, and thereby has begun to
express his thoughts, and this successively more and more perfectly
until he has been able to express the laws of civil society; several of
which are nevertheless impressed on beasts from their birth. 3. That
beasts have rationality like men. 4. Therefore, that if beasts could
speak, they would reason on any subject as acutely as men; a proof of
which is, that they think from reason and prudence just as men do. 5.
That the understanding is only a modification of light from the sun; the
heat co-operating by means of ether, so that it is only an activity of
interior nature; and that this activity may be so exalted as to appear
like wisdom. 6. That therefore it is ridiculous to believe that a man
lives after death any more than a beast; unless perchance, for some days
after his decease, in consequence of an exhalation of the life of the
body, he may appear as a mist under the form of a spectre, before he is
dissipated into nature; just as a shrub raised up from its ashes,
appears in the likeness of its own form. 7. Consequently that religion,
which teaches a life after death, is a mere device, in order to keep the
simple inwardly in bonds by its laws, as they are kept outwardly in
bonds by the laws of the state." To this they added, that "people of
mere ingenuity reason in this manner, but not so the intelligent:" and
they were asked, "How do the intelligent reason?" They said they had not
been informed; but they supposed that they must reason differently.

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.*">152.\*</span></span>

On hearing this relation, all those who were sitting at the tables
exclaimed, "Alas! what times are come on the earth! What changes has
wisdom undergone? How is she transformed into a false and infatuated
ingenuity! The sun is set, and in his station beneath the earth is in
direct opposition to his meridian altitude. From the case here adduced
respecting such as have been left and found in forests, who cannot see
that an uninstructed man is such as here represented? For is not the
nature of his life determined by the nature of the instruction he
receives? Is he not born in a state of greater ignorance than the
beasts? Must he not learn to walk and to speak? Supposing he never
learnt to walk, would he ever stand upright? And if he never learnt to
speak, would he ever be able to express his thoughts? Is not every man
such as instruction makes him,--insane from false principles, or wise
from truths? and is not he that is insane from false principles,
entirely possessed with an imagination that he is wiser than he that is
wise from truths? Are there not instances of men who are so wild and
foolish, that they are no more like men than those who have been found
in forests? Is not this the case with such as have been deprived of
memory? From all these considerations we conclude, that a man without
instruction is neither a man nor a beast; but that he is a form, which
is capable of receiving in itself that which constitutes a man; and thus
that he is not born a man, but that he is made a man; and that a man is
born such a form as to be an organ receptive of life from God, to the
end that he may be a subject into which God may introduce all good, and,
by union with himself, may make him eternally blessed. We have perceived
from your conversation, that wisdom at this day is so far extinguished
or infatuated, that nothing at all is known concerning the relative
state of the life of men and of beasts; and hence it is that the state
of the life of man after death is not known: but those who are capable
of knowing this, and yet are not willing, and in consequence deny it, as
many Christians do, may fitly be compared to such as are found in
forests: not that they are rendered so stupid from a want of
instruction, but that they have rendered themselves so by the fallacies
of the senses, which are the darkness of truths."

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.*">153.\*</span></span>

At that instant a certain person standing in the middle of the
Palladium, and holding in his hand a palm, said, "Explain, I pray, this
arcanum, How a man, created a form of God, could be changed into a form
of the devil. I know that the angels of heaven are forms of God and that
the angels of hell are forms of the devil, and that the two forms are
opposite to each other, the latter being insanities, the former wisdoms.
Tell me, therefore, how a man, created a form of God, could pass from
day into such night, as to be capable of denying God and life eternal."
To this the several teachers replied in order; first the Pythagoreans,
next the Socratics, and afterwards the rest: but among them there was a
certain Platonist, who spoke last; and his opinion prevailed, which was
to this effect; That the men of the saturnine or golden age knew and
acknowledged that they were forms receptive of life from God; and that
on this account wisdom was inscribed on their souls and hearts, and
hence they saw truth from the light of truth, and by truths perceived
good from the delight of the love thereof: but as mankind in the
following ages receded from the acknowledgement that all the truth of
wisdom and the consequent good of love belonging to them, continually
flowed in from God, they ceased to be habitations of God; and then also
discourse with God, and consociation with angels ceased: for the
interiors of their minds were bent from their direction, which had been
elevated upwards to God from God, into a direction more and more
oblique, outwardly into the world, and thereby to God from God through
the world, and at length inverted into an opposite direction, which is
downwards to self; and as God cannot be looked at by a man interiorly
inverted, and thereby averted, men separated themselves from God, and
were made forms of hell or devils. From these considerations it follows,
that in the first ages they acknowledged in heart and soul, that all the
good of love and the consequent true wisdom, were derived to them from
God, and also that they were God's in them: and thus that they were mere
recipients of life from God, and hence were called images of God, sons
of God, and born of God: but that in succeeding ages they did not
acknowledge this in heart and soul, but by a certain persuasive faith,
next by an historical faith, and lastly only with the mouth; and this
last kind of acknowledgement is no acknowledgement at all; yea, it is in
fact a denial at heart. From these considerations it may be seen what is
the quality of the wisdom which prevails at this day on the earth among
Christians, while they do not know the distinction between a man and a
beast, notwithstanding their being in possession of a written
revelation, whereby they may be inspired by God: and hence many believe,
that in case a man lives after death, a beast must live also; or because
a beast is not to live after death, neither will a man. Is not our
spiritual light, which enlightens the sight of the mind, become thick
darkness with them? and is not their natural light, which only
enlightens the bodily sight, become brightness to them?

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.*">154.\*</span></span>

After this they all turned towards the two strangers, and thanked them
for their visit, and for the relation they had given, and entreated them
to go and communicate to their brethren what they had heard. The
strangers replied that they would endeavor to confirm their brethren in
this truth, that so far as they ascribe all the good of charity and the
truth of faith to the Lord, and not to themselves, so far they are men,
and so far they become angels of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.*">155.\*</span></span>

THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. One morning I was awoke by some
delightful singing which I heard at a height above me, and in
consequence, during the first watch, which is internal, pacific, and
sweet, more than the succeeding part of the day, I was in a capacity of
being kept for some time in the spirit as it were out of the body, and
of attending carefully to the affection which was sung. The singing of
heaven is an affection of the mind, sent forth through the mouth as a
tune: for the tone of the voice in speaking, separate from the discourse
of the speaking, and grounded in the affection of love, is what gives
life to the speech. In that state I perceived that it was the affection
of the delights of conjugial love, which was made musical by wives in
heaven: that this was the case, I observed from the sound of the song,
in which those delights were varied in a wonderful manner. After this I
arose, and looked into the spiritual world; and lo! in the east, beneath
the sun, there appeared as it were a GOLDEN SHOWER. It was the morning
dew descending in great abundance, which, catching the sun's rays,
exhibited to my eyes the appearance of a golden shower. In consequence
of this I became fully awake, and went forth in the spirit, and asked an
angel who then happened to meet me, whether he saw a golden shower
descending from the sun? He replied, that he saw one whenever he was
meditating on conjugial love; and at the same time turning his eyes
towards the sun, he added, "That shower falls over a hall, in which are
three husbands with their wives, who dwell in the midst of an eastern
paradise. Such a shower is seen falling from the sun over that hall,
because with those husbands and wives there resides wisdom respecting
conjugial love and its delights; with the husbands respecting conjugial
love, and with the wives respecting its delights. But I perceive that
you are engaged in meditating on the delights of conjugial love: I will
therefore conduct you there, and introduce you to them." He led me
through paradisiacal scenery to houses built of olive wood, having two
cedar columns before the gate, and introduced me to the husbands, and
asked their permission for me to converse with them in the presence of
the wives. They consented, and called their wives. These looked into my
eyes most shrewdly; upon which I asked them, "Why do you do so?" They
said, "We can thereby discover exquisitely what is your inclination and
consequent affection, and your thought grounded in affection, respecting
the love of the sex; and we see that you are meditating intensely, but
still chastely, concerning it." And they added, "What do you wish us to
tell you on the subject?" I replied, "Tell me, I pray, something
respecting the delights of conjugial love." The husbands assented,
saying, "If you are so disposed, give them some information in regard to
those delights: their ears are chaste." They asked me, "Who taught you
to question us respecting the delights of that love? Why did you not
question our husbands?" I replied, "This angel, who accompanies me,
informed me, that wives are the recipients and sensories of those
delights, because they are born loves; and all delights are of love." To
this they replied with a smile, "Be prudent, and declare nothing of this
sort except ambiguously; because it is a wisdom deeply seated in the
hearts of our sex, and is not discovered to any husband, unless he be
principled in love truly conjugial. There are several reasons for this,
which we keep entirely to ourselves." Then the husbands said, "Our wives
know all the states of our minds, none of which are hid from them: they
see, perceive, and are sensible of whatever proceeds from our will. We,
on the other hand, know nothing of what passes with our wives. This
faculty is given to wives, because they are most tender loves, and as it
were burning zeals for the preservation of friendship and conjugial
confidence, and thereby of all the happiness of life, which they
carefully attend to, both in regard to their husbands and themselves, by
virtue of a wisdom implanted in their love, which is so full of
prudence, that they are unwilling to say, and consequently cannot say,
that they love, but that they are loved." I asked the wives, "Why are
you unwilling, and consequently cannot say so?" They replied, "If the
least hint of the kind were to escape from the mouth of a wife, the
husband would be seized with coolness, which would entirely separate him
from all communication with his wife, so that he could not even bear to
look upon her; but this is the case only with those husbands who do not
hold marriages to be holy, and therefore do not love their wives from
spiritual love: it is otherwise with those who do. In the minds of the
latter this love is spiritual, and by derivation thence in the body is
natural. We in this hall are principled in the latter love by derivation
from the former; therefore we trust our husbands with our secrets
respecting our delights of conjugial love." Then I courteously asked
them to disclose to me some of those secrets: they then looked towards a
window on the southern quarter, and lo! there appeared a white dove,
whose wings shone as if they were of silver, and its head was crested
with a crown as of gold: it stood upon a bough, from which there went
forth an olive; and while it was in the attempt to spread out its wings,
the wives said, "We will communicate something: the appearing of that
dove is a token that we may. Every man (\_vir\_)" they continued, "has
five senses, seeing, hearing, smelling, taste, and touch; but we have
likewise a sixth, which is the sense of all the delights of the
conjugial love of the husband; and this sense we have in the palms of
our hands, while we touch the breasts, arms, hands, or cheeks, of our
husbands, especially their breasts; and also while we are touched by
them. All the gladness and pleasantness of the thoughts of their minds
(\_mentium\_), all the joys and delights of their minds (\_animarum\_)
and all the festive and cheerful principles of their bosoms, pass from
them to us, and become perceptible, sensible, and tangible: we discern
them as exquisitely and distinctly as the ear does the tune of a song,
and the tongue the taste of dainties; in a word, the spiritual delights
of our husbands put on with us a kind of natural embodiment; therefore
they call us the sensory organs of chaste conjugial love, and thence its
delights. But this sixth sense of ours exists, subsists, persists, and
is exalted in the degree in which our husbands love us from wisdom and
judgement, and in which we in our turn love them from the same
principles in them. This sense in our sex is called in the heavens the
sport of wisdom with its love, and of love with its wisdom." From this
information I became desirous of asking further questions concerning the
variety of their delights. They said, "It is infinite; but we are
unwilling and therefore unable to say more; for the dove at our window,
with the olive branch under his feet, is flown away." I waited for its
return, but in vain. In the meantime I asked the husbands, "Have you a
like sense of conjugial love?" They replied, "We have a like sense in
general, but not in particular. We enjoy a general blessedness, delight,
and pleasantness, arising from the particulars of our wives; and this
general principle, which we derive from them, is serenely peaceful." As
they said this, lo! through the window there appeared a swan standing on
a branch of a fig-tree, which spread out his wings and flew away. On
seeing this, the husbands said, "This is a sign for us to be silent
respecting conjugial love: come again some other time, and perhaps you
may hear more." They then withdrew, and we took our leave.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.*">156.\*</span></span>

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF SOULS AND MINDS BY MARRIAGE, WHICH IS MEANT BY THE
LORD'S WORDS,--THEY ARE NO LONGER TWO, BUT ONE FLESH.

That at creation there was implanted in the man and the woman an
inclination and also a faculty of conjunction as into a one, and that
this inclination and this faculty are still in man and woman, is evident
from the book of creation, and at the same time from the Lord's words.
In the book of creation, called GENESIS, it is written, "\_Jehovah God
builded the rib, which he had taken from the man, into a woman, and
brought her to the man. And the man said, This now is bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called Woman, because she was taken
out of man; for this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave to his wife: and they shall be one flesh\_," chap. ii.
22-24. The Lord also says in Matthew, "\_Have ye not read, that he that
made them from the beginning, made them a male and a female, and said,
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife; and they TWO SHALL BECOME ONE FLESH? WHEREFORE THEY ARE NO
LONGER TWO, BUT ONE FLESH\_," chap. xix. 4-6. From this it is evident,
that the woman was created out of the man (\_vir\_), and that each has
an inclination and faculty to reunite themselves into a one. That such
reunion means into one man (\_homo\_), is also evident from the book of
creation, where both together are called man (\_homo\_); for it is
written, "\_In the day that God created man (homo), he created them a
male and a female, and called their name Man (homo)\_," chap. v. 2. It
is there written, he called their name Adam; but Adam and man are one
expression in the Hebrew tongue: moreover, both together are called man
in the same book, chap. i. 27; chap. iii. 22-24. One flesh also
signifies one man; as is evident from the passages in the Word where
mention is made of all flesh, which signifies every man, as Gen. chap.
vi. 12, 13, 17, 19; Isaiah xl. 5, 6; chap. xlix. 26; chap. lxvi. 16, 23,
24; Jer. xxv. 31; chap, xxxii. 27; chap. xlv. 5; Ezek. xx. 48; chap.
xxi. 4, 5; and other passages. But what is meant by the man's rib, which
was builded into a woman; what by the flesh, which was closed up in the
place thereof, and thus what by bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;
and what by a father and a mother, whom a man (\_vir\_) shall leave
after marriage; and what by cleaving to a wife, has been shewn in the
ARCANA COELESTIA; in which work the two books, Genesis and Exodus, are
explained as to the spiritual sense. It is there proved that a rib does
not mean a rib,--nor flesh, flesh,--nor a bone, a bone,--nor cleaving
to, cleaving to; but that they signify spiritual things, which
correspond thereto, and consequently are signified thereby. That
spiritual things are understood, which from two make one man (\_homo\_),
is evident from this consideration, that conjugial love conjoins them,
and this love is spiritual. That the love of the man's wisdom is
transferred into the wife, has been occasionally observed above, and
will be more fully proved in the following sections: at this time it is
not allowable to digress from the subject proposed, which is concerning
the conjunction of two married partners into one flesh by a union of
souls and minds. This union we will elucidate by treating of it in the
following order. I. \_From creation there is implanted in each sex a
faculty and inclination, whereby they are able and willing to be
conjoined together as it were into a one.\_ II. \_Conjugial love
conjoins two souls, and thence two minds into a one.\_ III. \_The will
of the wife conjoins itself with the understanding of the man, and
thence the understanding of the man conjoins itself with the will of the
wife.\_ IV. \_The inclination to unite the man to herself is constant
and perpetual with the wife; but is inconstant and alternate with the
man.\_ V. \_Conjunction is inspired into the man from the wife according
to her love, and is received by the man according to his wisdom.\_ VI.
\_This conjunction is effected successively from the first days of
marriage; and with those who are principled in love truly conjugial, is
effected more and more thoroughly to eternity.\_ VII. \_The conjunction
of the wife with the rational wisdom of the husband is effected from
within, but with this moral wisdom from without.\_ VIII. \_For the sake
of this conjunction as an end, the wife has a perception of the
affections of the husband, and also the utmost prudence in moderating
them.\_ IX. \_Wives conceal this perception with themselves, and hide it
from their husbands, for reasons of necessity, in order that conjugial
love, friendship, and confidence, and thereby the blessedness of
dwelling together, and the happiness of life may he secured.\_ X. \_This
perception is the wisdom of the wife, and is not communicable to the
man; neither is the rational wisdom of the man communicable to the
wife.\_ XI. \_The wife, from a principle of love, is continually
thinking about the man's inclination to her, with the purpose of joining
him to herself: it is otherwise with the man.\_ XII. \_The wife conjoins
herself to the man, by applications to the desires of his will.\_ XIII.
\_The wife is conjoined to her husband by the sphere of her life flowing
from the love of him.\_ XIV. \_The wife is conjoined to the husband by
the appropriation of the powers of his virtue; which however is effected
according to their mutual spiritual love.\_ XV. \_Thus the wife receives
in herself the image of her husband, and thence perceives, sees, and is
sensible of, his affections.\_ XVI. \_There are duties proper to the
husband, and others proper to the wife; and the wife cannot enter into
the duties proper to the husband, nor the husband into the duties proper
to the wife, so as to perform them aright.\_ XVII. \_These duties, also,
according to mutual aid, conjoin the two into a one, and at the same
time constitute one house.\_ XVIII. \_Married partners, according to
these conjunctions, become one man (homo) more and more.\_ XIX. \_Those
who are principled in love truly conjugial, are sensible of their being
a united man, and as it were one flesh.\_ XX. \_Love truly conjugial,
considered in itself, is a union of souls, a conjunction of minds, and
an endeavor towards conjunction in the bosoms and thence in the body.\_
XXI. \_The states of this love are innocence, peace, tranquillity,
inmost friendship, full confidence, and a mutual desire of mind and
heart to do very good to each other; and the states derived from these
are blessedness, satisfaction, delight, and pleasure; and from the
eternal enjoyment of these is derived heavenly felicity.\_ XXII. \_These
things can only exist in the marriage of one man with one wife.\_ We
proceed now to the explanation of these articles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

I. FROM CREATION THERE IS IMPLANTED IN EACH SEX A FACULTY AND
INCLINATION, WHEREBY THEY ARE ABLE AND WILLING TO BE JOINED TOGETHER, AS
IT WERE INTO A ONE. That the woman was taken out of the man, was shewn
just above from the book of creation; hence it follows, that there is in
each sex a faculty and inclination to join themselves together into a
one; for that which is taken out of anything, derives and retains its
constituent principle, from the principle proper to the thing whence it
was taken; and as this derived principle is of a similar nature with
that from which it was derived, it seeks after a reunion; and when it is
reunited, it is as in itself when it is in that from whence it came, and
\_vice versa\_. That there is a faculty of conjunction of the one sex
with the other, or that they are capable of being united, is universally
allowed; and also that there is an inclination to join themselves the
one with the other; for experience supplies sufficient confirmation in
both cases.

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

II\. CONJUGIAL LOVE CONJOINS TWO SOULS, AND THENCE TWO MINDS, INTO A
ONE. Every man consists of a soul, a mind, and a body. The soul is his
inmost, the mind his middle, and the body his ultimate constituent. As
the soul is a man's inmost principle, it is, from its origin, celestial;
as the mind is his middle principle, it is, from its origin, spiritual;
and as the body is his ultimate principle, it is, from its origin,
natural. Those things, which, from their origin, are celestial and
spiritual, are not in space, but in the appearance of space. This also
is well known in the word; therefore it is said, that neither extension
nor place can be predicated of spiritual things. Since therefore spaces
are appearances, distances also and presences are appearances. That the
appearances of distances and presences in the spiritual world are
according to proximities, relationships, and affinities of love, has
been frequently pointed out and confirmed in small treatises respecting
that world. These observations are made, in order that it may be known
that the souls and minds of men are not in space like their bodies;
because the former, as was said above, from their origin, are celestial
and spiritual; and as they are not in space, they may be joined together
as into a one, although their bodies at the same time are not so joined.
This is the case especially with married partners, who love each other
intimately: but as the woman is from the man, and this conjunction is a
species of reunion, it may be seen from reason, that it is not a
conjunction into a one, but an adjunction, close and near according to
the love, and approaching to contact with those who are principled in
love truly conjugial. This adjunction may be called spiritual dwelling
together; which takes place with married partners who love each other
tenderly, however distant their bodies may be from each other. Many
experimental proofs exist, even in the natural world, in confirmation of
these observations. Hence it is evident, that conjugial love conjoins
two souls and minds into a one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

III\. THE WILL OF THE WIFE CONJOINS ITSELF WITH THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE
MAN, AND THENCE THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE MAN WITH THE WILL OF THE WIFE.
The reason of this is, because the male is born to become understanding,
and the female to become will, loving the understanding of the male;
from which consideration it follows, that conjugial conjunction is that
of the will of the wife with the understanding of the man, and the
reciprocal conjunction of the understanding of the man with the will of
the wife. Every one sees that the conjunction of the understanding and
the will is of the most intimate kind; and that it is such, that the one
faculty can enter into the other, and be delighted from and in the
conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

IV\. THE INCLINATION TO UNITE THE MAN TO HERSELF IS CONSTANT AND
PERPETUAL WITH THE WIFE, BUT INCONSTANT AND ALTERNATE WITH THE MAN. The
reason of this is, because love cannot do otherwise than love and unite
itself, in order that it may be loved in return, this being its very
essence and life; and women are born loves; whereas men, with whom they
unite themselves in order that they may be loved in return, are
receptions. Moreover love is continually efficient; being like heat,
flame, and fire, which perish if their efficiency is checked. Hence the
inclination to unite the man to herself is constant and perpetual with
the wife: but a similar inclination does not operate with the man
towards the wife, because the man is not love, but only a recipient of
love; and as a state of reception is absent or present according to
intruding cares, and to the varying presence or absence of heat in the
mind, as derived from various causes, and also according to the increase
and decrease of the bodily powers, which do not return regularly and at
stated periods, it follows, that the inclination to conjunction is
inconstant and alternate with men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

V. CONJUNCTION IS INSPIRED INTO THE MAN FROM THE WIFE ACCORDING TO HER
LOVE, AND IS RECEIVED BY THE MAN ACCORDING TO HIS WISDOM. That love and
consequent conjunction is inspired into the man by the wife, is at this
day concealed from the men; yea, it is universally denied by them;
because wives insinuate that the men alone love, and that they
themselves receive; or that the men are loves, and themselves
obediences: they rejoice also in heart when the men believe it to be so.
There are several reasons why they endeavour to persuade the men of
this, which are all grounded in their prudence and circumspection;
respecting which, something shall be said in a future part of this work,
particularly in the chapter ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESS, SEPARATIONS, AND
DIVORCES BETWEEN MARRIED PARTNERS. The reason why men receive from their
wives the inspiration or insinuation of love, is, because nothing of
conjugial love, or even of the love of the sex, is with the men, but
only with wives and females. That this is the case, has been clearly
shewn me in the spiritual world. I was once engaged in conversation
there on this subject; and the men, in consequence of a persuasion
infused from their wives, insisted that they loved and not the wives;
but that the wives received love from them. In order to settle the
dispute respecting this arcanum, all the females, married and unmarried,
were withdrawn from the men, and at the same time the sphere of the love
of the sex was removed with them. On the removal of this sphere, the men
were reduced to a very unusual state, such as they had never before
perceived, at which they greatly complained. Then, while they were in
this state, the females were brought to them, and the wives to the
husbands; and both the wives and the other females addressed them in the
tenderest and most engaging manner; but they were cold to their
tenderness, and turned away, and said one to another, "What is all this?
what is a female?" And when some of the women said that they were their
wives, they replied, "What is a wife? we do not know you." But when the
wives began to be grieved at this absolutely cold indifference of the
men, and some of them to shed tears, the sphere of the love of the
female sex, and the conjugial sphere, which had for a time been
withdrawn from the men, was restored; and then the men instantly
returned into their former state, the lovers of marriage into their
state, and the lovers of the sex into theirs. Thus the men were
convinced, that nothing of conjugial love, or even of the love of the
sex, resides with them, but only with the wives and females.
Nevertheless, the wives afterwards from their prudence induced the men
to believe, that love resides with the men, and that some small spark of
it may pass from them into the wives. This experimental evidence is here
adduced, in order that it may be known, that wives are loves and men
recipients. That men are recipients according to their wisdom,
especially according to this wisdom grounded in religion, that the wife
only is to be loved, is evident from this consideration, that so long as
the wife only is loved, the love is concentrated; and because it is also
ennobled, it remains in its strength, and is fixed and permanent; and
that in any other case it would be as when wheat from the granary is
cast to the dogs, whereby there is scarcity at home.

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

VI\. THIS CONJUNCTION IS EFFECTED SUCCESSIVELY FROM THE FIRST DAYS OF
MARRIAGE; AND WITH THOSE WHO ARE PRINCIPLED IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, IT
IS EFFECTED MORE AND MORE THOROUGHLY TO ETERNITY. The first heat of
marriage does not conjoin; for it partakes of the love of the sex, which
is the love of the body and thence of the spirit; and what is in the
spirit, as derived from the body, does not long continue; but the love
which is in the body, and is derived from the spirit, does continue. The
love of the spirit, and of the body from the spirit, is insinuated into
the souls and minds of married partners, together with friendship and
confidence. When these two (friendship and confidence) conjoin
themselves with the first love of marriage, there is effected conjugial
love, which opens the bosoms, and inspires the sweets of that love; and
this more and more thoroughly, in proportion as those two principles
adjoin themselves to the primitive love, and that love enters into them,
and \_vice versa\_.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

VII\. THE CONJUNCTION OF THE WIFE WITH THE RATIONAL WISDOM OF THE
HUSBAND IS EFFECTED FROM WITHIN, BUT WITH HIS MORAL WISDOM FROM WITHOUT.
That wisdom with men is two-fold, rational and moral, and that their
rational wisdom is of the understanding alone, and their moral wisdom is
of the understanding and the life together, may be concluded and seen
from mere intuition and examination. But in order that it may be known
what we mean by the rational wisdom of men, and what by their moral
wisdom, we will enumerate some of the specific distinctions. The
principles constituent of their rational wisdom are called by various
names; in general they are called knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom;
but in particular they are called rationality, judgement, capacity,
erudition, and sagacity; but as every one has knowledge peculiar to his
office, therefore they are multifarious; for the clergy, magistrates,
public officers, judges, physicians and chemists, soldiers and sailors,
artificers and laborers, husbandmen, &c., have each their peculiar
knowledge. To rational wisdom also appertain all the knowledge into
which young men are initiated in the schools, and by which they are
afterwards initiated into intelligence, which also are called by various
names, as philosophy, physics, geometry, mechanics, chemistry,
astronomy, jurisprudence, politics, ethics, history, and several others,
by which, as by doors, an entrance is made into things rational, which
are the ground of rational wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

But the constituents of moral wisdom with men are all the moral virtues,
which have respect to life, and enter into it, and also all the
spiritual virtues, which flow from love to God and love towards our
neighbour, and centre in those loves. The virtues which appertain to the
moral wisdom of men are also of various kinds, and are called
temperance, sobriety, probity, benevolence, friendship, modesty,
sincerity, courtesy, civility, also carefulness, industry, quickness of
wit, alacrity, munificence, liberality, generosity, activity,
intrepidity, prudence and many others. Spiritual virtues with men are
the love of religion, charity, truth, conscience, innocence, and many
more. The latter virtues and also the former, may in general be referred
to love and zeal for religion, for the public good, for a man's country,
for his fellow-citizens, for his parents, for his married partner, and
for his children. In all these, justice and judgement have dominion;
justice having relation to moral, and judgement to rational wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

The reason why the conjunction of the wife with the man's rational
wisdom is from within, is, because this wisdom belongs to the man's
understanding, and ascends into the light in which women are not and
this is the reason why women do not speak from that wisdom; but, when
the conversation of the men turns on subjects proper thereto, they
remain silent and listen. That nevertheless such subjects have place
with the wives from within, is evident from their listening thereto, and
from their inwardly recollecting what had been said, and favoring those
things which they had heard from their husbands. But the reason why the
conjunction of the wife with the moral wisdom of the man is from
without, is, because the virtues of that wisdom for the most part are
akin to similar virtues with the women, and partake of the man's
intellectual will, with which the will of the wife unites and
constitutes a marriage; and since the wife knows those virtues
appertaining to the man more than the man himself does, it is said that
the conjunction of the wife with those virtues is from without.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

VIII\. FOR THE SAKE OF THIS CONJUNCTION AS AN END, THE WIFE HAS A
PERCEPTION OF THE AFFECTIONS OF THE HUSBAND, AND ALSO THE UTMOST
PRUDENCE IN MODERATING THEM. That wives know the affections of their
husbands, and prudently moderate them, is among the arcana of conjugial
love which lie concealed with wives. They know those affections by three
senses, the sight, the hearing, and the touch, and moderate them while
their husbands are not at all aware of it. Now as the reasons of this
are among the arcana of wives, it does not become me to disclose them
circumstantially; but as it is becoming for the wives themselves to do
so, therefore four MEMORABLE RELATIONS are added to this chapter, in
which those reasons are disclosed by the wives: two of the RELATIONS are
taken from the three wives that dwelt in the hall, over which was seen
falling as it were a golden shower; and two from the seven wives that
were sitting in the garden of roses. A perusal of these RELATIONS will
unfold this arcanum.

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

IX\. WIVES CONCEAL THIS PERCEPTION WITH THEMSELVES AND HIDE IT FROM
THEIR HUSBANDS, FOR REASONS OF NECESSITY, IN ORDER THAT CONJUGIAL LOVE,
FRIENDSHIP, AND CONFIDENCE, AND THEREBY THE BLESSEDNESS OF DWELLING
TOGETHER AND THE HAPPINESS OF LIFE MAY BE SECURED. The concealing and
hiding of the perception of the affections of the husband by the wives,
are said to be of necessity; because if they should reveal them, they
would cause a complete alienation of their husbands, both in mind and
body. The reason of this is, because there resides deep in the minds of
many men a conjugial coldness, originating in several causes, which will
be enumerated in the chapter ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESSES, SEPARATION,
AND DIVORCES BETWEEN MARRIED PARTNERS. This Coldness, in case the wives
should discover the affections and inclinations of their husbands, would
burst forth from its hiding places, and communicate its cold, first to
the interiors of the mind, afterwards to the breast, and thence to the
ultimates of love which are appropriated to generation; and these being
affected with cold, conjugial love would be banished to such a degree,
that there would not remain any hope of friendship, of confidence, of
the blessedness of dwelling together, and thence of the happiness of
life; when nevertheless wives are continually feeding on this hope. To
make this open declaration, that they know their husbands' affections
and inclinations of love, carries with it a declaration and publication
of their own love: and it is well known, that so far as wives make such
a declaration, so far the men grow cold and desire a separation. From
these considerations the truth of this proposition is manifest, that the
reasons why wives conceal their perception with themselves, and hide it
from their husbands, are reasons of necessity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

X. THIS PERCEPTION IS THE WISDOM OF THE WIFE, AND IS NOT COMMUNICABLE TO
THE MAN; NEITHER IS THE RATIONAL WISDOM OF THE MAN COMMUNICABLE TO THE
WIFE. This follows from the distinction subsisting between the male
principle and the female. The male principle consists in perceiving from
the understanding, and the female in perceiving from love: and the
understanding perceives also those things which are above the body and
are out of the world; for the rational and spiritual sight reaches to
such objects; whereas love reaches no further than to what it feels;
when it reaches further, it is in consequence of conjunction with the
understanding of the man established from creation: for the
understanding has relation to light, and love to heat; and those things
which have relation to light, are seen, and those which have relation to
heat, are felt. From these considerations it is evident, that from the
universal distinction subsisting between the male principle and the
female, the wisdom of the wife is not communicable to the man, neither
is the wisdom of the man communicable to the wife: nor, further, is the
moral wisdom of the man communicable to women, so far as it partakes of
his rational wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

XI\. THE WIFE FROM A PRINCIPLE OF LOVE IN CONTINUALLY THINKING ABOUT THE
MAN'S INCLINATION TO HER, WITH THE PURPOSE OF JOINING HIM TO HERSELF: IT
IS OTHERWISE WITH THE MAN. This agrees with what was explained above;
namely, that the inclination to unite the man to herself is constant and
perpetual with the wife, but inconstant and alternate with the man; see
n. 160: hence it follows, that the wife's thoughts are continually
employed about her husband's inclination to her, with the purpose of
joining him to herself. Her thoughts concerning her husband are
interrupted indeed by domestic concerns; but still they remain in the
affection of her love; and this affection does not separate itself from
the thoughts with women, as it does with men: these things, however, I
relate from hearsay; see the two MEMORABLE RELATIONS from the seven
wives sitting in the rose-garden, which are annexed to some of the
following chapters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

XII\. THE WIFE CONJOINS HERSELF TO THE MAN BY APPLICATIONS TO THE
DESIRES OF HIS WILL. This being generally known and admitted, it is
needless to explain it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

XIII\. THE WIFE IS CONJOINED TO HER HUSBAND BY THE SPHERE OF HER LIFE
FLOWING FROM THE LOVE OF HIM. There flows, yea there overflows, from
every man (\_homo\_) a spiritual sphere, derived from the affections of
his love, which encompasses him, and infuses itself into the natural
sphere derived from the body, so that the two spheres are conjoined.
That a natural sphere is continually flowing, not only from men, but
also from beasts, yea from trees, fruits, flowers, and also from metals,
is generally known. The case is the same in the spiritual world; but the
spheres flowing from subjects in that world are spiritual, and those
which emanate from spirits and angels are altogether spiritual; because
there appertain thereto affections of love, and thence interior
perceptions and thoughts. This is the origin of all sympathy and
antipathy, and likewise of all conjunction and disjunction, and,
according thereto, of presence and absence in the spiritual world: for
what is of a similar nature or concordant causes conjunction and
presence, and what is of a dissimilar nature and discordant causes
disjunction and absence; therefore those spheres cause distances in that
world. What effects those spiritual spheres produce in the natural
world, is also known to some. The inclinations of married partners
towards each other are from no other origin. They are united by
unanimous and concordant spheres, and disunited by adverse and
discordant spheres; for concordant spheres are delightful and grateful,
whereas discordant spheres are undelightful and ungrateful. I have been
informed by the angels, who are in a clear perception of those spheres,
that every part of a man, both interior and exterior, renews itself;
which is effected by solutions and reparations; and that hence arises
the sphere which continually issues forth. I have also been informed
that this sphere encompasses a man on the back and on the breast,
lightly on the back, but more densely on the breast, and that the sphere
issuing from the breast conjoins itself with the respiration; and that
this is the reason why two married partners, who are of different minds
and discordant affections, lie in bed back to back, and, on the other
hand, why those who agree in minds and affections, mutually turn towards
each other. I have been further informed by the angels, that these
spheres, because they flow from every part of a man (\_homo\_), and are
abundantly continued around him, conjoin and disjoin two married
partners not only externally, but also internally; and that hence come
all the differences and varieties of conjugial love. Lastly, I have been
informed, that the sphere of love, flowing from a wife who is tenderly
loved, is perceived in heaven as sweetly fragrant, by far more pleasant
than it is perceived in the world by a newly married man during the
first days after marriage. From these considerations is manifested the
truth of the assertion, that a wife is conjoined to a man by the sphere
of her life flowing from the love of him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

XIV\. THE WIFE IS CONJOINED TO THE HUSBAND BY THE APPROPRIATION OF THE
POWERS OF HIS VIRTUE; WHICH HOWEVER IS EFFECTED ACCORDING TO THEIR
MUTUAL SPIRITUAL LOVE. That this is the case, I have also gathered from
the mouth of angels. They have declared that the prolific principles
imparted from the husbands are received universally by the wives and add
themselves to their life; and that thus the wives lead a life unanimous,
and successively more unanimous with their husbands; and that hence is
effectively produced a union of souls and a conjunction of minds. They
declared the reason of this was, because in the prolific principle of
the husband is his soul, and also his mind as to its interiors, which
are conjoined to the soul. They added, that this was provided from
creation, in order that the wisdom of the man, which constitutes his
soul, may be appropriated to the wife, and that thus they may become,
according to the Lord's words, one flesh: and further, that this was
provided, lest the husband (\_homovir\_) from some caprice should leave
the wife after conception. But they added further, that applications and
appropriations of the life of the husband with the wife are effected
according to conjugial love, because love which is spiritual union,
conjoins; and that this also is provided for several reasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

XV\. THUS THE WIFE RECEIVES IN HERSELF THE IMAGE OF HER HUSBAND, AND
THENCE PERCEIVES, SEES, AND IS SENSIBLE OF, HIS AFFECTIONS. From the
reasons above adduced it follows as an established fact, that wives
receive in themselves those things which appertain to the wisdom of
their husbands, thus which are proper to the souls and minds of their
husbands, and thereby from virgins make themselves wives. The reasons
from which this follows, are, 1. That the woman was created out of the
man. 2. That hence she has an inclination to unite, and as it were to
reunite herself with the man. 3. That by virtue of this union with her
partner, and for the sake of it, the woman is born the love of the man,
and becomes more and more the love of him by marriage; because in this
case the love is continually employing its thoughts to conjoin the man
to itself. 4. That the woman is conjoined to her only one (\_unico
suo\_) by application to the desires of his life. 5. That they are
conjoined by the spheres which encompass them, and which unite
themselves universally and particularly according to the quality of the
conjugial love with the wives, and at the same time according to the
quality of the wisdom recipient thereof with the husbands. 6. That they
are also conjoined by appropriations of the powers of the husbands by
the wives. 7. From which reasons it is evident, that there is
continually somewhat of the husband being transferred to the wife, and
inscribed on her as her own. From all these considerations it follows,
that the image of the husband is formed in the wife; by virtue of which
image the wife perceives, sees, and is sensible of, the things which are
in her husband, in herself, and thence as it were herself in him. She
perceives from communication, she sees from aspect, and she is made
sensible from the touch. That she is made sensible of the reception of
her love by the husband from the touch in the palms of the hands, on the
cheeks, the shoulders, the hands, and the breasts, I learnt from the
three wives in the hall, and the seven wives in the rose garden, spoken
of in the MEMORABLE RELATIONS which follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

XVI\. THERE ARE DUTIES PROPER TO THE HUSBAND AND OTHERS PROPER TO THE
WIFE; AND THE WIFE CANNOT ENTER INTO THE DUTIES PROPER TO THE HUSBAND,
NOR THE HUSBAND INTO THE DUTIES PROPER TO THE WIFE, SO AS TO PERFORM
THEM ARIGHT. That there are duties proper to the husband, and others
proper to the wife, needs not to be illustrated by an enumeration of
them; for they are many and various: and every one that chooses to do so
can arrange them numerically according to their genera and species. The
duties by which wives principally conjoin themselves with their
husbands, are those which relate to the education of the children of
each sex, and of the girls till they are marriageable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

The wife cannot enter into the duties proper to the husband, nor on the
other hand the husband into the duties proper to the wife, because they
differ like wisdom and the love thereof, or like thought and the
affection thereof, or like understanding and the will thereof. In the
duties proper to husbands, the primary agent is understanding, thought,
and wisdom; whereas in the duties proper to wives, the primary agent is
will, affection, and love; and the wife from the latter performs her
duties, and the husband from the former performs his; wherefore their
duties are naturally different, but still conjunctive in a successive
series. Many believe that women can perform the duties of men, if they
are initiated therein at an early age, as boys are. They may indeed be
initiated into the practice of such duties, but not into the judgement
on which the propriety of duties interiorly depends; wherefore such
women as have been initiated into the duties of men, are bound in
matters of judgement to consult men, and then, if they are left to their
own disposal, they select from the counsels of men that which suits
their own inclination. Some also suppose that women are equally capable
with men of elevating their intellectual vision, and into the same
sphere of light, and of viewing things with the same depth; and they
have been led into this opinion by the writings of certain learned
authoresses: but these writings, when examined in the spiritual world in
the presence of the authoresses, were found to be the productions, not
of judgement and wisdom, but of ingenuity and wit; and what proceeds
from these on account of the elegance and neatness of the style in which
it is written, has the appearance of sublimity and erudition; yet only
in the eyes of those who dignify all ingenuity by the name of wisdom. In
like manner men cannot enter into the duties proper to women, and
perform them aright, because they are not in the affections of women,
which are altogether distinct from the affections of men. As the
affections and perceptions of the male (and of the female) sex are thus
distinct by creation and consequently by nature, therefore among the
statutes given to the sons of Israel this also was ordained, "\_A woman
shall not put on the garment of a man, neither shall a man put on the
garment of a woman; because this is an abomination\_." Deut. xxii. 5.
This was, because, all in the spiritual world are clothed according to
their affections; and the two affections, of the woman and of the man,
cannot be united except (as subsisting) between two, and in no case (as
subsisting) in one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

XVII\. THESE DUTIES ALSO, ACCORDING TO MUTUAL AID, CONJOIN THE TWO INTO
A ONE, AND AT THE SAME TIME CONSTITUTE ONE HOUSE. It is well known in
the world that the duties of the husband in some way conjoin themselves
with the duties of the wife, and that the duties of the wife adjoin
themselves to the duties of the husband, and that these conjunctions and
adjunctions are a mutual aid, and according thereto: but the primary
duties, which confederate, consociate, and gather into one the souls and
lives of two married partners, relate to the common care of educating
their children; in relation to which care, the duties of the husband and
of the wife are distinct, and yet join themselves together. They are
distinct; for the care of suckling and nursing the infants of each sex,
and also the care of instructing the girls till they become
marriageable, is properly the duty of the wife; whereas the care of
instructing the boys, from childhood to youth, and from youth till they
become capable of governing themselves, is properly the duty of the
husband: nevertheless the duties, of both the husband and the wife, are
blended by means of counsel and support, and several other mutual aids.
That these duties, both conjoined and distinct, or both common and
peculiar, combine the minds of conjugial partners into one; and that
this is effected by the love called \_storge\_, is well known. It is
also well known, that these duties, regarded in their distinction and
conjunction, constitute one house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

XVIII\. MARRIED PARTNERS, ACCORDING TO THESE CONJUNCTIONS, BECOME ONE
MAN (homo) MORE AND MORE. This coincides with what is contained in
article VI.; where it was observed, that conjunction is effected
successively from the first days of marriage and that with those who are
principled in love truly conjugial, it is effected more and more
thoroughly to eternity; see above. They become one man in proportion as
conjugial love increases; and as this love in the heavens is genuine by
virtue of the celestial and spiritual life of the angels, therefore two
married partners are there called two, when they are regarded as husband
and wife, but one, when they are regarded as angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

XIX\. THOSE WHO ARE PRINCIPLED IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, ARE SENSIBLE OF
THEIR BEING A UNITED MAN, AND AS IT WERE ONE FLESH. That this is the
case, must be confirmed not from the testimony of any inhabitant of the
earth, but from the testimony of the inhabitants of heaven; for there is
no love truly conjugial at this day with men on earth; and moreover, men
on earth are encompassed with a gross body, which deadens and absorbs
the sensation that two married partners are a united man, and as it were
one flesh; and besides, those in the world who love their married
partners only exteriorly, and not interiorly, do not wish to hear of
such a thing: they think also on the subject lasciviously under the
influence of the flesh. It is otherwise with the angels of heaven, who
are principled in spiritual and celestial conjugial love, and are not
encompassed with so gross a body as men on earth. From those among them
who have lived for ages with their conjugial partners in heaven, I have
heard it testified, that they are sensible of their being so united, the
husband with the wife, and the wife with the husband, and each in the
other mutually and interchangeably, as also in the flesh, although they
are separate. The reason why this phenomenon is so rare on earth, they
have declared to be this; because the union of the souls and minds of
married partners on earth is made sensible in their flesh; for the soul
constitutes the inmost principles not only of the head, but also of the
body: in like manner the mind, which is intermediate between the soul
and the body, and which, although it appears to be in the head, is yet
also actually in the whole body: and they have declared, that this is
the reason why the acts, which the soul and mind intend, flow forth
instantly from the body; and that hence also it is, that they
themselves, after the rejection of the body in the former world, are
perfect men. Now, since the soul and the mind join themselves closely to
the flesh of the body, in order that they may operate and produce their
effects, it follows that the union of soul and mind with a married
partner is made sensible also in the body as one flesh. As the angels
made these declarations, I heard it asserted by the spirits who were
present, that such subjects belong to angelic wisdom, being above
ordinary apprehension; but these spirits were rational-natural, and not
rational-spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="179.">179.</span></span>

XX\. LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF, IS A UNION OF SOULS, A
CONJUNCTION OF MINDS, AND AN ENDEAVOUR TOWARDS CONJUNCTION IN THE BOSOMS
AND THENCE IN THE BODY. That it is a union of souls and a conjunction of
minds, may be seen above, n. 158. The reason why it is an endeavour
towards conjunction in the bosoms is, because the bosom (or breast) is
as it were a place of public assembly, and a royal council-chamber,
while the body is as a populous city around it. The reason why the bosom
is as it were a place of public assembly, is, because all things, which
by derivation from the soul and mind have their determination in the
body, first flow into the bosom; and the reason why it is as it were a
royal council chamber, is, because in the bosom there is dominion over
all things of the body; for in the bosom are contained the heart and
lungs; and the heart rules by the blood, and the lungs by the
respiration, in every part. That the body is as a populous city around
it, is evident. When therefore the souls and minds of married partners
are united, and love truly conjugial unites them, it follows that this
lovely union flows into their bosoms, and through their bosoms into
their bodies, and causes an endeavour towards conjunction; and so much
the more, because conjugial love determines the endeavour to its
ultimates, in order to complete its satisfactions; and as the bosom is
intermediate between the body and the mind, it is evident on what
account conjugial love has fixed therein the seat of its delicate
sensation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="180.">180.</span></span>

XXI\. THE STATES OF THIS LOVE ARE INNOCENCE, PEACE, TRANQUILLITY, INMOST
FRIENDSHIP, FULL CONFIDENCE, AND A MUTUAL DESIRE OF MIND AND HEART TO DO
EVERY GOOD TO EACH OTHER; AND THE STATES DERIVED FROM THESE ARE
BLESSEDNESS, SATISFACTION, DELIGHT AND PLEASURE; AND FROM THE ETERNAL
ENJOYMENT OF THESE IS DERIVED HEAVENLY FELICITY. All these things are in
conjugial love, and thence are derived from it, because its origin is
from the marriage of good and truth, and this marriage is from the Lord;
and because love is of such a nature, that it desires to communicate
with another, whom it loves from the heart, yea, confer joys upon him,
and thence to derive its own joys. This therefore is the case in an
infinitely high degree with the divine love, which is in the Lord, in
regard to man, whom he created a receptacle of both love and wisdom
proceeding from himself; and as he created man (\_homo\_) for the
reception of those principles, the man (\_vir\_) for the reception of
wisdom, and the woman for the reception of the love of the man's wisdom,
therefore from inmost principles he infused into men (\_homines\_)
conjugial love into which love he might insinuate all things blessed,
satisfactory, delightful, and pleasant, which proceed solely from his
divine love through his divine wisdom, together with life, and flow into
their recipients; consequently, which flow into those who are principled
in love truly conjugial; for these alone are recipients. Mention is made
of innocence, peace, tranquillity, inmost friendship, full confidence,
and the mutual desire of doing every good to each other; for innocence
and peace relate to the soul, tranquillity to the mind, inmost
friendship to the breast, full confidence to the heart, and the mutual
desire of doing every good to each other, to the body as derived from
the former principles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="181.">181.</span></span>

XXII\. THESE THINGS CAN ONLY EXIST IN THE MARRIAGE OF ONE MAN WITH ONE
WIFE. This is a conclusion from all that has been said above, and also
from all that remains to be said; therefore there is no need of any
particular comment for its confirmation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="182.">182.</span></span>

To the above I will add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. After some
weeks, I heard a voice from heaven, saying, "Lo! there is again an
assembly on Parnassus: come hither, and we will shew you the way." I
accordingly came; and as I drew near, I saw a certain person on Helicon
with a trumpet, with which he announced and proclaimed the assembly. And
I saw the inhabitants of Athens and its suburbs ascending as before; and
in the midst of them three novitiates from the world. They were of a
Christian community; one a priest, another a politician, and the third a
philosopher. These they entertained on the way with conversation on
various subjects, especially concerning the wise ancients, whom they
named. They inquired whether they should see them, and were answered in
the affirmative, and were told, that if they were desirous, they might
pay their respects to them, as they were courteous and affable. The
novitiates then inquired after Demosthenes, Diogenes, and Epicurus; and
were answered, "Demosthenes is not here, but with Plato; Diogenes, with
his scholars, resides under Helicon, because of his little attention to
worldly things, and his being engaged in heavenly contemplations;
Epicurus dwells in a border to the west, and has no intercourse with us;
because we distinguish between good and evil affections, and say, that
good affections are one with wisdom, and evil affections are contrary to
it." When they had ascended the hill Parnassus, some guards there
brought water in crystal cups from a fountain in the mount, and said,
"This is water from the fountain which, according to ancient fable, was
broken open by the hoof of the horse Pegasus, and was afterwards
consecrated to nine virgins: but by the winged horse Pegasus they meant
the understanding of truth, by which comes wisdom; by the hoofs of his
feet they understood experiences whereby comes natural intelligence; and
by the nine virgins they understood knowledges and sciences of every
kind. These things are now called fables; but they were correspondences,
agreeable to the primeval method of speaking." Then those who attended
the three strangers said, "Be not surprised; the guards are told thus to
speak; but we know that to drink water from the fountain, means to be
instructed concerning truths, and by truths concerning goods, and
thereby to grow wise." After this, they entered the Palladium, and with
them the three novitiates, the priest, the politician, and the
philosopher; and immediately the laureled sophi who were seated at the
tables, asked, "WHAT NEWS FROM THE EARTH?" They replied, "This is news;
that a certain person declares that he converses with angels, and has
his sight opened into the spiritual world, equally as into the natural
world; and he brings thence much new information, and, among other
particulars, asserts, that a man lives a man after death, as he lived
before in the world; that he sees, hears, speaks, as before in the
world; that he is clothed and decked with ornaments, as before in the
world; that he hungers and thirsts, eats and drinks, as before in the
world; that he enjoys conjugial delights, as before in the world; that
he sleeps and wakes, as before in the world; that in the spiritual world
there are land and water, mountains and hills, plains and valleys,
fountains and rivers, paradises and groves; also that there are palaces
and houses, cities and villages, as in the natural world; and further,
that there are writings and books, employments and trades; also precious
stones, gold and silver; in a word, that there are all such things there
as there are on earth, and that those things in the heavens are
infinitely more perfect; with this difference only, that all things in
the spiritual world are from a spiritual origin, and therefore are
spiritual, because they are from the sun of that world, which is pure
love; whereas all things in the natural world are from a natural origin,
and therefore are natural and material, because they are from the sun of
that world, which is pure fire; in short, that a man after death is
perfectly a man, yea more perfectly than before in the world; for before
in the world he was in a material body, but in the spiritual world he is
in a spiritual body." Hereupon the ancient sages asked, "What do the
people on the earth think of such information?" The three strangers
replied, "We know that it is true, because we are here, and have viewed
and examined everything; wherefore we will tell you what has been said
and reasoned about it on earth." Then the PRIEST said, "Those of our
order, when they first heard such relations, called them visions, then
fictions; afterwards they insisted that the man had seen spectres, and
lastly they hesitated, and said, 'Believe them who will; we have
hitherto taught that a man will not be in a body after death until the
day of the last judgement.'" Then the sages asked, "Are there no
intelligent persons among those of your order, who can prove and evince
the truth, that a man lives a man after death?" The priest said, "There
are indeed some who prove it, but not to the conviction of others. Those
who prove it say, that it is contrary to sound reason to believe, that a
man does not live a man till the day of the last judgement, and that in
the mean while he is a soul without a body. What is the soul, or where
is it in the interim? Is it a vapor, or some wind floating in the
atmosphere, or some thing hidden in the bowels of the earth? Have the
souls of Adam and Eve, and of all their posterity, now for six thousand
years, or sixty ages, been flying about in the universe, or been shut up
in the bowels of the earth, waiting for the last judgement? What can be
more anxious and miserable than such an expectation? May not their lot
in such a case be compared with that of prisoners bound hand and foot,
and lying in a dungeon? If such be a man's lot after death, would it not
be better to be born an ass than a man? Is it not also contrary to
reason to believe, that the soul can be re-clothed with its body? Is not
the body eaten up by worms, mice, and fish? And can a bony skeleton that
has been parched in the sun, or mouldered into dust, be introduced into
a new body? And how could the cadaverous and putrid materials be
collected, and reunited to the souls? When such questions as these are
urged, those of our order do not offer any answers grounded in reason,
but adhere to their creed, saying, 'We keep reason under obedience to
faith.' With respect to collecting all the parts of the human body from
the grave at the last day, they say, 'This is a work of omnipotence;'
and when they name omnipotence and faith, reason is banished; and I am
free to assert, that in such case sound reason is not appreciated, and
by some is regarded as a spectre; yea, they can say to sound reason,
'Thou art unsound.'" On hearing these things, the Grecian sages said,
"Surely such paradoxes vanish and disperse of themselves, as being full
of contradiction; and yet in the world at this day they cannot be
dispersed by sound reason. What can be believed more paradoxical than
what is told respecting the last judgement; that the universe will then
be destroyed, and that the stars of heaven will then fall down upon the
earth, which is less than the stars; and that then the bodies of men,
whether they be mouldering carcases, or mummies eaten by men, or reduced
to mere dust, will meet and be united again with their souls? We, during
our abode in the world, from the inductions of reason, believed the
immortality of the souls of men; and we also assigned regions for the
blessed, which we call the elysian fields; and we believed that the soul
was a human image or appearance, but of a fine and delicate nature,
because spiritual." After this, the assembly turned to the other
stranger, who in the world had been a POLITICIAN. He confessed that he
did not believe in a life after death, and that respecting the new
information which he had heard about it, he thought it all fable and
fiction. "In my meditations on the subject," said he, "I used to say to
myself, 'How can souls be bodies?--does not the whole man lie dead in
the grave?--is not the eye there; how can he see?--is not the ear there,
how can he hear?--whence must he have a mouth wherewith to speak?
Supposing anything of a man to live after death, must it not resemble a
spectre? and how can a spectre eat and drink, or how can it enjoy
conjugial delights? whence can it have clothes, houses, meats, &c.?
Besides, spectres, which are mere aerial images, appear as if they
really existed; and yet they do not. These and similar sentiments I used
to entertain in the world concerning the life of men after death; but
now, since I have seen all things, and touched them with my hands, I am
convinced by my very senses that I am a man as I was in the world; so
that I know no other than that I live now as I lived formerly; with only
this difference, that my reason now is sounder. At times I have been
ashamed of my former thoughts." The PHILOSOPHER gave much the same
account of himself as the politician had done; only differing in this
respect, that he considered the new relations which he had heard
concerning a life after death, as having reference to opinions and
hypotheses which he had collected from the ancients and moderns. When
the three strangers had done speaking, the sophi were all in amazement;
and those who were of the Socratic school, said, that from the news they
had heard from the earth, it was quite evident, that the interiors of
human minds had been successively closed; and that in the world at this
time a belief in what is false shines as truth, and an infatuated
ingenuity as wisdom; and that the light of wisdom, since their times,
has descended from the interiors of the brain into the mouth beneath the
nose, where it appears to the eyes as a shining of the lip, while the
speech of the mouth thence proceeding appears as wisdom. Hereupon one of
the young scholars said, "How stupid are the minds of the inhabitants of
the earth at this day! I wish we had here the disciples of Heraclitus,
who weep at every thing, and of Democritus, who laugh at every thing;
for then we should hear much lamentation and much laughter." When the
assembly broke up, they gave the three novitiates the insignia of their
authority, which were copper plates, on which were engraved some
hieroglyphic characters; with which they took their leave and departed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="183.">183.</span></span>

THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. I saw in the eastern quarter a grove of
palm-trees and laurels, set in winding rows, which I approached and
entered; and walking in the winding paths I saw at the end a garden,
which formed the centre of the grove. There was a little bridge dividing
the grove from the garden, and at the bridge two gates, one on the side
next the grove, and the other on the side next the garden. And as I drew
near, the keeper opened the gates, and I asked him the name of the
garden. He said, "ADRAMANDONI; which is the delight of conjugial love."
I entered, and lo! there were olive-trees; and among them ran pendulous
vines, and underneath and among them were shrubs in flower. In the midst
of the garden was a grassy circus, on which were seated husbands and
wives, and youths and maidens, in pairs; and in the midst of the circus,
on an elevated piece of ground, there was a little fountain, which, from
the strength of its spring, threw its water to a considerable height. On
approaching the circus I saw two angels clad in purple and scarlet, in
conversation with those who were seated on the grass. They were
conversing respecting the origin of conjugial love, and respecting its
delights; and this being the object of their discourse, the attention
was eager, and the reception full; and hence there was an exaltation in
the speech of the angels as from the fire of love. I collected the
following summary of what was said. They began with the difficulty of
investigating and perceiving the origin of conjugial love; because its
origin is divinely celestial, it being divine love, divine wisdom, and
divine use, which three proceed as a one from the Lord, and hence flow
as a one into the souls of men, and through their souls into their
minds, and there into the interior affections and thoughts, and through
these into the desires next to the body, and from these through the
breast into the genital region, where all principles derived from their
first origin exist together, and, in union with successive principles,
constitute conjugial love. After this the angels said, "Let us
communicate together by questions and answers; since the perception of a
thing, imbibed by hearing only, flows in indeed, but does not remain
unless the bearer also thinks of it from himself, and asks questions
concerning it." Then some of that conjugial assembly said to the angels,
"We have heard that the origin of conjugial love is divinely celestial;
because it is by virtue of influx from the Lord into the souls of men;
and, as it is from the Lord, that it is love, wisdom, and use, which are
three essentials, together constituting one divine essence, and that
nothing but what is of the divine essence can proceed from him, and flow
into the inmost principle of man (\_homo\_), which is called his soul;
and that these three essentials are changed into analogous and
corresponding principles in their descent into the body. We ask
therefore now in the first place, What is meant by the third proceeding
divine essential, which is called use?" The angels replied, "Love and
wisdom, without use, are only abstract ideas of thought; which also
after some continuance in the mind pass away like the winds; but in use
they are collected together, and therein become one principle, which is
called real. Love cannot rest unless it is as work; for love is the
essential active principle of life; neither can wisdom exist and subsist
unless when it is at work from and with love; and to work is use;
therefore we define use to be the doing good from love by wisdom; use
being essential good. As these three essentials, love, wisdom, and use,
flow into the souls of men, it may appear from what ground it is said,
that all good is from God; for every thing done from love by wisdom, is
called good; and use also is something done. What is love without wisdom
but a mere infatuation? and what is love with wisdom without use, but a
puff of the mind? Whereas love and wisdom with use not only constitute
man (\_homo\_), but also are man; yea, what possibly you will be
surprised at, they propagate man; for in the seed of a man (\_vir\_) is
his soul in a perfect human form, covered with substances from the
purest principles of nature; whereof a body is formed in the womb of the
mother. This is the supreme and ultimate use of the divine love by the
divine wisdom." Finally the angels said, "We will hence come to this
conclusion, that all fructification, propagation, and prolification, is
originally derived from the influx of love, wisdom, and use from the
Lord, from an immediate influx into the souls of men, from a mediate
influx into the souls of animals, and from an influx still more mediate
into the inmost principles of vegetables; and all these effects are
wrought in ultimates from first principles. That fructifications,
propagations, and prolifications, are continuations of creation, is
evident; for creation cannot be from any other source, than from divine
love by divine wisdom in divine use; wherefore all things in the
universe are procreated and formed from use, in use, and for use."
Afterwards those who were seated on the grassy couches, asked the angels
"Whence are the innumerable and ineffable delights of conjugial love?"
The angels replied, "They are from the uses of love and wisdom, as may
be plain from this consideration, that so far as any one loves to grow
wise, for the sake of genuine use, so far he is in the vein and potency
of conjugial love; and so far as he is in these two, so far he is in the
delights thereof. Use effects this; because love and wisdom are
delighted with each other, and as it were sport together like little
children; and as they grow up, they enter into genial conjunction, which
is effected by a kind of betrothing, nuptial solemnity, marriage, and
propagation, and this with continual variety to eternity. These
operations take place between love and wisdom inwardly in use. Those
delights in their first principles are imperceptible; but they become
more and more perceptible as they descend thence by degrees and enter
the body. They enter by degrees from the soul into the interiors of a
man's mind, from these into its exteriors, from these into the bosom,
and from the bosom into the genital region. Those celestial nuptial
sports in the soul are not at all perceived by man; but they thence
insinuate themselves into the interiors of the mind under a species of
peace and innocence, and into the exteriors of the mind under a species
of blessedness, satisfaction, and delight; in the bosom under a species
of the delights of inmost friendship; and in the genital region, from
continual influx even from the soul with the essential sense of
conjugial love, as the delight of delights. These nuptial sports of love
and wisdom in use in the soul, in proceeding towards the bosom, become
permanent, and present themselves sensible therein under an infinite
variety of delights; and from the wonderful communication of the bosom
with the genital region, the delights therein become the delights of
conjugial love, which are superior to all other delights in heaven and
in the world; because the use of conjugial love is the most excellent of
all uses, the procreation of the human race being thence derived, and
from the human race the angelic heaven." To this the angels added, that
those who are not principled in the love of wisdom for the sake of use
from the Lord, do not know anything concerning the variety of the
innumerable delights of love truly conjugial; for with those who do not
love to grow wise from genuine truths, but love to be insane from false
principles, and by this insanity perform evil uses from some particular
love, the way to the soul is closed: hence the heavenly nuptial sports
of love and wisdom in the soul, being more and more intercepted, cease,
and together with them conjugial love ceases with its vein, its potency,
and its delights. On hearing these statements the audience said, "We now
perceive that conjugial love is according to the love of growing wise
for the sake of uses from the Lord." The angels replied that it was so.
And instantly upon the heads of some of the audience there appeared
wreaths of flowers; and on their asking, "Why is this?" the angels said,
"Because they have understood more profoundly:" and immediately they
departed from the garden, and the latter in the midst of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="184.">184.</span></span>

ON THE CHANGE OF THE STATE OF LIFE WHICH TAKES PLACE WITH MEN AND WOMEN
BY MARRIAGE.

What is meant by states of life, and their changes, is very well known
to the learned and the wise, but unknown to the unlearned and the
simple; wherefore it may be expedient to premise somewhat on the
subject. The state of a man's life is its quality; and as there are in
every man two faculties which constitute his life, and which are called
the understanding and the will, the state of a man's life is its quality
as to the understanding and the will. Hence it is evident, that changes
of the state of life mean changes of quality as to the things
appertaining to the understanding and the will. That every man is
continually changing as to those two principles, but with a distinction
of variations before marriage and after it, is the point proposed to be
proved in this section; which shall be done in the following
propositions:--I. \_The state of a man's (homo) life from infancy even
to the end of his life, and afterwards to eternity, is continually
changing.\_ II. \_In like manner a man's internal form which is that of
his spirit, is continually changing.\_ III. \_These changes differ in
the case of men and of women; since men from creation are forms of
knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom, and women are forms of the love of
those principles as existing with men.\_ IV. \_With men there is an
elevation of the mind into superior light, and with women an elevation
of the mind into superior heat: and that the woman is made sensible of
the delights of her heat in the man's light.\_ V. \_With both men and
women, the states of life before marriage are different from what they
are afterwards.\_ VI. \_With married partners the states of life after
marriage are changed and succeed each other according to the
conjunctions of their minds by conjugial love.\_ VII. \_Marriage also
induces other forms in the souls and minds of married partners.\_ VIII.
\_The woman is actually formed into a wife according to the description
in the book of creation.\_ IX. \_This formation is effected on the part
of the wife by secret means; and this is meant by the woman's being
created while the man slept.\_ X. \_This formation on the part of the
wife is affected by the conjunction of her own will with the internal
will of the man.\_ XI. \_The end herein is, that the will of both became
one, and that thus both may become one man (homo).\_ XII. \_This
formation on the part of the wife is affected by an appropriation of the
affections of the husband.\_ XIII. \_This formation on the part of the
wife is effected by a reception of the propagations of the soul of the
husband, with the delight arising from her desire to be the love of her
husband's wisdom.\_ XIV. \_Thus a maiden is formed into a wife, and a
youth into a husband.\_ XV. \_In the marriage of one man with one wife,
between whom there exists love truly conjugial, the wife becomes more
and more a wife and the husband more and more a husband.\_ XVI. \_Thus
also their forms are successively perfected and ennobled from within.\_
XVII. \_Children born of parents who are principled in love truly
conjugial, derive from them the conjugial principle of good and truth;
whence they have an inclination and faculty, if sons, to perceive the
things relating to wisdom, and if daughters, to love those things which
wisdom teaches.\_ XVIII. \_The reason of this is because the soul of the
offspring is from the father and its clothing from the mother.\_ We
proceed to the explanation of each article.

<span class="margnote"><span id="185.">185.</span></span>

I. THE STATE OF A MAN'S (\_homo\_) LIFE, FROM INFANCY EVEN TO THE END OF
HIS LIFE, AND AFTERWARDS TO ETERNITY, IS CONTINUALLY CHANGING. The
common states of a man's life are called infancy, childhood, youth,
manhood, and old age. That every man, whose life is continued in the
world, successively passes from one state into another, thus from the
first to the last, is well known. The transitions into those ages only
become evident by the intervening spaces of time: that nevertheless they
are progressive from one moment to another, thus continual, is obvious
to reason; for the case is similar with a man as with a tree, which
grows and increases every instant of time, even the most minute, from
the casting of the seed into the earth. These momentaneous progressions
are also changes of state; for the subsequent adds something to the
antecedent, which perfects the state. The changes which take place in a
man's internals, are more perfectly continuous than those which take
place in his externals; because a man's internals, by which we mean the
things appertaining to his mind or spirit, are elevated into a superior
degree above his externals; and in those principles which are in a
superior degree, a thousand effects take place in the same instant in
which one effect is wrought in externals. The changes which take place
in internals, are changes of the state of the will as to affections, and
of the state of the understanding as to thoughts. The successive changes
of state of the latter and of the former are specifically meant in the
proposition. The changes of these two lives or faculties are perpetual
with every man from infancy even to the end of his life, and afterwards
to eternity; because there is no end to knowledge, still less to
intelligence, and least of all to wisdom; for there is infinity and
eternity in the extent of these principles, by virtue of the Infinite
and Eternal One, from whom they are derived. Hence comes the
philosophical tenet of the ancients, that everything is divisible \_in
infinitum\_; to which may be added, that it is multiplicable in like
manner. The angels assert, that by wisdom from the Lord they are being
perfected to eternity; which also means to infinity; because eternity is
the infinity of time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="186.">186.</span></span>

II\. IN LIKE MANNER A MAN'S (\_homo\_) INTERNAL FORM WHICH IS THAT OF
HIS SPIRIT, IS CONTINUALLY CHANGING. The reason why this form is
continually changing as the state of the man's life is changed, is,
because there is nothing that exists but in a form, and state induces
that form; wherefore it is the same whether we say that the state of a
man's life is changed, or that its form is changed. All a man's
affections and thoughts are in forms, and thence from forms; for forms
are their subjects. If affections and thoughts were not in subjects,
which are formed, they might exist also in skulls without a brain; which
would be the same thing as to suppose sight without an eye, hearing
without an ear, and taste without a tongue. It is well known that there
are subjects of these senses, and that these subjects are forms. The
state of life, and thence the form, with a man, is continually changing;
because it is a truth which the wise have taught and still teach, that
there does not exist a sameness, or absolute identity of two things,
still less of several; as there are not two human faces the same, and
still less several: the case is similar in things successive, in that no
subsequent state of life is the same as a preceding one; whence it
follows, that there is a perpetual change of the state of life with
every man, consequently also a perpetual change of form, especially of
his internals. But as these considerations do not teach anything
respecting marriages, but only prepare the way for knowledges concerning
them, and since also they are mere philosophical inquiries of the
understanding, which, with some persons, are difficult of apprehension,
we will pass them without further discussion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="187.">187.</span></span>

III\. THESE CHANGES DIFFER IN THE CASE OF MEN AND OF WOMEN; SINCE MEN
FROM CREATION ARE FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE, INTELLIGENCE, AND WISDOM; AND
WOMEN ARE FORMS OF THE LOVE OF THOSE PRINCIPLES AS EXISTING WITH MEN.
That men were created forms of the understanding, and that women were
created forms of the love of the understanding of men, may be explained
above, n. 90. That the changes of state, which succeed both with men and
women from infancy to mature age, are for the perfecting of forms, the
intellectual form with men, and the voluntary with women, follows as a
consequence: hence it is clear, that the changes with men differ from
those with women; nevertheless with both, the external form which is of
the body is perfected according to the perfecting of the internal form
which is of the mind; for the mind acts upon the body, and not \_vice
versa\_. This is the reason why infants in heaven become men of stature
and comeliness according as they increase in intelligence; it is
otherwise with infants on earth, because they are encompassed with a
material body like the animals; nevertheless they agree in this, that
they first grow in inclination to such things as allure their bodily
senses, and afterwards by little and little to such things as affect the
internal thinking sense, and by degrees to such things as tincture the
will with affection; and when they arrive at an age which is midway
between mature and immature, the conjugial inclination begins, which is
that of a maiden to a youth, and of a youth to a maiden; and as maidens
in the heavens, like those on earth from an innate prudence conceal
their inclination to marriage, the youths there know no other than that
they affect the maidens with love; and this also appears to them in
consequence of their masculine eagerness; which they also derive from an
influx of love from the fair sex; concerning which influx we shall speak
particularly elsewhere. From these considerations the truth of the
proposition is evident, that the changes of state with men differ from
those with women; since men from creation are forms of knowledge,
intelligence and wisdom, and women are forms of the love of those
principles as existing with men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="188.">188.</span></span>

IV\. WITH MEN THERE IS AN ELEVATION OF THE MIND INTO SUPERIOR LIGHT, AND
WITH WOMEN AN ELEVATION OF THE MIND INTO SUPERIOR HEAT; AND THE WOMAN IS
MADE SENSIBLE OF THE DELIGHTS OF HER HEAT IN THE MAN'S LIGHT. By the
light into which men are elevated, we mean intelligence and wisdom;
because spiritual light, which proceeds from the sun of the spiritual
world, which sun in its essence is love, acts in equality or unity with
those two principles; and by the heat into which women are elevated, we
mean conjugial love because spiritual heat, which proceeds from the sun
of that world, in its essence is love, and with women it is love
conjoining itself with intelligence and wisdom in men; which love in its
complex is called conjugial love, and by determination becomes that
love. It is called elevation into superior light and heat, because it is
elevation into the light and heat which the angels of the superior
heavens enjoy: it is also an actual elevation, as from a thick mist into
pure air, and from an inferior region of the air into a superior, and
from thence into ether; therefore elevation into superior light with men
is elevation into superior intelligence, and thence into wisdom; in
which also there are ascending degrees of elevation; but elevation into
superior heat with women is an elevation into chaster and purer
conjugial love, and continually towards the conjugial principle, which
from creation lies concealed in their inmost principles. These
elevations, considered in themselves, are openings of the mind; for the
human mind is distinguished into regions, as the world is distinguished
into regions as to the atmosphere; the lowest of which is the watery,
the next above is the aerial, and still higher is the ethereal, above
which there is also the highest: into similar regions the mind of man is
elevated as it is opened, with men by wisdom, and with women by love
truly conjugial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="189.">189.</span></span>

We have said, that the woman is made sensible of the delights of her
heat in the man's light; by which we mean that the woman is made
sensible of the delights of her love in the man's wisdom, because wisdom
is the receptacle; and wherever love finds such a receptacle
corresponding to itself, it is in the enjoyment of its delights: but we
do not mean, that heat with its light is delighted out of forms, but
within them; and spiritual heat is delighted with spiritual light in
their forms to a greater degree, because those forms by virtue of wisdom
and love are vital, and thereby susceptible. This may be illustrated by
what are called the sports of heat with light in the vegetable kingdom:
out of the vegetable there is only a simple conjunction of heat and
light, but within it there is a kind of sport of the one with the other;
because there they are in forms or receptacles; for they pass through
astonishing meandering ducts, and in the inmost principles therein they
tend to use in bearing fruit, and also breathe forth their satisfactions
far and wide into the atmosphere, which they fill with fragrance. The
delight of spiritual heat with spiritual light is more vividly
perceivable in human forms, in which spiritual heat is conjugial love,
and spiritual light is wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="190.">190.</span></span>

V. WITH BOTH MEN AND WOMEN, THE STATES OF LIFE BEFORE MARRIAGE ARE
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT THEY ARE AFTERWARDS. Before marriage, each sex
passes through two states, one previous and the other subsequent to the
inclination for marriage. The changes of both these states, and the
consequent formations of minds, proceed in successive order according to
their continual increase; but we have not leisure now to describe these
changes, which are various and different in their several subjects. The
inclination to marriage, previous to marriage, are only imaginary in the
mind, and become more and more sensible in the body; but the states
thereof after marriage are states of conjunction and also of
prolification, which, it is evident, differ from the forgoing states as
effects differ from intentions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="191.">191.</span></span>

VI\. WITH MARRIED PARTNERS THE STATES OF LIFE AFTER MARRIAGE ARE CHANGED
AND SUCCEED EACH OTHER ACCORDING TO THE CONJUNCTIONS OF THEIR MINDS BY
CONJUGIAL LOVE. The reason why changes of the state and the successions
thereof after marriage, with both the man and the wife, are according to
conjugial love with each, and thus are either conjunctive or disjunctive
of their minds, is, because conjugial love is not only various but also
different with conjugial pairs: various, with those who love each other
interiorly; for with such it has its intermissions, notwithstanding its
being inwardly in its heat regular and permanent; but it is different
with those who love each other only exteriorly; for with such its
intermissions do not proceed from similar causes, but from alternate
cold and heat. The true ground of these differences is, that with the
latter the body is the principal agent, the ardour of which spreads
itself around, and forcibly draws into communion with it the inferior
principles of the mind; whereas, with the former, who love each other
interiorly, the mind is the principal agent, and brings the body into
communion with it. It appears as if love ascended from the body into the
soul; because as soon as the body catches the allurement, it enters
through the eyes, as through doors, into the mind, and thus through the
sight, as through an outer court, into the thoughts, and instantly into
the love: nevertheless it descends from the mind, and acts upon the
inferior principles according to their orderly arrangement; therefore
the lascivious mind acts lasciviously, and the chaste mind chastely; and
the latter arranges the body, whereas the former is arranged by the
body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="192.">192.</span></span>

VII\. MARRIAGE ALSO INDUCES OTHER FORMS IN THE SOULS AND MINDS OF
MARRIED PARTNERS. That marriage has this effect cannot be observed in
the natural world; because in this world souls and minds are encompassed
with a material body, through which the mind rarely shines: the men
(\_homines\_) also of modern times, more than the ancients, are taught
from their infancy to assume feigned countenances, whereby they deeply
conceal the affections of their minds; and this is the reason why the
forms of minds are not known and distinguished according to their
different quality, as existing before marriage and after it:
nevertheless that the forms of souls and minds differ after marriage
from what they were before, is very manifest from their appearance in
the spiritual world; for they are then spirits and angels, who are minds
and souls in a human form, stripped of their outward coverings, which
had been composed of watery and earthy elements, and of aerial vapors
thence arising; and when these are cast off, the forms of the minds are
plainly seen, such as they had been inwardly in their bodies; and then
it is clearly perceived, that there is a difference in regard to those
forms with those who live in marriage, and with those who do not. In
general, married partners have an interior beauty of countenance, the
man deriving from the wife the ruddy bloom of her love, and the wife
from the man the fair splendor of his wisdom; for two married partners
in the spiritual world are united as to their souls; and moreover there
appears in each a human fulness. This is the case in heaven, because
there are no marriages (\_conjugia\_) in any other place; beneath heaven
there are only nuptial connections (\_connubia\_), which are alternately
tied and loosed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="193.">193.</span></span>

VIII\. THE WOMAN IS ACTUALLY FORMED INTO A WIFE, ACCORDING TO THE
DESCRIPTION IN THE BOOK OF CREATION. In this book it is said, that the
woman was created out of the man's rib, and that the man said, when she
was brought to him, "This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;
and she shall be called Eve (\_Ischah\_), because she was taken out of
man (\_Isch\_):" Gen. chap. ii. 21-23. A rib of the breast, in the Word,
signifies, in the spiritual sense, natural truth. This is signified by
the ribs which the bear carried between his teeth, Dan. vii. 5; for
bears signify those who read the Word in the natural sense, and see
truths therein without understanding: the man's breast signifies that
essential and peculiar principle, which is distinguished from the breast
of the woman: that this is wisdom, may be seen above, n. 187; for truth
supports wisdom as the ribs do the breast. These things are signified,
because the breast is that part of a man in which all his principles are
as in their centre. From these considerations, it is evident, that the
woman was created out of the man by a transfer of his peculiar wisdom,
which is the same thing as to be created out of natural truth; and that
the love thereof was transferred from the man into the woman, to the end
that conjugial love might exist; and that this was done in order that
the love of the wife and not self-love might be in the man: for the
wife, in consequence of her innate disposition, cannot do otherwise than
convert self-love, as existing with the man, into his love to herself;
and I have been informed, that this is effected by virtue of the wife's
love itself, neither the man nor the wife being conscious of it: hence,
no man can possibly love his wife with true conjugial love, who from a
principle of self-love is vain and conceited of his own intelligence.
When this arcanum relating to the creation of the woman from the man, is
understood, it may then be seen, that the woman in like manner is as it
were created or formed from the man in marriage; and that this is
effected by the wife, or rather through her by the Lord, who imparts
inclinations to women whereby they produce such an effect: for the wife
receives into herself the image of a man, and thereby appropriates to
herself his affections, as may be seen above, n. 183; and conjoins the
man's internal will with her own, of which we shall treat presently; and
also claims to herself the propagated forms (\_propagines\_) of his
soul, of which also we shall speak elsewhere. From these considerations
it is evident, that, according to the description in the book of
Genesis, interiorly understood, a woman is formed into a wife by such
things as she takes out of the husband and his breast, and implants in
herself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="194.">194.</span></span>

IX\. THIS FORMATION IS EFFECTED ON THE PART OF THE WIFE BY SECRET MEANS;
AND THIS IS MEANT BY THE WOMAN'S BEING CREATED WHILE THE MAN SLEPT. It
is written in the book of Genesis, that Jehovah God caused a deep sleep
to fall upon Adam, so that he slept; and that then he took one of his
ribs, and builded it into a woman: chap. ii. 21, 22. That by the man's
sleep and sleeping is signified his entire ignorance that the wife is
formed and as it were created from him, appears from what was shewn in
the preceding chapter, and also from the innate prudence and
circumspection of wives, not to divulge anything concerning their love,
or their assumption of the affections of the man's life, and thereby of
the transfer of his wisdom into themselves. That this is effected on the
part of the wife without the husband's knowledge, and while he is as it
were sleeping, thus by secret means, is evident from what was explained
above, n. 166-168; where also it is clearly shewn, that the prudence
with which women are influenced herein, was implanted in them from
creation, and consequently from their birth, for reasons of necessity,
so that conjugial love, friendship, and confidence, and thereby the
blessedness of dwelling together and a happy life, may be secured:
wherefore for the right accomplishing of this, the man is enjoined to
\_leave his father and mother and to cleave to his wife\_, Gen. ii. 24;
Matt. xix. 4, 5. The father and mother, whom the man is to leave, in a
spiritual sense signify his \_proprium\_ of will and \_proprium\_ of
understanding; and the \_proprium\_ of a man's (\_homo\_) will is to
love himself, and the \_proprium\_ of his understanding is to love his
own wisdom; and to cleave to his wife signifies to devote himself to the
love of his wife. Those two \_propriums\_ are deadly evils to man, if
they remain with him, and the love of those two \_propriums\_ is changed
into conjugial love, so far as a man cleaves to his wife, that is, so
far as he receives her love; see above, n. 193, and elsewhere. To sleep
signifies to be in ignorance and unconcern; a father and a mother
signify the two \_propriums\_ of a man (\_homo\_), the one of the will
and the other of the understanding; and to cleave to, signifies to
devote one's self to the love of any one, as might be abundantly
confirmed from passages in other parts of the Word; but this would be
foreign to our present subject.

<span class="margnote"><span id="195.">195.</span></span>

X. THIS FORMATION ON THE PART OF THE WIFE IS EFFECTED BY THE CONJUNCTION
OF HER OWN WILL WITH THE INTERNAL WILL OF THE MAN. That the man
possesses rational and moral wisdom, and that the wife conjoins herself
with those things which relate to his moral wisdom, may be seen above,
n. 163-165. The things which relate to rational wisdom constitute the
man's understanding, and those which relate to moral wisdom constitute
his will. The wife conjoins herself with those things which constitute
the man's will. It is the same, whether we say that the wife conjoins
herself, or that she conjoins her will to the man's will; because she is
born under the influence of the will, and consequently in all her
actions acts from the will. The reason why it is said \_with the man's
internal will\_, is, because the man's will resides in his
understanding, and the man's intellectual principle is the inmost
principle of the woman, according to what was observed above concerning
the formation of the woman from the man, n. 32, and in other places. The
man has also an external will; but this frequently takes its tincture
from simulation and dissimulation. This will the wife notices; but she
does not conjoin herself with it, except pretendedly or in the way of
sport.

<span class="margnote"><span id="196.">196.</span></span>

XI\. THE END HEREIN IS, THAT THE WILL OF BOTH MAY BECOME ONE, AND THAT
THUS BOTH MAY BECOME ONE MAN (\_homo\_): for whoever conjoins to himself
the will of another, also conjoins to himself his understanding; for the
understanding regarded in itself is merely the minister and servant of
the will. That this is the case, appears evidently from the affection of
love, which moves the understanding to think as it directs. Every
affection of love belongs to the will; for what a man loves that he also
wills. From these considerations it follows, that whoever conjoins to
himself the will of a man conjoins to himself the whole man: hence it is
implanted as a principle in the wife's love to unite the will of her
husband to her own will; for hereby the wife becomes the husband's, and
the husband the wife's; thus both become one man (\_homo\_).

<span class="margnote"><span id="197.">197.</span></span>

XII\. THIS FORMATION (ON THE PART OF THE WIFE) IS EFFECTED BY AN
APPROPRIATION OF THE AFFECTIONS OF THE HUSBAND. This article agrees with
the two preceding, because affections are of the will; for affections
which are merely derivations of the love, form the will, and make and
compose it; but these affections with men are in the understanding,
whereas with women they are in the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="198.">198.</span></span>

XIII\. THIS FORMATION (ON THE PART OF THE WIFE) IS EFFECTED BY A
RECEPTION OF THE PROPAGATIONS OF THE SOUL OF THE HUSBAND, WITH THE
DELIGHT ARISING FROM HER DESIRE TO BE THE LOVE OF HER HUSBAND'S WISDOM.
This coincides with what was explained above, n. 172, 173, therefore any
further explanation is needless. Conjugial delights with wives arise
solely from their desire to be one with their husbands, as good is one
with truth in the spiritual marriage. That conjugial love descends from
this spiritual marriage, has been proved above in the chapter which
treats particularly on that subject; hence it may be seen, as in an
image, that the wife conjoins the man to herself, as good conjoins truth
to itself; and that the man reciprocally conjoins himself to the wife,
according to the reception of her love in himself, as truth reciprocally
conjoins itself to good, according to the reception of good in itself;
and that thus the love of the wife forms itself by the wisdom of the
husband, as good forms itself by truth; for truth is the form of good.
From these considerations it is also evident, that conjugial delights
with the wife originate principally in her desiring to be one with the
husband, consequently to be the love of her husband's wisdom; for in
such case she is made sensible of the delights of her own heat in the
man's light, according to what was explained in Article IV., n. 188.

<span class="margnote"><span id="199.">199.</span></span>

XIV\. THUS A MAIDEN IS FORMED INTO A WIFE, AND A YOUTH INTO A HUSBAND.
This flows as a consequence, from what has been said above in this and
the foregoing chapter respecting the conjunction of married partners
into one flesh. A maiden becomes or is made a wife, because in a wife
there are principles taken out of the husband, and therefore
supplemental, which were not previously in her as a maiden: a youth also
becomes or is made a husband, because in a husband there are principles
taken out of the wife, which exalt his receptibility of love and wisdom,
and which were not previously in him as a youth: this is the case with
those who are principled in love truly conjugial. That it is these who
feel themselves a united man (\_homo\_), and as it were one flesh, may
be seen in the preceding chapter, n. 178. From these considerations it
is evident, that with females the maiden principle is changed into that
of a wife, and with men the youthful principle is changed into that of a
husband. That this is the case, was experimentally confirmed to me in
the spiritual world, as follows: Some men asserted, that conjunction
with a female before marriage is like conjunction with a wife after
marriage.--On hearing this, the wives were very indignant, and said:
"There is no likeness at all in the two cases. The difference between
them is like that between what is fancied and what is real." Hereupon
the men rejoined, "Are you not females as before?" To this the wives
replied more sharply, "We are not females, but wives; you are in fancied
and not in real love; you therefore talk fancifully." Then the men said,
"If you are not females (\_feminae\_) still you are women
(\_mulieres\_):" and they replied, "In the first states of marriage we
were women (\_mulieres\_); but now we are wives."

<span class="margnote"><span id="200.">200.</span></span>

XV\. IN THE MARRIAGE OF ONE MAN WITH ONE WIFE, BETWEEN WHOM THERE EXISTS
LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THE WIFE BECOMES MORE AND MORE A WIFE, AND THE
HUSBAND MORE AND MORE A HUSBAND. That love truly conjugial more and more
conjoins two into one man (\_homo\_), may be seen above n. 178, 179; and
as a wife becomes a wife from and according to conjunction with the
husband, and in like manner the husband with the wife; and as love truly
conjugial endures to eternity, it follows, that the wife becomes more
and more a wife, and the husband more and more a husband. The true
reason of this is, because in the marriage of love truly conjugial, each
married partner becomes continually a more interior man; for that love
opens the interiors of their minds; and as these are opened, a man
becomes more and more a man (\_homo\_): and to become more a man
(\_homo\_) in the case of the wife is to become more a wife, and in the
case of the husband to become more a husband. I have heard from the
angels, that the wife becomes more and more a wife as the husband
becomes more and more a husband, but not \_vice versa\_; because it
rarely, if ever, happens, that a chaste wife is wanting in love to her
husband, but that the husband is wanting in a return of love to his
wife; and that this return of love is wanting because he has no
elevation of wisdom, which alone receives the love of the wife:
respecting this wisdom see above n. 130, 163-165. These things however
they said in regard to marriages on earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 201-250](cjl05)
