[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cjl12)  [Next](cjl14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402180012/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Conjugial Love*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1768\] at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDEX TO THE MEMORABLE RELATIONS.

Conjugial love seen in its form with two conjugial partners, who were
conveyed down from heaven in a chariot, n. 42, 43.

Three novitiates from the world receive information respecting marriages
in heaven, n. 44.

On the chaste love of the sex, n. 55.

On the temple of wisdom, where the causes of beauty in the female sex
are discussed by wise ones, n. 56.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the golden age, n. 75.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the silver age, n. 76.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the copper age, n. 77.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the iron age, n. 78.

On conjugial love with those who lived after those ages, n. 79, 80.

On the glorification of the Lord by the angels in the heavens, on
account of his advent, and of conjugial love, which is to be restored at
that time, n. 81.

On the precepts of the New Church, n. 82.

On the origin of conjugial love, and of its virtue or potency, discussed
by an assembly of the wise from Europe, n. 103, 104.

On a paper let down from heaven to the earth, on which was written, The
marriage of good and truth, n. 115.

What the image and likeness of God is, and what the tree of life, and
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, n. 132-136.

Two angels out of the third heaven give information respecting conjugial
love there, n. 137.

On the ancients in Greece, who inquired of strangers, What news from the
earth? Also, on men found in the woods, n. 151\*-154\*.

On the golden shower and hall, where the wives said various things
respecting conjugial love, n. 155\*.

The opinion of the ancient sophi in Greece respecting the life of men
after death, n. 182.

On the nuptial garden called Adramandoni, where there was a conversation
respecting the influx of conjugial love, n. 183.

A declaration by the ancient sophi in Greece respecting employments in
heaven, n. 207.

On the golden shower and hall, where the wives again conversed
respecting conjugial love, n. 208.

On the judges who were influenced by friendship, of whom it was
exclaimed, O how just! n. 231.

On the reasoners, of whom it was exclaimed, O how learned! n. 232.

On the confirmatory, of whom it was exclaimed, O how wise! n. 233.

On those who are in the love of ruling from the love of self, n.
261-266.

On those who are in the love of possessing all things of the world, n.
267, 268.

On Lucifer, n. 269.

On conjugial cold, n. 270.

On the seven wives sitting on a bed of roses, who said various things
respecting conjugial love, n. 293.

Observations by the same wives on the prudence of women, n. 294.

A discussion what the soul is, and what is its quality, n. 315.

On the garden, where there was a conversation respecting the divine
providence in regard to marriages, n. 316.

On the distinction between what is spiritual and what is natural, n.
326-329.

Discussions, whether a woman who loves herself for her beauty, loves her
husband; and whether a man who loves himself for his intelligence, loves
his wife, n. 330, 331.

On self-prudence, n. 353.

On the perpetual faculty of loving a wife in heaven, n. 355, 356.

A discussion, whether nature is of life, or life of nature; also
respecting the centre and expanse of life and nature, n. 380.

Orators delivering their sentiments on the origin of beauty in the
female sex, n. 381-384.

That all things which exist and take place in the natural world, are
from the Lord through the spiritual world, n. 415-422.

On the angels who were ignorant of the nature and meaning of adultery,
n. 444.

On delight, which is the universal of heaven and hell, n. 461.

On an adulterer who was taken up into heaven, and there saw things
inverted n. 477.

On three priests who were accused by adulterers, n. 500.

That determined and confirmed adulterers do not acknowledge anything of
heaven and the church, n. 521, 522.

On the new things revealed by the Lord, n. 532.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: INDEX TO CONJUGIAL LOVE](cjl14)
